PEPI YDPOPOSIAS: OR, A DISCOVRSE of WATERS: Their Qualities, and Effects
Diaeteticall, Pathologicall, and Pharmacaiticall.

By TOBIAS WHITAKER, Doctor in Physic of Norwich.

LONDON, Printed for John Grismond, at the sign of the Gunne in Ivie-Lane.
1634.

TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader,
AT the first view this subject may seem light, simple, and scarce worth the
reading; but whenas you have consulted with your second thoughts, you cannot
but confess, that our whole being in nature, and the continuance of the same,
does depend upon the right use and application of water, as being so necessary
in meats and drinks, as also in medicamental compositions, which cannot but
be a matter of very great consequence, since no natural good can be equal to
life and health, which is lost or enjoyed by the ill disposition of water and
air. Therefore not well knowing how to offer a sacrifice more grateful and
acceptable to my Country, and dearest friends, I have endeavored to wade
through springs, pools, moats, moors, as also the sea (which is the womb of
them all) And that I may guide both my self and others safely over these
Washes, no less dangerous then the rocks and quicksands of the Ocean,
therefore I have borrowed a light from those ancient guides which have steered
the course so many hundreds of years without shipwreck. This style and method
are answerable to my intention, which is only to inform strangers in our art,
without prejudice to the same, considering that I have enabled no man any
otherwise, then to defend himself, and preserve his health by the choice of a
wholesome situation in respect of water, which is so useful in the whole course
of his life, and so dangerous, if proceeding from an unwholesome earth, whether
used in medicament or diet: For this cause I have clad my discourse in such
robes as are most fashionable for the place and persons, to whom it is chiefly
intended: and although Suum cuique pulchrum, be the common proverb, and that
every man's own child seems to himself the fairest, howsoere apparelled; yet
in judgment (whatsoever otherwise my affection is) I ca^ admire beauty in
others more lovely then my own; and will be bold to tax censorious spirits,
chiefly in such as never yet were fruitful themselves: not knowing but that
their own birthes may prove as monstrous and deformed as any; and also others,
who out of a co^tentious spirit shall oppose any positive truth, or endeavor
to raise their own names by the defaming others more worthy then themselves:
for example, who is ignorant of that subtle Argenterius, as also with what
malignity and contentious spirit he does oppose the solid and learned doctrine
of Galen; notwithstanding there is a liberty of exception granted to all
writers, and has been practiced by all both ancient and modern, as is extant
in many volumes, where we plainly see the scholar at foyles with the Master,
and one equal with another; which were a new labor, and would require another
tract to make particular demonstration: therefore to avoyde all strife, I have
chiefly labored to shows plainly the ancient opinions, practice, and use of
this subject, as it may conduce to the preser vatio^ of health generation of
sickness, and recover of the same; and from hence to teacl how dangerous it
may be to forsake the beaten road or path, in which the ancient Worthies have
safely walked so many ages, losing our selus and dangerously misleading others
into unknown ways, which cannot but be doubtful, how ever we escape. If
therefore in thus doing I have given offense to any, it is beside my intention or
desire; if otherwise I have not, then I have the reward of my time and labor,
which might have been more negligently spent: yet had I desired to show my
self, rather then make good the just requests of my special friends, then J
would have chosen another part, which I suppose might have been better acted;
but lest the Gates should exceed the City, I take my leave.

Tobias Whitaker, Doctor in Physic.

PEPI YDPOPOSIAS.
HIppocrates Lib. de aere locis and aquis, sect. 3. Qui artem meadicam recta
investigatione consequi volet, is primum quidem anni tempora in co^sideratione^
debet adhibere, quid horu^ quidque possit, neque enim quicqua^ habent simile
sed cum inter se plurimum differunt, tum etiam propter varias quae in eis
contingunt mutationes.
advises earnestly those which will apply themselves to Arts, in the first
place that they diligently observe the times and seasons of the year, with
their alteration and change, as also the faculties of waters Gal. l. de aere
loc. and aq. cap. 1. Neque vero negligentiorem se circa aquaru^ facultates
cognosce^das exhibere co^venit; que^admodum enim gustu differunt et pondere sic
quoque virtute aliae ab aliss long dissentire videntur.
conducing much to the Diagnosticke, Prognostic, and Curative part of
Medicine, as appears plainly in the foresaid Book, and in his Book l. De
ulcer. sect. 6. ulceribus plerisque calidum anni tempus magis quam hyems
conducit, praeterquam ijs quaesunt in capite aequinoctium.
De Ulcer. Since therefore there is such necessity, as also such power in
these to preserve health, and maintain a natural body, as also in generating
diseases of ^arious forms, to ^he perdition and ^uine of the best Constitution
and Temper, it beho^eth a Physician especially specially to study the nature
and difference of them and all others to take notice and stricktly observe
them, so far as in their nature they are good or bad for common use for by
this mean they shall be abl^ to prevent a danger, which other wise were
inevitable: for commonly all diseases and distempers are conveyed to us in our
prinoiples of generation or conservation; to both which do chiefly concur the
elements both by way of existence and consistence, and in both respects are
Causes either of harmony or dispord in mixed bodies, and are Physically divided
into four (that is to say) material, formal, efficient, and final;
medically into two, and they are per consensum medicorum divided generally into
external and internal. But because external causes are prime and more
universal, therefore we will chiefly explicat the nature and condition of
them, so far as they tend to our purpose. External causes are such as come
from without, and of these we co^stitute three orders, divine, caelestiall, and
subluharie: But we pass by the two former, and (to atoyde digression) we
will bound our selves within the limits of the later: and amongst sublunary
causes, we will principally discourse of Hipp. sect. 3. fol. 66. demceps vero
de aquis nobis commemorandu^ est, and quae mor bosae and quae saluberrimae
existant.
Waters, and consider them not only philosophically, as elementary, but also
medically, as they are corrupt or incorrupt; Plurimum enim momentiad sanitatem
consert.
as a weighty matter in the government of our health. And of these we will
generally observe three differences (that is to say) aerie such as distill from
the clouds, secondly marine, or such as are contained in the Ocean and parts
adjoining, thirdly terrene, or such as arise out of the Earth. Aerie waters are
divided into rain, or such as come of Snow, Hail, and Frost; terrestrial
are such as spring out of the Earth; and they are either nourishing or healing;
the norishing are such as we call sweet, potable, and pleasant to the taste.
And of these are diverse species, as of fountains, mores, Standing pooles,
rivers, and the like. Medicall Waters are also diverse, as from Mineralls of
gold, silver, brass, Iron, Sulphur, Alum, Bitumen, etc. Lastly, Seawater is
such as is contained in the Ocean, and maritime parts adjoining. And these are
their general differences. It behooves now to discourse of their natures and
qualities more particularly, as they are good or bad, healthful, or
morbifical. Forasmuch as water that is simple, pure, and without alien mixture,
is so necessary for the preservatio^ of life, we will first make a description
of those which are set apart for common use and preservation of man; and these
are either such as spring out of wholesome earth, and of themselves are simple,
pure, and sweet, or such as fall from the clouds, and by transmutation are
made water; both which offer themselves to our view. Those therefore which
arise out of the earth, and are pure altogether, and void of alien mixture, or
such mixture as cannot be discovered by sense (for they can be known to us
otherwise then by their consistence, nature, spirits, and qualities, by which we
will in order demonstrat them) those are such waters as are most wholesome and
fit to be taken into the body, and ought to be such, as are without both
sapor and odor. And if any object that passage of Hipp. li. de aeie loc. and
aq. sect. 3. maxim vero commendantur quorum fontes ad solis exortus,
praesertim aestivos decurru^t limpidiores enim and boni odoris leves esse
necesse est. Gal. cap. 3. maxim vero laddare eas oporter quarum fluxiones ad
solisexortus erumpunt and presertim ad aestivos, necesse est enim sptedidiores
esse oderatas and leves.
and Gal. in their book de aere loc. and aquis, where they say, that sweet and
odoriferous waters are to be commended; it is answered, that by sweetness is
to be understood pleasantness, and such as are grateful to the taste; add
also that insipidnes, is as it were the first degree of sweetness in water,
but that which pertains to odor, is nothing else but a gentle smoothe vapor,
with out any roughness, and the water which is without smell, is said to smell
best, because it ought to be void both of odor and sapor, as is above said.
Secondly, good and healthful water is discovered by Gal. cap. 3. hae enim
dalces and albae sunt.
the smoothness, thinness, and clearenesse of the same: For waters by now
much more pure they are, by so much they are more smooth, clear, and thin, and
by reason of their Hipp. l. 5. A ph. 26. aqua quae cito cale fit and cito
refrigeratur levissima.
tenuitie and lightness, are soon made hott by fire, and soon cooled by the
impression of the air; and the reason is rendered by Gal. Gal. comment. 5. Aph.
Sed nunc levierem dixit aquam quae ventrem non gravat, and quae cito permeat.
not because such water is light in respect of weight, but because it is
without any sensible oppression in the ve^tricle, Gal. comment. 5. Ap. 26.
primum quidem si neque turbidae neque caenosae: deinde sineque in gustu, neque
in odoratu, aliquam absurdam qualitatem prae se fert: tum and illud, quod nunc
Hip: dixit, si cito refrigeratur and cale sit: nam perspicuum existit talem
esse been alterabilem.
when as the stomach is not troubled with the receipt of it, as also when it
passes quickly out of the body again by urine. Contrarily we call that water
ponderous, which does not pass through the body speedily, but is troblesom to
the stomach, ungrateful to the taste, and smell; and therefore Hipp. would
have us under stand, that such water as is soon hot and cold, by reason of
levitie, tenuitie and clearenesse, is most subject to a sudden and speedy
change or alteration, which in meat and drink we call concoctible
disposition, such as is easily transmutated or concocted by the ^e^tricle,
endowed with a property, and dedicated by nature to such a use. But this
description offers an objection, and peradventure some will urge or allege,
that rain water does possess the same con stitution of limpiditie, tenuitie,
and levitie, and yet is condemned by Gal. Gal. l. 4. de sanit. tuend. cap: 6.
Quan quam potest, qui volet, and ex pluvia aqua id conficere, ipseque si
pluviam aquam protarem, id suaderem, verum nec ipsam probo, and nihilo est
deterius, siaccessit.
as most unwholesome, either in diet or medicine, as appears plainly in his
discourse of Oximel, and the manner of making the same medicament; affirming
the use of rain water not to be approved, and that of it self it is worst of
all others, especially if it grow sower and corrupt. To which answer, that
neiher our Master, nor any other learned Phisician does mislike or not approve
such water, because it is clear, hin, and light, or asie of digestion, but
because of an apt disposion, that rain water has to putrify more speedily
the^ any other water. And in this respect is much different from the former,
which is also described by Hipp: Hip. de aere loc. aq. sect. 3. hae enim dulces
sunt and albae modicumque vinum serre queunt, per hyemem calidae, per aestatem
frigidae.
to be hot in winter and cold summer, which by reason of his incolation,
through the profound and deep parts of the earth by antiperistacie is hotter
in winter, and in frostie weather does commonly wreak: For it receives
alteration, both from the bowels of the earth through which it runs, and also
from the earthie air with which it is mixed. Fourthly, amongst fountains and
springs, from rocks or clifts, those are said to be most health full and
wholesome which flow through earth and sand: the reason is, because they are
purified in their course, and by colation through such a body of sandy earth,
they leave behind them their grosnes, and alien qualities, by which they do
infect, and are made by this colature much more wholesome. Fifthly, wa^ers which
are moved are more ^ure and wholesome, then those that want motion from the
air or winds, as wels ^r other enclosed springs; because open streams are
^urified continually by the wind and air, as is proved by Arist. Arist.
Meteor. l. 3. Finis est facere aeris et aquae commotionem, ne nimia quiet
putrescant and ne putredine sua ammantia enecent.
in his discourse o^ winds, affirming^ that the end o^ their generation is to
cause commotion in the air and waters, lest by quiet they should putrify and
destroy the creatures that live in them and of them; Lastly, the purity of the
air, fish and vegetals, demonstrate, the wholsomnesse of the water, and
salubritie for common use external or internal. By this time we have taught
what waters are principally to be elected, as also their nature and difference,
and how to distinguish them; for although all are esteemed wholesome that we
have hitherto spoken of, according to some modern opinions (that is to say)
brewed: Yet some are more healthful then others, and stand in need of less
caution. Now therefore I suppose it behoovefull that we explicate the nature
and qualities of morbifical waters, such as offend in smell or taste, or
otherwise, and ^re neither repu^ed wholesome for meat or medicine.

Air and water may affect human bodies three seve^all ways; first as ^hey are
elements, ^hey may hurt both by their qualities and substan^es, and that per se
immediately, or ^^mediatly per accidens: Secondly, as aliment, for so by
respiratio^ the spiritual substance of the air is said to nourish; water also
is said to nourish, insomuch that it serves for the distribution of aliment
into every part of the body, and may also nourish in deed in respect Avicen. li
1. sen. 2. doct. 2. Non autem dicimus quoth. aqua non nutriat quia nutriens est
illud quod est in potentia sanguis.
of its substance. For the use of water is not only necessary to nutrition, as
meat and drink, but also to life, and the continuance of the same; and
therefore by some Ranchinus Patholog. sect. 2. cap. 10.
is called vitae potus, salus corporis. Yet Gal. Gal. li. 4. de vsu part. cap.
5. at enim in hac quoque vena multa adhuc humiditate tenui et aquosa plenus est
sanguis: vocat autem ipsam Hippocrates (...).
conceives and seems to persuade others, that water does not nourish per se,
but instrumentally, so far as it is a vehiculum of the blood, and by the
thinness and moistness of the sam^ does convey the blood into every part, for
the nourishing and strengthening of the same Avicen Avicen. li. 1. fen. 2. doct.
2. cap. 16. aqua vnum existit elemeatorum: quae sola inter omnia elementa habet
proprium, ut in eo quod comeditur and bibitur ingrediatur, non ideo, ut
nutriat, sed quia nutrimentum penetrare facit, and ejus rectificat subst antiam.
also is o^ the same opinion water (says he) is the sole element endowed with
^ Property received either in meat or drink, to mix and incorporate with it,
and yet not nourish, but that it may rectify the substance of nutrime^t and
make it penetrable, and in this respect is only said to nourish. Thirdly, if
they be considered as medicaments; for by the use of medicall waters, as also
the mutation of the air, many diseases are begotten, and some are said to be
cured: and for this cause the doctrine of air, and water is not only referred
to diet, but also to pathologie, and the curative part of medicine. In order
therefore we will discourse of such waters as tend to the subversion of health,
Nevertheless before I explicate their qualities and differences; give me leave
to take up a question by the way, which peradventure may seem a small
digression, yet not so unnecessary, but that it may be well argued in this
place. The question is whether air or water have most power in preserving of
health, or generating sickness: They that prefer water first ground upon
Arist. Arist. li. 1. probl. 13. cur mutationem aqua rum gravem esse affirme^t.
where the Philosopher questioneth, why the mutations of the water are more
turbulent, then those of the air; and produces reason to prove it; for (says
he) those things which are able to make a stronger and firmer impression,
either by permanencie or crassitude, they seem to be more able, either to
help or hurt; but water is more thick then air, and makes a longer stay in
the body. Contrarily, Hippocrates co^ceiveth greater inconvenience in the air
then in water, and draws his reason from the necessity; for (says he) the
nocuments of water may be avoided, but the ambient air cannot be shunned,
but does continually affect us, as does appear in his li. de aere. lo. et
aquis li. de natura humana. li. de natura pueri.
elegant gradation, saying; such as is the air, such are the spirits, because
they are begotten of blood and air; such as are the spirits, such are the
humors, as following the mature of them; such as are the humors, such are the
parts of the body, because they are nourished by them, and maintained: To
conclude, such as is the condition of the part, such is the state of the whole
body. Hence appears the necessity of air in ou^ conservation and force in
generating sickness. But to set aside the decrees, both of Arist. and Hipp.
the question is determined thus; that the vital and animal parts of the body
are more and sooner affected by the air then by water, and that the natural
parts are more hurt by water then the vitals: This being conceived, let us take
notice of such waters as do destroy the temper of the body, and are called
morbificall, and after what manner they are said to be pernicious to the life
of man, some more, some less, either internally or externally applied.

Morbificall waters are such as are discoverd by sense to have a taste or
smell; for those that are healthful and wholesome, ought to have neither, as
is before said in the description of wholesome water: Secondly, unwholesome
waters are such as have an offensive taste and stinking smell, such as are
grips, ditches, and channels from salt marshes, or common shores, and these are
so unwholesome as I need not urge authority to prove it, yet because I desire
to satisfy, take one learned ancient, a^ instar omnium. Avicen Avicen. Tract.
5. fol. 585. Aquae mali odoris coenosae tardam descentionem suam a stomaco, and
pen^trationem cibi: and sitis quidem augetur cum aquis huju smodi, and virtus
debilitatur, et quia ipsae non sunt purae simplices, im o in hujusmodi aquis
est terrecitas plurima quare ex eis genera^ur humor a^^ phlegmaticus vitreus,
aut melancholicus, et propter illud multiplica^t aegritudines splenis in
hominibus, qui plurimum bibunt de ipsis, and acciden^ faciu^t haemorroidas et
hydropisim propter malltiam complectionis hepatis inductam ab eis, and mictum
vrinae involuntarium propter malitia^ complectionis renum.
says, waters of this nature that are ill savouring, hinder the penetration
and descent of meat, and by reason of their impuritie, beget viscous phlegm,
or melancholy, and multiply Diseases of the spleen, in such manner, that those
which drink them often either by coaction or otherwise, are subjected to the
haemorroids and dropsy by the imbecilitie and defect of the liver, obtained by
the ill quality of these waters, as also in voluntary mixtion by the ill
disposition of the reins; other waters there are of moors, standing pooles,
and lakes, and these are said to smell, especially in the summer, Gal. lib. de
aere and aq. cap. 3. quaecunque igitur palustres sunt, and stabiles ac
lacustres, eas necesse est aestate esse calidas, ac crassas and olentes, cum
enim non defluant, sed aqua pluvia semper nova inferatur et sol urat necesse
est ipsas decolores esse, and pravas and vitiosas.
which does necessarily come to pass for want of perflue^ce, for they are not
as springs fitted of themselves as they are emptied, but such as are augmented
with new showers of rain, and exhaled again by the power of the sun, insomuch,
that necessarily they are gross discolored, unpleasant and corrupt; in winter
begetting corrupt phlegm, by their congealed disposition, and in summer time
vicious and choleric by adustion; in winter they are cold and crude, and soon
converted or transmutated into ice, and mixed with mud and snow, are not much
unlike the dead sea, or some Stygian lake; but however they are very unwholsom,
troublesome to the ven^ricle, and such as ^^oth viciate and ^orrupt the whole
^ody, poison the ^^asse, and destroy ^he best temper; after what man^er
Hippocrates Hip. li. de aere loc. and aq. sect. 3. bibentibus autem lienes
semper magnos esse and compressos, ventres vero duros and tenues ac calidos
humeros vero and iugula and faciem extenuari, in lienem enim carnes
coliquescunt ideoque graciles sunt.
^heweth: The ^rinkers (says he) of such waters are always or con^inually
affected with large spleens, hard, thin, and hot bellies, shoulders, throat,
and face extenuat, the flesh resolved into spleen, and the whole body wasted
and consumed, they are also ravenous, and very thirsty, because of the siccity
and dryness, both of the upper and lower venters: Add also to these dropsies,
and for the most part, such as are lethall, besides many difficulties of the
bowels and fluxes of the belly, long quartane fevers, which by protraction of
time terminate in dropsies, both particular, and universally of the whole body,
by which they perish. And these diseases which are generated of such corrupt
water happen in the summer: But those of the winter, such as fall upon young
bodies, are inflammations of the lungs and madness; to those that are more
ancient burning fevers, by reason of the hardness of their bellies: Hip.
mulieribus vero tumores proveniunt, and pituita alba, vix concipiunt, and cum
difficultate foetus magnos and tumidos pariunt, quique postea dum educantur
contabescunt, and deteriores evadunt, neque bona post partum ^ulieribus
purgatio contingit.
women shall labor with phlegmatic swellings, it shall be difficult for them
to conceive child, and if they prove pregnant, their births shall be large and
great, brought forth with difficulty, and in short time perish; neither after
childbirth do they purge according to the custom of women: To children that
drink these waters chiefly happen ruptures, and to men warts and ulcers of the
anckles, of such a malignant condition, as that they do kill them in short
time, and in the mean while do wither them, and make them seem old or aged
before their time: Moreover such women seem to themselves to be with child,
and when the time of delivery comes, the tumor vanishes, and they are
altogether deceived, and their expectations frustrated: To conclude, these and
such like are the common and ordinary effects of such waters which are of moors,
standing pooles, and the like, through which we have speedily waded, and find
them good for nothing, but the nourishing of venomous creatures, especially
raw; and therefore to be shunned according to the caveat of Galen. Gal. de.
sanit. tuend. li. 1. cap. 11. covendae vero sunt, quae ex stagnis hauriuntur et
quae turbide, and quae malae olentes, and quae salsae, denique in quibus qualit
as aliqua gustu deprehenditur.
Now let us examine and pierce the rocks Hipp. ac hujusmodi aqua ad quidvis
paratus esse censeo; secundo loco eas quarum fontes in saxosis locis sunt (quas
duras esse necesse est) aut si vbi calidae aquae existunt aut serrum nascitur,
aut as, aut argentum, aut aurum, aut sulphur, aut al umen, aut bitumen, aut
nitrum haec enim omnia caloris vi proveniunt.
and mines, and taste what liquor springs from them useful and safe, or
morbificall. These waters that spring from rocks and clifts, are generally
esteemed crude and hard, that is such as pass not easily through the body, but
are turbulent to the strongest nature. Hip sect. 3
But those hot waters which spring from minerals of gold, silver, brass, iron,
sulphur, alume, bitumen, and the like; al these spring from the violence of
heat, insomuch, as some philosophers have thought these to be the shewers of
fire and brimstone, that destroyed Sodom, and were thrown up by the force of
some Earthquake, out of some Aetna. But however they are such as beget strange
diseases in humane bodies Hipp. neque igitur ex hujusmodi terra bonae aquae
nascuntur sed durae and aestuosae, quaeque per urinas non facile feruntur and
alvi egestioni adversantur.
and no good waters can spring from earth of this nature, for they are
fervently hot and dry, they pass not easily by urine, and are averse from
nature in common egestion. But because we shall have occasion to explicate them
more particularly in our following discourse, therefore we will forsake the
shore, and launch into the Ocean, where we chiefly observe the quality of sea
water, to be salt, and not to be drunk, but absolutely prohibited Hip sect.
3 salsae vero et indomitae and durae, in totum quidem ut bibantur inprobandae.
to be received into the body; for which cause I will hasten out, lest Neptune
enraged, should force me to drink whether I will or not, at festina lent,
let me before I take my leave, acquaint you with the will of my Master
Hippocrates, Hip. sect. 3 at vero de aquis salsis propter imperitiam falluntur
quidam quodque alvum solvere existimentur, cum maxim alvi d^sectioni
repugne^t, in domitae enim sunt et coquinequeunt; proindeque ah eis venture
potius adstri^gitur.
who would have it known, that for want of skill in the nature and qualities
of salt water many are deceived; For they conceive them to relaxe the belly,
when as they most of al constringe the same; besides they are indomitable,
quite out of the government of nature, and not by any natural power to be
concocted: Therefore I Will take my leave of them, and return to shore again,
and muse a little concerning caelestiall water, or such as falls from the
clouds in shewers, for these are also comprehended in the predicament of
morbificall waters, such as principally tend to the generation of diseases, as
also such as comes from snow, and ice, or the like. Gal li. de aere lo. and aq.
cap. 4. aquae igitur pluviales levissimae et duteissima and tetenuissimae, and
splendidissimae su^r, primum enim sol quod tenuissimum ac levissimum est in
aqua educit ac sursum rapit.
Rain water in respect of substance, is light and concoctible, limpid and thin
in respect of quality, sweet and grateful to the taste, and most proportionable
to the best of waters: But because it is an exhalation, although the thinnest
part of all other waters extracted by the power of the sun, as is evident; and
because of its universal collection and commixture with air and Gal. eod.
cap. quapropter ex omnibus aquis hae citissimae patresount, and odorem malum
pluvialis aqua ha bet, eo quod ex plurimis congregata est ac permixta ut
citissime putrescat.
clouds, which often times are infected and ill aspected; it is more easily
disposed to putresaction, and not thought fit to be used without correction,
(that is to say) taken Gal. verum opus habent ut decoqua^tur, ac excolentur,
sin minus odorem pravum habent, et raucedines and vocis gravitatem bibentibus
inde acce^ere par est.
fresh boiled, and strained according to the decree of the ancients, else it
soon corrupts and breeds raucitie or whorsnesse in those that drink it. Hip.
sect. 3. pravae vero omnes quae ex nive and glacie fiunt, ubi enim semet
con^reverint non am plius ad pristinam naturam redeu^t
Snow and ice waters are all corrupt, for when they are once congealed, they
never return to their former nature again, but the clearenesse, levity, and
sweetness, that is in them does vanish, leaving behind a terrestrial and
ponderous substance, as is proved by this experiment. Take a vessel of water,
and keep it till it be frozen, then set it in some hot place till it be
dissolved, then measure it again, and you shall find it much less in
quantity then before, and will plainly appear, that the lightest and
thinnest parts are expired; and for this cause it is said to be morbificall,
Hip. lo. cit. atque de aquis quidem quae ex imbribus nivibus and glacie
colliguntur ad hunc se res habet modum at vero calculo maxim tentantur, and
renum morbis, ac urinae stillicidia et cex. endicum affectionibus corripiuntur
herniaeque ijs suboriuntur cujusque modi aquas bibunt.
and most apt to generate the stone in the bladder, strangurie, pain of the
hips, and ruptures, and these are the effects in general: The same also happen
to the drinkers of river waters, which by reason of their mixture, with pooles,
ditches, and moors they obtain an alien quality, obnoxious and morbificall;
and the only cause of such difference is their various participation, and their
mutations are answerable to their several mixtures, some qualities more
predominant, according to their impressive force, and therefore some are called
salt, sulphurious, aluminous, bituminous, and the like; others sweet and
clear, others muddy and terrestrial, as appears by their setlings, but all
are causes of affliction to those that drink them; yet some bodies shall be
more Gal. li. de aere loc. and aq. cap. 5. quod autem non omnibus consequentur
declarabo, quorum quidem alvus satis fluida est, ac sana, and vesica non
ardens, neque stomachus vesica valde coardescit, hi facile urinam eijciunt and
in vesica nihil ipsis congregatur.
able to resist then others, as those that have naturally laxe and fluid
bellies, and sound bodies, temperate reins and bladders; for such do more
easily and speedily pumpe it out again, leaving little residence in the
bladder; Contrarily where the belly is costive, hot, and fiery, the bladder
must needs be affected after the same manner, and when it exceeds a natural
temper, then the neck o^ the bladder is soon inflamed, by which means the
passage of the urine is hindered, or that which passes, is the purest and
thinnest part of the same, the thicker being left behind, of which there is a
graduall collection of new matter, which is daily contracted till it grows
large, hard, and stony, and by the course and pressure of the urine in pissing,
the stone is forced into the neck of the blader, which hinders the passage
of urine, and procures extremity and pain; insomuch, as children when they
labor with this disease, do rub, and scratch, and tear the secret parts, as
if there were the only stopping of their urine; and it is a manifest sign of
such a disposition, when as ordinarily the urine comes forth so limpid and
clear, and manifests a stay of the gross matter behind, the purer part
being strayned from it, as it is reported by Bohemian bear

-- Nil spissius illa Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, unde Constat
quod mult as faeces in corpore linquat.

And thus the stone is often begotten by the drinking of water, especially when
the bladder is ill disposed; but in Hip. sect. 3. gignitur autem and pueris ex
lacte, si non salubre fuerit sed valde calidum et vitiosum.
children it is often begot by the use of milk, if it be not good and sound,
but hot and choleric: For by this means it heateth the belly and bladder,
exasperates the urine; and in my opinion (says Hippocrates) small dilute Wine
is more wholesome for them, Hipp. in eodem lib. et mea quidem sententia
praestat pueris vinum quammaxime dilutum exhihere cum nimirum venas minus
adurat and refecit.
because it does not scortch and dry the veins so much. Thus I have showed,
according to the method of the ancient fathers of medicine, what waters are
wholesome and dieteticall; as also those that are unwholesome and morbificall:
now we are to consider how they are pharmaceuticall, and to be used as
medicaments.

To the end that we may more fully satisfy, it will not be vain in our
progress, to cast our eye back upon the streams that flow from minerals, and
more particularly discover the mischieses of them; because they are so highly
advanced in the thoughts of some Physicians, and others; upon what ground I
know not, but sure I am that they were never so esteemed by any of the ancients
in our faculty, either Greeks, or Arabians, or learned moderns, some respect
they give them, and chiefly in external use, by the way of baths, lotions,
and the like, and yet not ordinarily so to be used, but with a great deal of
caution; as will appear hereafter, both in respect of tempers and distempers
of the bodies to which they are applied: In so much as Hippocrates or Galen
took little notice of them, which does imply the little regard they had of
them or their use in medicine, either for preservation or restoration; for
which cause we will travel amongst the Arabians, to the end that we may
search out the nature, and use of them more directly, and principally take our
view from that learned Avicen of such mineral springs, as are before
nominated: And because Chemists constitute sulphur as one of the tria principia
in minerals, therefore we will in the first place discover the nocuments of
such waters. As for their differences, they are as many as the minerals from
whence they spring, and with which they are mixed; but in general all of them
are accounted hurtful and dangerous, externally or internally applied, without
special indication and preparation, without which they are very obnoxious;
after what manner I am now to show.

The nocuments of mineral waters, by potation or drinking, and especially
springing from sulphur, are these, they Avicen tract 5 Istae quidem aqua
adurunt humores and eos putrefaciunt, quare sequuntur in principio febres
chotericae postea in fiae febris melancholicae, propter adastionem sanguinis ex
ets factum (...) et mela^cholicus quidem humor qui ex hujus modi aquis
generatur, est humor melancholicus malus qui nominatur cholera nigra, etc.
scortch and putrify the humors, beget choleric fevers, which alter and are
changed into melancholicke, by reason of adustion of the blood, and this
melancholicke humor thus generated is called adust choler, and is the worst of
all melancholy: Moreover the effects that come of drinking such waters, are
inflammations of the eyes, jaundies, hot rhumes, difficulty in pissing, and
consumption of the whole body.

Avicen. nocumentum istarum aquarum est stipricare et constringere naturam, and
exasperare pectus and vocem and causare difficultatem urinae and stringere vias
cibi et causare corporis maciem.
Aluminous waters are astringent generally, and they exasperate the breast,
cause a difficulty of urine, and wasting of the body.

nocumentum istarum est compositum ex nocumento aquae aluminosae et nocumento
aquae sulphureae, etc
Vitriall waters are compounded of alume and sulphur, and therefore the effects
are answerable to both in respect of stiptication and exasperation, as also in
adustion and putrefaction of humors.

nocumentum istius aquae est simite nocumento sulphureae.
Al springs from silver should seem cordial according to the vain apprehension
of the vulgar: Nevertheless by the same authority they make up the number of
morbifical causes, and the special nocuments are to ulcerate the bowels, and
the general are answerable to those of sulphur: So also are those waters which
nocumentum istius aquae est si mile etiam nocumento aquae sulphureae verum est
majoris nocumenti quam illud, etc.
spring from green brass, saving that the nocuments are greater then of
sulphur, violently opening the orifice of the veins, by which does happen
pissing and spitting of blood, and bloody fluxes, all being exceeding
dangerous, and these are the qualities of them, and effects inwardly taken,
either as meat or medicine. Now let us consider their nocuments externally
applied, as by way of bathing and the like.

Bathing in salt waters is somewhat allowed by Avicen, where he affirms it to
be good to cure the itch and scabs; and Hip. sect. 3. sunt tamen naturae
quaedam et morbi, quibus tales aquae potu sunt commodae.
Hippocrates, although in general he protests against them, and does
absolutely prohibit their use internally, yet (says he) the nature of some
disease may require such a remedy, by which is to be understood some
extraordinary occasion, and after a most special manner to be used: And so
also may other compositions of minerals be used; yet Avicen conceives it to
be somewhat doubtful, and (however) the remedy to be worse then the disease;
for (says he) Avieen. tract. 4. aqua salsa in balneo confert scabiei et
pruritui, verum caresacit cutem postea condensat, et quum non fuerit pruritus,
tunc ipsa facit accidere pruritum.
although it be profitable for the curing of itch and scabs, so it is apt to
generate the same in those that are clear and sound, by reason of condensation
and rarification of the skin; besides it withers the body, hurts the eyes,
disturbes the senses, and causes catharrs and rhumes; so as (if it be well
considered) the remedy is more obnoxious then the disease.

aqua aluminosa condensat cutem et constringit ipsam.
Bathing in aluminous waters, condenseth and constringeth the skin, causes
ephemeral fevers, cramps and convulsions, especially in clean bodies.

aqua sulphurea and neptica corrumpit complexionem cut is corporis et praeparat
ipsam ad putredinem et facit accidere catarrhas,
Baths of sulphurious and bituminous waters, spoil the complexion of the
body, and dispose it to putrefaction and rhumes; and if they continue in such a
bath long it does threaten a dropsy, but a jandice does more frequently
follow. The mineral waters of iron are thought to be least hurtful of all
other minerals, and yet of little use amongst the ancients for medicament or
otherwise. Thus I have waded, through fountains, pools, motes, moors, rivers,
and as far into the sea as I dare, or as is needful, and have showed both
generally and particularly their difference, use, and effects; by which
description every man may know how to distinguish for use, those that are
wholesome, from those which are unwholesome, and morbificall; as also how and
after what manner they hurt, being taken into the body alimentally or
medicamentally, without special correction; as also by their outward
application; and all this confirmed by the doctrine and decrees of the most
learned and ancient doctors, and parents of medicine. Now it remains that I
acquaint the world with a new mineral spring, unheard of before, and lately
practiced amongst us in our own County of Norfolk; and although it be yet
unknown to sound and learned Physicians, yet it is very adventurously, and most
dangerously practiced against both reason and all authority. For in my opinion
it will appear to be a flat confutation of all, both ancient and modern, as
it is used and advised, the manner whereof I intend to set down, and compare it
with the former grounds; as also with those which are more recent, by which it
will appear, either that mineral waters differ this year from those of old,
or else that our practice is either more learned or more rash.

The spring it self rises out of a clift naked, and unsensed against the sea,
and is embraced and often covered by the raging ocean, by which it obtayneth
some mixture, both of substance and quality from the same, which is not the
least of our observations, since it does co^duce much to the ill or well
disposing of the matter for use: the drinkers of the same have been many, and
they report some of them that it tastes harsh and like rust of iron, others
taste it like ink, and all think it a miracle, that by the infusion of a
nutgaule it does turnered, and alter the color: To be short, the manner of
practice is thus advised, and appointed by a Physician who is thought to be
learned, and he had need to be so, to make good the adventurous, and
confident advising such a remedy upon so small acquaintance and trial, which
if Hippocrates may be judge Hip lib. de prisca medicina. quandoquidem naturae
cegnitio mini medico esse necessaria videtur isque omni sludio deber contendare
(si modo quod recte praeslare volet) ut ir telligat quonam modo quis ad ca quae
comeduntur et bibuntur se habent, etc.
will appear to be a fault. Moreover this spaw (as it is named by the chief
Physician thereof) is resolutely determined to be from a mineral, but of what
mixture is yet disputable, and therefore the practice ought to be the more
doubtful, especially being to be received into the body: For which cause our
learned countryman of the bath in his discourse of mineral waters, Doctor
Jorden.
although his affection to such springs, persuades him of much good use, that
may be made of them, and great benefit to man in curing diseases if they were
inwardly taken, yet because of his fear of some mixture with other waters
which may issue into them, for this cause only he protests he dares not
advise the inward use of them; yet this our spaw lies more open to such mixture
then the bath, and a worse mixture from the sea, yet we will not fear to
drink, and advise it to be drunk by pottles at one time and in the morning
cold and fasting, as also in the open air, crude and raw from the spring,
contrary to the practice of all that ever, were rational; and this course
every morning to continue for the space of thirty or forty days, and it is
said to cure all distempers, without any other consideration: So that if we
examine this spring and the practice of it, we cannot but see a direct
opposition to, and confutation of all the ancients. But so it fares with too
much confidence, as the Tragedian speaks, (...) Aio, nego, neque ratio mibi
constat ulla, cur aiam aut negem.

And that this may appear, it is needful that we compare this practice and
opinion with the practice of those times, especially in this thing; which
indeed if it were but what it is by some thought to be, it were then the
complement of all medicine, which the learned Physicians never yet
comprehended. For although the vulgar claim power to make every weaver and
apothecarie a physician, without either study or learning, or authority from
any universitie; and think it a light matter to be a facile quidem est esse
medicum sed bonum medicum esse difficillimum, ne dicam impossible.
Physician; yet those that are so indeed, never found it so easy a matter,
Quolibet ex ligno non fit Mercurius. True it is, there are some which can act
the carriage of physicians, as Players do the persons of Kings and Lords, and
yet are none, according to Hipp.li.de leg. quemadmodum enim illi quidem formam
habitum and person^m bystriones referant.
Hippocrates. But to make good our undertakings, and to show the difference of
our spaw-practise from that of old, or any other that is called learned: Avicen
Avicen. tract. 5. cap. 1. potus plurimae aquae nocet tribus modis, quorum nous
est, quod debilitat caliditatem naturalem in nembris, et lebilitat membra
principalia, quare accidit eis tuno debilitas virtutum quatuor naturalium,
membris autem instrumentalibus accidit debilitas motuum et tremor; secundus
modus est quod virtus sequestrative in hepate debilitatur in sequestrando omnem
aquositatem a sanguine, quare aut effu^ditur aquositas ad parts inter mirach
et sifach accidit hydropisis aquosa: aut penetrat aquositas cum sanguine ad
membra and accidit hydropisis carnoso et virtus sequestrativa inrenibus
debilitature, qutaex eomictus urinae irvoluatarlus cum difficultate in ed, et
debilitantur renes.
affirms the drinking of waters in general to debilitate natural heat,
enervate the instruments of motion, deject the appetite, and weaken the liver:
but this our spaw is said to incite appetite, temper natural heat, inliven
the members, and rectify the liver. Hippocrates, Hipp. Gallen. Avicen li.
citat.
Galen, Avicen, say all with one consent, that the drinking of waters cold and
raw, unboyled, unstrayned, or uncorrected, although otherwise they be not of
minerals, yet that such drinking does enlarge the spleen, and swell and harden
the substance of the same: but contrary to this, we say, our spawwater drunk
in large quantities, cold and raw from the spring, does diminish, soften, and
cure the swellings of the spleen; and by its mineral quality (if it were well
known) is able to perform greater cures then these, to which I shall answer
more fully in our following discourse, when I discover the opinions of some
modern concerning the drinking of mineral waters cold and raw. Avicen. loc.
citat. Hipp. at vero calculo maxim renian ur er renum morbis ac urinae
stilliciaio.
Moreover the said authors affirm the drinking of water to generate waterie
dropsies, the stone and strangurie, with other diseases in such as have
imperfect and distempered reins: but this our Spaw is prescribed as a special
remedy against the same difficulty of urine, the stone and dropsy. Avicen
tract. 5. aqua bibita in iejunio debilitat stomachum and facit accidere
catarrhas in frigidan do cerebrum propter consensum stomachi cum cerebro, and
propter ascensum vaporum aquosorum, nocet enim in frigidando hepar et splenem
and preparat ad hydropisim, etc.
Matutine or morning drinking of water (says Avicen) does debilitate the
stomach, breeds rhumes, and refrigerateth the brain overmuch by consent
with the ventricle, as also by the ascent of waterie vapors, and refrigerating
the liver and spleen, disposes to the foresaid dropsies: but our Spaw-water
drunk early in the morning, and cold, cornforts the heart, strengthens the
stomach, and so by consent the head, liver, and spleen. They allow the
drinking of no waters, either fresh, salt, aluminous, bituminous or sulphurous
to be wholesome, Gal. de sanit. tuen. lib. 6 cap. 9. Si tamen ipsis utendum
quae ut^que dulces sunt: quod utile etiam aliqui ex ipsis p oveniat, id vero
nen perinde tuto dixeris.
and although I incline somewhat to an exact correction, yet Avicen, makes
question whether mineral waters will admit of any or not Avicen. rectificatio
istarum aquarum si possibile est.
: but they were ignorant of the virtue of our Spaw, for this is to be drunk
without any preparation, as if abundans cautela were heretical in this our
nimble age. Notwithstanding they were not ignorant of them, as will appear by
Galen, Gal. loc. citato. satius autem sit ejusmodi equas experientia
disceraere: quando etiam rarae inventu sunt.
when as he renders a reason of his dislike, which is the uncertainty of their
mixture, and such (says he) as cannot not be discovered or found out
otherwise then by experience, and experience is dangerous Hipp. aph. 1.
experientia periculosa.
(says Hippocrates) the reason is taken from the dignity of the subject,
which is the body of man, upon which such experiments are tried: And for this
cause Galen was fearful of their use, although we may grant something to be
profitable in them, as there is in every creature, in respect of their
qualities, so they be rightly prepared and applied; yet (says he)
Gal.loc.citato. Id vero non perinde tuto dixeris.
let no man say they are safe, or the practice of them; not that the ancients
were so ignorant of their qualities, Gal.loc.citato. Calidarum autem quae
sponte ascuntur noxius his usat est: siqui them quae sulphurosae bituminosaeve
sunt ^ae propterca quod (...) aciunt inimicissimae calida naturaliter capiti
sunt.
(as some modern Chemist; pretend) neither do I conceive any great difficulty
to prove their nova medicina to be but as a new cape set upon an old cloak, as
also that minerals were as substantially discovered and distinguished one from
an other, in respect of name, nature and mixture, as also first and second
qualities, as they have been by any Chemist; Although I am not ignorant of
Paracelsus, Arnoldus, Lullius, Crollius, Agric. and Libavius, which by way of
explication, and laborious operation, have made it somewhat more clear in
speculation and practice. And yet all is but a dilatation or enlargement of an
old foundation of the ancients, and no absolute new edifice of their own, as
some of them pretend. But however, because this practice of drinking mineral
waters in our country (I suppose) is chiefly encouraged by, and grounded upon
our own learned countreyman of the Bath, Doxtor lorden.
who is not unknown to any Physician; therefore it will not be amiss to
transcribe his opinion concerning the use of mineral waters, and whether the
drinking of them may be allowed after the manner of our mineral Spaw; that
is, to be taken into the body cold and raw. For although he were much devoted
to the use of them, yet he advises the external use only in bathing, when as
he says we find many of these to be venomous and deadly, as proceeding from
Arsenicke Sandaracha, Cadinia, and the like; therefore we had need be very
wary in the inward use of them, and therefore Neptunes well in Taracina was
found to be so deadly, as that for this cause it was stopped up; by Montpellier
at Perant is a well which kills all the fowls that drink of it, the lake
Avernus kills all the fowls that fly over it, so do the vapors arising from
Carons den, between Naples and Puteolum, so there are diverse waters in Savoy
and Rhetia which breed swellings in the throat, others proceeding from Gipsum
do strangle. But where we find waters to proceed from wholesome minerals, and
such as are convenient and proper for our intents, and upon good search, and
long experience found to be so, there we may be bold to use th^^^ both (...)
do not imagine them to be such absolute remedies, as that they are of
themselves able to cure diseases, without either rule for the use of them, or
without other help adjoining to them: Moreover the said Doctor does confess,
that although the mixture of the Bath in Somersetshiere, in his own opinion
be the most absolute and wholesome of all others, and he conceives as
wholesome as any to be taken into the body, yet (says he) the jealosie I
have of their alien mixture with other waters adjoining, does deter me from
the counselling their inward use, and the practice of them any other ways,
then by bathing. But if any adventure to drink of such mineral streams, he
desires them to be drunk hot by any means, both for the better penetration,
and less offense to the stomach, then when they are taken crude and cold
producing for proof the ancient custom of the Grecians and Romans, which
drank most of their wine and water hot, and not cold and raw from the spring,
according to the practice of our Spaw in Norfolk: Thus it appears that
neither ancient nor modern do much affect the practice of drinking any water,
except upon such strict and wary terms and circumstances, as rarely or never
will concur. But however the drinking of the water cold is absolutely
prohibited, as contrary to reason and antiquity: so that it must appear, that
the ground of this our practice, and the use of this our mineral spring is
precipitious and dangerous, as has bin plainly proved, both out of the
ancients and also many learned modernes; yet such is the vanity of our age, as
that Audax omnia perpeti Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas. Horat. Nitimur in
votitum semper cu pimusque negata.
prohibition is the greatest spur to praecipitation, and does hurrie us into
mischiefs forbidden, as also cause us Narcissus. like to dote upon our own
supposed perfection, transcending (if we may be our own judges) our reverend
and learned fathers, as if we were not (...) but (...) nay (...) as he vaunts
himself in the Poet; (...) Homer. Tydides melier patie. Horat.
upon which confidence in our own strength we are ready to blemish them with
dotage, thinking, those learned fathers of medicine too old, and not wise
enough to teach us; when wise men know we are too young to sound their depthes
without their own lines; For when we have done all our best, even then we are
compelled to acknowledge the truth of that everlasting sentence of Hippocrates,
(...), that our lives are too short to measure the extent of art; and for this
cause I think my self bound to admire that and those which I cannot
comprehend, according to his judgment in Plutarch, upon a book of Heraclitus.
(...)
And although I had rather be wise alone then err with any, yet in some
respects I proclaim with Epiphanius Ferdinandus, Mallem errare cum Galeno and
Hippocrate quam cum omnibus alijs sapere, not that I adore any mortal more
then by a venerable esteem which is their due; and it were facriledge to rob
them of it. But to return to our subject, mineral streams have some
toleration in external use, especially for bathes; and not so neither without
special indication and retification; but for the wanton course of drinking
them after such an irrational manner, it was never countenanced by any
ancient, or learned modern; For my own part I could wish there were some such
Nectar streams, that being used after the manner of our Spaw, might not only
cure all diseases, but also wash off that curse of mortality, changing age
into youth (as Medea is fabled to have done) infirmities into perfection,
Aesonidem mutasse velim etc. Ovid. Metam.
and weakness into strength; and on this condition, who would not shake hands
with Galen and all the rest, and break up schools of physic? for why should
students smother themselus in their studies, when they might sit upon a clift
and thence view Psalm. 107 24. Neptunnm procule terra spectare fureatem. Horat.
the wonders of the deep, and drink immortal health at so cheap a rate? And
as I heartily desire to taste of such, so I abhor the use of those that have
contrary effects; as to corrupt them that are sound, to weaken those that are
strong, to hasten age in those that are young, and in conclusion to strangle
and swallow up all in death; And such have bin the effects of mineral wels and
fountains, as is expressed in our former discourse, especially used without such
caution and circumstance, as is laid down by learned and discreet practisers.
And they are such also as can hardly or never be reconciled in one object.
Therefore both out of my special affection to my friends, and charity to my
opposites (if there be any such) but Patria una omnes omnium charitates
complectitur. Cicero.
above all in love to my Country, I have endeavored to acquaint those that
are not knowing in these things (although otherwise learned) with the danger of
unknown things, both in respect of their mixture and manner of using so
rashly: For rashness has bin condemned of old, and caution never known to
hurt, (...) Epicharimu^^
nay to be the very sinnewes of wisdom. However, when I see Galen and others
so strict in smaller matters prohibiting the use of rain water (which is little
different from the best of waters) I cannot but be zealous in matters of such
great consequence, as the inward use of mineral waters without any extraction
or correction, or so much as colation, which is the easiest of all other
preparations; Moreover if any shall say there is such perfect incolation through
the earth, as also such sufficient separation of heterogeneall qualities, that
they stand in need of no better it will soon be answered, that they are
altogether ignorant, both of their generation, qualities, and use; neither did
they ever take notice of the sweats and labors, which many learned Chemists
have taken about the preparation of those minerals, from whence the waters of
this kind receive their tincture. But however, were they in themselves sweet,
light, thin, without either sapor or odor, and pleasant as wine, yet the large
drinking of them cold, is most contrary to reason and all sound authority, as
is plainly proved. But that I may now avoid prolixity, I will hasten to shore,
and to conclude, am bound to advise a serious meditation of this subject, as a
most necessary consideration, being a maine cause of health or sickness of
diverse kinds. Therefore I have plainly showed the nature and difference of
waters by reason of their several mixture with wholesome and unwholesome earth,
and such as have been always esteemed and used both in diet and medicine for
sound and wholesome, all being confirmed by the practice and judgment of the
most learned and ancient Physicians; notwithstanding I have left a liberty to
every understa^ding agent, to make use of all as they may be strictly and
properly indicated, otherwise upon a mere logical notion, or some nice
distinction the practice thereof (forsooth) is to be prohibited. Not that I
undervalew the true use of logic, as a handmaid to all arts and sciences, but
the excess which is the essence of error. Besides physicians are sensible
artificers, and not only refer all to sense, but also are chiefly taught by
sensible precepts, and therefore Ranchinus by the authority of Galen condemns
distinctions, definitions and divisions that are too logical as causes of
confusion, rather then solid instruction, For which cause I have labored to be
the Echo of those worthies, rather then the parent of my own invention and
judgment.

FINIS.

