A commendation of Music, And a confutation of them which disprayse it.
WHen first within the corpse of man, dame Nature built her bower:
She saw what troubles eke and thral, was bent them to deuower.
To whom she gave as in reward, a pleasant note or sound:
Their carkes and cares to drive away, whereby much ease was found.
Whereof in children proof is had, whom nurses have in charge:
How soon they stop and stay their cry, when she does sound at large.
The Plowman eke, and Carter both, with ease does pass away:
In singyng of some merry note, their tranayle all the day.
Wherefore to Lady Nature I, do render praise and will:
By whom not only man alone, but birds in song has skyll.
The Poets feign that Amphion, who builded Thebes town:
Did first invent the pleasant note, whereby he got renown.
To Dionisius some the name, and some contrary wise:
To Zephus, who Eusebius says, the same did first deuyse.
Solinus says that men of Crete, by ryng and sound of brass:
By Thacbadianes does Polibius say, invented first it was.
In deed I think soon after that, dame Nature made the sound:
That Reason did the measure make, the concord and the ground.
And then in Mercury first it wrought, as auctour of the same:
The which even he (as worthy praise) did publish and proclaim.
Then Reason, as one not full suffysde, did seek for to deuyse:
Some instrument to give a sound, by whom there did arise
A foreward wit in Mercury, for to invent the same:
Who made a Harp of fyshes bone, a Tortes called by name.
Which he by Nilus river found, the fysh was dryde away:
And nothing but three sinowes left, whereon he sought to play.
But when they gave a sound again, thus do the Poets feign:
He made a Harp much like that bone, by thinuent of his brain.
Three strings to it did he apply, a Treble Base and Mean:
The which he made for to accord, in Musickes pleasant vain.
Then he it to Apollo gave, as gift of wondrous weight:
And he the same to Orpheus hands, made redeliuery straight.
Some think Amphion first it found, and some to that say no:
And some in Tuball think the like, but that can not be so.
Then Pan the Pype, Apollo eke, the Shalme he did invent:
Then David Regalles sought to make, by Reasones whole consent.
And Orphen first, with Linus next, and Arion als by name:
Timarias, and Trezenius both, thereby did purchase same.
Nor Cibell yet, with Pises too, their labor ought did cease:
But in the same did sore apply, their cunnyng too increase.
Thus have we proved by Poets lore, how ancient Music is:
And now I mean by Scripture plain, to prove the lykeiwis.
We read how David daunct and soung, before the Ark of God:
And how his wife which flowted him, was by the Lord forbode
For having children any more, but barren should she be:
Whereby I prove that God is pleased, with such like armony.
When MirIam with the Israelites, the red sea deep had past:
And Pharaos host were drowned all, who did pursue them fast,
Then took they Timbrelles in their hands, and to ye Lord sang praise
For that he was their aid and shyeld, to pass the daungerouse seas.
The Shepherdes eke, and Angels both, we read how they reioyst:
When they once heard and understood, the birth of Jesus Christ.
We see by this what Music is, we need no better proof:
The Scripture is a buckeler good, in Musickes right behoof.
In Fucsius, and in Galen both, who list to look shall find:
How much that Music does appease, the dolours of the mind.
You know what tauntes Themistocles, in banquet did sustain:
When he good music did disprayse, accoumptyng it but vain.
They judged his learning much the worse, because he did defye
That, which all men did much esteem, regard and eke set bye.
I pray you was not Socrates, whom crooked age had caught:
With Musickes skyll and armony, as one with Cupid fraught?
And said that concord was the ground, and eke the sure stay:
Without the which nothing is good, this could that wise man say.
And measure is a merry mean, and mean who does embrace:
Of every virtue has the ground, which brings man to grace.
This have I done in Musickes cause, my pen now will I rest:
Sith that I have that worthy science, as famous once professed.
And who that seeks the loss of it, needs must I speak my mind:
A great disprayse is to his wit, his words are coumpted wynd.
FINIS.
(quod) Nicholas Whight.

Imprinted at London in Aldersgate street, by Alexander Lacy: dwelling beside
the Well.


