A DISCOVRSE AND DISCOVERY OF NEVV-FOVND-LAND, WITH many reasons to prove how
worthy and beneficial a Plantation may there be made, after a far better
manner than now it is. TOGETHER WITH THE LAYING OPEN OF CERTAIN ENORmities and
abuses committed by some that trade to that Country, and the means laid
down for reformation thereof.

Written by Captain Richard Whitbourne of Exmouth, in the County of Deuon, and
published by Authority.

Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston, for William Barret. 1620.



TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF God, King of great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign,
IT has always been my chiefest study and practice, to serve your Majesty
and my Country: the intent of my best labors that way, I have put into the
following Discovery, and, upon good approbation thereof by diverse of your
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, have been encouraged to offer up the
same work unto your Majesty. I confess my weakness such, that I cannot put
so fit a Garment upon it, either of style or method, as I conceive the matter
it self deserves. The substance of the work, I submit to your Majesty's
wisdom and judgment; the errors and things needless, to your Highness
pardon. The purpose thereof, is, with your Gracious allowance, to beget a
disposition in all your Majesty's Subjects, for a Plantation in the
New Foundland, grounded upon reason of industry, both generally and
particularly profitable to the Undertakers and Posterities, as well in matters
of wealth, as also the means for increase of Defense and Power; which will the
better go forward, when your Majesty's Subjects are made acquainted, with what
facility it may be undertaken; and so to work the more effectual impression
in them, when they shall understand, that it is an Island, near as spacious as
Ireland, and lies so far distant from the Continent of America, as England is
from the nearest part of France, and near half the way between Ireland and
Virginia, and the most part of it above three degrees nearer the South, than
England, and has been already well approved by such of your Majesty's Subjects
as have lived there above ten years, that the Country is very healthful and
pleasant in the Winter. How commodious and beneficially that Land may be
peopled with small charge, and prove profitable to the Undertakers, and not
hurtful to any of your Majesty's Subjects, the following Discourse will make
it plainly appear, the which was presented unto your Majesty at Huntingdon
in October last; since which time, it has pleased such of the Lords of your
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, at White Hall, the 24. of July last
then present, to give me encouragement with their good approbation thereunto;
and ordered, that the book should be printed, with this further addition of
their Honors favor, to be recommended to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the rest of the Lords Bishops, to be distributed to the several Parishes
of your Majesty's Kingdom, for the better encouragement of such as shall be
willing to assist that Plantation, either in their persons or otherwise. And if
your Majesty's Subjects put it in trial to undertake; I trust, God will give a
blessing to the success, whereof I have only made a true and plain Relation
of the truth: if I should write other then the truth, there are many in your
Majesty's Kingdoms that have often traded to that Country, whom I suppose
will be ready to disprove me.

Thus being loath to be too tedious, I most humbly recommend to God, and to your
Majesty, my endeavors, the success thereof, and my poor self.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subject, RICHARD WHITBOVRNE.

To his Majesty's good Subjects.
Having had my breeding for many years together in the courses of
Marchandizing and Navigations, I have, through the expense of my time in that
calling, set this down to my self, for my duty therein, to observe and
collect, wherein my labors might become profitable to my Country; and the
rather, because I could not be ignorant, how much the maintenance, and increase
of Shipping and Mariners concerns us, who may fitly be styled, The nation of
the Sea; which general reasons were more and more commended to me, by more
particular considerations offered me, in the notice I took of the disposition
and affairs of other States, to which ours has relation; some points whereof
cannot now seasonably be mentioned; some others proper to what I discourse of,
will present themselves in their places, as I shall go along in giving account
of my endeavors.

Among my undertakings and employments in Seafaring, the most part have been
to an Island, called New Foundland, in part heretofore outwardly discovered,
but never looked into by those discouerers as it deserved; from the beginning I
found it promise well, in respect of the purpose, I had to gather some thing
for the bettering of the Common wealth; and the more I made trial of it, the
more satisfaction it gave me: Therefore I affected that course better then any
other I fell unto; insomuch as I did so fix my industry upon it, that for the
qualifying of my travels, I obtained Commission from the State to proceed in
it, and am now come to propound to my Countrymen, the benefit they may make of
an orderly Plantation and Traffic there: the following Discourse will
satisfy them, if they will forgive the vnhansomenes of the form it is put
into, and look into the matter it self only.

The description of newfound land, and the commodities thereof.
The Island of New Foundland is large, temperate and fruitful, the
fruitfulness of it consisting not only in things of sustenance for those that
shall inhabit it, but in many sorts of Commodities likewise, of good use and
value to be transported. The Natives in it are ingenuous, and apt by discreet
and moderate governments to be brought to obedience. The seat is fit for
Harbor and relief, upon the way between us and Virginia, and consequently of
advantage to us in any action that may engage us, either by way of offense or
attempt, in regard of those parts of the World. The Seas are so rich, as they
are able to advance a great Trade of Fishing; which, with Gods blessing, will
become very serviceable to the Navy; and the increase of fishing there, cannot
despair of finding Ports enough to vent the commodity at profitable rates.

Now if you would understand what motives we have at home with us to carry us
thither; do but look upon the populousness of our Country, to what a surfeit
of multitude it is subject; consider how charitable for those that go, and how
much ease it will be for those that stay, to put forth some of our numbers, to
such an employment of living. Compare the English nature with others; and find
whether we have not as much courage as they, both to undertake and mainetaine;
only we lose it, in having less industry. Turn then toward the Low
Countries; behold how they have won upon us, by taking advantage of our
sitting still; (and most remarkable in this point of fishing) which if their
Audit were published, would be found (I believe) one of the best Agents they
have, both for their strength and wealth.

There is another motive also, which amongst our Ancestors was wont to find
good respect, namely, the honor of the action, by the enlarging so Dominions;
and that which will crown the work, will be the advancement of the honor of
God, in bringing poor Infidels (the Natives of that Country) to his Worship,
and their own salvation.

I commend the design to the entertainment of his Majesty and his Kingdoms:
because I esteem it such a one as deserves, not only to be undertaken, but to
be gone through withal.

And as it is a Project of no fantasy in me, but a truth grounded upon a
well-weighed experience; so have I not presumed to publish it, but upon good
approbation, as has already appeared.

If these considerations, with many others here omitted, but contained in the
ensuing Discourse, may work an impression in the affections of his Majesty's
Subjects, for the advancement of Gods glory, their own and their Countries
prosperity, it shall be some content toward the great pains, losses of time,
and expense of my means that I have sustained in the prosecuting thereof, for
which I trust you will at least return your thankful acceptance; and so I
remain

Your loving friend, R. W.

THE PREFACE, BEING AN INDVCTION TO the following Discourse.
ALthough I well know, that it is an hard matter to persuade people to
adventure into strange Countries; especially to remain and settle themselves
there, though the conditions thereof be never so beneficial and aduantageous
for them: yet I cannot be out of all hope, that when it shall be taken into
consideration, what infinite riches and advantages other Nations (and in
particular the Spaniards and Portugals) have gotten to themselves by their many
Plantations, not only in America, but also in Barbary, Guinnie, Binnie, and
other places: And when it shall plainly appear, by the following Discourse,
that the Country of New Foundland (as it is here truly described) is little
inferior to any other for the Commodities thereof; and lies, as it were with
open arms toward England, offering it self to be embraced, and inhabited by
us; I cannot be out of hope (I say) but that my Countrymen will be induced,
either by the thriuing examples of others, or by the strength of reason, to
hearken, and put to their helping hands to that, which will in all likelihood
yield them a plentiful reward of their labors. But before I enter into
discourse of the Country it self, I hold it fit to make known partly the
means and degrees, whereby I attained unto the experience and knowledge I have
thereof.

And first, for mine own poor estate and condition, it is well known, that
my breeding and course of life has been such, as that I have long time set
many people on work, and spent most of my days in travel, specially in
Merchandising, and Sea-Voyages. I have been often in France, Spain, Italy,
Portugal, Sauoy, Denmark, Norway, Spruceland, the Canaries, and Soris Islands:
and for the New Foundland, it is almost so familiarly known to me as my own
Country.

In the year 1588. I served under the then Lord Admiral, as Captain in a
ship of my own, set forth at my charge against the Spanish Armada: and after
such time as that service was ended, taking my leave of his Honor, I had his
favorable Letters to one Sir Robert Dennis, in the County of Deuon, Knight;
whereby there might be some course taken, that the charge as well of my own
ship, as also of two other, and a Pinnace, with the victuals, and men therein
employed, should not be any way burdensome to me. Wherein there was such order
given by the then right Honorable Lords of the privy Council, that the same
was well satisfied; which service is to be seen recorded in the Book at
White Hall.

Now, to express some of my Voyages to the New Foundland, which make most for
the present purpose:

My first Voyage thither, was about 40. years since, in a worthy ship of the
burden of 300. Tun, set forth by one Master Cotton of South-hampton; we were
bound to the grand Bay (which lies on the Northside of that Land,) purposing
there to trade then with the Savage people, (for whom we carried sundry
commodities) and to kill Whales, and to make Train oil, as the Biscaines do
there yearly in great abundance. But this our intended Voyage was overthrown,
by the indiscretion of our Captain, and faint-heartednesse of some Gentlemen
of our Company: whereupon we set sail from thence, and bare with Trinity
Harbor in Newfound-land: where we killed great store of Fish, Dear, Bears,
Beauers, Seals, Otters, and such like, with abundance of Sea-fowle: and so
returning for England, we arrived safe at South-hampton.

In a Voyage to that Country about 36. years since, I had then the command of
a worthy Ship of 220. Tun, set forth by one Master Crook of South-hampton: At
that time Sir Humfrey Gilbert, a Devonshire Knight, came thither with two good
Ships and a Pinnace, and brought with him a large Patent, from the late most
renowned Queen Elizabeth, and in her name took possession of that Country,
in the Harbor of S. John's, whereof I was an eyewitness. He sailed from thence
toward Virginia; and by reason of some unhappy direction in his course, the
greatest Ship he had, struck upon Shelues, on the Coast of Canadie, and was
there lost, with most part of the company in her: And he himself being then
in a small Pinnace of 20. Tun, in the company of his Vice Admiral, (one
Captain Hayes) returning toward England, in a great storm, was overwhelmed
with the Seas, and so perished.

In another Voyage I made thither, about 34. years past, wherein I had the
command of a good Ship partly mine own; at that time one Sir Bernard Drake of
Devonshire, Knight, came thither with a Commission, and having diverse good
Ships under his command, he there took many Portugal Ships laden with fish,
and brought them into England as Prizes.

Omitting to speak of other Voyages I made thither, during the late Queens
Reign, I will descend to later times.

In the year 1611. being in New Foundland, at which time that famous
Arch-Pirate, Peter Easton, came there, and had with him ten sail of good Ships
well furnished and very rich, I was kept eleven weeks under his command, and
had from him many golden promises, and much wealth offered to be put into my
hands, as it is well known: I did persuade him much to desist from his evil
course; his entreaties then to me, being, that I would come for England, to
some friends of his, and solicit them to become humble petitioners to your
Majesty for his pardon: but having no warrant to touch such goods, I gave him
thanks for his offer; only I requested him to release a Ship that he had
taken upon the Coast of Guinnie, belonging to one Captain Rashly of Foy in
Cornwall; a man whom I knew but only by report: which he accordingly released.
Whereupon I provided men, victuals, and a fraught for the said Ship, and so
sent her home to Dartmouth in Deuon, though I never had so much as thanks for
my kindness therein. And so leaving Easton, I came for England, and gave
notice of his intention, letting pass my Voyage that I intended for Naples,
and lost both my labor and charges: for before my arrival, there was a Pardon
granted, and sent him from Ireland. But Easton houering with those Ships and
riches upon the Coast of Barbary, as he promised, with a longing desire, and
full expectation to be called home, lost that hope, by a too much delaying of
time by him who carried the Pardon. (...) too much delaying of time by him who
carried the Pardon. Whereupon he sailed to the Straights of Gibraltar, and was
afterward entertained by the Duke of Sauoy, under whom he lived rich.

I was there also in the year 1614. when Sir Henry Manwaring was upon that
Coast, with five good Ships strongly provided; he caused me to spend much time
in his company, and from him I returned into England; although I was bound from
thence to Marsellis, to make sale of such goods as I then had, and other
employments, etc.

In the year 1615. I returned again to New Foundland, carrying with me a
Commission out of the high Court of Admiraltie, under the great Seal thereof,
authorizing me to empannell Iuries, and to make inquiry upon oath, of sundry
abuses and disorders committed amongst Fishermen yearly upon that Coast, and
of the fittest means to redress the same, with some other points, having a
more particular relation to the Office of the Lord Admiral.

What was then there done, by virtue of that Commission, which was wholly
executed at my own charge, has been at large by me already certified into the
high Court of Admiraltie. Nevertheless, seeing the same has been ouerslipt
ever since, and not produced these good effects which were expected, I will, in
some convenient place of this Discourse, set down a brief collection of some
part of my endeavors spent in that service; not doubting but it will be as
available for the furtherance of our intended design, as any other reason I
shall deliver.

In the year 1616. I had a Ship at New Foundland of 100. Tun, which returning
laden from thence, being bound for Lisbone, was met with by a French Pyrate of
Rochell, one Daniel Tibolo, who rifted her, to the overthrow and loss of my
Voyage, in more then the sum of 860. pounds, and cruelly handled the Master
and the Company that were in her: and although I made good proof thereof at
Lisbone, and represented the same also to this Kingdom, as appertained, after
my return from thence; yet for all this great loss, I could never have any
recompense.

Shortly after my return from Lisbone, I was sent for by a Gentleman, who
about a year before, by a grant from the Patentees, had undertaken to settle
people in New Foundland; he acquainted me with his designs, and after some
conference touching the same, we so concluded, that he gave me a conueyance
under his hand and seal for the term of my life, with full power to govern
within his circuit upon that Coast; whereupon (being desirous to advance that
work) in Anno 1618. I sailed thither in a Ship of my own, which was
victualled by that Gentleman, my self and some others. We likewise then did
set forth another Ship, for a fishing Voyage, which also carried some victuals
for those people which had been formerly sent to inhabit there: but this Ship
was intercepted by an English erring Captain (that went forth with Sir Walter
Rawleigh) who took the Master of her, the Boatswaine and two other of the best
men, with much of her victuals (the rest of the Company for fear running into
the woods) and so left the Ship as a Prize, whereby our intended Fishing
Voyages of both our Ships were overthrown, and the Plantation hindered.

Now seeing it pleased your Majesty many years since, to take good notice of
the said New Foundland, and granted a Patent for a Plantation there, wherein
many Honorable and worthy men's endeavors, and great charge therein, have
deserved good commendations (as is well known) the which I desire to further
with all my best endeavors: and not to disgrace or disable the foundation and
Proiects of others, knowing they have been greatly hindered by Pirates and some
erring Subjects that have arrived upon that Coast; it being indifferent to me,
whether there be a new foundation laid, or whether it be builded on that which
has already been begun; so that the Plantation go forward. Yet I may truly
say, that hitherto little has been performed to any purpose, by such as
therein were employed, worthy the name of a Plantation, or answerable to the
expectation and desert of the Undertakers; neither have such good effects
followed, as may be expected from a through performance hereafter. And seeing
that no man has yet published any fit motives or inducements, whereby to
persuade men to adventure, or plant there; I have presumed plainly to lay
down these following reasons, which is the principal end I aim at, whereby
to further that work so worthily intended, by prescribing fit means how a
Plantation might be settled there; and have therefore undertaken it, as well to
discharge my conscience, which has often prompted me thereunto, as hoping
thereby to stir up many of your Majesty's good and religious Subjects, duly to
weigh the piety, honor and benefit that will arise from such a work,
considering how your Majesty's Kingdoms do abound and ouerflow with people.
And although I have often suffered great losses by Pirates and Sea-Rouers, and
other casualties of the Sea, yet in this point, I have tasted of Gods exceeding
great mercy, that never any Ship, wherein I my self was present, miscarried, or
came then to any mischance, or any casualty of the Sea, whereunto all Ships are
subject: so as I may well say, that my life has been a mixture of crosses and
comforts, wherein nevertheless they have not been so equally balanced, but
that the one has ouerweighed the other: for now, after more than forty years
spent in the foresaid courses, there remains little other fruit unto me,
saving the peace of a good conscience, which gives me this testimony, that I
have ever been a loyal Subject to my Prince, and a true lover of my Country,
and was never as yet in all my time beholding to any Doctors counsel, or
Apothecaries drugs, for the preservation of my health; and it will be to me a
contentment, if I may be so happy, as to become the instrument of any public
good herein: And so I descend to the particular Relation of the Country, etc.

A RELATION OF THE NEVV-FOVND-LAND, with a more ample discovery of that
Country, then ever was yet set forth to the open view; together with the
Briefes of such presentiments, as were there taken to the use of your Majesty,
by virtue of a Commission under the Broad Seal of the Admiraltie, directed to
me RICHARD WHITBOVRNE.
IT is to be seen by the Cosmographers Maps; and well approved, that the
New Foundland is an Island, bordering upon the Continent of America, from which
it is divided by the Sea: so far distant, The situation of the Country.
as England is from the nearest part of France, and lies between 46 and 53
degrees North-latitude: It is near as spacious as Ireland, and lies near the
course that ships usually hold in their return from the West Indies, and near
half the way between Ireland and Virginea.

I shall not much need to commend the wholesome temperature of that Country,
seeing the greatest part thereof lies above 3 degrees nearer to the South,
then any part of England does.

And it has bin well approved by some of our Nation, who have lived there these
many years, The temperature of the air.
that even in the winter it is as pleasant and healthful, as England is.

And although the example of one Summer be no certain rule for other years;
yet thus much also can I truly affirm, that in the year 1615, of the many
thousands of English, French, Portugals, and others, that were then upon that
Coast, (amongst whom I sailed to and fro more then one hundred leagues) I
neither saw nor heard in all that travel, of any man or boy of either of these
Nations, that dyed there during the whole voyage; neither was so much as any
one of them sick.

The Inhabitants, with their nature and customs.
The natural Inhabitants of the Country, as they are but few in number; so are
they something rude and savage people; having neither knowledge of God, nor
living under any kind of civil government. In their habits, customs and
manners, they resemble the Indians of the Continent, from whence (I suppose)
they come; they live altogether in the North and West part of the Country,
which is seldom frequented by the English: But the French and Biscaines (who
resort thither yearly for the Whale-fishing, and also for the Cod-fish) report
them to be an ingenuous and tractable people (being well used:) they are ready
to assist them with great labor and patience, in the killing, cutting, and
boiling of Whales; and making the Traineoyle, without expectation of other
reward, then a little bread, or some such small hire.

The conueniencie of the Bays in that Country.
All along the coast of this Country, there are many spacious and excellent
Bays, some of them stretching into the land, one toward another, more then
twenty leagues.

On the East side of the land, are the Bays of Trinity and Conception; which
stretch themselves toward the South-west; Tor Bay, and Capelin Bay, lying also
on the East, stretch toward the West: The Bays of Trepassey, S. Mary, Borrell,
and Plaisance, on the South part of the land, extend their arms toward the
North: The great Bay of S. Peter's, lying on the Southwest side of the land, and
East, Southerly from the great River of Canady, being about twenty leagues
distant, the same stretches toward the East.

And here I pray you note, yt the bottoms of these Bays do meet together
within the compass of a small circuit: by means whereof our men passing over
land from Bay to Bay, may with much facility discover the whole Country.

From the Bay of S. Peter round about the Westside of the land, till you come
to the grand Bay, which lies on the North-side of the Country; and so from
thence, till you come round, back to Trinity Bay, are abundance of large and
excellent Bays; which are the less known, because not frequented by the
English, who seldom fish to the Northward of Trinity Bay.

And it is to be observed, Commodious Islands and worthy Harbors.
that round about the Coast and in the Bays, there are many small Islands,
(none of them further off then a league from the land) both fair and
fruitful: neither does any one part of the world afford greater store of good
Harbors, more free from dangers, or more commodious, then are there built by
the admirable workmanship of God; I will only instance two or three of the
chiefest, for some special reasons.

Trinity Harbor affoording diverse good commodities.
Trinity Harbor lies near in 49 degrees North-latitude, being very
commodiously seated to receive shipping in reasonable weather, both to anchor
in, and from thence to sail toward either the East, West, or South: It has
three Arms or Rivers, long and large enough for many hundred sail of Ships,
to moare fast at Anchor near a mile from the Harbors mouth; close adjoining
to the Rivers side, and within the Harbor is much open land, well stored with
grass sufficient, Winter and Summer, to maintain great store of ordinary
cattle, besides Hogs and Goats, if such beasts were carried thither; and it
stands North, most of any Harbor in the land, where our Nation practices
fishing; It is near unto a great Bay lying on the North-side of it, called the
Bay of Flowers; to which place no Ships repair to fish; partly in regard of
sundry Rocks and Ledges lying even with the water, and full of danger; but
chiefly (as I conjecture) because the Savage people of that Country do there
inhabit: Savages living near to Trinity Harbor.
many of them secretly every year, come into Trinity Bay and Harbor, in the
night time, purposely to steal Sails, Lines, Hatchets, Hooks, Knives, and
such like. And this Bay is not three English miles over land from Trinity Bay
in many places; which people, if they might be reduced to the knowledge of the
true Trinity indeed, no doubt but it would be a most sweet and acceptable
sacrifice to God, an everlasting honor to your Majesty, and the heauenliest
blessing to those poor Creatures, who are buried in their own superstitious
ignorance. The task thereof would prove easy, if it were but well begun, and
constantly seconded by industrious spirits: and no doubt but God himself would
set his hand to rear up and advance so noble, so pious, and so Christian a
building.

The bottom of the Bay of Trinity lies within four leagues through the land
Southwest, The bottoms of di^^^^ bays meeting near together.
Southerly from Trinity, as by experience is found, and it comes near unto the
Bay of Trepassey, and the bottom of some other Bays, as I have already
touched before.

And what commodities may thereby redound, if some of your Majesty's Subjects
were also once settled to plant near unto Trepassey, being the South part of
New Foundland, where some ships use yearly to fish? If therefore near the
Harbor of Trinity it were inhabited by some of your Majesty's Subjects, I see
no reason to the contrary, but that a speedy and more certain knowledge might
be had of the Country, by reason those savage people are so near; who being
politikely and gently handled, much good might be wrought upon them: for I have
had apparent proofs of their ingenuous and subtle dispositions, and that they
are a people full of quick and lively apprehensions.

Trepassey in like manner is as commodious a Harbor, lying in a more temperate
climate, almost in 46 degrees the like Latitude, The Harbor of Trepassey lying
commodiously.
and is both fair and pleasant, and a wholesome Coast free from Rocks and
Shelues: so that of all other Harbors, it lies the South-most of any Harbor
in the land, and most conveniently to receive our shipping passing to and from
Virginea, and the Bermuda Islands; and also any other shipping that shall pass
to and from the River of Canady and the coast thereof; because they usually
pass, and so return in the sight of the land of Trepassey; and also for some
other purposes, as shall be partly declared in the following discourse.

But I will not insist upon further particulars of Harbors in this place,
seeing our men that yearly trade to that Coast, know them to be as good and
commodious Harbors, as any other whatsoever.

The fertility of the soil.
The soil of this Country in the valleys and sides of the mountains, is so
fruitful, as that in diverse places, there the Summer naturally produces out
of the fruitful womb of the earth, without the labor of man's hand, great
plenty of green Pease and Fitches, fair, round, full and wholesome as our
Fitches are in England: of which I have there fed on many times: the hawmes of
them are good fodder for cattle and other beasts in the winter, with the help
of Hay; of which there may be made great store with little labor in diverse
places of the Country.

Several sorts of fruits there growing.
Then have you there fair Strawberries red and white, and as fair Raspasse
berries, and Goose berries, as there be in England; as also multitudes of
Bilberries, which are called by some, Whortes, and many other delicate Berries
(which I cannot name) in great abundance.

There are also many other fruits, as small Pears, sour Cherries, Filberds,
etc. And of these Berries and fruits the store is there so great, that the
mariners of my Ship and Barks company, have often gathered at once, more then
half an hogshead would hold; of which diverse times eating their fill, I never
heard of any man, whose health was thereby any way impaired.

There are also herbs for Sallets and Broth; Herbs and flowers both pleasant
and medicinable.
as Parsley, Alexander, Sorrel, etc. And also flowers, as the red and white
Damask Rose, with other kinds; which are most beautiful and delightful, both
to the sight and smell.

And questionles the Country is stored with many Physical herbs and roots,
albeit their virtues are not known, because not sought after; yet within these
few years, many of our Nation finding themselves ill, have bruised some of the
herbs and strained the juice into Beer, Wine or Aqua-vitae; and so by Gods
assistance, after a few drinkings, it has restored them to their former health.

The like virtue it has to cure a wound, or any swelling, either by washing
the grieved places with some of the herbs boiled, or by applying them so
thereunto (plaister-wise) which I have seen by often experience.

This being the natural fruitfulnes of the earth, producing such variety of
things, fit for food, without the labor of man; I might in reason hence
infer, that if the same were manured, and husbanded in some places, as our
grounds are, it would be apt to bear Corn, and no less fertile then the
English soil.

But I need not confine my self to probabilities; Corn growing there,
yielding good increase.
seeing our men that have wintred there diverse years, did for a trial and
experiment thereof sow some small quantity of Corn, which I saw growing very
fair; and they found the increase to be great, and the grain very good; and
it is well known to me, and diverse that trade there yearly, how that Cabbage,
Carrets, Turnips, Lettice, and such like, prove well there.

Store of Dear and other beasts.
In diverse parts of the Country, there is great store of Dear, and some Hares,
many Foxes, Squirrels, Beuers, Wolves, and Bears, with other sorts of beasts,
serving as well for necessity, as for profit and delight.

Neither let me seem ridiculous, to annex a matter of nouelty, rather then
weight, to this discourse.

A rare example of the gentle nature of the beasts of that Country.
In the year 1615. it was well known to 48 persons of my company, and diverse
other men, that three several times, the Wolves and beasts of the Country
came down near them to the Seaside, where they were laboring about their
Fish, howling and making a noise: so that at each time my Mastiffe-dogge went
unto them (as the like in that Country has not been seen:) the one began to
fawn and play with the other, and so went together into the Woods, and
continued with them, every of these times, nine or ten days, and did return
unto us without any hurt. Hereof I am no way superstitious, yet it is something
strange to me, that the wild beasts, being followed by a stern
Mastiffe-dogge, should grow to a familiarity with him, seeing their natures
are repugnant: surely much rather the people, by our discreet and gentle usage,
may be brought to society, being already naturally inclined thereunto.

But to return to our purpose, and to speak something of the great plenty of
Foul in that Country, Plenty of Land-fowle.
as well Land-fowle, as Water-fowle; the variety of both kinds is infinite.

The Land-fowle (besides great number of small birds flying up and down, some
without name, Great store of Land-fowle.
that live by scraping their food from the earth in the hardest winter that is)
there are also Hawks, great and small, Partridges, Thrush, and Thrussels
abundance, very fat. As also Filladies, Nightingales and such like, that sing
most pleasantly.

There are also birds that live by prey, as Ravens, Gripes, Crows, etc. For
Water-fowle, Water-fowle.
there is certainly so good, and as much variety, as in any part of the world;
as Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, Gulls, Penguins, and many other sorts.

These Penguins are as big as Geese, and fly not, for they have but a little
short wing, and they multiply so infinitely, upon a certain flat Island, that
men drive them from thence upon a board, into their boats by hundreds at a
time; as if God had made the innocence of so poor a creature, to become such
an admirable instrument for the sustentation of man.

There are also Godwits, Curlewes, and a certain kind of foul that are
called Oxen and Kine, with such like; which foul do not only steed those that
trade thither greatly for food, but also they are a great furthering to diverse
Ships voyages, because the abundance of them is such, that the Fishermen do
bait their hooks with the quarters of Sea-fowle on them: and therewith some
ships do yearly take a great part of their fishing voyages, with such bait,
before they can get others.

The fresh waters and Springs of that Country, are many in number, Fresh water
and Springs.
and withal very pleasant, delightful and wholesome, that no Country in the
world has better. And Fuel for fire is so plentiful, that there is never
like to be want of that commodity.

Many sorts of Timber there growing.
In like manner there is great abundance of Trees fit to be employed in other
serviceable uses: There are Fur and Spruce trees, sound, good, and fit to
mast Ships withal; and as commodious for boords and buildings as the Spruce
and Fur trees of Norway; and out of these came abundance of Turpentine. No
Country can show Pyne and Birch trees, of such height and greatness as those
are there: and doubtless, if some store of your Majesty's subjects do once
settle there to live, and would be industrious to search further, and more
thoroughly into the Country, then as yet it has been, there might be found
many other commodities of good worth. Amongst the which I may not omit, Good
hope of Mines, and making of Iron and Pitch.
that there is much probability of finding Mines, and making of Iron and Pitch.

The Rivers also and Harbors are generally stored with delicate Fish, as
Salmons, Peales, Eeles, Herring, Fish in great abundance.
Mackerell, Flounders, Lance, Capelin, Cod, and Troutes the fairest, fattest
and sweetest, that I have seen in any part of the world. The like for
Lobsters, Crafish, Muskles, Hens; and other variety of Shellfish great store.

And also observe here, that in these places there is usually store of the
spawne and fry of several sorts of fishes: whereby the Sea-fowle live so fat,
as they are there in the winter: And likewise the Beuers, Otters and such like,
that seek their food in the Ponds and fresh Rivers.

The Seas likewise all along the Coast, do plentifully abound in other sorts
of fish, as Whales, Spanish Mackerell, Dorrell, Pales, Herring, Hogs, Porposes,
Seals, and such like royal fish, etc.

But the chief commodity of New Foundland yet known, and which is grown to
be a settled trade, and that may be much bettered by an orderly Plantation
there, (if the Traders thither will take some better course, then formerly they
have done, as shall be declared) is the Cod-fishing upon that Coast,
Cod-fishing a great hope of benefit there from.
by which our Nation and many other Countries are enricht.

And if I should here set down a valuation of that fish, which the French,
Biscaines, The benefit arising to France, Spain, and Italy, from fishing upon
those coasts.
and Portugals fetch yearly from this Coast of New Foundland, and the Bank,
which lies within 25 leagues from the South-cape of that Country, where the
French use to fish Winter and Summer, usually making two voyages every year
thither: (To which places, and to the Coast of Canady, which lies near unto
it, are yearly sent from those Countries, more then 400. sail of ships:)

It would seem incredible, yea some men are of opinion, that the people of
France, Spain, and Italy, could not so well live, if the benefit of the
fishing upon this Coast, and your Majesty's other Dominions, were taken from
them.

But I trust it will be sufficient, that I give an estimate of our own trading
thither, and partly of the wealth and commodities we reap thereby, without any
curious search into other men's profits.

In the year 1615. when I was at New Foundland with the Commission
beforementioned, 250. Sail of ships lying upon that Coast, Anno 1615.
which was an occasion of my taking the more particular observations of that
Country, there were then on that Coast, of your Majesty's subjects, 250. sail
of Ships great and small. The burdens and Tunnage of them all one with
another, so near as I could take notice, allowing every ship to be at least
threescore tun (for as some of them contained less, so many of them held
more) amounted to more then 15000. tons. Now for every threescore tun
burden, according to the usual manning of Ships in those voyages, agreeing
with the note I then took, there are to be set down twenty men and boys: by
which computation in these 250. sail, there were no less then five thousand
persons. Now every one of these ships, so near as I could guess, had about
120000. fish, and five tun of Train oil one with another.

What the value of the fish contained in most ships did amount unto.
So that the total of the fish in these 250. sail, when it was brought into
England, France or Spain, (being sold after the rate of four pound, for every
thousand of fish, six score fishes to the hundred, which is not a penny a
fish, and if it yield less, it was ill sold) amounted in money to 120000.
pound.

Now, as I have said before, allowing to every ship of 60. tun, at least five
tun of Train oil, the total of that arises to 1250. tun; each tun,
whether it be sold in England, or elsewhere, being vnder-valued at twelve
pound. So as the whole value thereof in money, amounts to the sum of 15000.
pound, which added to the fish, it will appear that the total value of the
fish, and Train oil of those 250. sail of ships that year, might yield to
your Majesty's subjects better then the sum of 135000. pound, omitting to
reckon the ouer-prices which were made and gotten by the sale thereof in
foreign Countries, being much more then what is usually made at home, and so
the like in other years.

And this certainly, in my understanding, is a point worthy of consideration,
that so great wealth should yearly be raised, by one sole commodity of that
Country, yea by one only sort of fish, and not upon any other trade thither,
which must needs yield, with the employments thereof, great riches to your
Majesty's subjects: And this also to be gathered and brought home by the sole
labor and industry of men, without exchange or exportation of our Coin, and
native commodities, or other adventure (then of necessary provisions for the
fishing) as Salt, Nets, Leads, Hooks, Lines, and the like; and of victuals, as
Bread, Beer, Beef, and Porke, in competent measure, according to the number
and proportion of men employed in those voyages.

The converting of these commodities (gotten by fishing) into money, cannot
choose but be a great benefit to all your Majesty's Kingdoms in many respects.

What the charge in setting forth of these 250. sail might amount unto (being
only for victuals, which our Country yields) I hold it not fit here to set
down, lest I should be accused by some therein.

And withal it is to be considered, The relief that the trading there will
afford to several sorts of people.
that the trade thither (as now it is) does yearly set on work, and relieve
many numbers of people, as Bakers, Brewers, Coopers, Ship-Carpenters, Smiths,
Net-makers, Rope-makers, Line-makers, Hooke-makers, Pully-makers, and many
other trades, which with their families have their best means of maintenance,
from these New Foundland voyages. Add unto them the families or servants of
diverse Owners and Masters of such ships as go thither, and mariners with their
families, hereby employed and maintained.

By this little which has been thus briefly spoken of the situation,
temperature, safenes of the Coast, natural fertility, commodities and riches
of New Foundland, it does plainly appear, that it is a Country not only
habitable and lying open, ready to receive the first comers; but also for the
goodness thereof, worthy to be embraced, and made the habitation of Christians.

Reasons inducing for a Plantation there.
What the reasons, motives and inducements are, either of honor, profit or
advantage, which may justly inuit your Majesty, and all your good subjects,
to take some speedy and real course, for planting there, I will endeavor
hereafter to show.

First reason, hope of converting the Inhabitants to Christianity.
For it is most certain, that by a Plantation there, and by that means only,
the poor misbeleeuing Inhabitants of that Country may be reduced, from
Barbarism, to the knowledge of God, and the light of his truth, and to a
civil and regular kind of life and government.

This is a thing so apparent, that I need not enforce it any further, or
labor to stir up the charity of Christians therein, to give their
furtherance toward a work so pious, every man knowing, that even we our
selves were once as blind as they in the knowledge and worship of our Creator,
and as rude and savage in our lives and manners.

Only thus much will I add, that it is not a thing impossible, but that by
means of those slender beginnings which may be made in New Foundland, all the
regions near adjoining thereunto, may in time be converted to the true worship
of God.

Secondly, the uniting of a Country so beneficial already, Second reason, the
temporal benefits that may justly and easily arise from hence.
and so promising unto your Majesty's Kingdoms, without either bloodshed,
charge, or usurpation, must needs be a perpetual honor to your Majesty in
all succeeding ages: and not so only, but also a great benefit and advantage
to the State, by a new access of Dominion. And what Prince or State can
enlarge their territories, by a more easy, and more just means then this?

The English are reputed for the first Discouerers of this Country: and a
Subject of this State, one Sir Humfrey Gilbert (as is touched before) has long
since taken possession thereof, Sir Hum. Gilbert long since took possession
thereof to the use of this Crown.
to the use of your Majesty's royal Crown; and that possession has bin
continued by several Patents and Commissions: so that of right, I do
conceive, it appertains to your Majesty, although it be not yet peopled with
your Majesty's subjects, notwithstanding the said Patents.

Neither seems it impossible to me, but that your Majesty, and your royal
Progeny, may in time annexe unto your Crown, a great part of the Continent of
America, bordring upon New Foundland, Hope of joining America, or some parts
thereof to New Foundland.
the same lying nearer to your Majesty's kingdoms, then to any other Country
of these our known parts of the World: and for the most part of it under the
same Elevation of the Pole with us; and but little above six hundred leagues
distance from hence.

At least I cannot see, but that from hence further Discoueries may be made,
and new trades found out, yea peradventure the supposed Northwest passage: For
if it can be proved, or if there be any possibility or probability, that
there is such a passage, on the Northside of America toward Iapan and China,
which in the opinion of some men, is to lie near the height of 64 degrees: the
fittest place from whence to proceed to that Discovery, is (in my opinion) the
New Foundland. And for those that henceforth attempt to search that straight
or passage, to set forth sooner and more early, then heretofore they have
done, and to sail directly to some convenient Harbor in New Foundland, there
to refresh themselves with such provision as shall be needful; and so put out
from thence about the twentieth day of May (if it be once set in a fair
Westerly wind,) and to sail along the North part of New Foundland, and that
Coast which is called Cambaleu, continuing that Northerly course unto 64, which
is but 15 degrees from Trinity Harbor; and it may be sailed in less then six
days, with a fair Westerly wind, which commonly makes a clear coast all
along to the North, both from fogges and Ice also; both which are violent
hinderers to men that have undertaken these voyages. For coming to feeke out
those straights or passages, with a large Easterly, Southerly, or Northerly
wind, which commonly bring on that Coast the fogges and Ice, and coming so
late in the Summer, they have thereby lost the advantage and benefit of time
for finding out so happy a business.

But if this design of a Plantation should not be entertained, and thoroughly
prosecuted, it may be justly doubted, that some other Prince will step in, and
undertake the same: which if it so fall out, your Majesty shall not only lose
all those advantages and benefits, which your Majesty, and your subjects might
reap by this Plantation, but also the actual possession; and then those that
should usurp your Majesty's right there, will be an hindrance to your Majesty
either to remove them, or to plant by them, without hazarding a breach of peace.

And it may be feared, that such a Plantation, growing to have strength, your
subjects shall be (if not prohibited) yet at least hindered of their free
trading and fishing there, or constrained to take their fish of the Planters,
and at their prices; which may fall out to be a notable disseruice to your
Majesty, and the utter overthrow of your subjects trade thither.

But in setting down the advantages we shall have by a settled Plantation
there, I have sufficiently discovered, what our losses will be, if we suffer
our selves to be prevented by others.

That Country may be made a place of great use and advantage, for this State
in any action, that may engage us by way of attempt or defense, in regard of
those parts of the world.

For the first, this Country lies so near the course which the Spanish
ships, that come from Mexico, Hauona, and other places of the West Indies, hold
in their return from thence, that they often sail within 150. leagues from
the South part thereof.

In the year 1615. whilst I was in that Country, three ships returning from
the West Indies, did arrive there, purposely to refresh themselves with water,
wood, fish, and foul, and so have diverse others done at other times.

Sundry Portugal ships have come thither purposely to load fish from the
English, and have given them a good price for the same, and sailed from thence
with it to Brasile, where that kind of fish is in great request, and they have
made great profit thereby.

And diverse Dutch and French ships have also oftentimes come thither, purposely
to load fish from the English, which they afterward transport into Italy,
Spain, and other parts, whereby they employ both their shipping, and mariners,
making good profit thereof.

We have already spoken of the great numbers of French and Portugal shipping,
that usually trade every year to this Coast, and the places near adjoining in
fishing voyages: so that what in all likelihood may be the event of a
Plantation to be made there, if either Spain or France should break league
with your Majesty, or your royal Progeny; I leave to the consideration of
your Majesty.

And certainly as your Majesty's subjects sailing to and from Virginia, and the
Bermuda Islands, might in any extremity (having spent a mast or yard, or when
any leake is sprung) be relieved, and at other times refresh themselves in
their voyages, if a Plantation were settled near about Trepassey: So upon
occasion of any attempt, or other injuries which might be offered those more
remote Plantations, they might from thence receive succor in shorter time then
from England.

Besides all this, it would be a great ease to all the rest of your Majesty's
subjects, if some part of our superabounding multitudes were transplanted into
New Foundland; for besides the great number of idle persons that live here,
spending their time in drinking, and other excess, among which many of your
New Foundland men may be reckoned, during the winter season, whilst they are
at home: There are many thousands of poor people of both sexes, which might be
spared out of all your Majesty's Dominions, who living penuriously, and in
great want, would be persuaded to remove their dwelling into New Foundland,
where they might not only free themselves of their present miseries, but also
by their industry, in time enrich themselves, and deserve well of the State by
their imploiments: for there is yearly great abundance of good fish lost for
want of laborers, and other good things also.

Neither are the people of those your Majesty's Kingdoms, any way inferior to
other Nations in courage, either to undertake, or maintain, but they are often
less industrious and diligent. And (with grief it is to be spoken) by our
sluggishnes, some of our near neighbors have won from us the ancient
honor, and that reputation, by which we were held the Masters of Navigations,
and Commanders of the Seas.

And I am verily of opinion, if their Audit were truly published to the world,
that their trade of fishing upon your Majesty's Seacoasts, has been the best
means of their present strength, having thereby increased their shipping and
wealth, and enabled their men for Navigations. For it is well known, that the
French and also the Dutch, by their fishing on your Majesty's Seacoasts, do
use a petty kind of picking away of infinite sums of money yearly from your
Majesty's Kingdoms; not only from North-Yarmouth, and other places thereby,
all the time that the Herring fishing lasts: but also for Mackerell, Soles,
Whitings, and other sorts of fish which they take, in sight of your Majesty's
Kingdom, and bring it here to land daily, and sell it for ready money; such
daily gathering away of coin, may well be remedied, if your Majesty's subjects
would forbear to buy any fresh fish of other Nations, which me thinks they
should: then Strangers should be constrained to bring coin into your Majesty's
Kingdoms with their fish, to set poor people a work to salt and preserve
their Herrings, and other fish withal, when they bring it here a land; whereby
some Customs and other duties will also grow: or otherwise they will leave
their daily fishing so near your Majesty's Kingdoms (as now they do) and
then such fish will be the more plentiful for your Highness subjects to take,
and thereby greatly encourage them to set forth and employ many a poor man
the more in fishing, then now there is: and it will then not only preserve
great sums of money yearly from carrying away from your Majesty's Kingdoms,
but also there will be more gotten, than now there is, and great numbers of
mariners increased, to be very serviceable for the Navy, when there may be
cause.

Now that which is like to be the present benefit, and which (in my opinion)
will weigh most toward the furtherance of this Plantation in New Foundland, by
reason of the many consequences thereof; is the bettering of our trade there,
which will fall out exceeding beneficial in diverse respects, if those who
adventure thither, will follow some better course then formerly they have used:
And in so doing, ships may then fail in much more safety thither, and return
yearly from thence much more richer then now they do. For many disorderly
courses are committed by some traders and adventurers thither, in setting
forth to that Country, and practiced by some of them when they arrive there:
If these disorders were reformed, the great benefit expected will soon follow.

It is well known, that they which adventure to New Foundland a fishing,
begin to dress and provide their ships ready commonly in the months of
December, January, and February, and are ready to set forth at Sea in those
voyages near the end of February, being commonly the foulest time in the
year. And thus they do, striving to be there first in a Harbor, to obtain
the name of Admiral that year: and so, to have the chiefest place to make
their fish on, where they may do it with the greatest ease, and have the
choice of diverse other necessaries in the Harbors, which do them little stead:
but the taking of them wrongs many others of your Majesty's subjects, which
arrive there after the first.

And thus by their hasting thither, oftentimes there comes not only danger to
themselves, but also great mischief, and losses to many others which arrive
there after the first; as it may by that which follows truly appear.

For by the hasting forth as now they use, they greatly endanger themselves,
being many times beaten with rough and stormy winds; and oftentimes they are
thereby forced to return back with great loss both of men's lives and goods,
as it is well known: So that to get the superiority to arrive there first in
an Harbor, they will bear such an ouer-prest sail, and in so desperate a
manner, as there are no true understanding Seamen that use the like to any
other part of the world. For albeit when the fogges are thick, and the nights
dark, that sometimes they cannot discern the length of three ships in the way
before them, and the Ice often threatening much peril to them: yet on runs
the ship amain, so fast as possibly she may, when commonly most part of the
company are fast asleep, even with extreme hazard of their lives. Thus many
times both ships and men have been suddenly cast away, to the utter undoing of
many Adventurers, and families. So had I my self a ship lost sailing to that
Country, and diverse others the like.

And also this untimely setting forth, consumes a great quantity of
victuals, that might be saved to better purpose, and it forces them to carry
and recarry many more men in every ship, every voyage, then they need, if they
once take a fitter course.

Such Stages and Houses, that the first arriuers into an Harbor find
standing, wherein men set diverse necessaries, and also salt their fish, some
men have used to pull down, or taken their pleasures of them: by which unfit
disorders of some first arriuers there yearly, those which arrive after them,
are sometimes twenty days and more to provide boords and timber, to fit their
boats for fishing; and other necessary rooms to salt and dry their fish on:
whereby much time is lost, and victuals consumed to no good purpose; and
thereby also the voyages of the after-commers, are often greatly hindered and
prolonged, to the great hurt of your Majesty, and many a good subject: and the
mariners themselves which trade to that Country, and commit those great
abuses, are thereby also much wronged, as they have acknowledge, by their own
disorderly behauiours.

Wherefore if such which hence-foorth adventure to that Country, take some
better course in that trade of fishing, then heretofore they have used, they
shall find the greater safety of their adventures, and much good thereby. For
whereas heretofore they have used to make ready their ships to sail in those
voyages, in such unseasonable time of the year, whereby they often receive
great hindrances and losses; they need not then go forth in the said voyage,
until the 25. day of March, which is a fit time of the year to put to Sea
from our Coast to that Country; the winter storms beginning then to cease.
And then any such ship which carries in her thirty men in every voyage, may
well leave six men there behind them, or more, all the winter season, until
the ships return to them again. And these six men's victuals will be saved,
and serve to better use, and thereby also likewise cut off that months setting
forth in those voyages so soon in the year, as now men use to do, and then
the victuals for that month which is so vainly and with such great danger
consumed, may well maintain those men, which are left in the Country all the
winter season, till the ships return to them again, with a very small
addition to it.

And if it may so please your Majesty, that any subject which will undertake
to settle people in the New Foundland, shall have this privilege, that in
case he leave there a fifth person of such which he carries thither in his
fishing voyage to inhabit; whereby those me^ so left, might keep a certain place
continually for their fishing, and drying thereof, whenever their ship
arriueth thither: then would all such which leave people there, build strong
and fitting necessary rooms for all purposes; and then in some of those
necessary houses or rooms they may put their fish when it is dried, which fish
now stands after such time it is dried, until it is shipped, which is
commonly above two months, in great heaps packt up uncovered, in all the
heat and rain that falls, whereby great abundance of good fish is there
yearly spoiled, and cast away for want of such necessary rooms: And for the
want of such fit houses, some men's voyages (to my knowledge) have been greatly
overthrown; and then a mean place to make fish on, will be made more
commodious then the best place is now, that men so dangerously and desperately
run for every year. And thus every man's fishing Pinnaces may be preserved in
such perfect readiness, against his ship shall yearly arrive there again,
which Pinnaces are now often lost, and sometimes torn in pieces by the first
arriuers there very disorderly.

And if such Pinnaces and such Stages and Houses may be maintained and kept in
such readiness yearly, it would be the most pleasant, profitable, and
commodious trade of fishing, that is at this time in any part of the world.

For then every ships company might fall to fishing, the very next or second
day after their arrival; whereas now, it is twenty days until they are
fitted: and then such ships should not need so soon to haste away from England
by one month at least; men's lives might be thereby much the better saved,
less victuals wasted, and many dangers prevented. And so every ship in every
such voyage, may gain quickly one hundred pound, that usually carry in her but
twenty men, more then now they do, by leaving of four men there of twenty.
And as the proportion (before named) holds for leaving six men in
New Foundland of thirty, so the allowing of men to be made proportionably from
every ship, will soon raise many people to be settled in every Harbor where
our Nation uses to fish, and in other Harbors there also in little time.

Some ships by this course may then quickly gain two hundred pound, and some
three hundred pound and more, according to their greatness, more then they do
yearly now. And those men so left, will manure land for come, saw boords, and
fit Timber to be transported from thence, and search out for diverse commodities
in the Country, which as yet lie undiscovered: and by such means the Land
will be in little time fitly peopled with diverse poor handy-crafts men, that
may be so commodiously carried thither to live with their wives.

And that no man else should appropriate to himself any such certain place,
and commodity for his fishing voyage, except he will in such manner settle a
fifth part of his company there to live. And then such Adventurers thither will
carefully provide yearly for such as they leave there, not only for bread and
victuals, but likewise for all necessary tools, fit for any kind of
husbandry. The charge thereof will yearly repay it self, with the benefit of
their labors that shall be so left there, with great advantage.

And for others which yearly adventure thither, and will not settle people
there in such manner, they may hold on such unfit courses in setting on to that
Country, and take their places, as it falls out, as formerly they have done:
wherein I am persuaded they will soon grow weary, when they shall see the
great commodity and benefit that other men will gain by settling of people
there.

By this means will the burdens and numbers of your Majesty's subjects
shipping be greatly increased, and strengthened, and great numbers of mariners
yearly augmented, and then our shipping may well trade thither two voyages in
every year, and more, whereas now they go but once.

If you will know what victuals might be saved by those six men of thirty so
to be left there, and so proportionably for greater numbers; this is the
estimate:

The allowance of victual to maintain every six men, to carry and recarry
them outward bound and homewards, is six hogsheads of beer, and six hundred
weight of bread, besides beef and other provision; which men, when they sail
to and fro (as now they use) do little good or any service at all, but pester
the ship in which they are, with their bread, beer, water, wood, victual,
fish, chests, and diverse other trumperies, that every such six men do cumber
the ship withal yearly from thence: which men, when the voyage is made, may
be accounted unnecessary persons returning yearly from thence.

But being left in the Country in such manner, as aforesaid, those parts of
these ships that leave those men there, that are so pestered now yearly with
such unprofitable things, may be filled up yearly with good fish, and many
beneficial commodities, for the good of those Adventurers that will so settle
people there to plant.

These men that may be so fitly left in the Country, will not only be free
from the perils of the Sea, by not returning yearly, as now they use to do,
but will live there very pleasantly; and (if they be industrious people) gain
twice as much in the absence of the ships that leave them there, more then
twelve men shall be able to benefit their Masters, that are kept upon most
Farms in England in a whole year.

For certainly I have already seen and known by experience, that the desired
Plantation can never be made beneficial by such idle persons, as I found
there the year 1618. when I was there with power, by virtue of a grant from
the Patentees, which people had remained there a whole year, before I came
near, or knew any of them; and never applied themselves to any commendable
thing, no not so much as to make themselves an house to lodge in, but lay in
such cold and simple rooms all the winter, as the Fishermen had formerly built
there for their necessary occasions, the year before those men arrived there.

Such persons are not fit to advance your Majesty's intended work, but rather
disgrace and hinder the same.

Therefore seeing those people that were so formerly sent to plant in the South
part of the Country, to be so unfit for that service, as it is well known, I
grew out of heart to behold such abuse to be used by those that were so sent to
plant.

Yet entering into consideration, how injurious I should be to God, and (as I
did conceive in my conscience) treacherous to your Majesty, and my Country,
having once as it were laid hold on ye plough, I should take it off and look
back: I did then encourage my retiring spirits; notwithstanding all my former
wrongs then sustained. And although I found those people that were so formerly
sent to plant, so unfit for that service, I did not only consider of the
fittest course whereby to advance that work, which was formerly so worthily
intended; but also truly and plainly to write this Discovery, as now I have,
how commodiously and beneficially it may be proceeded on; and so shipped some
of them to return home again, and gave others leave to depart, all, excepting
six only; to whom I gave directions for building an house, and employing
themselves, otherwise then formerly they had done, until they heard from the
Gentleman that sent them thither: And so they lived there pleasantly all the
next winter.

Now having laid open a commodious and beneficial course how that Land may be
peopled; yet I suppose it may be questioned, that if a fifth man of some ships,
or every ship were so left in the Country; that it will rather lessen the
number of mariners, that may be ready here at home to do your Majesty
service, then to increase them: and so by misconceiuing therein, your Majesty's
intended Plantation may be hindered. To which I answer, that most ships which
trade thither yearly a fishing, do commonly carry in them every fifth person
that was never at Sea before, or such as have but little understanding in their
Compass; neither knowledge of Sea terms, or what to do in a ship: and those
men are yearly hired by the Owners, and Victuallers forth of ships in those
voyages, and by the Master of the ship, and the better sort of men for small
wages, who have the benefit of their shares; and those men do serve even so
fitly for some purposes in those New-land voyages the first year, as some of
those men do that have bin there often: So that by carrying thither yearly
every fifth man, such as were never there before, there will be above 1000.
Seamen increased every year by that trade; and they being left there the
winter, will at times kill Dear and other beasts, and also take store of fish
and foul for their provision; and it will harden them well to the Sea, and at
other times they may employ themselves beneficially in Husbandry upon the land,
as servants ought to do. So that whereas there goes now yearly, as the trade
is, above two hundred and fifty Sail of your Majesty's subjects ships, with
above five thousand men in them; and being yearly carried thither the fifth
person that was never at Sea before, there will be by that course increased
above five thousand Seamen in every five years: and whereas now there is
yearly trading thither above two hundred and fifty Sail of ships, there will
be then in little time (God blessing that trade) above four hundred Sail of
your Majesty's subjects ships there employed; which may be a greater increase
of wealth, strength and power to your Majesty and Kingdoms, than now it is.

And although it be well known, that the New Foundland yields yearly such
great blessings from God, to maintain Christians; yet many of our English
Nation, who in great fullness taste them, do there as it were tread them under
their feet; as may partly appear by the following discourse. For our Nation,
upon their arrival yearly to that Country, do cut down many of the best
trees they can find, to build their stages and rooms withal for their
necessary occasions; hewing, rinding, and destroying many others that grow
within a mile of the Sea, where they use to fish.

The rindes of these trees serve to cover their Stages, and necessary rooms,
with turfes on them; so that in fevv years, I fear, that most of the good
timber trees near the Seaside, where men use to fish, will be either
felled, spoiled or burned: yet at our peoples departure from such rooms and
stages, they will suffer but little thereof to stand, whereby to do any man
service the year ensuing.

These are things lamentable to be suffered, and great pity that it is not
redressed: for no Nation else does the like, neither do the Savage people,
after such time as our Countrymen come from thence, either hurt or burn any
thing of theirs, thatz they leave behind them; so that those trees, and that
timber might be converted to many serviceable uses for the good of your
Majesty, and your subjects.

Now I think good to make known partly what abuses be also offered to the
Harbors and Rodes in New Foundland, that are so beautiful and excellent,
ordained by God for ships to ride safe in at anchor, as there are not better in
any part of the world: yet for all this beauty of theirs, and the commodity
that we receive by them; these disorders diverse men do there commit, viz.

All ships, for every voyage they make there, take in many exceeding great
stones, therewith to press their dry fish in their ships; which work being
done, they cast many of these stones into ye Harbors where they ride at Anchor,
which are to be seen lying in great heaps in some places, within three fadome
of water, to the great indangering of ships and cables; to the peril also both
of men's lives, and their goods, and likely in time to choke up or spoil many
excellent Harbors in that Country, if provision be not by your Majesty's high
authority made to the contrary.

All these abuses are confessed in the brief of the presentiments, that follow
in the latter part of this book, the which being made known to the subjects
that adventure thither, I am confident (in my opinion) that they should all
desire your Majesty, that there may be some better government established
there, than now it is: and that such which plant there, may not abuse or hinder
any such which yearly come thither a fishing, whereby they should have any
just cause to complain the one against the other, as now they do.

And because my desire is, that not only Merchants, or such as live near the
Seaside, but also all others that shall give their furtherance to this
Plantation, either by aduenturing their moneys, or sending men thither
(because it is to be undertaken by men of good ability) and in such manner, as
the wealthy men do in other Countries, joining their purses to further any
such good work: I think it fit to show how such persons may adventure to that
Country, though they dwell far from the Seacoast; and others likewise that
dwell near, may do it with little trouble, but only by a trusty servant to
give account yearly of his disbursings, and likewise of his receipts; which (I
trust) will be very beneficial to all such as will adventure therein.

Some, who dwell far from the Seacoast, may say, they are so far off, that
they should be but little the better for a Plantation to be made in
New Foundland, and so may hold it a needless thing for them to know how
beneficial that Country has long time bin to these your Majesty's Kingdoms;
and how it may in little time be worth double to your Majesty's subjects, in
respect of what now it is, even in the only trade of fishing, besides the good
that may come by other commodities.

To such therefore that should here object, that those that live far from the
Sea, whether Gentlemen or others, and are not experienced in affairs of this
nature, cannot so conveniently adventure thither: I answer, that none of your
Majesty's Subjects dwell further then 100. miles from the Seaside, which is no
great journey; By the same reason that Commodities brought from Foreign parts,
and landed on our coasts and Haven towns, dispersed through all places of your
Majesty's Kingdoms, and so vented (our men living thus in any of these places)
may with as little difficulty adventure into other Countries. For as we have
the example of diverse, both Gentlemen and others of Italy, Spain, Germany,
Sauoy, the Low Countries, and other places that come yearly more then 200.
miles to the City of Civil, purposely to sail to the West Indies, and do
return rich; So it may be also well understood by the following discourse, how
commodiously there may be sent many people from any part of your Majesty's
Kingdoms to be there employed, that have but small means to live, and be
very beneficial to themselves, and will employ the^ there. The first thing
therefore that I will advise any subject that is but little acquainted with
Sea-affaires, and such as is willing to adventure in the desired Plantation,
is, to acquaint himself with an approved understanding man in Sea-affaires,
and also with a second; and then with both their opinions and his own
judgment, he may set forward therein, with great hope of the better success;
for to my knowledge, diverse worthy gentlemen that have adventured to the Seas;
partly through their own conceit, seeming to know that which they did not,
have also oftentimes been animated on by some turbulent spirits that have
outrun themselves, and so brought men in such minds, that on the coast of
Guinnie there, they might gather up gold along the Seashore, washed up with
the Sea in great abundance; and likewise if they would adventure to the West
Indies, there they should load their ships with gold-oare, and draw it aboard
their ships with Wheele-barrowes, and then share it by the pound; and such like
proiects.

Thus by such means diverse men have run so far at Sea, in some such unfit
voyages, that they have brought land to water, and knew not how to shape a
course to recover unto land again. God send all those that will henceforth
adventure to the Seas in any Plantation, good Pilots, and it will be the
greater hope of good success.

Now for those that will put their hands to the furthering of a Plantation in
New Foundland, my opinion is, they are best either to buy a Ship of 100. Tun,
and a Pinnace of 40. Tun, or near such burdens, or else to hire the like Ship
to serve for the passing of people, victuals, and provisions, in the Spring of
the year, fit for such a purpose, and for the returning of such fish, and
other commodities from thence, as those men so sent and employed, may procure
with their labors; and those Ships and men so sent, may be so fitted and
provided with Salt, Nets, Hooks, Lines and such like provisions, as those Ships
and men are, which yearly fail thither a fishing.

The best course of the two, as I conceive, is for any such, to buy a Ship and
a Pinnace to serve for that purpose, and then the Pinnace may be sent thither
before the bigger Ship, whereby to settle and begin to such a convenient place
for habitation, as God shall direct them whither the greater ship may repair:
and they may employ themselves all the time that there is good to be done in
fishing in that trade only, and between the fail of the Shoales of fish,
they may build houses and other necessary things in perfect readiness to be
transported into Spain, Portugal and other places beyond the Seas, much
cheaper then the Hollanders do, seeing it is to be had there easily with man's
labor only. And therefore more commodiously from thence for us from those
parts, then the Hollanders are able to serve them, as now they do, who buy
such commodities with their money in Spruce-land, Norway and other places, and
yet thereby gain much, and increase a number of Shipping and Mariners, and set
them a work continually.

Now having showed how men may undertake to further this Plantation, by
providing ships for the fishing trade, as is formerly expressed; I suppose that
some worthy men, that may be zealous and willing to further so pious,
honorable, and beneficial a work, may be unwilling to trouble themselves
with the fishing trade, and yet very willing to further the said Plantation
after some other manner, that may be less troublesome to them, which they may
well perform in this manner:

They may hire a ship with men, and victualled to sail from any part of your
Majesty's Kingdoms, to the New Foundland, to carry people, victuals, beasts,
and other provisions in such competent number, as may be fit to pass in such a
ship, as any one shall so hire; and having landed such people and provisions
there to plant, the said ship may there load fish from the fishermen; and if
any will plant in that manner, they are to bargain for their fish here in
England, with such as do set forth ships in the fishing trade, which fish may
be bought before hand of them to be delivered there at eight shillings the
hundred weight, or near that price, and to pay for the same within forty
days, more or less, after such times here in England, that there comes from
thence the sight of any Bills of Exchange, from those that receive the fish
there in that manner; and the ship so hired, being there laden, may sail
from thence to Portugal, Spain, or any other Port within the straights of
Gibraltar, and unto Marsellis or Naples; I suppose the freight of every Tun
of fish so to be transported there, will be near four pound the Tun,
twenty hundred weight to the Tun; which freight and hire for the ship, men
and victuals, in all that time, it may be agreed to be paid there where the
fish is sold; so that for the hire of the ship, men and victuals, there will
be no occasion to disburse any money before the ship safely arrive to either
of the places aforesaid, where, by Gods assistance, any one shall so intend to
make sales; and there the ship so hired may be set free; and then what more
so-euer the fish may yield, may be to discharge the buying of the fish in the
New Foundland, and what profit may accrue over and above the freight and hire
of the ship, men, and victuals being discharged, will redound to the good of
any man that will adventure so to plant, and hire his ship in that manner;
and such course may any sufficient man take every year to further the said
Plantation, and have one ship to make three voyages there in a year, that
shall but land people and provisions for them, and presently reloade such Fish,
Masts, Deale-bords, Beams, Timber for buildings, and other commodities, such
as those people which he had formerly sent, should have provided in readiness:
with which commodities, if he return to Spain or Portugal, it will yield
ready money: and if he return with it to the City of London and Port of
Bristoll, or any other place within your Majesty's Kingdoms, it will also not
only yield ready money, but it will be a means to employ many the more of
your Majesty's Subjects and shipping therein: so that the Hollanders and other
Nations should not bring so much of such commodities into your Majesty's
Kingdoms as they do now yearly, and carry away much coin for the same.

And withal it is to be considered, that whereas now there are yearly at
New Foundland of your Majesty's Subjects ships in the fishing trade, at least
15000. tun burden of shipping, as is already expressed, and that these
ships yearly carry thither, near half their lading of salt, to save their
fish withal, which cannot be less then 7000. tun, the which salt, whether
it be bought in Spain, Portugal or France at a cheap rate, it cannot cost
less then seven thousand pounds, which is but twenty shillings the tun,
adding the freight thereunto for bringing it from those parts, it cannot stand
in less then twenty shilling a tun more, which is seven thousand pounds
more; so that the salt may stand those that trade thither as the trade is now,
with the waste and transportation of it thither, above fourteen thousand
pounds, of which sum there is above seven thousand pounds yearly bestowed in
other Countries, which I should gladly show some fit means that it may be
henceforth saved and brought into your Majesty's Kingdoms in Coin, or some
other good commodities. The which may be very fitly, commodiously and
beneficially done, if those which yearly adventure thither, will settle people
there in such order as aforesaid, in every harbor where they use to fish, and
provide pannes in every such harbor to boil salt to preserve their fish
withal, the which may be performed there very cheap; so in that manner one
pan will make above twenty bushels of good salt in every four and twenty
hours for that purpose, only with man's labor and the salt water; and not as
some do use, to make salt upon salt; and there it will be undertaken to be
made with the wood-fire (which may be there had with little labor) without
Charcole or Sea-coles; and that salt so made there, shall not stand in
threepence the bushel, to those that will provide to make it in that manner:
and now salt stands those that adventure there, never less then twenty pence
a bushel.

And it is well approved by all those that yearly fish for Ling, Codde, and
Herrings upon all your Majesty's Seacoasts, that salt orderly boiled in such
manner, does much better preserve fish, and keep it more delightfuller in
taste, and better for man's body, then that fish which is preserved with any
other kind of salt. And I am well assured, that such fish as is salted with
the finest white salt, will sell far better in Civil, and other places of
Spain and Italy, then that which is preserved with any other kind of muddie
salt: and thus by taking such a fit course for making thereof in
New Foundland, it will not only save a great deal of coin yearly in your
Majesty's Kingdoms, but also greatly enrich your Majesty's Subjects thereby.

There is no question to be made, but that those ships which may be so
procured to carry people thither, will yearly return from thence deep
laden with good fish to diverse places beyond the Seas, and make good profit
with the employments thereof, (if fit provision be made to take fish withal
as it ought to be: for every man, the better he does provide himself for that
purpose, shall reap the greater benefit thereby at the first) and not be able
to return from thence, Deale-bords, Masts, and such like, until such time as
shipping be builded much greater, and fitter for that service then now they are.

The trade to the New Foundland being followed in this manner, as it may well
be, your Majesty's Subjects may then have there yearly, above 400. sail of
good ships from all your Majesty's Kingdoms, ready to be called home from
thence, without imbarment of any foreign Prince, upon less then fourteen
days warning, if the wind serve, with above eight thousand lusty, strong and
serviceable Seamen in them, upon any occasion of service, when some other ships
and Mariners that are then abroad in voyages, to the East, or West Indies, and
diverse other places, will not be so speedily called home; neither (when they
come) so lusty and strong, as those which use to the New Foundland are, if
your Majesty and Kingdoms have never so great need of their service.

Which being considered, must needs be also a great terror to any foreign
Prince that shall proffer to quarrel with your Majesty, when he shall
consider that your Majesty may so speedily be furnished with so many
serviceable ships of your Subjects, and so many Saylors, and that but from that
only place of trading: So, again it is to be considered, that yearly from
the New Foundland, as the trade is now, the Subjects bring from thence to the
value much above the sum of 135000. pounds: what the benefit and employment
thereof, and the employments of ships and Mariners are thereby, may be well
considered, and that trade carries not away any coin out of the Land, as some
others do, neither any other commodities, and therefore it may be well
understood what a great benefit shall arise to all your Majesty's Kingdoms, if
the trade be once orderly settled and increased as aforesaid: and then your
Majesty's Subjects ships will be much bigger builded for that trade, and better
furnished with good Ordnance, fit for any defense, and likewise then Ordnance
will not be sold into other Countries (as it has been much in my time) which
Ordnance so sold (I fear) if occasion should be offered, may shoot their
bullets at our own bosoms, as it is already too much seen.

And whereas my opinion is, that it is better to buy ships for that trade, then
to take them to hyre (as some do) which yearly send ships thither, to load
either fish or Train and transport it into France, Spain and other places;
those which hire ships, are bound by conditions under hand and seal, which we
call Charter parties; wherein it is expressed, in how many days the owners of
the ships are to make them ready, and how many days she must stay there, to
attend the Merchant, and such like conditions: And although the place where she
ariues be never so much ouerlaid with the like commodity that she brings;
yet there must she discharge and also relade; though such commodities, which
she is to relade, be there much dearer then at some other place not far from
it: which has bin a great loss to many Merchants; yea diverse cauils have
risen thereby between them that have taken and letten Ships in that manner.

Therefore I hold, that the buying of Ships to follow that service, is the best
and profitablest course that may be taken therein; for then they may send them
to New Foundland, or where they think good at all times of the year, and to
any place, or so many places as may please God to direct them, to make their
sail and employments, and likewise to vent the same, where they may be best
advised.

Such as will undertake to send people to that land, as aforesaid, I would also
advise them to acquaint themselves with a fit man to be Master in each Ship,
that understands the order of a fishing voyage to that Country; and he will
procure fit fishermen, to go with him for that purpose, and likewise acquaint
them with every particular thing that is fit for such a voyage. And withal it
is to be observed, that for every such servant that any Master will send
thither to plant, and live all the year, he is to have a single share allowed
unto every man alike of such fish as is taken, whilst they labor together in
the Summer time with the ships company with whom they are, though afterward
they stay in the land, and follow some other service for their masters, whiles
the ships are employed abroad in venting their commodities, and until they
return to them again, to the New Foundland: which single share of fish so
taken, may well defray all the charge and hire that any man shall have of his
master, who does stay there all the winter, with good advantage.

Note also I pray', that any ship which shall be so employed to fish only, as
now men use to do, if she be 100. Tun, does commonly carry in her 36. men and
boys; and that ship will sail well to the New Foundland, and from thence to
the Straites of Gibraltar, or any other part of Christendom, with 20. of the
former 36. men: so that 16. of the said company may very well remain there,
till the said ships return to them again, and do good service to your
Majesty and themselves, but most of all to those who shall send so great a
number thither to live all the year; whereas now these 16. men lie still in
the ship at great charge every voyage, much pestering the ships with their
persons, victuals, chests, and diverse unprofitable things to no good purpose,
as is touched before; which places in the ship may be filled with good fish and
other profitable things, if those 16. men were left behind in the Country
where they may be well employed, which is almost the one half part of such a
ships company.

By this it may plainly be understood, that the victual which those 16. men
spend sailing thither, and returning homeward, and a months victual at least
for all those 36. men, will yearly be saved to maintain them there all the
winter season, with the help of very little victuals to it, and also it will
be a great good ease to the Commonwealth, to leave so many there all the
Winter; and after this rate poportionably from diverse ships, great companyes
may commodiously and beneficially be raised to remain there in little time,
from such as will voluntarily and willingly entertain their certain places to
make their fish on, and plant: for the most part of those men, who may so well
and beneficially remain there to plant, may be, some handycrafts-men with
their wives, and some such other people as your Majesty's Kingdoms may very well
spare, doing good to themselves, their masters and Commonwealth, learning
experience and to be fit for service.

I am also confident in my opinion (wherein I submit my self to deeper
judgments) that if New Foundland may be thus planted, our Shipping and
Mariners will be so increased, Mariners to be increased.
that we may hereafter furnish France, Spain, Portugal, and other Countries,
with such kind of fish as those Seas do yield; and so by this means the
whole fishing trade on that coast, may be drawn into the hands of your
Majesty's subjects only: and whether then it will be better for your Majesty's
Kingdoms, let each man judge.

I do not intend that other Nations should be prohibited the free privilege of
fishing, No Nation to be forbidden Fishing.
which for many years they have inioyed there with us; or that we should
assume it unto our selves by strong hand, or constrayne those that come
thither, to take their fish of us at our prices: but this is my only meaning;
That whereas at this present, the French, Bilcaines, and Portugals send yearly
to that Country many sail of ships, as I have already declared, our men by
sailing thither with fewer persons, and in less danger in every ship then now
we do, by multiplying their voyages, and spending less time and victuals in
the same, and by carrying more and better fish in every ship then now they use
to do, may be able not only to furnish France, Spain, and Italy with those
commodities, but also to sell far better cheap, then any of these nations
can possibly fetch the same from thence with their own shipping and labors.
And which of these nations will then adventure thither, when he knows that his
return will be a certain loss?

^urres of diverse sorts.
Moreover, our men wintring there, might take of the beasts of the Country
yielding Furs, when they are in season, and in their perfection; So that in
process of time, they may also settle a traffike with the Savages for their
Furs of Beuer, Martons, Seal, Otters, and what else is of worth amongst them.

Shipping maintained.
Shipping also (the walls and Bulwarks of your Majesty's Kingdoms) will be
hereby not only maintained; but also greatly increased, both in number and
burden, which would be a great advantage to your Majesty, and a notable
defense and addition of strength unto your Majesty's Kingdoms.

Artificers set on work.
Many more poor Artificers and others will be then in great numbers hereby set
a work, then now there are, and by the increase and bettering of this Trade,
a great augmentation of your Majesty's Revenues in your Customs must of
necessity follow.

And certainly if this Trade and Plantation were once settled in such manner,
it would prove more commodious and beneficial then any other Plantation your
Majesty has elsewhere: for, as I have said, it brings in great wealth, and
carries away nothing but a little victuals, Wealth brought in, none carried
away.
which would be consumed by so many idle persons in less then half the time,
which have no employments, and yet the Kingdoms receive no benefit by such
Drones neither.

Much more might be said to this purpose: Fishing on the coast of
New Foundland, great security to great Britain.
but I desire not to invent, or enlarge matters beyond my observations; yet
thus much also may I truly say, that the fishing on the coast of
New Foundland, is a sure and good trade to great Britain, and therefore
deserves to be cherished: for trading thither and returning home thence, we
little fear the Turks bondage and circumcision, nor any outlandish
Inquisition, nor the Imbarkements of any Prince, nor such contagious heates, as
those find that trade near the Line, neither the danger and hurt of
Art-wormes, wherewith ships that trade to most parts Southward, are sometimes
much hurt, nor many other hazards and inconveniences, to which some of our
other tradings are subject.

And as this Plantation will be in all respects so beneficial, as any of those
your Majesty holds abroad elsewhere: so may the same be effectually proceeded
on in much more safety, and with a great deal less charge.

For first of all, touching the transportation of men, (...)ransporting of
(...)en, victuals (...)nd other neces(...)aries from (...)ence, at an easy
(...)ate.
victuals and other necessaries from hence into New Foundland, it will be by
the cheapest and easiest way that can possibly be: for there will be no
occasion to hire any ships expressly for that voyage, as is usually done to
other of your Majesty's Plantations, from whence having vnloden, ships return
sometimes with few commodities.

But those ships that go yearly empty to the New Foundland, only to load
fish and Train oil, and so to depart from thence, cannot be less in number
then 40. sail: Therefore whatsoever shall be thought fit and necessary to be
transported from hence, toward the furtherance and setting forward of that
Plantation, may be by those Ships and Barks carried thither with a very little
charge, and without trouble or hinderance to their voyages; and for the
providing and furnishing of the Plantation with victuals and provisions for
their liuelyhood, the chief want at the beginning will be Corn, (the Country
it self yielding plenty of beasts, foul, fish and fruits, as was before
spoken of:) yea much good fish is there yearly cast away, which might be made
good food for the Planters, if it were preserved. And if need be, ships may
sail from thence in five days with a fair wind, to the Islands of Flowers,
Islands abounding with great store of Beasts for provision of victuals.
and Azores, which Islands abound in Wheat, Beeues, Sheep, Goats, Hogs,
Hens, Potatoes, Muske-millions, Onyons, and many other fruits which they may
have there at cheap rates: and if that should fail, our Country men that stay
there, may be supplied with as little inconvenience and prejudice, as to any
other Plantations, until the Country shall be by their pains and industry
made fit to bear Corn.

For the settling of people there, I have sufficiently declared, it being that
they, who shall either alone or with their families voluntarily go thither,
have good conditions, both for allowing them land, and other convenient
privileges.

For the employment of men in the absence of the shipping, it will be very
beneficial in many respects; Employment for all in the absence of our men.
so that although thousands of your Majesty's people should at once go
thither, yet there would be present employment for them all: no man shall need
to live idly for want of work.

And as New Foundland is nearer to us by more then 400. leagues then Virginia;
The quick return of our people, a comfort to their Country men.
and far from any of the Plantations of the King of Spain, which
peradventure might make this business the more difficult; so those of this
Plantation will have a great comfort and encouragement above all others, in
that they shall not be left desolate in a remote Country, to shift for
themselves, as some have been, but that after five months past, they shall
again see great numbers of their country men, and have their company the rest
of the year.

Neither are there in that part of the Country any Savages, to oppose and
resist our men's planting, No Savages in that part where our Nation trades,
as it falls out in many other places; Those that are there, live in the North
and West parts of the Country (as has bin said) where our Nation trades not:
But on the East and South side of the Land, where the English do fish, and
which is the fittest place for a Plantation, there is not the least sign or
appearance, that ever there was any habitation of the Savages, or that they
ever came into those parts, to the Southward of Trinity Bay: of which I could
also give some reasons, if it were not a thing needless to trouble this
discourse withal.

And as they shall stand in no fear to receive hurt from the Savages, Security
from (...)yrates, (...)nd the Savages.
so may they be easily secured against the injury of Pirates, who sometimes come
thither, and not only take from the fishermen, victuals and other provision
and munitions, and have thereby strengthened themselves, but also have carried
away from them many serviceable Mariners into Barbary and other parts, and
thereby made many a poor widow and fatherless child: and it is to be feared,
that those men so carried from the New Foundland, who seeing their estates and
their families so overthrown, may be provoked to animate the Turks men of
war, to sail thither to take the spoil of our Nation, and others that are
yearly a fishing on that Coast (which God defend) whereby to hinder that
Trade, or the desired Plantation. The which inconvenience that is so to be
feared, may be easily prevented by maintaining two good ships of war, of 200.
tun a piece, and two Pinnaces of 40. tun a piece well provided, to be there
maintained all the Summer time, and that the Commanders of them may have power,
that if any great force of the Turks, or any others should at any time come
thither, whereby to disturb your Majesty's Subjects in their trade of fishing,
or attempt to hinder the Plantation; that then to raise a greater force from
the Fishermen and Planters to defend any such attempt.

The charge of which Ships and Pinnaces of war, so to be yearly maintained
there for that service, An easy contribution for maintenance of their security
from Pirates.
may be easily and commendably defraied, with your Majesty's allowance therein,
if every Ship and Vessel of your Majesty's Subjects, fishing on that Coast,
will voluntarily contribute thereunto the value of half a good days fishing
in the whole voyage, which will be abundantly recompensed unto them, in regard
that they may then fish continually and securely many a days fishing the more
in every voyage, which now oftentimes they dare not do. And then these two
Ships of war, and two Pinnaces so to be maintained, by such a small
contribution to be paid for their service at New Foundland in dry fish, they
will so scour the Seas every year going forth thitherward bound, and likewise
in their return, that no Pirate of any Nation durst come near the Southern
parts of your Majesty's Kingdoms; neither to lie in wait in the course
sailing to and from the New Foundland, for those that trade thither, as
yearly heretofore they have done, and overthrown many a man's voyage.

For which course, Hollanders attended with men of war
we have the example of our neighbors the Hollanders, who generally in all
their trades, but most specially in their fishing upon your Majesty's
Seacoasts, are attended with men of war, which are defrayed by a certain
contribution from those men, in whose defense they are employed. And by this
means the Merchants and Traders of Holland, receive far greater assurance
and benefit, then if every Merchants ship should set themselves forth in
warlike manner in their own defense. For besides the security they have, and
saving the charge which such provisions would require, they have much the more
room in their Merchants ships for their Commodities.

Many serviceable men and Mariners bred th^^.
And these ships thus sent to guard their Fleets, which are called Wafters, do
continually breed many serviceable Seamen, not only Mariners, but also good
soldiers, and fit Commanders, that are well experienced how to command in
Ships upon all occasions; for without such fit Commanders in good Ships, there
is but small hope of good service to be performed by them: and if the
New Foundland men may be thus guarded with two such Ships, and two Pinnaces,
it would not only in little time breed many a Gentleman and others in them to
be experienced how to command in ships, upon any occasion of service, but also
it will make your Majesty's subjects Ships that trade thither, so strong, that
they need not fear the greatest force, that any Prince should at any time
send thither to disturb or hinder them, neither in returning from thence, upon
any occasion to do your Majesty service.

If after all this, I should be demanded by those which know not the Country,
what other places in the Land are also fit to be peopled at first, so well as
the Harbors of Trepassey, and Trinity (of which I have already spoken) whereby
those which will adventure thither, may not be doubtful to plant in other
Habors, although I have first expressed the^ for some special reasons as it
may be well understood, the one of them lying North-most, where our Nation
uses to fish, near the Savages, and the other lying on the South-most part of
the Land, and near unto the passages of diverse ships that sail yearly to and
from other places of the world, as is already plainly showed; yet there are
many other excellent good Harbors where our nation uses to fish, lying
between them both, which are very good for ships to moore fast at anchor, and
easily to be defended from enemies, that shall at any time attempt to molest
such as shall plant in them: and better for fishing, then either of the
foresaid two Harbors are, of which I will particularly express some of their
names.

First, the Harbor of Sant John's: Foriland: Good Harbors, Bays and Rodes for
Ships and Fishing.
Formosa: Agafort: Harbor de Grace: Renouze: and diverse other good Harbors,
Bays, and Roades, where there is good fishing, and are fit places for ships to
ride in the Summer time: and as it is already showed, that the bottomes of
diverse Bays, that are expressed to be in this South part of the Land, do even
meet together, within the compass of a small circuit, near unto the Bay of
Trepassey; So likewise not far from Trepassey, which lies six leagues to the
West, from the South cape of the Land, which is called Cape Derasse, and six
leagues to the Northward of the said Cape, lies the Harbor of Renouze, which
is a place easily to be defended, there being at a low ebb not 18. foot water
fine sand: yet in danger to be spoiled by the stones and ballast that are
thrown into the same, Stones and Ballast thrown in the said Rodes, dangerous
for Ships.
which are to be seen in great heaps when the water is clear, as commonly it
is in a fair Sun-shining day. These stones and ballast, so thrown into the
Harbors by Christians (if there be not some better course taken therein) it is
to be sorrowed, that the offenders are not severely punished.

Good land for Tillage.
Close adjoining to the Harbor of Renouze, are above 200. Acres of good land,
that is clear without Woods or Rocks, and lies commodiously to be overflowed
with fresh Rivers in the Summer time, with very little labor, as I have well
observed: and within a mile further off from the said Harbors, lie many
hundred acres more of very good open land, that are able to receive and relieve
many hundreds of Cattle, and fit, with little labor, to be manured for
Tillage.

Great store of Dear.
There are yearly near unto the said Harbor of Renouze, great store of Dear
seen; and sometimes diverse of them have been taken. There is a man yet living,
that was once at New Foundland in a ship with me; and he in one voyage did
there, near unto the Harbor of Renouze, kill 18. very large and fat Dear, as
it is well known, yet he went with his Piece but seldom for that purpose, and
would then have killed many more, if he might have been spared from other
labor to attend thereon: whereby it may be well understood, that there is
great store of Deeres flesh in that Country, Store of Fish and Foul, fresh
water and wood.
and no want of good fish, good foul, good fresh water, and store of wood, etc.

From the said Harbor of Renouze, it is not above ten miles over land to the
Harbor of Trepassey, and not far from thence to the bottom of Trinity Bay,
and within three leagues unto the Harbor of Renouze, are three very good
Harbors, where our Nation uses to fish, which lie to the Northward of it.

Now whereas there have been reports made of great cold in that Country, by
people that have traded thither, who (I suppose) never saw any other Country,
but only that, and their own native soil: and such when they have returned
from thence one voyage, though they never understood, or felt the nature and
temperature of other Clymates, neither consider the goodness of
New Foundland, as it is now partly made known, have given a great deal worse
report of that Country, then in reason they should: and if such were but a
little acquainted, or would understand of the great cold that is at times in
Muscouia, Sweidon, Norway, Spruceland, Poland, Denmark, and other Eastern and
Northern parts of the world, where the people live well and grow rich; such
ill reporters of New Foundland would alter their opinions. And although the
Ice is so great in those other parts the Winter season, commonly four months
together, that neither Ship nor Boat can pass in all that time, from one place
to another, but lie still fast frozen, yet in that season, where Ships use to
sail the Summer time from one place to another, Carts and Coaches do pass
upon the Ice.

Ships also in Holland and in those near places, in some Winters do lie there
fast frozen a long time together: and likewise it has been in some Winters so
hard frozen in the River of Thames, above London Bridge near the Court, that
the tenderest fair Ladies and Gentlewomen that are in any part of the world,
who have beheld it, and great numbers of people, have there sported on the Ice
many days together, and have felt it colder there, then men do that live in
New Foundland.

Now if such men, when they come from thence, that have but little experience
of the cold in other Countries, neither take due observation of the cold that
is sometimes in England, would listen to men that have traded in the Summer
time to Greeneland, for the killing of Whales, and making of that Train oil
(which is a good trade found out) and consider well of the abundance of great
Islands of Ice, that those Ships and men are there troubled withal at times,
they would thereby be persuaded to speak little of the cold in
New Foundland: yet, praised be God, seldom any of those Ships and men that
trade to Greeneland, take hurt thereby.

Wherefore I desire to satisfy any that shall be willing to further this
Plantation, and clear those reports and doubts that are feared by some people
of the cold there; and also to let them know, that the Savage people of the
Country endure it so well, that they live there naked Winter and Summer. And
also my self, and most of our Nation, and others that have traded there,
endure the greatest cold we have met withal there at any time, in our faces,
necks, and ears, as well as any Gentlewomen in England do the cold in their
naked bosoms, necks and faces in the Winter time, when they go so uncovered:
and therefore I do conceive, that it is but a little needless charie
niceness used by some that trade there, that complain any thing of the cold
in that Country, by keeping themselves too warm: which cold (I suppose) some
that have been there, may feel the more, if they have been much accustomed to
drink Tobacco, strong Ale, double Beer, or have been accustomed to sit by a
Tavern fire, or touched with the French disease: such, when they come to a
little cold, wheresoever they be, feel the cold more extremely then otherwise
they would.

Furthermore they may be also more fully satisfied of the cold in that Country
by a Gentleman, one Master John Guy, late Mayor of the City of Bristoll, that
lived there two years together, with diverse others of sort and quality, many
years so pleasantly, and healthful with their wives and families, as if they
had lived in England.

And whereas there come some years upon that Coast great Islands of Ice, which
are congealed in the North, far from thence, as it may be well perceived, and
that the coast of New Foundland lies in longitude from the South Cape thereof
to the graund Bay, which is the North-most part of the Country, North,
North-East, and South, South-west, above five degrees; and that from thence,
any ship being off from that Coast twelve Leagues, and sailing North,
North-East, may run on, till they come to the Northward of 70. degrees, and no
land to hinder him, neither from thence any land found, in that altitude,
directly East unto Greeneland, where the trade is for killing of Whales, which
is above 400. leagues distance from that course:

Therefore it may be well understood, as it has bin approved by diverse me^
that have attempted to seek out some new Discoueries, in those North parts of
the world, that there is always abundance of great Islands of Ice, which the
current setting very strongly from thence, by reason (as I conceive of) of some
Strait and passage that the Sea has from the large Seas that lie on the North
side of Tartaria, and those unknown parts of the world, and sets toward the
Coast of New Foundland, with the said Current and North winds; and do there in
little time dissolve, and thereby they make the air and water some thing the
colder there. Jlands of Ice there speedily melt.
Those Islands of Ice are not dangerous unto Ships being once descried, as by
their whitenes they may in a dark night when men look out for them; for they
will drive along so fast with the wind, as I have often proved, that if a Ship
be under the Lee of an Island of Ice, and there strike down his sails, the
Ice will drive faster with the wind, then the ship will drive before it, so
that a ship may turn from it when there is cause.

Thus having showed (as I conceive) the reasons that such Islands of Ice are
seen some years on the Coast of New Foundland; I will also show my opinion
partly, why there are such Fogs there also sometimes.

It is well known unto all those that have seen the Country and observed it,
how the Land is ouergrowne with Woods and Bushes that have grown, and so
rotted into the ground again (in my opinion ever since the flood) the
rottennes thereof has so covered the earth, and Rocks in diverse places of the
Country in great thicknes, and by reason thereof, the open land and woods do
a long time in the Summer contain a great moisture under the same, The cause
of the Fogges.
so that a man may observe, when the heat of the year comes on, a kind of
Fogge arising continually from it.

Therefore, in my opinion, How to abate the Fogs, and to make the Country
hotter.
which I submit to deeper Judgments, if those unnecessary bushes, and such
unserviceable woods were in some places burned, so as the hot beams of the
Sun might pearce into the earth and stones there, so speedily as it does in
some other Countries, that lie under the same elevation of the Pole, it would
then there make such a reflection of heat, that it would much lessen these
Fogs, and also make the Country much the hotter Winter and Summer, and thereby
the earth will bud forth her blossoms and fruits more timely in the year,
then now it does, and so bring the Land more familiar to us, and fitter for
Tillage, and for Beasts, and also for Land-fowle, then now it is; and thereby
those Islands of Ice that come on that Coast at any time, will the sooner
dissolve, which do speedily melt, when they come near the South part of that
Land, etc.

Also, it may be objected by some, that the Country is rockie, and
mountainous, and so ouergrowne with trees and bushes, in such a Wilderness, that
it will be an endless trouble to bring it to good perfection: and such like
objections are often used, as if they would have such a Land cleansed to them
without labor. Yet my hope is, when any such shall read over this Discourse,
and consider well of the particular motives herein expressed, whereby a
Plantation there should be embraced, they will be well satisfied therein, and
I suppose, forbear to say it is such a rockie, and cold Country as is unfit
to be planted.

I have been several times in Norway, where the Country is in most places
more rockie, and mountainous then the New Foundland, and lies above six
degrees more to the North, and yet very beneficial to the King of Denmark,
where many of his Majesty's Subjects live pleasantly; but the New Foundland is
much more pleasant to live in. I have often seen the Coast of Biskay and
Portugal all along the Seacoast, how rocky, barren and mountainous these
Countries be in most places, although they lie in a pleasant and temperate
Climate; if such which should dispraise the New Foundland, had seen it as I
have, they would not only like well, and be in love to further the desired
Plantation, but also admire how the people in those other Countries do live by
their good industry, and seek out little places amongst the Rocks, and in the
sides of Hills and Mountains, Rocks and Mountains good for Seeds, Roots and
Vines.
to set and sow their seeds for Roots, Cabage, Onions, and such like, whereby
they receive great comforts: for all along those parts on the Seacoast,
their best means of living is by fishing, and other trades by Sea. The like
benefit may all such have, that will plant at New Foundland, and much better
in many other things, as is already sufficiently touched.

Likewise it is well known to all those that have travailed from thence all
along the Coast of Spain, even to Granada, how barren and rockie those parts
of Spain are also in most places; and yet the people by their good industry,
plant many of their Vines and other fruits, on the sides of some steep Hills
amongst the Rocks, where men are feign in diverse places, even to creep on
their hands and knees to prune the said Vines, and gather the Grapes of them,
to make their strong wines, and sweet Raysins withal, which we so much
delight to taste. In those toothsome, and delightful Commodities, our
Merchants bestow much money, which the New Foundland trade and Commodities had
from thence, will be able in little time, if it be peopled as aforesaid, to
supply all your Majesty's Kingdoms withal, with the sales of such commodities
had from thence, to be employed therein.

Likewise from Granada, to Carthagena, Allegant, Denia, and from thence even to
the City of Valencia, which is a large circuit, the most parts all along, as I
have traveled by land, are very barren, rockie and mountainous; that very few
Cattle, Sheep, Goats, or any other beasts are able to live there, and yet
do the people in those parts use great industry, to plant their Vines and
other fruits, whereby they seek out their best means they have to live: and
likewise also in diverse other places near the Mediterranean Sea, from thence
to Bassalonia, Marsellis, Sauoy, and Genoway, and in diverse other places in
Italy, these Countries are very Rocky and Mountainous: and yet those places do
abound with many other rich blessings, by means of the peoples good industry
there, and so by reason thereof, the people in all those parts from the Coast
of Biskay, unto Italy; and also the most parts of France, Gascoyne, Britain,
Normandy and Picardy, are by the New Foundland fish greatly relieved: which
fish is in all those parts in great request, and steeds them greatly, and does
sell very well there most commonly, and so likewise in England great abundance
thereof is spent; which being well considered, I know no reason to the
contrary, but that the Subjects of all your Majesty's Kingdoms should be most
willing to further that Plantation, and show their good industry to cleanse Land
there for Corn and Woade, and plant diverse kinds of fruits, which
questionless will also prove very well there; and then will it be to all your
Majesty's Kingdoms such a nurcery to get wealth, and increase and maintain
Shipping, and beget serviceable Seamen, as great Britain had never the like.

With these good blessings which are before recited, being followed by
industrious spirits, there is a great hope of a plentiful harvest unto your
Majesty and Kingdoms thereby. God send good Seedsmen and Planters to set it
forward, as I trust in God it will have, seeing it has already had many right
Honorable and worthy Fathers to commend it.

And although that sithence I presumed to write this Discourse, I have been
often dishartened from proceeding herein: Yet, when I did remember Columbus his
good endeavors, that first and patient Discouerer of the West Indies, whom, if
God had not hartened him on with a worthy mind, and a bosom armed for all the
storms of cross fortunes, he had never finished that Honorable attempt for
finding such an happy business out, the which Discovery of his, has ever
since filled the Spanish Cofers with gold and silver, and made that Nation
Lords of the greatest riches under the Sun: and although that attempt of his,
was held at first impossible to to come any good effect, and Columbus laughed at
by some: yet ever sithe^ce, by his attempt I may say, that Spain has had from
thence to help to furnish other Christian Kingdoms with gold, silver, and
diverse other great riches; and also now to that Country so discovered, those
commodities that great Britain may yearly well spare, and other Countries
also, are the better vented: and so likewise, may the New Foundland and the
parts of America, near thereunto, prove beneficial for diverse trades in
little time.

These good motives considered, what great good comes unto Christian Kingdoms,
by Foreign Plantations, and what infinite wealth is yearly brought from the
West Indies into Spain, as I have there seen landed; do put me in great
hope, that if there be an orderly Plantation settled in New Foundland, the
trade to that Country by your Majesty's Subjects, and other places thereby,
may yearly be so beneficial to your Majesty and your Highness other
Kingdoms, as the West Indies are now yearly worth to the King of Spain.

Now having thus commended the Country of New Foundland in my opinion, it
ought not to be one of the least motives, whereby to further this Plantation,
the setting of some better order and government amongst the Fishermen, and all
others of our Nation that yearly trade there, then now there is; so that
there may be a reformation of such abuses as are there yearly committed;
wherein it is well known, that I have already used my best endeavors in the
year 1615. at which time I had a Commission with me for that purpose under the
broad Seal of the Admiralty, and did then therewith set forth, to follow that
service from the Port of Exceter, in the County of Deuon, on the 11. day of May
1615. in a Bark victualled and manned with 11. men and boys at my own
charge, and I did then arrive at the Coast of New Foundland, in the Bay of
Trinity, upon Trinity Sunday, being the 4. of June, and anchored the same day
in the said Harbor of Trinity; and there, in the name of the holy and
individual Trinity, began, to the use of your Majesty, by virtue of that
Commission, to send forth a Precept, to call the Masters of those English
ships, that were then there riding at Anchor, and also the Masters of some
other English ships that were near thereunto, and so began to hold the first
Court of Admiralty in your Majesty's name, that ever was (as I believe) holden
in that Country, to the use of any Christian Prince, and proceeded therein
according to course of Law, as the tenor of my Commission did warrant me
therein; and also in other Harbors of the said Coast I did the like. Part of
which abuses there committed, I have already touched: so likewise I will
briefly insert a part of the several presentiments of such injuries, that were
the^ there deliuerd unto me, as aforesaid, under the hands and seals of those
170. Masters of English Ships, to the use of your Majesty: which presentiments
were, upon my return from the said voyage, delivered by me into your Majesty's
high Court of the Admiralty, and then by those Masters of ships there
impannelled, such abuses as follow, they did acknowledge, and order, that
henceforth with your Majesty's allowance might be redressed etc.

fish with hook and line, upon the Sabbath day, as usually as upon the week
days.

Secondly, that diverse of our Nation do take into

There are many men yearly, who unlawfully convey away other men's fishing
boats, from the Harbor

There are some men, who arriving there first into

There are also some, who arriving first in Harbor, to the great hurt and
hinderance of many other that come after them.







They did acknowledge, that some men rip, and

would not work, and were so lazy and idle, that their work was to little
purpose: which was worthy of punishment.

Against all these great abuses, and diverse others New Foundland (which they
did set down in their several presentiments, as by them it may at large
appear, they did all co^discend, and order from that time thenceforth, that no
subject to your Majesty should commit any more such abuses in that Country:
which may be very well remedied, seeing they tend to the advancement of the
Trade, and quietness amongst the Fishermen, and to the Glory of God, the honor
and good of your Majesty, and the general benefit of the Common-welth.

They did further present to the use of the Lord England, two small Boats,
Anchors, and a small Grapple, that were found in the Sea upon that Coast, which
were there prized to be worth two shillings sixepence apiece, amounting to
seven shillings sixepence.

Now having laid open how commodious and beneficial it will be to your
Majesty and Kingdoms, to settle a Plantation in the New Foundland, and also
made known some unfit courses that are yearly used by some Fishermen that
adventure there: and likewise showed a part of some great wrongs that have been
committed there by Pirates and some erring subjects; and also touched a little,
that there have not been such fit courses taken by some of those that have been
employed to that Country in the Plantation already there begun, as they
should have done, by reason whereof it is to be feared, that some of those
Honorable, and other right Worshipful persons that undertake the same, and
that have been at some great charge therein, seeing their good endeavors and
charge take no better success, they may wax cold and weary in disbursing
more thereunto, and so by their remissness the Plantation might be given
over, and the Country left to the spoil and usurpation of some other Prince
that may undertake the same, and then reap the harvest of your Majesty's
Subjects labors, that shall then trade to that Country, etc. And therefore
showing how it may be provided for by your Majesty, and all those wrongs
henceforth remedied: now I suppose, that some, who may find themselves a
little touched herein, may not only envy me, for laying open that which I
have; whereby to prevent such further dangers and inconueniencies in that
Country, and to further such a worthy work: and therefore I may be unjustly
taxed, as many worthy men have been, for well doing. For although I have by
Pirates, and other crosses received great losses, yet do I acknowledge my self
much bound to God my Creator, who has preserved me from many dangers in my
time, and safely to return with my ship wherein I was; I do also most humbly
give God the praise, that I am now so happily arrived with this my plain and
true Discovery, unto the view of your most Sacred Majesty, and the right
Honorable Lords of your Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and my
Country, whereby to show what in all likelihood the effect of a Plantation
will there produce; using also many arguments, motives and inducements to
persuade a general willingness thereunto.

And these excellent benefits distribute themselves, between your Majesty and
your Subjects: your Highness part will be the Honor of the Action; the
access of Territory, increase of strength and power, advantage against other
Princes, augmentation of Reuenew, and ease of your Majesty's Kingdoms, etc.
The Subjects part will be the bettering and securing of their Trade; enriching
of themselves; relief of other Trades; and a means of further Discoueries.

But these two have a relation and dependency, the one on the other, that
neither can subsist without the other. I will not therefore divide your
Majesty from your Subjects; your Highness prosperity being their happiness;
and their wealth, your Majesty's riches.

The first thing which is to be hoped for, and which has ever been your
Majesty's principal care, is the propagation of the Christian Faith: and by
that means only, the poor unbelieving Inhabitants of that Country may be
brought to the knowledge of God, and a civil kind of government: and it is
not a thing impossible, but that from those slender beginnings which may be
made in New Foundland, all the Regions adjoining (which between this place,
and the Countries actually possessed by the King of Spain, and to the North of
New Foundland, are so spacious as all Europe) may be converted to the true
Worship of God.

The next is, the uniting of a Country so beneficial already, and so
promising unto your Majesty's Crown, without bloodshed, charge, or usurpation,
which must needs be a perpetual Honor to your Majesty, in all succeeding
ages; neither will it be an Honor only to your Highness, but a benefit to
the State, by a new access of Dominion. And what Prince can enlarge his
Territories by a more easy and more just means then this, seeing that of
right it appertains to your Majesty, and therefore deserves to be embraced?

Now if it please your most excellent Majesty, not only to lend your ear to
a Project of this nature, but also to approve the matter proiected, and
vouchsafe the furtherance therein, the which out of my souls devotion, and
zealous affection to do service to your Majesty and your Kingdoms, I tender
on my knees; most humbly beseeching your Highness, both to accept of my honest
and zealous intent, as also to pardon my boldness and presumption therein; for
it is, and so has ever been my resolution, rather to bear the burden of
poverty, then justly to deserve, or give cause of reproach; and to subject all
the days of my life, and the manifold dangers thereof, thereby to approve my
self a profitable member, both to your Majesty, and to my Country that gave
me my first breath; for which only cause I have adventured to publish this my
simple and plain Discourse, whereunto my very conscience has a long time, and
still does not forbear to solicit me.

The prosecution and perfection of the work, I leave to the pleasure of God,
and your Majesty's happy directions; in the discourse and discovery whereof, if
I have either been tedious, or any other way offensive, it is to be imputed to
my want of learning: and so, though perhaps I do not satisfy some men's
curiosities, yet I hope I have sufficiently informed their judgments; and
beseech God to incline their affections to the furtherance of so pious, and so
profitable a business, as this appears to be.

And so I rest, and ever will remain a faithful and loyal Subject to your
Majesty, an hearty and true lover of my Country, and a zealous well-wisher to
this intended Plantation.

Richard Whitbourne.

A conclusion to the Reader, containing a particular Description, and relation
of some things omitted in the former Discourse.
GEntle Reader, seeing my former Discovery received such good approbation and
allowance before it was printed, it puts me in some hope, it will also receive
good acceptance from all his Majesty's well-affected Subjects, now that it is
published; the which when I shall understand, by their thankful acceptance, I
shall be encouraged the more willingly, to set forth what I have observed
touching the Altitude of some head-lands of that Coast, on the East side of the
New Foundland, and also the Deepes, and several soundings, that I have taken
notice of in my travels to that Country; which I conceive to be necessary for
those that shall henceforth trade thither; which as yet no man, to my
knowledge, has undertaken; and also be ready with my life and means
whatsoever I have, or may have in this World, to discover other Bays and
Harbors round about that land, which are yet undiscovered, whereby to find
out some other new Trades with the Natives of the Country; for they have great
store of red Oaker, which they use to color their Bodies, Bows and Arrows,
and Cannowes withal, which Cannowes are built in shape, like the Wherries on
the River of Thames; but that they are much longer, made with the rinds of
Birch trees; which they sow very artificially and close together, and ouerlay
every seame with Turpentine; and in like manner they sow the rindes of Spruce
trees, round and deep, in proportion like a brass kettle, to boil their
meat in, which has been well proved by three Mariners of a Ship, riding at
Anchor by me, who being robbed in the night by the Savages, of their apparel
and diverse provisions, did the next day seek after them, and came suddenly
where they had set up three Tents, and were feasting, having three Cannowes by
them, and had three pots made of such rindes of trees, standing each of them on
three stones boiling with twelve Fowls in each of them; every Foul as big
as a Widgeon, and some so big as a Ducke: they had also many such pots so
sowed, and fashioned like the leather buckets that are used for quenching of
fire, and those were full of the yolks of eggs, that they had taken and
boiled hard, and so dried small, which the Savages used in their broth, as
Sugar is used in some meats: they had great store of the Skins of Dear,
Beauers, Bears, Seals, Otters, and diverse other fine skins which were well
dressed; as also great store of several sorts of flesh dried; and by shooting
off a Musket toward them, they all ran away naked without any apparel, but
only their hats on their heads, which were made of Seals skins, in fashion
like our hats, sowed handsomely with narrow bands about them, set round with
fine white shells, such as are carried from Portugal to Braseile; where they
pass to the Indians as ready money. All their three Cannowes, their Flesh,
Skins, Yolks of Eggs, Targets, Bows and Arrows, and much fine Okar, and
diverse other things, they took and brought away, and shared it amongst those
three that took it, and brought to me the best Cannowe, Bows and Arrows, and
diverse of their Skins, and many other things worth the noting: which may
seem to inuit us to find out some other trades with them.

Now also I will not omit to relate some thing of a strange Creature that I
first saw there in the year 1610. in a morning early as I was standing by the
water side, in the Harbor of Saint John's; which I espied very swiftly to come
swimming toward me, looking cheerfully, as it had been a woman, by the Face,
Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Chin, Ears, Neck and Forehead: It seemed to be so
beautiful, and in those parts so well proportioned, having round about upon
the head, all blew strakes, resembling hair, down to the Neck (but
certainly it was no hair:) for I beheld it long, and another of my Company
also, yet living, that was not then far from me; and seeing the same coming
so svviftly toward me, I stepped back, for it was come within the length
of a long Pike. Which when this strange Creature savv, that I went from it,
it presently thereupon diued a little under water, and did swim toward the
place where before I landed; whereby I beheld the shoulders and back down to
the middle, to be as square, white and smooth as the back of a man, and from
the middle to the hinder part, poynting in proportion like a broad hooked
Arrow; how it was proportioned in the forepart, from the neck and shoulders, I
know not; but the same came shortly after unto a Boat, wherein one William
Hawkridge, then my servant, was, that has bin since a Captain in a ship to
the East Indies, and is lately there employed again by Sir Thomas Smith, in
the like Voyage; and the same Creature did put both his hands upon the side of
the Boat, and did strive to come in to him and others then in the said Boat:
whereat they were afraid; and one of them struck it a full blow on the Head;
whereby it fell off from them: and afterward it came to two other Boats in the
said Harbor; the men in them, for fear fled to land: This (I suppose) was a
Maremaide. Now because diverse have written much of Maremaids, I have presumed
to relate, what is most certain of such a strange Creature that was seen at
New Foundland: whether it were a Maremaid or no, I know not; I leave it for
others to judge, etc.

R. W.


