AVRELIA.

The Paragon of pleasure and Princely delights: Containing The seven days
Solace (in Christmas Holy Days) of Madona Aurelia, Queen of the Christmas
Pastimes, and sundry other well-courted Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, in a noble
Gentleman's Palace.

A work most sweetly intercoursed (in civil and friendly disputations) with
many amorous and pleasant Discourses, to delight the Reader: and plentifully
garnished with Moral Notes, to make it profitable to the Regarder.

By G. W. Gent.

printer's or publisher's device R I

HEB DDIM HEB DDIEV



At London printed, by Richard Iohnes. 1593.

To the friendly Readers, both Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, Wealth and Welfare.
GEntlemen and Gentlewome^, I present you here (as I think) a profitable
unpolished labor: For, he that is the Trouchman of a strangers tongue, may well
declare his meaning, but yet shall mar the grace of his Tale: And therefore,
Themistocles the noble Captain and Philosopher of Athens, compares such
forced speeches, to Tapistrie Hangings rolled up: which being open, appear
beatifull: and foulded, reserve their Virtue, but lose their show: But I expect
(somewhat) a better event, then may an Interpreter, that is bound to a present
Report: for my Respit has been sufficient to consider of Segnior Philoxenus,
and his honorable companies virtues: and (least by rash acquital of their
favors, I should do injury to their reputation) I have with well advised
Judgment, bethought me of such memorable Questions and devices, as I heard and
saw presented, in this most noble Italian Gentleman's Palace, the Christmas
past: and answerable to my weak capacity, have exposed the same, in such
sort, as if you be not too curious, may delight and content you: and if not
too careless, may direct and benefit you: And to satisfy you herein, I give
you friendly knowlehge, that Segnior Philoxenus reverent regard of the Queens
Majesty's high virtues, is a president for you; with a dutiful, and unfeigned
heart, to love, fear, and obey her Highness, from whom, next under God, you
receive such blessings, as through the whole world her excellency is renowned,
and your prosperity envied. By this noble Gentleman's civil entertainment of
strangers, you may perceive with what Garland, Courtesy is principal,
crowned: By the civil behauiours of Soranso, Dondolo, Bargetto, and other
Gentlemen herein named, you have a President of government, which will commend
you: and by well regarding their speeches, you shall find a discreet method of
talk, meet for you Gentlemen. The like benefit, shall Gentlewomen receive in
imitating of Madona Aurelia, (Queen of the Christmas pleasures) Maria Beloch^,
Lucia Bella, Franceschina Sancta, and the rest of the well qualited
Gentlewomen. Besides, a number of other Moral documents, needful reprehensions,
and witty sayings, to perfect the commendation both of a Gentleman and
Gentlewoman. (Courteous Gentlemen and Gentlewomen) you have here the honorable
institution of Marriage, so perfectly Anatomed, as a very weak judgment may
see the causes, which make household quarrels to resemble Hell. Again, the man
which is willing to live happily, may here learn such directions and laws, as
will change his private house into a Paradise on earth. If civil and Moral
pleasures, with all these benefits, may make you entertayne this book, and
report well of the Author, I assure you, you shall be pleased, and I satisfied.
But if you make your tongue enemy to your own reputation, you may detract,
but not reproach the work: Iniure, but not hurt the writer, for both will live,
and laugh such Calumniators to scorn, when either are ready to do the
discreet Reader service.

Some will (perchance more of envy to hear a stranger commended, then of pity
to bemone my hard fortune, or foul usage) say, I have as just cause to
complain of injuries received at Roane, Rome, and Naples, as to commend the
virtues and good entertainme^t of Segnior Philoxenus: But to give such
suggestioners a double good example, both of patience and thankfulness: I here
protest, that as these injuries begun, with my hard fortune, so they ended no
ways in my discredit: And as I forgive the causes of my mishaps, so scorn I
to recount them, to receive amends, in a little pity. But for that they, and
all such as view my report, may learn of me to be grateful for received
benefits: I make it known, that this travel is Segnior Philoxenus due: And I
still his debtor, and so shall remain during my life: reserving a good
affection, to bestow on such as receive his Virtues: and my pains to profit
and commend themselves. And in my opinion, it is just they do so: Wherefore,
to give a disgrace to ceremonies, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, I end: as I hope
to find you friendly.

Your assured friend, G. W.

T.W. Esquier, in the commendation of the Author, and his needful Book.
EVen as the fruitful Be, does from a thousand Flowers,
Sweet Honey drayne, and lays it up, to make the profit ours:
This Moral Author so, to us he does imparte,
A Work of worth, culd from the wise, with judgment, wit, and Art.
No Stage toy he sets forth, or thundering of an Host,
But his rare Muse, a passage makes twixt burning fire and frost,
Such virtues as beseem the worthy Gentles breast,
In proper colors he does blaze, by following of the best:
The Virtue is but rare, and Vice not yet in use,
That modestly he not commends, or mildely shows the abuse,
Such matter in good words, these few leaves do reveal,
Vnforst, or strainde, as that it seems a kindly common weal.
Of forced Marriage, he does show the foul event,
When Parents join the childrens hands, before their hearts consent:
And how these fortunes eke, in wedlock seldom prove,
Unequal choice, in birth, in years: and Childrens hasty love.
Yet he with learned proofs, this sacred state does raise,
(As it deserves) above the Skies, in words of modest praise.
More, every Page, here does present the Readers eyes,
With such regardes as help the weak, and do confirm the wise.
Which needless were, to blaze, in praises to allrue:
The holy Bush, may well be sparde, where as the Wine is pure.
Verses translated out of Latin, and delivered by VRANIE, with a Silver Pen,
to Ismarito in a Device, contained in the seventh days exercise: placed in
this Forefrunt, for the excellency of Pandora.
THe mighty Jove beholding from above
The mistes of sin, which from the earth arose,
In angry mood sent Iris down to move,
Throughout the world, the exercise offoes,
With vengeance armde: who powered down her Ire,
And with debates, set Monarchies a fire.
Whole Countries burnde, did dim the Sun with smoke,
The Canon noise the air with Thunder rent:
The wounded men, with shrikes the heavens shoke:
The Temples spoylde: the Towns to ruin went:
Unwilling yet, to work the Worlds decay,
Jove, Cyllen sent, in part his wrath to stay.
Who hastes his charge, with Wings as swift as wind,
But coming to the Region next the ground,
He could no way for clowdy darkness find:
And fearing in the Ocean to be drownde:
He houered till, in fine, he did epsy
Apharos light, which was a Phoenix eye.
Led by this Star, amayne he comes down,
And footing sets upon a fruitful I Will:
Where lived a Queen, crowned with the Worlds renown:
Upon whose rule, Grace, Peace, and Wealth did smile.
Her Senate, grave; her Cities, Mansions wear,
For such as fled, for persecutions fear.
To whom he gave the tokens that were sent,
Fair Pallas form, and Venus lovely face:
Sweet Pithos tongue, and Dians chaste consent:
And of these gifts, Pandora named her Grace:
And ioynes withal, Jove's blessings to the same,
To make her live in everlasting fame.
These monsters fell, which public order break,
Dissension, Wrath, and Tyranny he bound:
This office done (he thought as Jove would leake)
To heaven he hyes, and blessed leaves the ground:
Where this good Queen, and Subjects quiet live,
When civil wars, her neighbor kingdoms grieve.
Even this is she, whose sacred fame is known,
Throughout the world, in Envy, Fear, and Love,
Enui'd, because she reigns in peace alone:
Feared, in that she shielded is by Jove:
Loved, for desert, whose virtues shine as bright,
As twinkling Stars do in the frosty night.
This silver Pen, meet for a Virgins praise,
Vranie here, does Ismarito give:
With charmed charge, this Queens renown to raise:
As she in spite of Death, and Time may live:
Which right is hers, the labor is but thine,
Then (Judging) write, as she may seem divine.
Vaticinium VRANIES.

A brief Summarie of the principal Arguments handled in these seven Days
Pleasures.
1 OF the difference between the Married state and the single life. 2 Of the
inconveniences of forced Marriages. 3 Of the inconveniences of rash Marriages. 4
Of diverse special points concerning Marriage in general. 5 Of the
inconveniences of over lofty, and too base Love, in the choice of either
Husband or Wife. 6 Of the inconveniences of Marriages, where there are
inequality of years. 7 Of the excellency of Marriage: with many sound Laws
and laudable directions, to continue love between the Married.
All which Principles are largely and pleasantly intercoursed, with other
Moral Conclusions of necessary regard.

FINIS.
Madona Aurelia, her first days pleasures.
Chiefly containing: A civil Contention, whether the married or single life is
the more worthy: And after many good Reasons, alleged on either part,
Sentence is given on the behalf of Marriage.

AT what time the Earth dismantled of her brave Attire, A description of the
dead of winter.
lamented the absence of Dame Aestas company, and that fair Phoebus in his
Retrogradation, entering the Tropique of Capricorn, and mounting in the
Zodiac, licensed naked Hyemps, to power down her wrath upon the face of the
whole world: through dread of whose boisterous storms, every living creature,
by the direction of Nature retired himself unto his safest succor, as the
Bird to his Nest, the heast to his Covert, the Be to his hiue, the Serpent to
his hole: only Man excepted, Man by reason inlargeth the bounds of nature,
within whose limits every other creature lives.
who (being beautified with a divine spirit, and armed with reason, far
above the reach of Nature) scorneth to be chayned unto any place, through the
violence or injury of Time.

In this dead season, such were my Affairs, that Necessity sent me into a
Country far from home, whereas I was no less unacquainted with the people,
then ignorant of the ways: This was the Forest of Rauenna in Italy, (for the
most part) of pine Apple trees.
and having travailed the great part of a Christmas Eve in a desert Forest,
strayed out of knowledge; I took me to a deep beaten way, which promised a
likelihood to find out some speedy Harbor: and after I had iornied the space
of an hour, in a sweet Groaue of Pyne Apple trees, mine eye fastened upon a
stately Palace, the brightness whereof, glimmered through the Branches of the
younger woodde, This Palace was 10 miles from Rauenna toward the River of
Poe. The custom of Christmas.
not unlike the Beams of the Sun through the Crannelles of a wall, assuring
then my self, to receive best Instructions of the better sort of people: such
was my haste, as I soon arrived at this sumptuous place: but according to the
condition of time, in Christmas, sooner to find a friend feasting in the Hall,
then walking in the field: other then a few of ignorant peysants, I could
perceive no person. The delight I took to behold the situation, and curious
workmanship of this Palace, made me so long forget the cause of my arrival
there, as in the end one of the well qualited servants (having knowledge of my
being without) in a seruisable order, came and presented me with his Lords
courteous welcome, and reverently requested me to alight and enter the Palace:
which imagined this entertainment to be but an Italion courtesy, after thanks
given, by a modest excuse, refused so great a favor, and only craved, to be
directed the readiest way to Rauenna: the servant cunningly replying, that I
could not be received into the City without his Lords Bollytyne, Bollytine, a
warrant of health without which, no man may travel in Italy.
and at this time he sealed no man's safe conduct, without knowledge, that his
affairs required great haste: in so much, as won with his importunities, and
overcome with weariness of Travel, I committed my Horse, to the ordering of
my man, and accompanied this officious servant to wards the Palace, and by the
way, over a large entrance into a fair court, I might read these two briefes
in Italion.

Pisano e Forresterio. A liberal welcome.

Entrate, e ben venuto.
Which general inuiting, imboldned me so far, as I hardly marched toward the
great Hall, the Skreene whereof, was curiously fronted with cloudy Marble,
supported on every side the passages, Welcome and Bounty, the porters.
with stately Pillars of Geate: and over the three Portalls, stood the Images
of two men: the one of Allablaster Marble, bare headed, representing the virtue
of welcome: the other of blew Marble, attyred like a Cook, and by him were
artificially painted, Pheasants, Partriges, Capons, and other costly Cates, as
the figure of Bounty: at the entry of this stately Hall, I was received by the
Lord of the Palace, accompanied with diverse Gentlemen of good quality, with
so civil and friendly intertainement, as his behavior blazoned the true
knowledge of courtesy: before we past any further, I began to recount the
adventure which brought me thither, and craved his honorable favor for my
dispatch: why? then (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus) for so (for some cause) I name
the Lord of the Palace, I thank your hard fortune for arriving you here, to
do me this honor: no hard, but happy fortune (quoth I) if I may live to honor
you with any effectual service, well (quoth he) after your werie travail, it is
more needful to provide for your repose, then for a further journey, and so
lead me the way into a fair great Chamber, richly hung with Tapistrie: the
roof whereof was Allablaster plaster, embost with many curious devises in
gold, and in sundry places in proper colors was ingraued his devise, which
was A Holly tree, full of red beries: and in the same, a fluttering Mauis fast
limed to the bows. with this posie in french, Qui me nourit, me destruit: And
in very deed, the beries of the tree feeds this bird, and the bark makes
Lime to fetter her. But I afterward learned, Segnior Philoxenus used this
Ensign as a covert description of desire: A covert description of desire.
whose sweet torments nourishes the mind, but consumes the body to the
grave. In this beautiful place, I embraced the salutations of such a brave
troop of Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, as the honor of the householde might
well give Envy unto some Princes Court. And least, at my first coming, I
might be abashed through small acquaintance, Segnior Philoxenus emboldened me
with a familiar communication, A civil foresight meet for a Gentleman.
and in the end upon a convenient occasion, demanded of me the name of my
Country? I answered him, I was a Gentleman of England, voluntarily exiled with
a burning desire, to see the Monuments of other Countries, A necessary regard
for trauelers.
the order of their government, and manners of the people. And are you of that
blessed I Will (quoth he?) where the people live in peace and prosperity, under
the rule of a Maide^ Queen, crowned with such divine virtues, The virtues of
the Queens Majesty, makes the Island of England famous throughout the whole
World.
as the whole world may hardly contain her fame. Sir (quoth I) your good
testimony of her worthiness, being a Stranger, takes all occasion from me
(her dutiful subject) to enlarge her renown. O (quoth he) if Envy durst
detract her openly, as she secretly conspireth her overthrow, in these parts
you should be driven to stop your ears, or endure a torment (to a faithful
subject) more violent then Death. But the virtue of her Shield, Virtue
stops the mouth of Envy, but fireth her heart with malice.
I mean her grave Senate, has returned the Darts of Envy so thick upon her
shoulders, as she has no power to eclips her bright renown, whose virtue
shines in Enuies despite as a Diamond in an obscure place, or as the Sune
through small passages, into the bowels of the earth: so that happy and thrice
happy are you, the Subjects of the good Queen of England, whose gracious
government fills your Cofers with wealth, seals your doors with peace, and
planteth quietness in your Conscience: so that (blessed above other Nations)
you live abroad, without suspicion of danger at home: and at home fearelesse of
enemies abroad. Wherefore, in honor of your Soueraigue, whose fame armeth all
true knights, with an earnest desire to do her service, I am glad of the mean
to bestow on you, or any of her nation, the affection of a friend. Sir (quoth
I) the virtue of these honorable thoughts blaseth the true magnanimity of a
noble mind, which measures not your favor by the desert of others, but with
the royalty of your heart, The true Blazon of a noble mind.
and so bind thousands in recognisance of service, among which debtors I
desire to be enrolled, although I can discharge but little. After we had
bestowed a small time in these like speeches, he commanded some of his servants
to direct me unto a lodging (if I pleased) to be dispoiled of my riding
attire: who straight ways brought me into a Bed Chamber, so well accommodated
with every necessary pleasure, as might have served for the repose of Cupid
and his loner Ciches: having a fair prospect into a goodly Garden, beautified
with such rare devises, as deserved to be compared with the earthly Paradise
of Tiuoly. Tiuoly 12. miles from
And to be brief, this Palace, with all her conueiances, as well necessary,
as of pleasure, Rome, where the Cardinal of Esta has a most rare Garden.
Cardinal Furnesaes palace in Rome.
fully matched the stateliness of Cardinal Furnesaes Palace, builded and
beautified, with the ruinous Monuments of Rome in her pride: so that the
curiousness thereof was of power to have inchaunted my eyes with an immodest
gaze, had I not remembered, that it belongs unto a Gentleman to see, and not
to stare upon the strangest Novel that is: for bace is his mind, whose spirit
hourly beholds not greater matters then either beauty, A necessary
observation for a Gentleman.
building or bravery. And certainly, at this instant, I delighted more to
contemplate of Segnior Phyloxenus virtues, then to regard his sumptuous
buildings, who (as I learned of one of the Servants) all the year opened his
doors to every civil Gentleman, and at Christmas, invited all comers, A
worthy Custom.
as a customarie duty: so large was the prescription of his courtesy. But,
which shined above the rest, he was in his youth, brought up in the French
Court, where, by the grace of God, and labor of some good friend (as his
behauiours could not but win many) he learned to serve God, with pureness of
heart, and not with painted ceremonies, H. was a Protestant.
as his superstitious Country men do: which was one chief cause, why he
spoke so reverently of the Queens Majesty, whose virtues make her enemies
dumb, for malice will not let them say well, and shame forbids them to speak
amiss of her sacred life: by the time I had talked a while with one of the
servants, and put my self in a more civil order, then was necessary for
travail, supper was in a readiness: which although it exceeded the common
order of fasts, yet it passed not far the bounds of ancient custom: for my
place at the Table, I had the privilege of a stranger, set above my degree,
and with the same intertainment, were Frenchmen, Almain, Duchmen and other
Gentlemen, Other strangers arrmed by the like adue ture. A custom g^nerally
used in France, and in some places of Italy.
strangers, entreated. The Grand Master of the feast, in words gave us one
welcome for all, but not so few as a thousand in affable countenances. Supper
being ended, according to the custom of the place, a Cake was cut in pieces,
to the number of the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen present, and if the marked piece
were allotted unto a man, he should be King, if to a woman, she should be
Queen of the Christmas pleasures: for it was agreede, there should be but one
to command, and all to obey. Madona Aurelia, Sister to the Lord of the
Palace, was crowned with the lot, whose worthiness was such, as herein it
seemed fortune obayed desert: for there was no Gentlewoman in the troop, that
Aurelia exrelled not in beauty, and singularity of wit, nor no Gentleman, that
her virtues inchaunted not, with more admiration, then the Sirens sweet songs,
the wether wearied Sayler, so that of the one she was crowned with Envy, and
of the other with Honor. But in as much, as this was but the first night of her
reign, she referred the Proclamation of her laws until the next day, and so
dismissed the attendance of her subjects for that night, which (in sooth) lasted
me but a sleep, so soundly after travel, I embraced mine ease.

The next Day nosooner appeared, but the Trumpets sounded the honor of
Christmas: upon which Sommons, the compauie rose, and (attired in their most
sumptuous weeds) in the great Chamber attended their Queen Aurelia, who about
Service time, (with the Majesty of a goddess) presented her self: on whom
all the troop waighted unto the Chapel, where the Service was not so
ceremonious, as in other Churches of Italy, and yet more then agreed with
Segnior Phyloxenus conscience, only to give no offense, to the superstitious
zeal of others. The Service ended, against the return of the company, the
Tables were covered in a most stately order, and with the sound of tru^pets,
were furnished with so many several dainty disshes, as the rialtie of the feast
might have pleased Heliogabalus: Heliogabalus a most voluptuous emperor of Rome.
After Queen Aurelia was set, the rest took their accustomed places: but (God
knows) the eyes of the greater part were more hungry then their scomacks: for
their appetites were dulled, with the ouerplentie of meats, and their desires
quickened, with the regard of the fair Gentlewomen.

The dinner and every solemn service ended, Segnior Phyloxenus committed the
company to the good intertainement of his Sister Aurelia, and (with a special
suit) recomended me unto her favor: after view was taken of the attendants,
certain Gentlemen and Gentlewomen (by the appointment of Queen Aurelia) were
adopted with the names of their fortunes, as occasion will manifest hereafter:
and for that I was a traveler, she called me Caualiero Ismarito, in English,
The wandering Knight: whereupon, Madam (quoth I) you have christened me with
the true name of my fortune: for I was but late out of my way, and now am
strayed out of my self: where are you then quoth Aurelia? at your only
direction (quoth I:) well (quoth she) since so cunningly you prefer your
self, I admit you my servant, and as you deserve, so will I reward: and
Madam quoth I, if I be not loyal, let me not live: well (quoth the) I expect
the best. The rest of the affairs set in good order, the Harold proclaimed the
laws, whereunto the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen were bound, with the penalties
for the breach of them.

The Laws of Queen Aurelia.
FIrst, every Gentleman, and Gentlewoman, were coniured faithfully to execute
all the charges, and offices assigned by their Queen Aurelia, and that they
should be attendant of her pleasure. Item every Gentleman was bound, to serve
some one mistress, before the next day at noone, upon pain to be turned into
the great hall, among the country Trulles the whole Christmas. And every
gentlewoman that had not a servant, was judged unworthy, to be courted for one
week: for his merit was hoiden very small, yt could be entertained of none,
and her conditions very crooked that was beloved of none. Item every Gentleman
was bound to give his own mistress the honor of his service, and the chief
place in his commendations, upon pain, to lose her service, and to be
entertained of no other. For he that was disloyal to one, could not be holden
faithful unto another. Item every Gentlewoman was bound, to employ her own
servant, upon pain to be reputed simple. For she that affyed not in her own
Servant, had no reason to trust another. Item every Gentleman was bound, to
defend the honor of his Mistress, both with word and sword, upon pain to be
reputed a Coward, and not to wear her glove. For he was holden very
insufficient, that prised not his Mistresses honor above his own life. Item,
every Gentlewoman was bound to encourage her Servant with good countenances,
and upon the execution of any worthy service to reward him, with the kissing
of her hand, upon pain to be deemed unworthy to be served. For she of all the
world is accounted too rygorous a Dame, that with scorn receives dutiful
service. Item, every Gentleman was bound to Court his mistress with Civil
speeches, upon pain to be forbidden, to talk of love for three days. For he
was accounted bace mannered, or very gross witted, that could not pleasantly
entertain time with a civil discourse. Item, every Gentleman was bound,
either by some exercise of value, or by some show of excellency of wit, to
approve himself worthy of his mistress: upon pain to be spoiled of his
Arms, and the whole Christmas to attend with the Pages: for he was holden
unworthy the society of men, or the affection of woman, that was neither
valiant nor wise.
These Laws proclaimed, Queen Aurelia appointed an elderly Courtier named
Fabritio, and a well spoken Gentlewoman, called Donna Isabella, to be Judges of
the controversies, in disputation: and to attend her in her affairs of
pleasure, she chused Segnior Soranso, a Gentleman Italion, of wit quick and
sharp, and for his devices, sweet and pleasant: Don Dondolo, a Napolitan,
haughty and proud in his conceits. Monsier Bargetto a Frenchman, amarous and
light headed. Courtesy unto strangers, is a mark of Gentilitie.
Doctor Mossenigo, a German so called, for the plain discovery of his mind.
Segnior Faliero a Scot, subtle and cunning in his devices: and my self
Caualiero Ismarito, an Englishman, in which name hereafter, I will present
those actions that touch my self.

This wise choice she made to privilege the Strangers with the highest favor.

Of Gentlewomen, she chused Maria Belochy, a Damsel, whose eye was able to
fire a mountain of Ice. Lucia Bella, for fairness and sweet behavior an
Angel. Hellena Dulce, a loving and affable Gentlewoman. Franceschina sancta, so
called for her modest and lowly countenance: Katherina Trista, a sour and
testy Dame: Aluisa Vechio, who although she were in the wane of her years, yet
was she in the pride of young desires.

This done, Queen Aurelia, by consent, A division of their pleasure^
divided the exercises of every day, into these times: the forenoone to be
bestowed in the service of God: after dinner two hours to be entertained in
civil discourse, and disputation: the rest til supper at pleasure: and after
supper to spend a time in dancing, masking, or in other like pastimes, as
occasion presented.

The greater part of Christmas day, was spent in establishing these orders, the
rest was overcome with solemn Music, for, among the better forte that day is
honored, with no light mirth.

THe next day by nine a Clock, according to one of the charges in the
Proclamation, you might see the youg Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, coupled
together like fowls on Saint Valentines day morning.

But Signior Ismarito, having the eyes of his heart settled upon his Mistresses
beauty, with careless regard, beheld the rest of the company: and leaning by a
door, through which she should pass, he awaighted Queen Aurelias coming. Who
at her accustomed hour, presented her self with an advantage of bravery,
whom the whole troop reverently saluted, and honorably accompanied unto the
Chapel.

After Service, Dinner, and all were solemnly ended: Queen Aurelia with a
chosen company, Music refreshes the wit.
retired her self into a pleasant drawing Chamber to execute the reported
ordenaunce. But to quicken the Spirits of the company, before they entered into
discourse, she commanded a fair Eunuche Boy, to sing some one song, as he
thought good, who obaying her commandment, with a heavenly note, unto the
Lute sung this loving lay.

NO joy comes near the heavenly joy of love,
When we embrace the wish of our desire:
All pleasures else that kind or Art may move,
To love, are like the heat of painted fire.
Love is the root, whereon sweet thoughts do grow:
Love is the sowrce, from whence content does flow.
When I behold my Misterisse in the face,
Love from her eyes a thousand Graces throws:
But when in arms I do her self embrace,
One smiling look exileth all my woes.
Then straight our lips prepare themselves to fight:
And on each kiss love sets a new delight.
What would you more? I wish me in my grave,
Were but my soul with half these pleasures crownde;
And hear on earth to be my Misterisse slave,
I hold me free and others to be bound.
Wherefore I sing which I in solace prove,
There is no heaven to life bestowed in love.
The sweet delivery of this sonet, so enchanted the hearts of the hearers, as
for a space their senses gave place to the contemplation of their souls. In
the end Madona Isabella by this motion, made the whole company a passage for
speech.

If Love be so sweet a passion (quoth she) I muse from what cause proceeds
the complaints of Lovers, who with showring tears bedewe the earth with misty
sights, dim the air, and with shrill outcries pearse the heavens.

The cause, quoth Soranso, proceeds of our fleshly imperfectio^s, which
corrupts the nature of good things, and not of any defect in love: Love simply
is good.
for love is a simple divine virtue, and has his being in the soul, whose
motions are heavenly.

I have read (quoth Isabella) that there be sundry kinds of love.

The use of love are diverse, quoth Soranso, as in zeal toward God, The
distinctions of love.
in duty toward our Country, in obedience toward our parents, and in
affection toward our friends. All which motions proceed forth of one love,
although some are more vehement then the other, even as many Rivers do run out
of one Spring, whereof some have a more swift course then the other. But of
that passion which we ordinarily call love, the wish either tends to Marriage or
wantonness.

There is matter of disputation in Marriage (quoth Franceschina,) Known euik
are not to be defended.
because the estate is honorable, and yet subject to cross fortunes: But
touching your conclusion of wantonness, deserves to dye in silence, for known
evils are to be chastened without allowing their defenses.

Madame (quoth Faliero) unless you revoke this sentence, we will have you
indicted at Rome as an heretic, for by the Popes Canons, Priests may not marry:
and they have a custom among themselves, not to live chaste.

Well (quoth Franceschina,) if the Pope for this opinion, burn me as an
heretic, good men will cannonise me for a virtuous Virgin.

These digressions (quoth Queen Aurelia) are the means (rather) to work a
confusion of our memories, A necessary note.
then to conclude any beneficial matter for our instruction. And therefore I
hold it to greater purpose (substantially) to handle one argument, the^
(sieightly) to ouerrun many causes, where the doubts we leave unresolved, will
be more dangerous unto ye hearer, then the counsels we use, profitable unto ye
follower.

Madame, A contention whether Marriage or the single life is the worthier.
(quoth Fabritio) I hold it good we obey your direction. And for that Marriage
is the most honorable event of Love: and that a Single life is the greatest
testimony of Chastity: A civil Contention, to prove which is the most worthy
of the two, would conclude much contentment: For as Iron and Flynt beat
together, have the virtue to smite fire: so men's wits encountering in doubtful
questions opens a passage for imprisoned Truth.

Queen Aurelia, Argument decideth doubts.
and the rest of the company liked very well of the Subject: and studying who
were ye fittest to deal in this controversy, Aurelia (with a glauncing eye)
beheld that her servant Ismarito witsafed no greater token, Wise silence
works more regard then foolish talk.
that he took delight in these actions, then (sometime) the secret bestowing
of a modest smile: whereupon she forethought, that as Floods, when they are
most highest, make least noise: even so (perchance) his still tongue was
governed by a flowing wit, and desirous to sound his sufficiency, she quickened
him with this cross surmise.

Servant (quoth she) your sober looks, promises a hope that you will
undertake Dianaes quarrel: but (which will serve in this question) I fear me,
you command Love, so much, A fault in many travelers.
as you contemn Marriage: And the greater is my suspicion, in that you are a
Trauailer: the nature of which sort of people, is to swell, with a monsterous
disdain of Marriage, The reason is (say they) their affections are paysoned,
with the knowledge of women's so hamous evils, as they dare not venture of that
vocation. But my opinion is, they have learned so many subtilties to deceive a
shiftles woman, as dandled with the imbracements of sundry Loves, they
forswear Marriage, who binds them to one only wife: And if you be infected
with the humor of these sort of Trauailers, you may well undertake this
charge: All unmarried pass under the name of chaste.
for Venus, though she love not Diana, yet is she the sworn enemy of Juno. And
if you be sound from this infirmity, the little haste you make to marry,
witnesses, you honor Hymen with no great devotion, and therefore, I command
you to use all your possible proofs in the Defense of a Single life, and for
your assistance. I do appoint you Lucia Bella, whom this charge cannot mislike,
because (as I understand) she means to be a professed Nun: You are to encounter
the opinions of many, and therefore arm your selves with as good reasons as
you may.

Madame (quoth Ismarito) I am so deeply bound unto your commandment, as I am
driven to leave your suggestions not answered, and my own innocence
vnexcused, and only attend the encounter of him, that will maintain Marriage, to
be more worthy then a Single life: which vocation of Marriage, though I
reverently honor, yet I so zealously affect the other, as I hope (where the
Judges are indifferent) to make the glory thereof to shine as the fair white,
above every other color.

Sir, Defenses of Marriage.
quoth Soranso, though white be a fair color, yet are the choice of all other
colors more rich and glorious: so, though Virginity (which is the fairest
flower of a Single life) be precious in the sight of God, and in the opinion of
men, yet is Marriage more precious, in that it is a sacred institution of God,
and more honored of men: the Married are reverently entertained, when the
unmarried are but familiarly saluted. The Married in assemblies, are honored
with the highest places, the unmarried humble themselves unto the lowest. To be
short, Virginity is the handmaide of Marriage. Then, by how much the Master is
greater then the servant, by so much Marriage is more worthy then is Single life.

I confess, quoth Ismarito, Marriage is an honorable estate, Defenses of a
single life.
instituted of God, and embraced of men, but whereon had she her beginning?
upon this cause, to keep men from a greater inconvenience: as the Law was
founded upon this reason to punish the trespasses of men. But if no offense had
been given, the Law had not needed: So if man had lived within bounds of
reason, (which before any commandment given; was unto him a Law) Marriage
might have been spared: and therefore in ye highest degree, is but a virtue
upon necessity: where Chastity, is a divine virtue, governed by the motions
of the soul, which is immortal, and participating of the same virtue is
always fresh and green. The euerspringing Bay, is the Metamorphosis of chaste
Daphne, whom Apollo, although he were a sovereign God, could not allure to
Marriage, which proves Chastity a true spark of Divinity, whose twinkling
reflections, so daseleth the eyes of imagined Gods (whose powers must needs be
more great then the greatest of men) as they cannot see an end of their
incontinent desires: whereas the beauty of Marriage is many times blasted by
fortune, or the frailty of the Married. Therefore (think I) by how much divine
things are of greater emprise then earthly, by so much the Single life is more
worthy then the Married.

And in advantage, (quoth Lucia Bella) where Soranso says, that there is
great honor done unto the married, and to the Single is given light regard, I
pray you whether are Bacchus minions or the Muses most reverenced? among men
whose places are hyer then the Cleargies? and among women, whose greater then
the religious Dames?

They have not this pre-eminence (quoth Faliero) because they profess a Single
life, Defenses of Marriage.
but because their function is more sacred then other men's, The cause why the
clergy are reverenced.
who if their prayers to God be no more zealous, then their vows to chastity
are steadfast, you fly to the authority of a company as spotted as Labans Sheep.

But where Sir Ismarito says, that Marriage is but a virtue upon necessity, to
restrain man from a greater evil: I approve it an estate set down by
Nature, and that man has but amplified it with certain ceremonies, to make
perfect the determination of nature: For we daily see in unreasonable
creatures, Marriage is (in a sort) worshipped: Fowls of the Air (I mean) the
he and the she, cupple together, fly together, feed together, and neast
together. The Turtle is never merry after the death of her Mate: and in many
brute beasts the like constancy is found: But (generally) there is never jar
nor misliking between the Male and Female of vnpollitique creatures:
Vnpollitick creatures reverence marriage.
and among the most barbarous people that ever lived, by the impresson of
nature, Marriage has (evermore) been reverenced and hououred: Much more civil
people ought to affect this holy estate: And where Ismarito attributes such
glory unto a Single life, because that Daphne was metamorphosed into a Bay
Tree, whose branches are always green: In my opinion, his reason is faired
like the Bay Tree: for the Bay tree is barren of pleasant fruit, and his
pleasing words of weighty matter. Furthermore, what remembrance is there of
fair Sirinx coyness, refusing to be God Paris wife? other then that she was
metamorphosed into a few unprofitable Reeds: Or of Anaxaretes chaste cruelty
toward Iphis, over then yt she remains an Image of Stone in Samarin. Many
other such like naked Monuments remain of nice contemners of Marriage. But in
the behalf of Marriage thousands have been changed into Olive, Pomegranate,
Mulberie, and other fruitful trees, sweet flowers, Stars, and precious
stones, by whom the world is beautified, directed and nourished. In many well
governed common wealths, Sterility has been reputed so vile, as the Aged was
of no man honored that had not children of his own to do him reverence. Then
by how much those things which nourish with increase are more necessary then
those things, which but simply please the eye: by so much the married is more
worthy then the single life.

Sir, quoth Ismarito, it seems that you have read a Leaf more then Saint
Katherins Nun: Defenses of a single life.
for she (simply) tried all things, and you (subtly) use but what serves
your own turn: you reproach a Single life, with Barrenness, and commend the
fertility of Marriage; but had you showen ye weeds with the Corn, bare pasture
would have returned as great a benefit as your harvest. The Monsters,
Serpents, and loathsome Creatures, mentioned by Ovid in his Metamorphosis, were
they not I pray you the fruits of Marriage? as well as the blessings, which you
so affectedly reported: Oedipus was glad to scratch out his eyes, because he
could not endure to behold the vices of his Children. The good Emperor Marcus
Aurelius in his aged days, never rose that he sighed not, never dined that he
fretted not, nor never went to bed that he wept not: to hear, see, and
consider the monstrous evils of his Children. Admit the Married have virtuous
Children, they may dye when they are young, then the goodness of their lives,
increases sorrows by their deaths: and where the comfort is so doubtful, it
is not amiss to refuse the hazard of the grief: Virtuous fame is another life.
neither dies there any of Dianas band, but that their virtues reuiueth them
as the ashes of the Phoenix turns to another Phoenix.

It is for some Phoenix sake, quoth Queen Aurelia, that you thus stoutly defend
a Single life.

I do but your commandment quoth Ismarito.

I (quoth she) it is at my commandment, but yet for some others merit.

Aluisa vechio, The impatiencie of women will not be hid.
fearing that marriage would receive some disgrace if that Queen Aurelia
favored the Defense of a Single life, could not longer suppress her
affections, but with a woman's Impatiencie, blamed the rigor of Diana, who
condemned Acteon to be devoured of his own Hounds, who caused sweet Adonis to
be stain by a wild Boar: with many other cruel parts, unseeming the
natural pity of a woman: but (which might have saned a great deal of
Argument, or at the least, which will now soon end the Controversy:) compare
(quoth she) Juno and Diana together, and by their callings you may easily judge
who is the worthier. Diana (poor soul) is but a Goddess here on earth, and
Juno is Queen of Heaven: Dianaes force is in her Bow and Arrows, Juno
bestows Thunderbolts upon her enemies: Diana is attired with green leaves,
and Juno with glorious Stars: Diana feeds on raw fruits, and drinks
cold water: Iunoes Feasts are of Manna and her bowls are filled with Nectar:
Dianaes music is no better then the voices of a few Nymphs: Juno is recreated
with the harmony of Angels: Dianaes pastime is (a foot) to chase the fearful
Roe, where Juno (in Phaetons winged Chariot) pursues a thousand several
pleasures: then, by how much the pomp of Juno exceeds the naked Triumphs of
Diana, by so much Marriage must needs be more worthy then the Single life.

Lucia Bella that should have answered Aluisa Vechio, (not unlike the Marigolde
that closes her Beauty, when Phoebus is attired with his brightest rays) so
admired the glory of Juno, Vain glorious shows bewitcheth women.
that as an inchaunted creature, her tongue forgot her natural office: the
reason was, her heart was suddenly surprised with an ambitious desire of honor.

Which change, Ismarito perceived with the first: and least her silence should
conclude a yielding: All is not gold (quoth he) that glistereth, Contentment
neither follows the greatest, nor scorneth the meanest.
nor every thing counterfeit that is not curiously garnished: a smiling
countenance is no full testimony of a merry heart, nor costly Garments of a rich
Purse: And (perchance) the grief of Iunoes secret discontentments, is greater
then the delight of her glorious pomp: where Diana, who (as a Diamond in the
dark, shines of her self) needs not the Ornaments of Juno. And as she is
(simply) of a pure substance, so her thoughts must needs be sweet and quiet.

Sir (quoth Maria Belochy) our soundest judgments are of those things that we
our selves see: therefore, if the appearance of Marriage be worthier th^n the
appearance of the single life: if sentence be truly pronounced, it must be in
the behalf of Juno.

Queen Aurelia p^rceiuing the increase of Ismaritos adversaries, (for who can
stop a stream, measure the sire, weigh the wind, or hinder Fancies passages)
and with all considering how that the controversy was sufficiently debated,
commanded the contenders to keep silence: and referred the question to be
judged by Fabritio and Isabella.

Who having advisedly considered, the reasons on both sides, agreed that a
single chaste life pleased God, because Chastity is pure: and also delights
man, because she quieteth the mind: but a chaste married life, both pleases
and honoreth God: because Marriage hourly presents the world, with the Image
of himself: pleases and profits man, because she gives him a companion, by
affection, changed into his own disposition: of whom he has children, who in
despite of death, preserves him alive. And therefore the sentence of them
both, was pronounced by Fabritio, Sentence given in the behalf of marriage.
in the behalf of Marriage: who withal, enlarged her praises with the report
of many sweet Blessings, which she liberally bestows upon her Subjects. But
lest the company should have been fired with too hasty a desire of Marriage, he
cooled their affections with such caueats, as they that had their voices ready
tuned, to sing the praises of God Hymen, were of the sudden, as mute as a
fish: by reason whereof, Fabritio had free passage: for his counselling
report: who, after many words, to either purpose delivered, concluded with
the opinion of Plato: That Marriage was a paradise on earth, Platoes opinion of
Marriage.
if her Laws be observed: and a Hell in the House where her Statutes are
broken.

The Gentlewomen wist not what to say to Fabritios bitter-sweete commendation
of Marriage, until Bargetto quickened their tongues, by this pleasant
suggestion. Pleasant talk is good phis^^k for sorrow.


If (quoth he) Platoes opinion be law, by the same reason women are either
Angels, or Devils.

And why not men, as well as women, (quoth Isabella) whose disposition bears
the greatest sway in this vocation.

I will show you a reason, quoth Doctor Mossenigo, men with a mean can temper
their passions: The extreme passions of a woman.
when a woman has no measure in her love, nor mercy in her hate: no rule in
her pity, nor piety other revenge: no judgment to speak, nor patience to
diffemble: and therefore she is likened unto the Sea, A Gundelo is a little
Boat like a wherry.
which (one while) is so mild, as a small Gundelo indureth her might, and anon,
with outrage she over whelmeth the tallest ship.

Ah master Doctor, quoth Katharina (...) I fear me you are so learned, Hien,
sometimes a man, and sometimes a woman.
as like the Hyen, you change your self sometimes into ye shape of a woman:
but yet of this malicious purpose, to learn their dispositions, only to
reproach their kind: but had any of us the cunning, to become a man but a while,
I imagine, we should ever after love yt better to be a woman.

You have rather cause (quoth Dondolo) to let master Doctor kiss your hand,
(for commending your kind) then to blame him, by a surmise of injury, offered
unto women: for if there be a few good, they cover the faults of a number that
are evil: as a little gold guildeth a great quantity of iron: and for any
thing he said, you have as general an interest in virtue, as in vice.

Yea, but (quoth Queen Aurelia) he is to be blamed for his intent, The intent
of evil is to be punished.
which was evil, and deserves not to be praised for the good which came of
it, which was our merit.

Madame (quoth the Doctor) so much greater is the good you receive by my
Trespass, as thereby you are honored with the virtue, to forgive.

Yea, Pardon is to be used in ignorant, and not in wilful faults
but (quoth she) remission is to be used in ignorant offenses, and not in
wilful.

My habit (quoth he) is a testimony that I spoke not of malice.

So much (quoth she) the greater is your fault, in that it proceeded upon
pleasure: The punishment of great offenders does most good in examples.
and where you think to privilege your self by your habit: for example sake,
you shall at (open) Supper, bath renounce your heresy and make satisfaction,
or abide the Judgment, of these Gentlewomen.

If there be no remedy (quoth he) I must obey.

The Doctor thus taken tardie, gave occasion of laughter unto the whole company.

Which, blown over [quoth Soran so] we have trauayled this day to an
unfortunate end: for that now, toward night we are entered into an open
Champion, where we find many broad ways to Hell, and but one cross path to
heaven.

Well (quoth Queen Aurelia) we will take other times, to beat out the true
passage: And (least we be lated) we will no further to day.

Whereupon, after a courtly reverence done: Queen Aurelia, with her
Attendantes, showed her self in the great Chamber, where she might repose her
mind with the choice of sundry pleasures: For his, or her disposition was very
strange, that in that company could not find both a Companion and sport, that
pleased his humor.

The first Nights Pastime.
AMong wise men, these Orders have evermore been observed, or allowed: In the
Church, to be devout: in place of Justice, to be grave: at home to be
affable, Devotion.
and at meals to be merry: for in the Church we talk with God, who sees our
hearts and hates hypocrisy: Gravity.
in Justice, we sit to chasten light demenours, then great were the shame, yt
our countenances should contemn our selves.

At home we rule and command, then were it Tyranny to use severity there,
where is no resistance. Affabilitit.


At meals to be merry, digesteth meat, and refreshes the wit: then is he an
enemy unto himself, that contemns the rule of health, and the helper of
knowledge. Mirth.
Howsoever the three first precepts were observed, Segnior Philoxenus and his
honorable guestes duly executed the last, who in the midst of supper hearing
of Doctor Mossenigos penance, hasted the execution.

The Doctor seeing there was no remedy, openly confessed that he had praised
women against his wist, for which he was condemned to (...) Ab renuntio, and to
make satisfaction by some other means: And as he thought the contrary was the
amends of every trespass, and therefore, whereas he had praised them against
his will, he was ready to desprayse them with his will. Subtilty beats true
meaning with his own sword.


Queen Aurelia would have taken exceptions to these words, but that the
company cried, The Doctor speaks Law, which she could not with Justice
violate, whereupon Mossenigo reported, as follows.

Doctor Mossenigo his Satisfaction, for praising women against his will.
IN the famous City of Vienna, in Austria, sometimes dwelled a simple Sadler,
named Borrihauder, who was married to an old crabbed shrew, called Ophella: the
agreement of this couple was so notable, as the Emperor Charles the fifth
commanded his Paynter Parmenio, to draw their counterfeits, as a monument of
fury. Parmenio coming to do the Emperors commandment, found Borrihauder
weeping with the agony of his wives stripes, and Ophellas cheeks as red as
fire with the heat of her tongue: which strange sight, changed his
determination into a pleasant conceit, and in place of their Counterfeits, in
a fair table, he drew an Element troubled with lightening, and under writ,
Ophella, and in another Table fastened to the same, he likewise drew an Eloment
darkened with rain, and under writ, Borrihander. Parmenio presented this
travel unto the Emperor. The Emperor seeing the two names, and not the shape
of those he commanded to be drawn, demanded the Painters meaning herein, who
plesantly answered, that he could not take the view of Ophellas face, for fear
of being fiered with the lightening of her tongue, and that Borrihauder was
drowned with tears, which as showers of rain followed the thunderclaps of his
wives Fistes: But in good time (had she died) this. Demideuil Orphella fell so
extremely sick, as in every man's judgment it was needful to give Physic to
her soul, but bootelesse to bestow any of her Body: Borrihauder seeing her, as
he thought, at a good pass, was so accustomed to sorrow, as he determined to
knole her passing bell, with this counterfeit moan. Ah dear God (quoth he) how
unhappy am I to lose my loving wife, my good wife, my sweet wife? O how happy
were I, that as we have lived together, so we might now die together. This
pittious sound of her husband so melted the dying heart of Ophella, that like a
candle consumed, that leaves a little smoke in the week, she lay both
speechless, and senseless, save that the pangs of death sometimes threw a weak
breath out of her mouth: but like unto wild fire, that burns in water, the
Corsiue, that would have killed the devil, in her case, recovered her to
health, which was her husband, out of fear of her life, in despite of the
injury of time past, fell to kiss and coll his Maid, which watched his
gasping wife, before he took order with the Clarke, to ring her knell: which
Ophella, as dim as her sight was, perceived, and Fury, which was the last
motion, that accompanied her in life, like a whirle wind, that we a sudden
violence, draws things into the air, so fired her heart with malice, to see
her husband in this iollitie with her maid, as madness gave her the strength to
cry. Ah, ah, Traitor, I am not yet dead: ah villain, villain, I am not yet
dead: and through this passion, choler so dried her Catar, as shortly after,
she perfectly received her health: and so canuassed her husband Borrihauder, as
by the motions of sorrow, and pain, he hung himself in a Crabtree. O quoth
Katherina Trista, it was great damage that Thymon of Athens was not in the
town, to show all malicious men that tree. The devil might have p^t in their
minds, to have hanged themselves.

This sudden answer of Katherina Trista, tickled all the company with a
laughter, a good part whereof, A cunning answer takes away the grace of a
shrewd tale.
were ready to scandal women, with a froward nature, being by this example,
more fostered with despite then good usage: who, now for fear of their own
reproach, amplifted not Master Doctors tale, with any other spightfull
authorities.

For the History of Thymon of Athens dogged nature, Thymon of Athens was the
sworn enemy of humanity.
was so well known to every Gentleman, as the remembrance of his name, assured
them, that there never lived woman of so froward a condition: neither is it
possible that ever any man again should be so great an enemy to humanity.

And thereupon [quoth Falerio] Thymon of Athens was without heir or
successor, and therefore is no able example to blame us.

Neither had Ophella (for any thing we hear) either heir or successor (quoth
Aluisa Vechio:) then by your own reason is of no authority to stander our sex.

This one quip for another (although more mildely handled of the Gentlewomens
side, according to their natural modesty) quieted either part. In so much as
Doctor Mossenigo humbly desired to be received into the grace of women again.

Nay, [quoth Queen Aurelia] you deserve to be evermore banished the presences
of women.

Alas good Madame, (quoth he) I did but your commandment, and thereupon I
appeal to the report of the company.

Yea, A dutiful subject is bound to obey his Princes words, and not linger upon
the effect.
but (quoth she) my meaning was otherwise.

O Madame (quoth he) Subjects are bound to execute their Sovereigns words,
and are not privileged to interpret their charge to their own fancy.

I see well, [quoth Queen Aurelia] that there is no dealing with a Lawyer, for
they can defend their own trespasses with the same sword, A fained friend is
better then a dangerous open enemy.
wherewith they punish other men's offenses: and therefore better to have you a
feigned friend (being so dangerous) then an open enemy: wherefore we pardon you.

By this time, Supper, and every service of the Table ended. Whereupon Queen
Aurelia and the whole company rose, and saluted one another with a civil
reverence. The Music summoned the young Gentlemen, and Gentlwomen to dancing:
for (this night) they expected no other pastime, unless it were dicing,
carding, or such like unthrifty sportes. And therefore as the night grew on, or
they waxed weary, until the next morning they committed one another, a dio.

MADONA AVRELIA, Her second days pleasures.
Containing (with many other necessary Questions) a large discovery of the
inconveniences of forced Marriages.

AVrora had no sooner forsaken her husband Tithons bed, A Description of the
sun rising.
but that Phoebus ashamed of his over drowsy sleeping, in the dark Caves of
Tartessus: hastily harnesed up his Horses, and in his fiery Chariot, climed
the mountain Oeta, the painful travel whereof made brighte Pyrois, and
sparkling Phlegon, Pyrois and phlego^ fained to be two of the Suns Cock horses.
breath flames like the burning Furnace, wherein Vnlcan forgeth the
Thunderboltes of Jupiter: In so much as Phoebus golden rays (which beautifieth
the Heavens, and comfort the earth) pierced through every small passage,
into Segnior Philoxenus Palace: and glimmering in the young Gentlemen's faces,
wakened them, with an imagination of their mistress beauties, The bed
resembles the Grave.
(who scorning their beds, as graves which buried ye one half of their
pleasures, and the Cannapies, as clouds that shadowed the brightness of their
Load Stars) now started up, to honor and salute the Images of their hearts
delight: and to waken the Ladies and gentlewomen (who of the sudden could not
be attyred) ye tingling of a small Bell gave them warning of a Sermon. Insomuch
as by nine of the clock, Queen Aurelia and her stately attendants entered the
Chapel, in such Equipage, as I think the Preacher, Laureta, commonly called
Loretto, the great pilgrimage of Italy, where is a small Chapel, sometimes
made by the cunning of certain Friars, and the consent of some of the Citizens
of Racanati: only to bring Fraffique to their City, destroyed by the Goths
and Vandals: and in the night stole it out of the town, and spread a rumor,
that our Lady by Angels had brought it out of Jury: the mansion house wherein
she there lived, which Fable a number hold for a truth.
Friar Bugiardo imagined our Lady was come from Loretto, to honor Segnior
Philoxenus Altar: and therefore to welcome her the more, he so extolled our
Ladies virtues, and the good and pitiful works of our Cannonized Matrons,
and Virgins: if the Crown of Heaven had stood upon our Ladies head, and that
the earth (chiefly Italy) was blessed for pitiful women's sake: of which they
could have no greater testimony, then that our Lady by miracle, had possessed
them, with her earthly Mansion: which she daily visits, with a thousand
blessings. And therefore (quoth he) repair her Churches, cherish her Priests,
pray before her Aulters, and your finnes, whatsoever, shall be forgiven: O she
is pitiful, as a woman, and can rule her son as a Mother: and with such
like old tales, Ignorance Cave, the hie way to hell.
and Tapers, he lighted the people, as they thought, to Heaven: but in very
truth, into blind Ignorance Cave, from whence the devil carried them to Hell.

Ismarito smiled to hear the subtlety of the Friar, and sorrowed to see the
simplicity of the people, in causes that appertain unto the soul, Italians a
most subtle kind of people.
who in the affairs of the flesh, are as wily as Serpents: whose countenance,
when Philoxenus beheld, he pleasantly demanded, how Ismarito liked Friar
Bugiardo his sermon.

Ismarito merely answered, it was pity that Judas had not heard the like,
after he had betrayed his Master Christ: it might have been, upon these large
promises of forgiveness, he would not so desperately have hanged himself.

Then quoth Philoxenus these pleasing sermons be not unnecessary in this
country, where sin is so gross: for were not the people in hope, Sin
cannot endure to hear of Gods Justice
that our Lady of pity would pardon them, anumber would follow Judas in
despair: with fear, that Gods Justice would condemn them.

It seems reason (quoth Ismarito) that the people believe what is said in the
Pulpit: for they understand not what is read in the Church. A tyranny ten times
more cruel then Phalaris Bull.


In this especial case (quoth Philoxenus) all our crosses, are curses.

So that our first restraint from reading the Scriptures, could not but come
from as accursed a spirit as his, Alcaron, a law that forbids the Turks to
dispute of Mahomet.
that first invented the Turks Alcaron, for by the pain of the one, Mahomets
Idolatry is vnreprehended, and through our ignorance in the other, the Popes
blasphemy, is in us vnespyed, and thereby, both God is dishonored, and many a
Soul destroyed: so that happy, and thrice happy, Turks to dispute, of
Mahomet. A divine blessing.
are you of England, that have the sacred Bible, and the hard passages of
Scripture expounded in vulgar language: that your common sort, howsoever your
Prelates live, understand whether they err or no in their doctrine.

And since the subjects of the Emperor, Alexander Seuerus, honored their
sovereigns virtues, with these acclamations.

NOble Alexander, we pray the gods, that they have no less care of your
Majesty, then you have of us: A token of loving Subjects.
most happy be we, that we have you among us. Noble Alexander: the gods
preserve you, the gods defend you: proceed forth in your purpose: we ought
to love you, as our Father, to honor you as our Lord, and to admyre you as a
God, here among us. And thereunto added: Noble Emperor, take what you will of
our Treasure and substance to accomplish your purpose, (only) for building of
three Hospitalles, to succor the sick bodies of the poor.

By how much more zeal ought you, the good Queen of Englands Subjects, add
to this Prerogative?

Do (gracious Queen Elizabeth) what shall seem to you good: for your most
blessed nature cannot err, or do any thing amiss that you purpose, who by
divine inspiratio^, has unlocked the fountain of grace: so that the thirsty
souls both of her rich and poor subjects, may freely drink the water of life.

Segnior Philoxenus so affected this speech, as Ismarito could not but imagine
his heart abiudged him, a strunger to grace, and unworthy life, that was her
vassaile and said not thereunto, Amen. The end of Friar Bugiardos clawing
Sermon, Reconciliation may take away revenge, but not grudge from enemies hearts.
broke off this private talk, and the Gentlewomen, proud of the commendation
of their pytifull sex, now wished, that Doctor Mossenigo had been unpardoned
his yester-nightes trespass toward women: yt the holy. Friar might have cited
him before our Lady of Loretto: who, the greater part of dinner time, left his
victualles to enlarge his feminine praises.

In the end, tasting the goodness of the meat, he found prating very
unsavory: and therefore, to recover his losses, his lips laid on load:
which Faliero, and some other of the pleasant company perceiving, assayed to
reward the Friar for his good Sermon, with Tantalus dinner, and to that end,
busied him with many questions, Questions answered by monosillable.
which he ever answered in a monosillable, so that his tongue hyndred not his
feeding: as (quoth Faliero) a question or two, Master Friar I pray? say, quoth
he: who strikes with the sharpest rod: God: of all other, who is most evil?
Devil: in distress, who deserves most ruth? Truth: who is charged with most
crime? Time: what holds the world in most imprice? Vice: who is the greatest
lier? Friar: desire: without flame, what makes the greatest fire? Ire: what
sin is most accursed? Lust: what bread is best to eat? Wheat: what drink is
worst for the eyne? Wine: when they could devise no talk, to put life in the
Friars tongue, doctor Mossengio demanded, why he was so brief in his
answers? O (quoth he) Pauca sapienti: Then (quoth the Doctor) it is good
taking away, this plenty of meat, for cloying Friar Bugiardoes wit. The whole
company, hearing the Friar beaten with his own sentence, turned into a
contrary sense, burst out into such an immoderate laughter, as choler that
rose to the very throat of the Friar would not suffer him to swallowe one bit
more of meat: in so much, as the board was taken away, and the Friar driven to
say Benedicite, with an empty stomach: an intertainement, as fit for a
flatterer, as a reward for a faithful servant.

The office of courteous reverence, A good reward for Flattery.
fully discharged: the company retired toward the fire, to pause a little
after their dinner, observing therein an old health rule.

After dinner, talk a while,
After supper, walk a mile.
Where the pitiful Gentlewomen, moned the disgrace of their praise master,
the Friar, but murmured more that he was crossed (without a blessing) by their
enemy, the Doctor. And to put them out of this matter, Bargetto said merisy,
that the friar had taught him such a cunning way to woo, as to melt a woman
into pity, he would wish, but the opportunity of three hours: two to love,
and one to praise the thing they like. Yea (quoth Franceschina Santa, his
Mistres) since women are so merciful, it is necessary to bridle the subtilty
of men: and to give example, I enjoin you, these three days to speak no more
of love: and questionless, this pain set upon Bargettos head, was no greater
then his oversight deserved: for in doing of these three things is great
danger, and small discretion: to play with fire, to strive with water, A
profitable Note.
and to give a woman knowledge of our power: therefore, he that will discover
his own secret advantage, is worthy to have his hair cut with Sampson.

Queen Aurelia, by this time was ready to walk into the drawing chamber, to
continue her established exercise: and for the execution thereof, she called
certain of her chosen attendants, (whose appearance being made,) to observe
her former course, for ancient customs profitable, are better then new laws
incertaine, she commanded the Eunuke, to set their wits in an order, by the
virtue of some sweet harmony, who taking his Lute, after a dutiful obeisance,
played, and sung this following Sonnet in Italion.

TO realish Love, I taste a sowrie sweet,
I find Repose, in Fancies fetters bound:
Amid the Skies, my wish I often meet:
And yet I lie, fast staked to the ground:
My eye sees Joy, my heart is gripde with pain,
I know my hurt, and yet my good refrain.
But how these hang, the faithful Lover knows,
And yet can give no reason for the cause:
The power of Love man's reach so far outgoes,
As bound (perforce) he yields to Cupids Laws,
And yet we find, this Liberty in Love,
As bard from Joy, Hope does our griefs remove.
Then Love sit crownde, as Sovereign of my thought,
And Fancy see, thou other motions chase,
To do whose will, Desire in me has wrought,
A strength to run, in Gyues, sweet Pelops race,
And those to charm, that study me to stay,
It may suffice: the wisest past my way.
The double effects of this Sonet, made them freshly to remember the doubts
they left yesterday unresolved. And to avoid digression, which raises many
difficulties, and resolves few: Queen Aurelia caused a repetition of Platoes
opinion of Marriage, which was: She was a Paradise on earth, where her Statutes
were kept: and a Hell in the House, where her laws were broken.

Whereupon (quoth Dondolo with the liberty of Queen Aurelias favor) I
demand the causes why that the Male, and Female, of brute and wild
creatures love, cherish and take comfort, in one another company, only by
the impression of nature: and man and woman, that are beautified both with the
virtues of nature and reason, many times matches together, make a hell of this
holy institution.

By Queen Aurelias commandment, Reason gives man souerainty over al
creatures.
to answer.

Sir (quoth Faliero) the advantage of reason, with which you have priueledged
man and woman, is the only cause thereof: no man will deny, but that there is
a difference of conditions, There is diversity of condition in every kind.
in creatures of every kind: some horse, an unskillful horseman, can hardly
disorder; and some in despite of his rider will have a iadish trick. Some
Bauke though she be evil served, will not straggle forth: and some, do the
Faulkener what he can, will continually fly at checkes: some hound by no
means will be rated from riot, and some will never forsake his undertaken
game: even so some man will filch if his hands be fast bound, and some having
the advantage of a booty, will rather starve, then steal: some woman, with an
hours liberty will offend, and ten years loving suit cannot overcome some
other. Reason finds out the imperfection of nature. Cause of misliking in
marriage.
But the vice and virtue in every creature, by the opinions of many sage
Philosophers, proceeds from the pureness, or the imperfection of nature:
which is not to be found, but by reason: and the use of reason only belongs
to man: now, if by over sight in choice, married are divided in desire, differ
in life, and delight in neithers love: Reason that finds out this
contrariety, Causes of comfort in marriage.
sows contention between the unfortunate couple in Matrimony thus matched.
Again, when between the married there is equality, of birth, years, and
manners, no difference in love, nor suspicion of others behavior: reason that
delights in unity, makes the joys of Marriage innumerable.

Therefore (think I) the opinion of Plato may be embraced as a sound judgment.

The whole assembly, allowed Falieroes reason: and Dondolo himself was
reasonably well satisfied. But quoth he, since Marriage brings with her
unspeakable joy, or incurable sorrow: how may a man assure himself of the one,
or avoid the other? when a woman's unsearchable heart is the only harbor both
of her good and evil conditions: and (once) in appearance, the honorable, and
the dishonest, the virtuous, and the vicious: and in brief, every sort of
women are naturally beautified with modesty. If the good repulse dishonest
request with chaste disdain, the badde with counterfeit sobriety, will blush at
incontinent suits: if the good uses silence as a virtue, the bad with well
ordered speech, will be as highly esteemed: if the good with the beauty and
benefits of nature, delight: the bad with the flourish of Art, will no less be
fantasied. So that at the first face, the cunningest Clarke may be deceived, in
judging who best deserves.

The greatest Clarke (quoth Faliero) proves not always the wisest man, and
none more apt to be beguiled then he. He valueth all that glistereth, Gold: he
esteems fair words, Experience is the best ludge
as friendly deeds: and thinks that lovely countenances do spring from a
loving condition: when experience knowing the contrary, will try them all by
the best.

The corruptest Canker bloometh like the sweetest Eglantine: the bitter
Bullice, resembles the pleasant Damson, and the sower Crah, the sauorie
Pippin: Even so good and bad, fair and foul, chaste and unconstant women are
made of one moulde, framed of one form, The form deceives, but the quality
shows the creature.
and naturally graced with a shamefast blushing: but as in smell the Canker, in
taste the Bullice, and the Crab in relish, bewray their imperfections, even so
with cunning usage, the subtillest woman will show her unnatural conditions:
counterfeits will to kind: copper holds print, but not touch with gold, fire
hid in ashes, will break forth in heat: water courses stopped, find out new
passages: even so the impatient woman, thoroughly moved, discloseth her
passions: ye proud with sufferance exceeds in pomp, and the wanton sore
charged, will fall to folly.

Well (quoth Dondolo,) notwithstanding your directions be good, yet the path to
heaven is so difficult to find, as the ignorant passenger without direction,
is like to follow the beaten way to hell, and the surest guide is Experience.

So that the direction of the Parents, The foresight of Parents.
is to be embraced of the Children in this behalf.

Parents with regard, foresee the evils that negligent Children feel ere they
withstand: Parents provide living to maintain their Childrens love.

Children often times by matching with beggars, diminish their parents
inheritance.

Parents labor for necessaries to support an house-hould.

Children only seek for silken rags, to uphold their pride.

Parents have care to match their Children with those of virtuous condition:
and Children lightly regard no more then their lovers amiable countenance.

I confess with you (quoth Faliero) the ouersights of young men in their
choice, A reprehension of forced marriage.
but I cry out upon forcement in Marriage, as the extremest bondage that is:
for that the ransom of liberty is the death of the one or the other of the
married. The father thinks he has a happy purchase, if he get a rich young
Ward to match with his daughter: but God he knows, and the unfortunate couple
often feel, that he byeth sorrow to his Child, slander to himself, and
perchance the ruin of an ancient Gentleman's house, by the riot of the son in
Law, not loving his wife.

But admit there be no disagreement between the parties, which is rather
fortune then foresight in parents, who regard that the lands and goods be
great, but smally way whether the beauty and behauiours please or no: yet love
inforst takes knowledge neither of friends, favor, form, Love will not be
constrained.
goods nor good bringing up.

Delicate meat hardly forces an appetite unto the sick. Pleasure yields no
sollace to the sorrowful, no more can forcement enforce the free to fancy.
The Lion with gentleness may be tamed, but with curstnes never conquered: much
more lordly is Love, for as Petrarke defines, The Prince, the Peer, the
Subject and the slave,
Love gives with care, to him they make their moan,
And if by chance, he grant the grace they crave,
It comes of ruth, by force he yields to none.


I could report many examples of large authority, The evil of tediousnes.
to prove this inconvenience, but to a needelesse end: for tediousnes duls the
remembrance of the hearer, and tyres the tongue of the reporter. In daily
action, you may view the liberty of Love, his contempt to be constrained, and
the great compassion he uses when he is with courtesy acquired, which account
in forced Marriage is sildome considered. There is procurement of friends before
plightment of faith: safety for livings before assurance of love, and clapping
of hands before knitting of hearts: an occasion that the sorroful parties
mourn when they are Married, and rejoice when by death they are severed.

Dondolo replied, that when there is no remedy, Reason will drive them to love.

But Faliero maintained, that Reason and Love, are at deadly food: Reason bids
thee love, but where thou art liked, Reason and Love, as enemies.
and Love bids thee fancy where thou art hated: Reason directs for thy
benefit, and Love allures to thy detryment: and to conclude, the office of
Reason is to appease old griefs, and the nature of Love is to raise new
debates.

Tush, tush (quoth Bargetto,) among the married, quarrels in the day, are
qualified with kisses in the night: whereupon grows this Adage.

The iangling words, that Lovers use in rage:
Gives Love a grace, when anger does assuage.
A witness that unkindness inlargeth Love, as the wrack of Winter does the
beauty of Summer: then, although the Parents match at first, be without the
fancy of the Children, a reconciliation (in fine) will double their comfort.

Sir (quoth Soranso, favoring Falieros opinion) you wrest: the Adage is to a
contrary meaning: Another reprehension of forcement in marriage.
for it is to be used but where there has been some time perfect love, and
where a grounded love is, although the Married menace with their tounges, they
malice not with their hearts: on the contrary part: look what rule the Lover
uses in love, the enemy observes in revenge.

Therefore if the Married abhor before Marriage, they may well dissemble with
their tongues, but will never be delighted in their hearts: and where there is
such a division in the desires of the Married, fair fained semblance, will
soon turn to flat foul falling out, their thrift goes forward as the
carriage drawn by two Oxen, tail to tail: the husband will have no delight
to get, nor the wise desire to save: servants with negligence will waste, and
hyrelings with prolining, will win: and (which is worst) the continuance of
malice will custom them with mortal hatred: hatred between the Married,
breeds contention betwixt the parents, contention betwixt the parents,
raises quarrels among the kindred, and quarrels among the kindred, occupies
all the neighhours with slander: so ye for the most part, these forced
marriages, engendereth sorrows for the married, disquietnesse to both their
friends and kindred: but which still renueth grief, the scandal of enemies,
ends in neither of their wretchedness.

This being said, little auayled the further proofs of the contrary part, so
full was the cry: Fie of forcement in marriage, so that to paint out the
inconveniences thereof in his proper colors, Queen Aurelia commanded Faliero,
to confirm his sufficient reasons, with the discourse of some rare History.
Whose commandment he willingly satisfied, and reported as follows.

The History in the reproach of forced Marriage, reported by Faltero.
IN the famous City of Cirene in Afric, dwelled sometims a rich Merchant
named Tryfo. This Tryfo had a welthy neighbor called Clearches, who of long
time entertained one another with a neighbourly affection: Tryfo to inherit
all his livings, had but one only Son, named Sicheus: and Clearches one
only Daughter called Elisa. The parents to establish (as they imagined) an
everlasting amity between their houses, concluded a marriage for their
unfortunate Children, making no doubt but that they would as well inherit
their affections as their livings, of which there was hope enough, if the order
had been as good to establish their Lone, as the haste great to solemnize the
Marriage: for that in their persons appeered no sign of disagreement, nor in
their abilities cause of exception: but love (that beholds no more quickness
in a Diamond then in a dym Saphyre) though he take impression by sight, Love
rooteth by contemplation.
rooteth in contemplation: which divine exercise of the soul, smally
delights green youth, who intertain their thoughts with a thousand vain
fancies: but to my purpose. The Marriage day drew near, and as at the very push
of Battle, the wise Captain animateth his Soldiers with some plausible
oration, even so the night before the Marriage, Tryfo schooled his son Sicheus
with this following advertisement.

My good son quoth he, so great are the follies of men, Advise to a booteles
purpose.
and so cunning the deceits of women, as they most (especially the younger sort)
will credit their looks, without looking into their lives: believe their
words, and lightly regard their works: delight to recount their
entertainments, and disdain to reckon their shrewde paiments. For as the sick
patient comforted with the Physicians words, leaves to examine ye qualities of
his receites: Even so, the wretched lover cured with the yielding of his
beautiful Mistres, Love yields neither to wit, strength, nor learning.
with negligence both ouerlooks his own benefit, and her behavior. Solomon
was deceived, Sampson subdued, Aristotle derided, and Hercules murdered by the
illusions of errant honest women.

King Demetrius notwithstanding he was both wise and valiant, An extreme
affection.
was so bewitched with the wyles of the notorions strumpet Lamia, as in open
Schools he raised disputations, whether the love he bare Lamia, or the Jewels
he bestowed upon her were the greater: or whether her merit exceeded them both
or no. Yea when she dyed he caused her to be entombed under his bed Chamber
window, to the end that with daily tears he might worship her engraued bones,
who living was of him entirely beloved.

If the wisest and the worthiest be thus overtaken in their affections, what
easy baits may beguile thee, who in years art young, of substance delicate
and lusty, and therefore apt to love: ready in conceit, and of consideration
imperfect, hot in desire, and in discretion cold: My son, by experience I
know, and to prenent thy ouerlikely mischaunce in choice, I have chosen thee a
wife, fair to please thee, rich to continue love, her Parents my assured
friends, and she thy affected lover: love her well, bear with her insmall
faults, as a woman and the weaker, and bridle thy own evil affections as a
man, her head and governor: and in thus doing, God will multiply his
blessings upon you, and make your aged Parents to die in peace, to see you live
in prosperity. Young Sicheus regarded his Fathers tale, as Scholars do their
Tutors, who giving them leave to play, admonishes them with all to keep good
rule, which they promise, and perferme the contrary. With the like affection
Sicheus embraced marriage. He was not so soon weary of dallying with his wife,
as he was ready to entertain a Harlot: so that in short space he became a
common Lover, and a careless Husband: and withal grew as arrogant in
defending his liberty, The title of Marriage makes youth arrogant.
as dissalute in his actions and behavior: If his friends did gently advise
him, he was of age to counsel himself: if his Parents did sharply reprehend
him, he would impudently answer, he was past correction: if his Wife found
her self agreeued with his hard usage, she might well complain, but he would
take no time to amend; so that his daily actions of evil took away all after
hope of well doing: insomuch as he became odious to his friends that beheld his
lewd inclination: and a plague unto his Wife, who was daily oppressed with his
monstrous vices. So that the ouercharge of sorrow made her many times passage
for these and such like passions.

O unhappy and over hasty Marriage, which in the pride of my youth with
discontentments make me resemble a fair Fig tree, Abuse of good things
work evil effects.
blasted with the after cold of an untimely Spring: but why blame I Marriage
which is honorable? alas, because the abuse of good things, work evil
effects: Roses unadvisedly gathered, prick our hands, Bees ungently used sting
our faces, yet the one pleasant and the other profitable: so that if there come
any evil of that which is good, our folly or fortune is cause thereof: Ay me,
That which is blessing to one may be a curse to an other.
when I was married I was too young to be a wife, and therefore have no reason to
exclaim on folly. But fortune foul fall she, which coursest me with curses, in
possessing me with those things which others hold for blessings: Wealth, that
bestows pleasures on many, is the original of my woe. Marriage, which gives
liberty to many, inlargeth my Fetters, and demands death for my ransom:
Beauty that aduaunseth many, is to me a disgrace: for that, inioying her form,
Carelesnes of the husband breeds in the wife.
I am of Sicheus not fantasied, of whom every foul and common Trull is
beloved: But therein Fortune thou do me no wrong, for my hate toward him
ouerpoyseth his light regard of me. O but my heart is continually afflicted
with his evil, and his finger never aches with my malice. Yea: Choler is soon
quieted, but forbeara^ce increases malice.
but Forbearance edgeth the sword of Revenge, when Choler, though it often
strikes, it wounds not much. Rain falls every where, yet beats but the
leaves, the thunder Boult lights in one place, but yet teareth up the roots:
so though I dissemble till opportunity, Sicheus shall feel my hate to death:
and though I endure a space, I will redeem my dying life: and perseuering in
this resolution, Elisaes thoughts, The Devil is the executioner of vengeance.
that were lately drowned in sorrow, now flamed with desire of Revenge: and the
Devil, who is the Executioner of Vengeance, presented her forth with this
ungracious mean.

A young Gentleman named Chion, among a troop of other Ladies and Gentlewomen,
beheld fair Elisa with such a burning affection, as he forthwith dispossessed
his own heart, to make his bosom the seat of her imagined Image: so that his
soul that continually eyed her beauty and his heart, at the direction of his
Mistress, gave such a heat to his desire, that had he been sure to have
received Ixions torments, for his ambitious attempting of Iunoes love, he could
neither have left to love, An extreme passion of love.
nor have forborne to seek for grace: so that follow what would, he forth with
presented his affections, in this ensuing Letter.

Chions Letter to Elisa.
Fair Mistress had I virtue to persuade you to ruth, as you have power to
make me love: the discovery of my blazing affections would melt you, (were you
a Mountain of Ice) to pity, But for that Love is more vehement in the heart
then in the tongue, I appeal to your own motions for grace, if you have ever
loved; if not, I hope for such justice at Venus hands, as you shall love: and
yet thus much I say, although I affye nothing in my persuasions, because they
be but words, I presume of my endeavors, for that I have vowed my life to death
to do you service: of which you can have no better assurance then employment,
nor I a hyer favor then to be employed.

Good Madame, martyr me not with ordinary doubts, in that my affections are not
ordinary. For as your beauty excels al other Dames, as the fair Rose each
Garden Flower, even so the full power of Love has made me in the estate of
flaming flax, that is, presently to receive grace, or in a moment to perish.
Thus longing for your sweet answer, I somewhat succor my torments, with the
imagination, that I kiss your gracious hand.

No more his own Chion.


This Letter sealed and subscribed, was delivered to so cunning a Messenger as
needed no instructions in Chions behalf. The letter presented, and advisedly
read by Elisa, surprised her with an unmeasurable joy: not so much for that she
had purchased her self a faithful Lover, as procured her Husband a mortal
enemy: A natural fear in a woman, surpriseth many of their evil affections.
of which Chions Letter gave her not so great assurance, as the disposition of
his countenaunces in a former regard: and thereupon pursuing Sicheus with more
hate, then minding Chion with affection, she mused upon a number of mischiefs,
invented by desire to be revenged, and suppressed by fear to be defamed.

In fine, remembering that she had read: Love quickneth a man's wit, although it
burieth Reason: To try if he could define what service she desired: she
returned Chion a Brief, wherein he had a light to mischief, and might be
read, without blemish of her honor: the effect whereof was this.

While SICHEVS does live,
ELISA cannot love.
CHION received this Scrowle, but yet before he presumed to read the Contents,
he kissed and rekissed the same: holding an opinion, that coming from his
mistresses hands it deserved such honor (although it contained Sentence of his
death:) not unlike the foolish Mahometians, An example for Christian Subjects.
who upon their Emperors Commandments, are ready Exerutioners of their own
lives.

But to my purpose: Craft has many times his will, with an opnion of honesty.
when Chion had thoroughly perused this strange answer: were it Sicheus his
heavy Destiny, or a just scourge for his foretrespasses: (accursed that he
was) he became too just an Executioner of Elisaes wicked will: but yet with
this interpretation, that the love she bare her husband, directed her in this
answer.

Insomuch, as overcome with a furious hate toward Sicheus, as the bar of his
welfare, like a Lion that bites the Iron grate, which holds him from his pray:
suddenly with this salutation, he sheathed his Sword in Sicheus ntrailes.

SICHEVS shall not live,
To hinder CHIONS love.
The fact was so foul and withal so public, Wilful faults deserve no pardon.
as ye Officers of Justice immediately seized upon Chion; and for that his
bloody sword was a witness of the trespass, there was no Plea to save him: for
wilful faults may be pitied, but deserves no pardon: and to say truth,
neither did he destre to live, because Elisa the virtue of his life, by the
charge of law, was bound to sue him to death: who followed the process, with
an appearance of sorrow, such as if her Couscience had been without scruple of
guiltiness, or her heart a thousand degrees from joy: when God knows she was
puffed with the one, and the other: so that the wonder at her dissimulation,
equalled the reproach of her notorious hatred.

To be short, A favor evil bestowed.
this was the Judges sentence: Chyon should be behaded, as amends for Sicheus
death, and the Widow should be endowed with his goods, for the damage done
unto her: but God which knows our secret faults (when Judges though they rule
as Gods, know, but what they hear and see as men) not willing to hide such an
heinous offense. This Judge is not partial, for favor, gain or fear.
First, amassed all the hearers with an unknown voice, Elisaes heart is as
guilty as Chions hand: and there with all thundered this following vengeance
upon the cleared malefactor. The Infant in Elisaes womb, as it were engendered
of the Parents malice, at the very instant not obeying the course of Nature, so
tirannised her Intrailes, as with very agony she dyed, and withal remains an
opinion, that the Husband, Wife and Son, by the appointment of the Gods, were
Metamorphosed into Vipers, which venomous Beasts are thrall to these curses.
The female after she has engendered, The curses given unto a Viper.
murdreth the Male, because she will not be ruled as an inferior: and the young
eat themselves forth of their Dams intrailes, because they will not be bound
to the obedience of Nature.

Well (quoth Soranso) though your Metamorphosis be unlikely, yet it is not
unnecessarily applied. For, for the most part, those which are forced to
Marriage, agree little better then Vipers. But it seems to me (Segnior
Faliero) you have too favorably reported this History in Elysaes behalf,
considering the mortal venime she tempered in her heart.

O (quoth Faliero) long foul ways, Brevity is best in passionate matters,
and affectation in pleasant.
both tyreth the Horse and wearieth his Rider, where both the one and the
other, overcomes the length of fair passages, with pleasure: Even so, in a
ruthful History, over plenty of words both greeueth the reporter, and gives
mean for a thousand sighs to break from the hearer, where affected
circumstances give a grace to a pleasant tale. Sorrows causes silence.
Sorrow to hear their kind thus stained with cruelty, locked up the tunges of
the poor Gentlewomen a pretty while. In the end (quoth Aluisa Vechio, We are
bound to show as well the cause as to punish the evil.
a dame more old and bold then the rest,) me seems that Faliero has but
little favored Elysa, for he has showen her evil, and the scourge of her
evil, and in charity he was bound to show the cause of her evil: I would
(quoth Doctor Mossenigo) that Friar Bugiardo had heard this disputation, Good
morality, is better then evil doctrine.
it might have been the breking down of the Altar, whereupon he but lately
committed blasphemy, it would have more reformed him, the^ his pleasing Sermon
could have confirmed us. These advantages the Doctor took to cross the
Gentlewomen, his late open enemies, There is no trusting of a reconciled enemy.
and but now his fained friends: not unlike a sneaking dog, that never barks
but bites withal. And to spite them the more, quoth he, Monsier Bargetto,
since you are bound from speaking of love, you have both cause and opportunity
to talk of women's hate.

Pardon me (quoth Bargetto) for this penance was but a due pain for my
presumption, The example of a naughty nature.
which I hope to overcome with patient suffering: and sure in this mild
answer: Bargetto showed a moral virtue, A necessary note.
and Doctor Mossenigo by his malicious question, a canckred nature: for simply
to offend proceeds of frailty, but to persevere in evil is a note of wilful
frowardness.

Well, notwithstanding Bargettos temperance, a Cauiller caught hold upon this
question, as a Mastiue upon an old dry Marybone, A Cauiller has colors for
every question.
and to prove a woman's hatred more greater then her love, he avouched many
cruel authorities. But Faliero who had done them some initirie in reporting
the late history, made them part of amends, and put their adversary to silence
in proving the contrary: his reason was, that their hate in the extremest
degree, stretched but to the death of an other, and their love many times has
done wilful murder upon them selves.

Then it follows, Women's love is more great then their hate.
by how much we prise our selves above an other, by so much their love is
greater then their hatred.

Yea (quoth the Doctor) but their love and hatred are both violents, Women do
amiss, but men are the cause.
and every violent is an evil.

Yea Master Doctor (quoth Maria Belochy) their evils are the greater for men,
for by their flattering inchauntments, women love immoderately, and stung with
men's insufferable injuries, they hate mortally.

The Doctor replied, Beauty overcomes the wisest.
there was more power in her looks, then authority in her words: but least he
should be subdued by the one, he would not contend with the other.

Why (quoth Queen Aurelia) beauty works no more impression in a Doctors eye,
then does poison in Mineruas sheelde, for he by Philosophy can subdue affection.

Madame (quoth he) you may well compare beauty and poison together, EVRIPIDES
comparison between beauty and love.
for their operations are alike: save that beauty is the more extreme, in that
she infects with her looks, and poison not, unless we taste it: or when it is
most strong, not unless we touch it: yea, Euripides compares her inchauntment
with the inticements of a kingdom, whereas he says.

IN these two things a Kingdom to obtain,
Or else to work the fair to their will:
(So sweetly tastes the grace of either gain,
As) men ne dread their friends with foes to kill.
The reason is, controlement shrinkes the place,
Whereas a King as sovereign Judge does sit
In love, because that reason lackes his grace,
For to restrain the self conceits of wit,
So that God knows, in danger stands his life:
That is a King, or has a fair wife.
To deal in Princes affairs, the company was too green: but in beauties
behalf, there was neither Gentleman, nor Gentlewoman, that was not desirous to
be revenged of the Doctors detraction, for he that has a slanderous tongue
iniurieth many, Slander is generally hated.
and is himself hated of all men: but for that it was now too late to decide
any other great question, Queen Aurelia adiourned the ending of any
controversy, until the next day.

The Device of the second Nights Mask.
BY a secret foreknowledge of a Mask, with which Soranso, Bargetto, Ismarito,
and others, purposed to honor Segnior Philoxenus and his company, supper was
hastened and soon ended: and after the one had saluted the other with an
accustomed reverence, while the rest of the Gentlemen entertained Time, with
dancing, or devising with their mistresses, the Maskers withdre with themselves,
and about nine of the clock in this disguise presented themselves again.

A Consort of sweet Music, sounded the knowledge of their coming: the
Musicians, in Gyppons and Venetians, A Gentleman is not to show his passions by
his attire.
of Russet and Black Taffata, bended with Murrey, and thereon imbrodered this
Posie. Spero, Timeo, Taceo: expressing thereby the sundry passions of Love: and
before them, two Torchbearers, apparelled in Yellow Taffata Sarcenet: the
general apparel of the Maskers, was short Millaine Clokes, Dublet and Hose
of Green Satin, bordered with Silver, Green silk stocks, White Scarpines,
Rapyers and Daggers Siluered, Men in mary case, are to be privileged for
another; merit.
Black Velvet Cappes and White Feathers. They agreed to be thus attyred, to
show themselves free in the eye of the world, and covertly bound unto their
mistresses.

Ismarito for courtesy sake, because he was a stranger, and withal, in that
his Mistres was ye most honorable, had the leading of this Mask, who lighted
with a torch, by his Page, apparelled in Blew, Carnation, and White Taffata,
the colors of his Mistres, Ventoy, a Fan.
entered with a Ventoy in his hand, made like an Ash tree: wrethed about with
Iuy: expressing this poesy, Te stante virebo: with which, upon fit
opportunity, he presented Queen Aurelia, his Mistress: within which were
(covertly hid) these verses in English Italion.

TWo Sovereign Dames, Beauty and honesty,
Long mortal foes, accorded are of late:
And now the one dwells in my Mistress eye,
And in her heart the other keeps her state.
Where both to show the virtue of this peace,
To garnish her, make riot of their Grace:
In her fair eye, Dame Beauty does increase,
A thousand Gleames that do become her face.
And with her heart thus does the other deal,
She lowly seems, and mounts through chaste disdain,
So that her thrals do serve with honest zeal,
Or fearing blame, do yield unto their pain.
The heavenly souls enuies the earths renown:
Such gifts divine in human shape to see,
And Jove still moves, a Goddess her to crown:
Which is decreed, when nature shall agree.
Thus happy I [in Fortunes frowns long whirld]
A Goddess serve, and Sovereign of the world.
BArgetto lighted by a Page, apparelled in his Mistress colors, Green,
Carnation, and White, followed Ismarito, having the mouth of his Mask closed
with a small Golden Lock, as a witness of the true execution of his Mistres
commandment: and upon his fist he carried a Parrate to prattle to his Mistres,
upon pausing between every solemn Almain, and covertly under the Parrates wing
was hidden this passion.

HEnce burning sighs, which sparkle from desire,
To pity melt my Mistress frozen Heart:
Her frozen heart, that Fancy cannot fire,
Nor true intent, persuade to ru^my smart.
Haste, haste, I pray, the Icye pa^^^e break,
And plead for him that is forbid to speak.
What though at first, you fail to calm her rage,
Yet as the Sun from earth does draw the Rain,
Your virtues so, the storms of scorn may swage,
Or feed Desire, with showers of disdain.
For even as drink does make the Dropsy dry,
So cold disdain compels Desire to fry.
Her will be done; but I have sworn to love,
And with this vow, will nourishe my delight:
Her scorn, my woe, nay, time may not remove,
A faithful zeal out of my troubled spright.
Yea more then al, I Will Sacrifice my blood,
And fire my bones, to do my Mistress Good.
SORANSO, lighted by a Page, in Orange Tawny, Watched and Green, was the next
that presented himself: who upon his left side had a Heart of Crimson Granado
Silk, so artificially made and fastened to his dublet, as if his body had
opened, and his heart appeared, which fell down at his Mistress feet, upon
such a Fortune as she was bound to take it up, which opened, she might behold
the picture of berselfe, reading this submission.

EVen as the Heart a deadly wound that has,
Retyres himself, with sighs to solace grief:
And with warm tears his gored sides does bath,
But finding moan to render small relief:
Impatient Beast, he gives a heavy bray,
And hastes the Death, that many would delay.
So I whose Love, beyond my hap does mount,
Whose thoughts as Thorns, yet prick me with Desire:
Whose suit and zeal return's with no account:
Whose hope is dry, set in a heart of Fire:
Hold this for ease, forthwith to spoil the eye,
That lookte and lou'de, th^^ in despair to dye.
A happy Doom, if it for law might stand,
But men condemnde, themselves may not dispatch:
Their lives and deaths, are in their Sovereigns hand.
So mine in hers, whose Looks did me attach:
And therefore I, to pardon or to kill,
Must yield my self, the Prisoner of her will.
L'ENVOY. THen Lady fair, receive what longes to thee,
A fettered thrall, attyred with disgrace,
And at thy feet, his wounded heart here see,
And in the same, the Image of thy face?
Which bleeding fresh, with throbs throws forth his moan,
Rueth, rueth, dear Dame, for that I am your own.
DONDOLO lighted by his Page, apparelled in Tawny, Blew, and Black Taffata, was
the fourth: who upon his Breast bare a Myrrour, set the outside inward, and yet
fastened so siope as it might receive light, with an imagination, that he
showed his Heart, the Beauty of his Mistress, and in the thought, he wrote
upon the outside: Bastache Spero: within which glass, this Sonet was cunningly
conveyed: which upon a fit opportunity he presented unto his Mistress, Lucia
Bella.

FRom shore to sea, from dales to mountains hie,
From meddowes fair, amid the craggie rock,
Love does me lead, I know not whither I,
But evermore a passage does unlock.
Now do I fight, now weep, now death I fear,
In all these storms, yet love the healme does steare.
In desert woods I wander too and fro,
Where I wild beasts, and fiery Serpents meet.
Yet safe I pass, Love does direct me so.
In tempests rough, my bark does always fleet,
Yea, when Sun, Moon, and stars forsake the sky,
Love gives me light, from my fair Mistress eye.
I mount to heaven, I know not with what wings,
I sink to hell, yet drown not in distress:
Twixt Ice and flame, Love me in safety bringes,
But to what end? in sooth I cannot guess:
Yet hap what shall, Love gives me this scope,
In dangers mouth, to live always in hope.
FALIERO lighted by a Page, attired in Peach color, yellow, and popeniay
green Taffata, was the fifte and last that entered: who (as if she were
climing up his Arm) carried a white Turtle, so artificially made, as it
deceived no less, then Parrhasius painted Table Cloth: In whese Beak, were
finely rolled these Verses.

IF on firm faith, one Heart vncharg'd with fraud,
One langour sweet, one wish desire does move:
If honest Zeal, a gentle breast does lawde,
If wandering long, in the Lab'rinth of Love,
If wan pale cheeks, are witnesses of woe,
If reaking sighs thrown from a burning heart:
If all these, and thousand sorrows more,
May charm Mistrust, and make you rue my smart.
Fair Mistress, look but in my Meagre face,
And you shall read, that I have need of Grace.
In this order, and with these devises, the Maskers entered, and after they had
saluted Queen Aurelia, and the honorable of the company, they placed
themselves, some of the one side of the great Chamber, and some of the other,
observing therein a more discreet order then the ordinary Maskers: who at
their first entrance, either dance with themselves, or rudely sease upon the
Gentlewomen: but these Maskers, entertained a small Time, with their Music,
while they had leisure to look about, and epsy who were the worthiest among
the Ladies.

In the end, Ismarito kissing his hand, with a Countenance abased, humbly
desired Queen Aurelia to do him the grace, to dance with him. Next, Bargetto
made choice of Franceschina Santa: after him, Soranso chose Maria Belochi:
Dondolo raised Lucia Bella: and last of all, Faliero took his Mistress
Catherina Trista: and thus they observed in their choice, the same course they
kept in their entrance.

After this company had performed all the civil Services of Maskers, leaving
behind them their Mistresses honored, and the whole company much contented:
they departed in the good order they entered, saving that their Mistresses were
possessed with their several Devices.

Which done, the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen began to shrink out of the great
Chamber, as the stars seem to shoot the Sky, toward the break of day.

MADONA AVRELIA, Her third days pleasures.
Containing sundry Moral Precepts: With a large discovery of the inconveniences
of Rash Marriages.

THE Authority, is daily Experience, that proves how that the bitterest
worldly Sorrow, ^he vncertain^^ of worldly ^^ings.
soon ends, either by benefit of Fortune, or violence of death: neither is
the firmest worldly pleasure of more continuance then an Imagination, which is
straight crossed with a contrary Suggestion.

What difference was there betweeue the Fortunes of Caesar and Pompey, Both
Pompey and Caesar di^d violently.
when their ends were both violent? save that I hold Caesar's to be the
harder: for that he was murdered in the Arms of Prosperity, and Pompey, at
the feet of Disgrace: but being both dead, unto their Monuments, Writers add
this Opinion.

Caesar, in his life, was more fortunate then Pompey: and Pompey more honest
then Caesar. A proof, that some disgrace is the ground of Good Report: and
some good Fortune, the Trumpe of Infamy: therefore, let no man yield to
Adversity, nor affie too much in Pomp and painted Prosperity: for the one,
is but vexation, the other vanity, and both in short time vanish.

A sudden alteration (as me thought) made me to contemplate of these causes:
for that (coming out of my lodging, somewhat timely) I entered the great
Chamber, with as strange a regard, as he that comes out of a House full of
Torch and Taperlights, into a dark and obscure corner: knowing that at
midnight (about which time, I forsook my company) I left the place, attyred
like a second Paradise: the earthly Goddesses in brightness, resembled
Heavenly Creatures, whose Beauties dasied men's eyes more then the Beams of the
Sun.

The sweet music recorded the Harmony of Angels, the strange and curious
devices in Maskers, seemed as figures of divine Mysteries.

And to be short, the place was a very Sympathy of an imagined Paradise. And
in the space of one slumbering steep, to be left like a desert wilderness,
without any creature, save sundry Savage Beasts, portrayed in the Tapistrie
hangings, impressed such a heavy passion in my mind, as for the time, I fared as
one whose senses had forgot how to do their bounden offices: In the end, to
recomfort my throbbing heart, I took my Citterne, and to a solemn Note, sung
this following Sonet, which I a little before composed upon a quiet thought, I
possessed after my reading of Boethius of the consolation of Philosophy,
translated into Italion by Cosimo Bartoli.

Farewell bright Gold, thou glory of the world,
Fair is thy show, but foul thou make the soul:
Farewell proud mind, in thousand Fancies twirld:
Thy pomp is like the stone that still does roll. SISIPHVS

Farewell, sweet Love, thou wish of worldly joy,
Thy wanton Cups are spiste with mortal sin:
Farewell dyre Hate, thou do thy self annoy,
Therefore my heart, no place to harbor in.
Envy, farewell, to all the world a foe,
Like DENNIS BVLL, a torture to thy self:
Disdain, farewell, though hie thy thoughts do flow,
Death comes, and throws thy Stern upon a shelfe,
Flattery, farewell, thy Fortune does not last,
Thy smoothest tales concludes with thy shame:
Suspect, farewell, thy thoughts thy intrails wast,
And fear to wound the wight thou feign would blame.
Slander, farewell, which pryest with LYNX his eyes,
And can not see thy spots, when al are done:
Care, Care, farewell, which like the Cockatrice,
Do make the Grave that al men feign would shun.
And farewell world, since naught in thee I find
But vanity, my soul in Hell to drown:
And welcome Philosophy, who the mind
Do with content and heavenly knowledge crown.
During the time that my thoughts swounded with the charm of my passionate
Music: The Sun decked in his most gorgious Rays, gave a bon Giorno to the
whole troop: and so many as were within the sound of my instrument, were
drawn with no less virtue, then the Steel unto the Adamant. In so much, of
the sudden, to behold the^ statelines of the presence, I was driven forth of
my muse, with a starkeling admyration, not unlike unto him, that sleeping over
a dying brand, is hastily wakened with the lightening of a thousand sparckles,

The offices of Courtesy discharged on every part, Segnior Soranso said: the
Poets feigned not without reason, that Amphions Harp gave sense unto stone
Walls. For so divine (quoth he) are the operations, and virtues of Music: A
commendation of Music
as he that shall be bound, to declare her particular Graces, shall be no less
troubled then the painter Zeuxes was in the counterfetting of Cupid: Who after
much travel, was driven to draw him blind, for otherwise, he had under taken
Sisiphus task, because the twinkling reflections of Cupids eyes, A faining
how Cupid came to be called blind.
threw a thousand Beauties upon his face, and shadowed the work of the Painter.

Thus through ignorance, Cupid has ever since been reputed blind, and for his
own perfection, is honored with the title of the God of Love. The name of Love
gave a large occasion of discourse: but for that another time was appointed for
those disputations, and the morning was wholly dedicated unto the service of
God: the question drowned in Soransos suggestion, and the whole company silent,
in such affairs, attended Queen Aurelias coming: who, in change of gorgious
and rich apparel, kept her accustomed hour, to go unto the Chapel. By
that time service was ended, and every man's devotion done, dinner was ready to
be set upon the Tables, with such choice of delicate Viands, as unto the
bounty of the feast, there might nothing be added.

After that Queen Aurelia and the rest, had taken their ordinary places, every
one helped the disgestion of their meat, either in inuenting some civil
merriment, or in hearing it reported by another.

Bargetto all this while, was neither heard to speak, nor seen to smile.

Which, perceived by Franceschina Sancta his Mistres, she (moved with the
spirit of compassion) studied, how with justice she might revoke her sentence,
and vnstring her servants tongue: and to that end, she demanded, how three good
turns might be unrewarded, three offenses pardoned, A question to try a
quick wit.
three injuries left unrevenged, and in every of these, Justice preserved? This
question passed through the table: and returned without his true resolution.

In the end (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) Monsier Bergetto, what is your opinion?

Sir (quoth Bergetto) my mistress has locked the tongue, that should
pronounce it.

Why (quoth Franceschina) these be no questions of love, and therefore you have
liberty to speak.

No Lady (quoth Bergetto) but his virtue may appear in the answer.

Well (quoth his Mistress) if you can clear your trespass, by one of these
questions, I must do no injury to Justice, and therefore say your pleasure.

Upon this warrant (quoth Bergetto) to your first three, I answer. Three good
turns may be received unrewarded.
A Captain may betray his charge, which is a benefit to the enemy: but the
betrayer is not to be received as a friend: for he that will fell his
countryman, may not be held assured to a stranger. Secondly, a Thief that
peacheth his fellows, does good to the common wealth: and yet deserves no
reward: for he that may privilege his own theft, in bewraying other men's,
will ever more steal upon presumption. Thirdly, to win a man's money is a good
turn, and yet the loser is not to be recompensed: for his intent was to win
the winners.

To your second three questions, Three offencesmay with Justice be pardoned.
a man may offend through ignorance, which is excused without a pardon: for
ignorance is without intent of evil: therefore to be suffered, though not to be
cherished: a man may offend, through necessity, which commends Justice, with
the virtue to forgive: for necessity is bound unto no law, and therefore
deserves not to be punished with the rigor of law: To the third, a man may
offend through rashness, and make amends with repeutance: which Justice may
pardon, without prejudice to equity: and herein (fair Mistres) I have showen
my trespass, and the reparation of my trespass.

To your third three questions, Three injuries may pas vnteuenged.
a man may hurt his friend against his will, which is an injury: yet ought not
to be revenged: for reneng can but afflict the trespasser, and the misfortune
grieueth him: before the husband, a man may kiss the wife, by mistaking: which
is an injury, not to be revenged: for the wife may wipe away the wrong with her
hand, and the husband by revenge, may make work for the Surgeon: and to the
last, a man must be content to take good words of a beggarly debtor: which is
an injury not to be revenged: for a man can have of a Cat but her skin, and of
a beggar, but his scrip: unless he will sell the Apothecary the grease of the
one, and the dice maker, the bones of the other.

The whole company gave a verdict, that Bergetto had expounded his Mistres
doubts without blemish to Justice: and therefore were ernest suitors for his
remission. Whom she pardoned, with this prouiso, that he should behave
himself honorably toward women hereafter. For his liberty, Bargetto
reverently kissed his Mistresses hand, and thus all unkindness pacified.

Queen Aurelia moving a little, raisde the company from the Table, who a
pretty time after dinner had respyt, to prepare their wits, for the accustomed
exercise.

The Clock had no sooner sounded the disputation hour, but Queen Aurelia,
and her Ladies were ready in the drawing Chamber, and upon warning, the chosen
Gentlemen gave their attendance: who having taken their places, the Eunuck
(knowing his charge) unto the Lute sung this Sonet, TO thee I send, thou
fairest of the fair,
The vows and rites, of an unfeigned heart:
Who with my plaints, do pearce the subtle Air,
That Beauty thou, may hear and see my smart.
Who sues, but that thy deputy on earth,
May take in gree, my offerings of good will,
And in account return my Love in worth.
With charge thy priests, my bones to ashes burn:
And with the same, thy aulters all to meal,
That I may make [to serve each lovers turne]
The peace offering, with Sacrifice of zeal.


This Sonet in Beauties behalf, put the whole company in remembrance of
Doctor Mossenigoes last nights lavish speech of Beauty, and the scandalous
comparing of her to poison, or, which is worse, a more subtle infection: and
therefore, to be resolved of his wrong, or her gyltines, Queen Aurelia
appointed Monsier Bargetto to be her Champion, and to assist him, (for it was
agreed that free choice of Marriage, should (this day) be disputed: whose
affection for the most proceeds from the virtue of Beauty,) she lycensed
every one that favored her cause: which done, she willed the Doctor and his
favorers to spit their venym.

Maddame (quoth the Doctor,) Old men are bound by their gravity, to say no
more then they will stand to.
it neither beseems the stayednes of my years, nor agrees with the gravity
of my profession, in such an assembly, to speak the thing I dare not avouch,
and therefore since it comes to this issue, that I must hazard upon a charge,
or shrink away with shame: though my enemies be many, my cause is just: upon
which warrant I am feareles of my foes, and resolute in mine opinion.

Bargetto likewise glad of this favor, protested before Queen Aurelia and the
whole company, that in the faithful execution of his charge, the prodigal
spoil of his life should give contempt to death.

The Doctor, The dash of a Pen, is more grievous then the counterbuse of a
lance.
that had given as many deep wounds with his Pen, as ever he had done with his
lance, shronke no more at these threats, then an Oak at the Helue of an Axe,
but coldely willed him, to use his pleasure, he was ready to defend (or to
die, in) his opinion.

Whereupon Bargetto, to strengthen himself the better, made this remembrance,
of the yester days report.

It is (quoth he) already approved, Free choice in marriage defended.
if the married in forced marriages, could as well finish with the Church, as
they can account with their consciences: their joy to be Married was not so
cold, as their destre to be deuorsed would be whot: therefore by this awke
ward success in forcement, a free choice in Marriage cannot choose, but
continue (as I think) as much love between the Married, as the other sowed
debate.

Rashness and constraint (quoth the Doctor) are both violents, Reproof, etc.
Defense, etc.
and every violent is a vice, then how can a vicious attempt have a virtuous
success? men do evil (quoth Bargetto) that good may come of it, and it is
allowed.

And men do good (quoth the Doctor) that evil may come of it, and it is
forbidden: Reproof, etc.
for it is the intent both in good and evil, that commends or condemns:
and what good intent has the foolish young man, yt by his rashness in marriage,
robs his parents of their comfort, and himself of his credit?

He satisfies his fancy (quoth Bargetto) a special regard in Marriage: and
where there is a sweet accord between the Married, the parents cannot but
rejoice, and the neighbors are bound to speak well: and beauty in his wives
face, will feed his heart with a thousand delights: so that he shall sustain
want with little grief and labor to get wealth with a great desire: for where
unity is, small things grow to great.

Such may be the unity (quoth the Doctor) as small griefs may grow to great
sorrows, Reproof, etc.
when the wind is in the neck of a stooping Tree, it falls down right: and
when the unthriftiness of the Husband, agrees with the evil huswiferie of the
Wife, Sorrow strives to be in the married man's bosom, before the married be in
his wives bead: and what other expectation may there be, either of the one or
the other, when he satisfies his fancy, before he considers of the duties
of Marriage? and she in taking an husband, that is ignorant in the affairs of
husbandry, and in offices of Marriage: It is the office of the married, to be
advised ere he love, Duties before Marriage.
and loving to be reposed in his choice: It is the office of the married to be
provide for an household, before he take possession of his hearts delight: and
it is the office of the married, to examine the conditions of his mistress,
before he enter into any covenant of marriage. And how can he be advised, that
marieth without the priuitie of his Parents? And how can he support an
household, that marries with his Parents displeasure, upon whose devotion he
lives? and how can he judge of his mistress conditions, that wants
discretion to consider of his own estate? and where you allege, the beauty of
his wives face, will feed the husband with delight: his delight will starve his
body, without other supplies: so that when charge shall increase, and his
wealth diminish, let the foolish young married man, impose himself upon this
fortune, that he cannot so often kiss the sweet lips of his beautiful wife,
as he shall be driven to fetch bitter sighs, from his sorrowful heart.

Sir (quoth Soranso, Defense, etc.
taking Bergettos part:) of two evils the least is to be chosen: and it is
less evil for a man, to live a while hardly, and satisfy his own fancy,
then to live ever discontented and please his friends. The good behavior of
the married may win the parents to consent, and amend their exhibition: or death
may come, and put them in possession of their parents living.

If either of these chance, as one is shortly like to happen, the penance that
they endured, will season their prosperity, and counsel the married to keep
within their teacher, to leap within their latchet, and live within their
compass: the loving advise of the husband will reform the disposition of
evil in the wife. No man nor woman, but in some point deserve to be blamed,
and in some other to be praised.
For (as Plato says,) there is no woman so perfect good, but in some one point
may be reprehended: nor no man so faultlesse, but that some what in him may be
amended: so that if the Husband gently reprehend the fault of his Wife, and the
Wife patiently suffer the offense of her Husband, the ability of their estate
will sustain a household, and their love and agreement will be an especial
comfort unto themselves, and a commendable example unto all the neighbors.

The best of both your evils (quoth Doctor Mossenigo) is stark naught:
Reproof, etc.
but our question was not, to choose the least of evils, but that which is
simply good: not withstanding, to answer to the sequel of this rashenes in
marriage, you say, their good behauiours may recover their parents good will,
but I prophecy, that their evil demeanours, are more likely to extinguish the
affection of a Father: for necessity will accustom the Husband with dishonest
shifts, and keeps his fair Wife from being idle: for want must be supplied,
what shame so ever ensue. Then is it likely, that the parents which did shut
their purses in the beginning, to punish the contempt of their Children, will
now fast lock them, to be revenged of their infamy. And where you gave them a
hope, by their parents death: I say no man dines worse, Their penance is
great that live in incertaine hope.
then hoping Tantalus, nor none are more wetshod, then they which expect dead
men's shoes, and when they fall, the souls (perhaps) will be worn: I mean
the Father in his life time, may take order to die even with the world, or at
least, leave his living maimed, and the most of his substance wasted: for in a
tempest at Sea, what Pylot has any care of goods, that feeth the ship at the
point to sink: An ungodly child makes an unthrifty father.
even so what parents can have any joy of worldly wealth (more then to defend
necessity) when he sees, the heir both of his labor and living, out of hope
of well doing: so that through this rashness many sons, during their
fathers lives, with hard shifts, shift of necessity, and after their deaths
live disinherited: and not altogether so much for their own contempt, The
several pains of offenses.
as for their wives incontinency: and truly in the first, although the parents
may be thought cruel, yet are they not to be reputed unnatural, for that
every offense has his proper scourge: restitution is the true pain for
robbery: an eye is revenge for an eye, a hand for a hand, death challe^geth
death, and disobedience in the son, deserves disinheritance, by the father.
Incontinency slandereth an honest man's house.
Touchiug this dishonesty of the daughter in law (as it is great hazard but
that necessity thus bestowed, will bend her a little:) the severity is
sufferable, if her husbands father shut her forth of his doors, for that the
honor of a man's house is so delicate, as it can away with no stain: and
(reserving your favors virtuous dames) where a strumpet enters, she stuffeth
the house with slander, as carraine infected the air with stincke, yea the
occasion is just: if the father spare to get, and the mother cease to save, nay
if they spend that which they have, for it were great pity, that there should
be any thing left, either of their living or labor, to support a harlots
pride. O how innumerable are the inconveniences of this temeritie in marriage?
The wise by conjecture and daily experience sees, and the foolish (with
sorrow in their own entrails) feels: and therefore as a heinous offense,
the ancient Philosophers (which without partiallitie, checked Vice, and
cherrished Virtue) punished this contempt of Children. Plutarke says, the
son that marieth without his Parents consent, among the Greeks was publicly
whipped: Pains for temeritie in marriage.
among the Lacedaemonians disherited, and among the Thebanes both disinherited,
and of his parents openly accursed.

The younger company, began to fear a restraint of Freeloues liberty, and
their Goddess Beauties disgrace: The Doctor gave Captain Bargetto such
cross blows, who though he fainted in his opinion, yet (like a Cock, that
has one of his eyes stricken out, and his head bared to the brains, yet
strikes until he dies) he assailed the Doctor with this one more reason.

Master Doctor (quoth he) they go far that never return, Defense, etc.
and the battle is very cruel where none escapes: what although a number
speed ill in making of their own choice, many have prospered well. In matches
of the best foresight, good Fortune has not always been found, and yet
foresight is not to be blamed, nor the other adventure to be dispitefully
condemned. Ovid says, that Forma numen habet, then by virtue of her Divinity,
it is like she will sustain them in adversity, that in prosperity became her
vowed Servants: neither does this stayne of the wives behavior often follow,
for where Beauty, Love, and Free choice, makes the Marriage, they may be
crossed by Fortune, and yet continue faithful. Piramus and Thisbie, Romeus and
Juliet, Arnalt and Amicla, and diverse others at the point to possess their
loves, were dispossessed of their lives, but yet unstained with dishonesty. This
want with which you threaten them, what is it in respect of the pleasures these
Lovers possess? Wealth which is the contrary, A description of wealth abused.
what is it, being ill used? a beauty in the Chest, a bondage to the mind,
and a blot in the soul: but a couple united by this affection, for a little
Fleabiting of worldly penury, suck Nectar between their lips, cram Manna into
their Bowels, and possess heaven in their hearts. How far Master Doctor
argues from the opinion of ancient Philosophers, and famous Schoolmen, these
authorities witnesses: A joy of true love.
Ovid, Nigidius, Samocratius, Petrarke, and others in their life time, adored
Beauty, with their books honored her, and by their deaths eternized her glory.
But for that her virtues be divine, and Master Doctor is soyled with slannder,
blasphemy and malice, he is unworthy to be perfected with one thought of her
excellency, which ignorance makes him so obstinate. The younger company began
to take heart in hearing of this tale, so that the Gentlewomen strengthened
Bargetto with good countenances, for (for modesties sake) they were silent, and
the Gentlemen succored him with their best reasons, but all this hope proved
but a lightning joy: for Doctor Mossenigo double enraged, partly for the check
he received, partly for the countenance the company gave his adversary, but
cheefely for to behold a new Dye set upon a stained matter, so sharply
refuted Bargetto, as he had no delight to reply, nor his supporter desire to
succor him. (Quoth he) Ovid dreamed of a divinity in beauty, but never tasted
other then a sweet venime to proceed from her: He loved Iulia, Augustus
daughter, and enjoyed her, but with what fortune? Sundry famous Philosophers
and Poets punished for their loves. Cause of rash Marriages.
marry he was stripped of his living, and spoiled of his liberty for her sake.
Nigidius an ancient Roman and in great favor with the people, for this folly
tasted of Ouids fortune, which was, to dye in exile. Samocratius was in youth
so prodigal of his Love, as in age hated of his friends, he died in prison
with famine. And as for frantic Petrarke, I fear me Madonna Laura smiled more
often in reading of his follies, then he him self did with the sweet
recompenses of his fancies. All these were men learned, wise, and in their
other actions (for their gravity) were admired, and only for their lightness
in love, live to this day defamed: For your other authorities, your own
remembrance of their deaths, show a vengeance sufficient for the contempt of
their children. But where you say Beauty, Love, and Free-choyse lade the Married
with such pleasures, that they endure poverty as a Fleabiting. Indeed want
will so quicken them, as the husband will leap at a crust, and the wife trot
for her dinner, But suppose the best, thus married (whose loves are indifferent)
with patience do endure the afflictions of Fortune: their agreement is no
general warrant. The greater number of these Marriages are not solemnized
through equality of living. The covetous Merchant with no more delight hears
the passing bell of his rich neighbor, which promises him the first loppe of
his sons living, then the poor Gentleman eyeth the able heir, with desire
to match him, (perhaps) with his fair proud daughter. Then as pleasant baits
baineth Fish, as counterfeit Calls beguileth fowls, and as Crocodiles tears
intrappeth fools: to like destruction, lures are thrown to lime this gallant,
freendly usage shall entice him, good words shall welcome him, courtesy shall
cheer him, Beauty shall bewitch him, and fair promises shall altogether
beguile him. New vessels are apt for any liquour, and young heads (empty of
experience) are seduced with easy subtilties: to be short, he shall be betrothed
by cunning: An unfortunate Marriage.
his promise once past (for that in delay is danger) the Marriage must be in
post haste, and the misliking at leisure: but in most of these matches, the
sorrow begins before the solemnity of the Marriage ends. The father hearing
of the indiscretion of his son, galleth his heart with grief: the mother
spoyleth her eyes with tears, and the friend occupies his tung, in bemoning
of his kinsemans folly. There is yet a further sorrow, bitter to the father,
and vnbeneffciall to the son. The father that thought to bestow his daughter
with the Marriage money of his son, is forced to diminish his inheritance, for
her advancement, and by this means the joy which begun in the beauty of his
wife, is like to end in the beggerye of himself: and since these unsavory
effects grow from the virtue of beauties divinity, let Mounsier Bargetto
burn in his heresy.

But Doctor Mossenigo will hold himself happy, never to be warined by her
fire.

Bargetto had not a word more to say, A Gentleman in his revenge ought not to
offend a civil company,
but angerly looked upon his sword, with a countenance that promised vengeance
upon the Doctors blasphemous tung, had he not been stayed with a reverent
consideration of the company.

In the end, because Master Doctor should not be too proud of his conquest,
nor Bargetto overmuch apalled with his defeat, quoth Segnior Fabritio Judge of
the controversies, in a single controversy the argument of the one is to be
allowed as truth, and the cauilling of the other to be rejected as error: but
for that this has been a double contention, as in defense and reproof, both
of Beauty and Free-choise of marriage, Madona Isabella and I, pronounce sentence
with Bargetto, in the behalf of Beauty, for Beauty is a blessing, and if she
work evil effects in some, their naughty disposition and not Beauty is to be
blamed: and with Doctor Mossenigo we likewise give judgment in reproof of
rashness in Marriage.

This judgment pleased Queen Aurelia, and the whole company, who were glad
that they were thus forewarned of ye inconvenience of Free-choyse in Love,
which they a little favored, but yet were moreglad of the triumph of beauty,
whom they all affectedly honored, Virtue commends heselfe.
and therefore quoth Queen Aurelia, good wine need no Iuie Bush, fine
Marcha^dise are sold without a Sign, and beauty is sufficienly commended by
her own excellency, and therefore we will spare Bargettos ready service, until
opportunity present further employment.

But for that your triumph shall have his full right, we license you to tell some
one history to confirm your reasons.

The Doctor glad of this liberty, who (although he had received no disgrace:
yet he repined that he had not yt whole honor of the disputation) determined
in his history a little more to nettle yt favorers of beauty, with which
intent upon Queen Aurelias commandment, he reported as follows.

The History in reproof of rash Marriages, reported by Doctor Mossenigo.
BEsides Capo Verdo in times past, the capital City within the kingdom of
Naples, sometime dwelled a forward young Gentleman called Marco Malipiero,
Beauty, half a Dowry in a woman.
the son and heir of Caualiero Antonio Malipiero, in his youth renowned, for
many valiant services. This young Gentleman in the pride of his youth, became
inamoured of a most fair Gentlewoman named Felice, the Daughter of Philippo
Prouolo, an ancient Gentleman, by hard adventure decayed. But yet in despite
of Fortunes injury, who disabled him with many losses, and thereby of small
wealth to advance his Daughter: Felice her self was enriched with such
perfections of nature, that the friends lamented, but could not blame the
affection of young Malipiero: which in very deed grew so great, as it
contemned the duty of a child, and scorned the advice of a Father: Felice
alone governed him, and none but Felice he obeyed.

Prouolo entertained Malipiero with ye courtesy of a friend, The poor seeks
to match with wealthy.
as the good parts he possessed: as for the possibility of living he stood
in, who (striking the iron while it was hot) secretly fianced Malipiero to
his fair Daughter. The old Knight stormed at these news, and notwithstanding
this known contract, if by any persuasions he could have revoked his sons
consent, he would have caused the Pope to have dispensed with his conscience:
and to that effect he caused sundry of his friends to deal with him in these
affairs. And among many an ancient Gentleman, his Governor and sometimes his
Schoolemaister (whose gravity Malipiero reverenced) in a mild order commoned
with him, and among other questions demanded with what reason he could
justify his light affections, and condemn the sound advice of friends.

Malipiero resolute in his love boldly answered, A rash answer.
that Felices divine beauty, was a sufficient warrant for either.

This wise Governor would not harden his heart with obstinacy, The words
shows the wit of the reporter, but his gesture causes attention in the
hearer.
in a sharp reprehension of his public arrogant answer, but with an affable
countenance coniured him to listen unto his grave sayings.

O (quoth he) is she beautiful? then you have work enough to watch her, and
mischaunce sufficient to suspect her.

Is she beautiful? then her rashness in consent shows that she is
indiscreete: so that the diversity of qualities will soon find out a
division in your desires.

Is she beautiful? then it is like (by her quick agreement) that she is poor,
then is her love fastened on your riches: so that when you lack money to
maintain her pomp, she leaves to make much of your person.

Is she beautiful? then she is withal (lightly) proud, The nature of Pride.
and the pride of a woman (says Periander) is like unto a Dropsey: for as
drink increases the drouth of the one, so (says he) Cost enlarges the
expense of the other: then if your pursse be not open to feed her folly, she
will pawn her honor to please her fancy.

Is she beautiful? then her indiscretion in this hastiness, shows her but a
slender huswife, so that the charge of your house shall eat and consume your
gains abroad.

Is she beautiful? then your dispense must be in her disposition, or else her
looks will little repose you: if she order your goods, her expenses will be
great, and her gettings small, your house shall be stored with costly stuff,
and your servants starued with lack of meat, she will go like a Peacock, and
you like a meacock: what follows? in her bravery she must be seen: if she
take the liberty to walk, she gives other occasion to speak, and your self
to sigh. A fair picture set in the market place, moves many to gase: if the
counterfeit gives contentment, the creature must needs delight: and if any vie
we your wife with unlawful affection, his practices will be many to win his
desire. Take heed, you undertake an intising course, which without good order
will make you breathelesse before the midst of your race: you enter into great
charge, see means to support it. Your Father lives, and must maintin his
accustomed reputation: if he spare to sustain you, it is much: to defray the
charge of your Wife and household, he cannot: therefore so love, that this
dispense may be shared between you and your wives Parents: and as far forth
as I can see, Felices Father has much ado, to keep rain out of his house
top: then if with difficulty he lies dry in his Bed, it is impossible he
should have any great cheer at his Boorde: what reckoning can you make, to be
supported by him that has it not? and how can you dare presume to be supplied
by your own Father? when the temeritie of your marriage displeases him to
death. Look into these mischeefes, before you feel the miseseries they
presage: look before you leap, least you be wet, before you be aware: your
friends has a comfort, but you the benefit of well doing.

The Schoolemaister gave Malipiero this advice, with such a temperate gesture:
Love enioyneth us to do what we know is amiss.
that (although good counsel preuasled not,) yet he reverently told him, that
his experience knew more, then his green imagination could attain: and
therefore he would meditate of his loving admonition, and proceed no further
without his priaitie. But ah, these were but sweet words to betray himself,
and to blind his friend. For upon the first opportunity Malipiero speedes unto
PHILIPPO PROVOLO, and recountes the importunyties of his friends, with a desire
to have the Marriage privily solemnised, since that he could not obtain the
open consent of his parents.

Prouolo fearing the danger of delay, was as ready to satisfy, as Malipiero
was earnest to request: insomuch as early in a morning, An early marriage
works a late repentance.
Marco Malipiero was set in possession of his hearts delight: and before night
was dispossessed of his whole bodies welfare: for his sorrowful Father, and
heavy friends hearing of this sudden Marriage, after they had a while bemoned
the rashness of Malipiero, with the affection of Parents, menaced to punish his
oversight (in not regarding him) as Strangers.

Prouolo on ye other side, to give knowledge to his Son in laws friends, The
reward of pride is poverty.
that although Fortune had crossed him, she had not wholly consumed him: set out
his ability to the most advantage, much like unto a market Merchant, that on a
New years day morning exposes his painted tokens to the richest show: his
Son (in law) was accommodated with the attire and furniture of a Gentleman,
and his wife was set forth with the show of rich Malipieroes Heirs Espouse,
and not as poor Prouoloes daughter: The common sort judge as they affect.
Insomuch as the common sort blinded with shows, judged after their eyes
affection, and reputed old Malipiero a cruel covetous Churl, for dealing with
Prouolo so frowardly, that had entreated his Son so honorably. But these
murmurings little moved the good ancient knight: for well he wist, this bravery
was but a blase, as soon ended as the flame of a dry Faggot. And which should
avenge him, this pride promised a change, attired with as much pennurie as the
other with pomp.

The following effect, confirmed old Malipieros opinion: for Prouolo spent so
largely at the beginning, in hope with this flourish, to make accord between
the Son and the father, as now his Table was furnished with empty platters,
The misery of want.
and his Audit bags with a set of Counters. So that Want, that will make a
toothlesse woman to bite at Brazen walls, entered into Prouolos House, and
swore both him and his whole household unto the statutes of necessity, whose
laws were so strait, that although they all had great occasion of sorrow,
they had no leisure for shifting to supply their wants: insomuch as in short
time there was no Neighbor that Prouolo was not in his debt or danger, and no
good natured youth there abouts, that Marco Malipiero had not boorded or
coosoned.

And what should fair Felice do in this extremetie? live upon her husbands
travel, and be idle her self? that were no good Huswiferie: and yet poor
Malipiero loved her so deerly, that he would have ventured upon a thousand
infamies, to maintain her in the state of an honest Gentlewoman, but although
his shifts helped, they defraied not her desire to be brave. A Diamond has not
his grace but in gold, nor a fair Woman her full commendation but in the
ornaments of bravery. So that attired to her best advantage, Bravery
belengeth to Beuty. Piatso a market place, or a place of assembly.
fair Felice would many times walk unto yt Piatso Richio, a place where the
brauest Gentlemen assembled, and where the finest devices were sold, she
taking this liberty to walk, bound ye gal lant young gentlemen in eurteste to
Court her: courteous service is to be accepted with thanks: acceptance of
service inlargeth acquaintance: acquaintance ingendreth familiarity: and
familiarity sets all follies abroach: So that let other Married men take
warning by Malipieros hard Fortune, A necessary note.
for if their wives love gadding like fair Felice, and be inconstant, do want,
or find in their husbands miscontentme^t, twenty to one they will pawn their
honors to please their fancies.

Well, Felice lost nothing by these iournies, for some one Gallant would
present her with a Ventoie, to cool her self: some other with a mirror to
behold her self: and some with Lawnes, Courtesy done with an evil intent.
Ruffes, Coyfes, and such necessaries to set out her self: and yet upon no
dishonorable condition, but (by your leave) with hope of an after favor.

This trafique fair Felice used, until (among a number that temperately
affected her,) Marino Giorgio the rich Orphant of Capo verdo immoderately loved
her, and withal the honors of courtesy served her: But notwithstanding his
lusty personage might please: his lovely countenance might entice: and his rare
wit, passing through a sweet tung, might be witch a woman in love: for that
Malipiero was enriched with these perfections: Felice regarded Marino Georgio,
but with an ordinary grace: Disdain haunteth desire.
and had it not been for that Archinchaunter, Gold (perhaps) would never have
been inconstant.

This light account of Felice enlarged the affection of Marino, The fire of
love.
for as drink increases the dropsies drouth, so disdain heapeth coals upon
desire: whereof Marino (Test seipso) has left an infallible authority: whose
torments were so grievous, as the fire, which of all flames burns most, and
appearesh least, burst out of his mouth the smoke of such furious sighs, that
where he was but late of a pure Sanguine Complexion, he seemed now nothing but
Choler adust: So that his friends mourned, and many moned his strange
alteration, who counseled him to take the Physicians advice: But neither
Galen, Hipocrates, nor their enemy Paracelsus, could skill of his cure, so that
he was in danger to have consumed to Cinders, had not Macrello the Physician of
Love undertaken his health, who comforted him with many sweet words of hope:
Physic cures not love.
but Marino continually afflicted himself in recounting an impossibility of
favor.

Why (quoth Macrello) is not your personage seemly? Yes, but it does not
please. Is not your face lovely? Yes, but it does not allure. Is not your wit
quick and good? Yes, but it can not persuade. Is not Felice a woman? Yes, and
more, an Angel.

Well, then (quoth Macrello) be of good comfort, Angels be not cruel nor
steely hearted.

O (quoth Marino) but Felice is constant and true to he husband, who to
continue her affection, is graced with these and many more perfections.

Yea (quoth Macrello) but he wanted one of your chiefest beauties.

What one is that (quoth Marino?) Even that, The force of Gold.
that opened the double locked door of Acrisius brazen Tower, and put Jupiter
in possession of his daughter Danais love. And think you this golden Beauty
will not make a passage into poor Malipieros bedchamber? I warrant you yeas:
you have Gold more at commandment than I, but I know the virtue better then
you.

This short tale quickened dying Marino, as the flashe of Rose water does a
sullen swounding child.

Whereupon (quoth he) Macrello, if your medicine be of no less virtue to
restore my life, then your words to give me hope: the fortune shall be your
profit, as well as my pleasure. Hope comfort, but Love cures the Lover.


Well (quoth Macrello) sustain your self with hope, and for that your
invention is delicate, devise you some curious rich Jewel, and let me alone
(quoth he) both to charm and to present it: and so with a remembrance in the
hand, he left Marino to contemplate of his love, and to consider how to
recover his life: who in the end, concluded to send fair Felice, the Image of
himself in Gold, inameled black, his face meagre and pale, and by a device,
the black mantle thrown aside, for to appear the bared Carcass of Death,
with the intrayles consumed, and in the seat of his life, Marinoes present to
his Mistress.
to place Felice, attyred with Diamonds, Rubies, Emrods, and other precious
Stones, looking upon his smoking heart, whereupon was written these two briefes.

Love only gives me health,
Not Medicine nor wealth.
This Image made unto his fancy, he wrote this following Letter.

Marino Georgios letter to Felice the fair.
Fair Mistress, if I enjoyed any health, I would wish you part, but what I
do possess I acknowledge to be yours, and my self to be but your Steward.
And for this service because it is duty, I crave nothing, but leave my merit
wholly to your consideration. Yet lest my silence should rob the glory of your
pity, and my death reaue you of a faithful Servant: more of zeal to do you
long service, then of any desire I have to live, I here present you my consumed
self, only kept alive, by the life of fair Felice, who sits crowned in the
Palace of my heart: which bleeding at her feet, shows the means of my
cure: which if you witsafe, I live: if not, you see my death. And thus,
doubtful between both until I kiss your sweet answer, I remain,

Unto my latter gasp, Your faithful Marino Georgio.


THis letter Sealed, and Subscribed, To the hands of the most fair Felice:
Macrello was sent for: to whom Marino delivered both the Jewel, and the
letter, without instructions to do his message: for Protheus could not change
himself into more shapes then Macrello: as well to avoid suspicion, as to
compass his purpose: who behaved himself so cu^ningly in Marinoes errand, as
(to be short, virtues dames) after many persuasions, Felice returned him with
this answer.

Felices answer to Marino Georgio.
I Am not cruel, although with difficulty I consent to love: and for that
your passions are so extreme, I keep your Picture in my bosom: But, with
what thought, I blush to write, though pity be my warrant: so that I leave
the event of our Love to your consideration: and my yielding to Macrelloes
Report: who in bewraying your passions, let fall more tears then I could dry
up with a thousand sighs: So that overcome with rueth, to see your affection
so great, and your passion so dangerous, I can not but commit my love, my
honor, my self and all, to the Affection and wise government of Marino
Georgio.

FELICE.


THis Letter was subscribed, Life to Marino Georgio: and delivered to the
faithful Macrello: with charge, that he should make known his great
importunities, before Felice would grant so hie a favor: which Prouiso, might
have been spared: for Macrello (partly for his glory, but chiefly for his own
benefit) upon delivery of this Letter, willed Marino to receive it, as a
Conquest as hardly gotten, as Hercules labors: and if (quoth he) I had endured
not your torments (by Imagination) it had not been impossible to have moved
Felice to rueth: Marino heard these circumstances, with no better remembrance,
Sudden joy or sorrow dulleth our senses.
than if he had been in an Ecstasy: The Subscription, Life to Marino, overcame
him with such a sudden passion of Joy, who read, and a hundred times over read
this Life letter: and for that it came from Felices sweet hand, he a thousand
times kissed the Paper.

Which done, by the direction of Macrello, this Conqueror Gold, made such a
passage, into a reputed honest Citizens house, as without suspicion, Marino
Georgio, and fair Felice, there (many times) met, but to what purpose, Gold
makes passage into difficult places.
I leave to your constructions: and yet thus much I say, this Fortune followed:
Marino in short space recovered his former Complexion: and it was not long
before Felice was richer then either Father or Husband.

But, O that Fury Jealousy, envying this Accord, sent sly Suspicion, to
infect Malipieroes heart: who prying with Lynx his eyes, presented him a
thousand causes of mistrust, Thevenemous nature of Ielousy.
which love strait suppressed with as many contrary imaginations of his Wives
good behavior: insomuch, that with the sharp uicounter of Love, and mistrust,
poor man, he was continually afflicted. A shrewd suspicion.


In conclusion, seeing his Wife to exceed in bravery, and knowing himself, to
decline with poverty, be resolved upon this certainty: this cost could not come
from the empty Coffers of her undone Parents: Suspect is more cunning then
Argus was wary.
and then proceeding from others, it was impossible to be the favors of
honest courtesy: so that armed with fury, he deferred revenge, but to entrap
the friend of his wives follies, and the enemy both of her honor, and his
delight.

In fine, as heedeful, as these Lovers were in their dealings, Jealousy
directed suspecte to Marino Georgio: and moreover, Neapolitans are most severe
in revenge.
made him an eye witness of the injuries done unto Malipiero: which when he
assuredly knew, he studied a while of a torture, equal to this treachery: for
who has not heard the Neapolitan to be the seuerest revenger of dishonor in
the world? To be brief, his bait was this, he feigned a journey far from home,
and furnished himself, with such an appearance of truth, A Judas kiss.
as took a way all color of suspicion: which done, with a dissembling kiss,
he committed his wife to God, and the charge of his house to her good
government: and so set forward toward Rome.

Malipiero was no sooner a mile on his way, then Macrello certified Marino of
this wished opportunitic: and Love made both him and Felice so bold, as in his
own house they determined the following night, to exercise upon Malipiero
their wonted injury: A fit time to deceive mistrust.
but about midnight when mistrust was at repose, Malipiero entered the house
with such a sudden violence, as these two unfortunate friends, were surprised
amids their imbracements, before they had warning to shifte: I sorrow to tell
the rest, but truth will have passage.

Malipiero, in his revenge like a Lion hungring after his pray: with his
Rapyer and these bitter words nailed Marino unto the Bed.

Thou Couch [quoth he] soyled with dishonor, wash out thy staynes, Death is
too easy a scourge for a disloyal wife.
with the Adulterers blood. But holding death too easy a scourge of his wives
trespass, he condemned her to this torture, more extreme then death: He made
an Anatomy of her well-beloved Marino, and set him in a fair Chamber, within
which, he enclosed his wife, without doing her any bodily injury; save the
cutting of her hair, and to say truth, Hair, the ornaments of Chastity.
this beautiful ornament of hair, beseems not an Adultresse head. And to
punish her the more, Malipiero caused her every dinner and supper to take her
accustomed place, that at meals she might be tormented with the sight of her
living enemy, and all the day with the bones of her martyred friend: neither
could she quench her thirst, but out of a Mazar, made of Marinoes skul. But
(to tell her virtue, The bounden office of a Writer.
with her vice) her patience was such, as she was never heard to complain of
this cruelty: and yet her penitent sorrow so great, as the plenty of her
tears, sometimes moved her injured Husband to pity.

But least he should be overcome with compassion, Justice must not yield to the
tears of Trespassers.
many times from dinner, he commanded her to her prison: who after an humble
reverence, went behind the Tapestry hangings, and so unto her solitary
Chamber, barred from other company the^ the ghastly bones of unfortunate Marino:
which penance she patiently endured, until God, who saw that her repentance was
unfeigned, sent Segnior Cornaro to be a peace maker between her husbands
injury, God regards repentance.
and her offense: who (when Supper was set upon the Boorde) seeing from behind
the Tapistrie Hangings, a fair Gentlewoman to appear, somewhat pale with
sorrow, her head bare, both of attire and hair, apparelled all in black, and
in her hand, her drinking Boule of Marinoes skull, and saying never a word,
with a sober reverence sitting down in the chiefest place: was stricken with
such amaze, as on the sudden he wist not what to say.

Dinner being ended, which was longer than pleasant, either to husband, wife,
or friend: Felice, as she entered, so departed, Who not withstanding left part
of her sorrow behind in Cornaros heart, whose cheareles countenance, when
Malipiero perceived (quoth he) let not the martyrdom of this woman afflict
you: for her fault deserves this vengeance, and so recounted the reported
adventure. And in advantage, she wed him her prison, A honorable favor.
and the Anatomy of her dishonor, and withal licensed him to talk with
Felice, to hear what plea she had for her discharge. Upon which warrant,
quoth Cornaro, Madame, if your patience be equal with your torment, I hold
you the most happy Woman of the world. Felice with a countenance abased, and
Cheeks dewed with tears told him in humble words, The true ensign of sorrow.
that her trespass was ten times greater then the torment which the Lord of
the house, whom she was not worthy to call husband, had appointed her. And
therewithal the sorrow of her heart took away the use of her tongue.
Whereupon Malipiero led the Gentleman away, who rendered him affected thanks,
in that besides his good entertaynment, he witsafed him the honor to know so
great a secrecy: withal, moved with compassion, he effectually entreated
Malipiero to accept Felices sorrow, True repentance, is to be received in
satisfaction of offenses.
the true witness of grace and amendment, as satisfaction of her offense,
which proceeded of frailty, and withal importuned him with such earnest
reasons, as Malipiero mas content to send bath for her and his own friends.
Perfect love, cannot be so injured, but it will always retain some affection.
To be partly ruled, and partly advised by them in her behalf.

The parents and friends of every side seeing the humility, sorrow, and
patience of poor Felice, were all earnest suitors for her remission.

The root of ancient love not altogether dead in Malipiero, was comforted
with their intercessions, and quickened with the hope of amendment: in so much,
as upon solemn promise to be henceforth of good behavior, he received her to
grace: and to repair her crased honor, with the favor of both their parents,
he new married fair Felice, in which holy estate, A reparation of dishonor.
they lived, loved, and agreed many happy years afterward together: And with
the bones of Marino Georgio buried the remembrance of former injuries.

Master Doctor, quoth Fabritio, you have reported a very necessary history:
for it contains many heedfull notes both of admonition and advise. Besides
the due punishment of rashness in Marriage. For therein we may see how
hungerstarued want, compels the best natured man to deceive his friend, and
yield unto his own slander. Again, how that monster, Gold, conquereth the
honor of the fairest. Yea, quoth Isabella, and corrupts yt conscience of the
wisest: so that this is no example of any honor to you men, because Gold
enticed Felice to be disloyal to her husband, for it draws many of you both
from the fear and love of God.

Well, quoth Soranso, let it pass, Felice in her repentance has made a large
amends of her trespass, and I fear me, if every like offense were so
sharply punished, we should have Mazers of men's Skuls more ordinary then
silver Boules, and pouled women more common than balde men.

Not so, quoth Queen Aurelia, Fear of correction brideleth the affections of
the evil.
for a few of these examples would bridle the incontinent affections both of
man and woman, if not for the love of virtue, for the fear of correction.
After these and a few other Moral notes were culled out of Doctor Mossenigoes
History. What hurts one, instructs the other


Madame, quoth Dondolo, if we continue this course, it will be a good while
before we do find out the Paradise that Plato speaks of.

Be it so, quoth Queen Aurelia: but if we still continue the way to his house
Hell, our error will instruct others: and since we have yet long respite, it
shall not be amiss every day to take a sundry hie way, until we find out the
true passage: And for that our Question is concluded, and our hour glass run,
we will (for this Day) make here an end.

The Question that arose by beholding the Mountebanks, in the third Nights
Pastime.
AT the accustomed hour, Supper was served in, with many dayntie Dishes,
which were sauced with sundry short civil, and pleasant events of the
Gentlemen and Gentlewomens wits: For he, or she, was held of weak capacity
that either of forestudy, or upon offered occasion, could say nothing of good
regard.

In the end, when supper was done, Brevity is best for Table talk
and Queen Aurelia, and the most Honorable of the company had taken their
places upon a Scaffold made for the nonce, there mounted a Mountebanke, his
neck bechayned with live Adders, Snakes, Mountebanks of Italy are in a manner
as English pedlers
Eau'ts, and twenty sundry kind of venymous vermines, whose mortal stinges
were taken away by Art, and with him a Zanni, and other Actors of pleasure:
who presented themselves only with a single desire to recreate Segnior
Philoxenus, and his worthy company: and not with the intent of common
Mountibankers, to deceive the people with some unprofitable Merchandise.

In the midst of this pastime, an ancient Gentleman (of the Society) seeing
these Viperous Beasts, by cunning usage, to be made so Domesticke and affable,
whether it were upon an impression of his own grief, or of the experience he
had of another man's Plague, I know not: but sure I am, he burst into these
passions.

O God, The strange nature of (...) woman's tung.
(quoth he) of what metal is a woman's tongue, which correction cannot chastise,
nor lenity quiet, when these dumb Serpents by the one or the other are tamed?

Marie (quoth a pleasant companion) it is made of the same metal, that
Virgils Brazen Flayle was of, which struck both his friends and foes.

But (quoth the Gentleman) Virgil knew, and taught others how to pacify this
engine.

It is true (quoth the other) but in teaching the secret unto his scruant,
cost him his own life. So a woman knows how to hold her tongue, by having of
her will, but if a man think to stay it, he must beat her to death.

A young youth named Phrisio, thinking to win the Spurs, Defenses for a
chiding wife.
by building a Fortress for women, who have no weapons but their tongues, to
defend and offend, took upon him, to prove a chiding wife, though she be a
little unpleasant, both profitable and necessary: his reasons were these.

Unsavory receipts turn to wholesome effects: The strongest Poison is pleasant
in taste, and the remedy for the poisoned, offends the mouth with
tartenesse: Nettles that stinges the hand, makes Pottage to comfort the
heart: the blood of the Scorpion cures the biting of the Viper. If poisoned,
unpleasant, and bitter things retain a virtue for the benefit of man: in my
imagination (quoth he) an unquiet wife is not unprofitable though she be a
little unpleasant: Her anger keeps servants in awe, and her quickness
ouerseeth their negligence: if her tung run at riot, where she hunts there is
store of abuse, which must be chased either with blows or words: if y^ fury of
her speech offend her Husband, it is like that her outrage grows from his
fault: and where an injury is offered, it is sufferable, if the wrong be
blamed: but which makes a full amends for her furious mood: as the clowdy and
rainy day lightly cleereth toward night: even so, though she bitterly scowld
at board, she will be sure to kiss sweetly a bed.

The ancient Gentlemen commending the quick wit of this young Gentleman, In
blaming, mildens is to be used.
used this circumstance before he refelled his error.

Ah (quoth he) if wit were as advised in Judgment, as he is ready in conceit,
his imaginations would turn to wonderful effects: but as fairest colors
soonest stain, as sweetest flowers are blasted with a breath: as beautiful
creatures, are blemished with a little care, as the brightest Sun threatens
sudden rain: yea, as every mortal thing has his imperfection: even so, wit
being mortal, Wit simply in imperfect.
and assigned by Nature, to make man glorious above other creatures, by rashness
corrupts the ripenes of his conceits, and to good purpose, his pride is thus
abated: for other wise, man which inioyeth wit to worship his Creator, and to
live content with the liberties of the sea, and to keep him within the limits
of the earth, would search the secrets of heaven: and I think dispossess Pluto
of hell.

Young Gentleman (quoth he) I use not this ceremony to repress your liberty of
speech: for the error of your rashness, I will refell with reason and
experience: but least hereafter you should be as arrogant in opinion, as you
are ripe in conceit: I have thought good, freendly and breefely to signify
your imperfection: and now to answer your late suggestion.

I affirm that Nature has created nothing to a needless purpose, but not
withstanding our abuse, or mischance, changes hurtful things into occasions
of our help: surfite, and sickness only, commends Medicine: and as you
affirm, the blood of a Scorpion, cures the biting of the Viper.

But take away the cause, which proceeds from our grief, and you shall find
medicine an enemy to health: and the stinge of a Scorpion no better then death:
and trust me, he is to be reckoned a fool, and his misfortune to pass
vnreleeued, that wilfully indammageth his health in hope of remedy. In like
sort, let him live vnpittied, to ouersee the slacknesse of his servants, who
will marry a wife, whose tung shall overrule himself. But more particularly
to describe the properties of an unquiet wife, and more largely to discourse
the displeasures of her unfortunate husband: I will approve her lowrings as
unprofitable, as his life is unpleasant: you say her quickness ouerseeth the
negligence of sernants: but I affirm, that her curstness makes them as swift
to run away, Shift is unprofitable for Master and Servant.
as they were slow to serve her, and common use auowes, that often shift is
neither beneficial for Master nor servant: for proof, as the rolling Stone
gathers no Moss, and want of use canckereth Iron, in likewise thrift flies
the fleeting Servant, and idleness consumes his ability of service. Now
touching the evil reckoning of those which are served: their wandering
servants not only charge their common accounts, with double wages, but with
secret pilfering, they set their masters in more deep arrerages. The Grecians
that in times past neither used medicine for sickness, Gienta a venomous herb,
one sort whereof is supposed to be Hemlocke.
nor patience in adversity, but upon every great veration, poisoned themselves
with venomous Cienta. In their Histories remember more, that have voluntarily
died, through the violence their Wives tunges, then of any other calamity.
Diogenes being demanded the diversity of an evil, between ascold and a
harlot? answered: They differ as the Viper does from yt crockadill: for the
scolde says he, with outrage destroys her Husband, A needful regard for
young Gentlemen.
and the other with dissembling love, consumes him to death. And so concluded
the^ both enemies to life, and quiet living of man. Phrisio, being both
modestly warned, and thoroughly answered, with a blushful grace replied: ye the
gravity of his person, and ye sound reason in his words, had taken from him al
occasion of further Question, unless that women were his Judges. An ill cause
asks a partial judge.
This witty shift moved such as were within the hearing to smile, for where
the cause is ill, it is necessary to seek a Judge that is partial, and which
commended Phrisios government, upon a small check he left to contend with this
ancient Gentleman: for young men although their wits be good, are not
privileged to dispute with the grauer sort, without license, entreaty, or
great renerence.

By this time the Mountibanke with describing the qualities of his vermin, and
the Zanni in showing the knauish conditions of his Master, had wasted a good
part of ye night, and wearied the most part of the company, so that desire of
repose, summoned them unto their lodgings.

MADONA AVRELIA, Her fourth days pleasures.
Containing variety of necessary discourse, and yet withal, the greater part
appertaining to the general argument of Marriage.

SO deep are the impressions of sorrow, The great impression.
as the faining of Poets may be held for Moral truths, where as they
affirm, that the bitter moan of Orpheus tung, together with the passionate
sound of his Instrument, moved such ruth in infernal creatures, as while he
was a suter to Pluto, for the restitution of his wife Euridice: his plaints so
charmed the torments of Hell, as for the time, the Gripe forbear to tear upon
Titius growing heart, Tantalus endeavored not to drink, Danais daughters lest
filling of their brincklesse Tub: toyling Sisiphus sat and eased himself upon
his rolling Stone: yea and Pluto ouercharged with pity, made restitution of
Euridice. This sorrow to hear, that Queen Aurelia by some distemperature, was
sick and kept her Chamber, wrought such greefes in the hearts of the whole
company, that they hung their heads in disgrace, like Garden Flowers: which
(seeming as tears) are cloyed with the dew of a foul mistie day. True sorrow
is known rather by sighs then words.
Among the rest, Ismarito although he used not so many words of lament as some
other did, yet with the tears of his heart he solemnifed the true rites of a
Mourner: and to say truth, where the tung has free passage to talk, the heart
is occupied with no great grief.

Segnior Phyloxenus seeing Ismarito in this passion, and that occasion
entertained him with no other business, while the rest of the company were
hearing of a little superstitious service, The Pope has begun, and not yet
finished a most rare Gallerie. Beautiful attires for a Gallerie.
lead him into a very fair beautiful Gallerie, where the Maps of the world
were so artificially set forth in painting, as I doubt the Popes Microcosmos
at Latteran, which has been this sixteen years a making, will be ended with
no more perfection. In this Gallerie were the Pictures of all Christian
Princes: and in an other place by themselves the pictures of ce^rtain heathen
rulers: and in another rank the Pictures of so many learned men and grave
magistrates, as he could through freendship or reward obtain.

After much discourse of the especial Monuments, wherewith this pleasant
gallerie was attired, An especial Book of devises.
Segnior Phyloxenus brought Ismarito a fair book, wherein were diverse rare
devises, and (directing hun to Pensils, colors, and other necessaryes of
Harrowldry) requested that he would help to beautify the said book, with
some ingenious remembrance.

Sir (quoth Ismarito) I have already recorded your good favors in the table of
my heart, and I beseech you that this fair book may not be blemished by me,
or remain a witness to you of my indiscretion.

This niceness (quoth Philoxenus) professes more then ordinary knowledge, and
therefore I conjure you, by the affection you bear me, to satisfy my request.

Ismarito upon this importunity, because he would not leave a suspicion,
Ismaritos devise, Pharos, a Lantern or light, devised by King Ptolemie,
surnamed Philadelphus, for the benefit of Navigations in those parts, which cost
800. talents.
that his curiosity grew rather of simplicity then discretion: and missing
among the Modern Monuments, their Pictures, the virtues of whose fame, are
blazed in the Capitols of the whole world: he took a Pensill, and with the
same drew an Island, and over the midst thereof made a Pharos, which shined
like the Sun, and therein a Phoenix bathing of her self, whose gleaming
reflections shined over all Loegria, Cambria, and the greatest part of Albania,
and extended unto a great part of the Continent, especially unto that part
that lay between the Ocean, the Mediterrane, and the great Sea called Euxinus
Pontus, and underneath writ: Pharos Europae, non Africae.

Philoxenus advisedly regarded this devise, before he would either require
Ismaritos intent, or give his own judgment. In the end deuining what should
be the secret meaning of this Simbole or Ensign: quoth he, Segnior Ismarito,
this Cognizance of your quick wit, pleases me much, and withal remembers me
of a neglected courtesy, which (I think) will show you the Image of your
Phoenix, and blason the secrecy of your whole devise: and thereupon he lead
Ismarito into a most curious privy Gallerie, where (drawing a fair Curtain,
and reverently kissing his hand) he showed Ismarito the Picture of a Royal
Princess, An honourble favor.
most richly and lively set forth, with which a Merchant of Venice who
traffiqued toward the Western Islands, presented him: which Ismarito beheld,
with a regard so dutiful, as there needed no gloss to expound the zealous
affection of his heart. The counterfeits of other Potentates there were, which
Philoxenus placed in the rank of these Princes, for some regarded virtues
known unto himself. And by his own testimony, he prised these
counterfeites, above all the Monuments (ancient or Modern) which beautified
his Palace.

Upon which warrant, Sir quoth Ismarito, A regard in strangers, to teach
subiecte^ their duty.
the honorable regard that you have of these Princes shadows, being a
stranger, prescribes rules of duty, unto their Subjects, humbly to reverence
their sacred persons.

Indeed (quoth he) it is but just, their tungs cry, God save their highness,
and their hearts answer, So be it.

After Segnior Philoxenus and Ismarito had had some conference, as well
touching the meaning of this Pharos, as of some other devises figured in
Philoxenus Book: the Trumpets sound gave knowledge of Dinner: so that this
private conference was adiorned, till Segnior Philoxenus pleasure should renew
it. When Ismarito entered into y^ great chamber, and among so many fair
Flowers, The Rose is the most glorious of flowers.
missing the glorious Rose, his countenance well showed, that his mornings
sorrow had been but a sleep, which new awakened, streaked with the increase
of passion, yea such was the pensiveness of the whole company, An unexpected
good news, is double welcome.
as the first service represented rather a Funeral dinner, then a Christmas
feast. But in the midst of a storm, as Phoebus sometimes beholds the
Earth, with a cheerful countenance, so in the deapth of this heaviness, there
was news brought of Queen Aurelias amendment, who commanded the chosen
company after Dinner to attend her coming in the Chamber of pleasure. This
knowledge so quickened the dulled spirits of the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen,
Mirth cures as much as Medicine, where the malady is not mortal.
as they agreed for one day (if Queen Aurelia pleased) to alter ye solemn
course in their ordinary exercise: for where the malladie is not mortal, mirth
cures as much as medicine, and holding this determination, they, the rest of
Dinner, in actions of pleasure, fully avenge themselves of the injury of
former sorrow: After Dinner was ended, and the company had a while pawsed, to
set themselves in good order: upon a new summons, the appointed number, A
sumptuous Tapistrie.
marched into this Chamber of Pleasures, which was hanged with a rich Tapistrie
of voluntary devise, every Tree, Flower, Bird, Beast, or whatsoever was
therein resembled, in his proper colors of Silk, was portraied. The Sheep
with their Fleeces fryzeled, the Beasts curiously raised with raw Silk, like
unto their natural hair, the Trees beautified with proper leaves and fruit,
the Rose with his buds, sprigs, and other attire: and to be brief, every other
Flower was counterfaited with such Art, as they seemed to be natural. Yea a
man might have been indifferently wise enough, Men may be deceived without the
sl^under of simplycitie
in other ordinary matter, and yet have adventured to have gathered a flower,
or have plucked an Apple in these hangings, and who so was best acquainted,
could not weary his eyes, in the beholding of them: so that the very attire of
this Chamber walls, had an intertaining virtue, were there no other creature
in the place. Curious sights please more then uncivil people.


Queen Aurelia attended with the Ladies and Gentlewomen, presented her self
before the young Gentlemen had half gazed their will. The company saluted their
Sovereign with a reverent courtesy, whose cheeks some what more bleake then
ordinary, with this distemperature, resembled in color the perfect white
Gilliflowre, A little sickness makes an alteration in beauty.
a little streaked with Carnation.

After some private talk between her and one or two of her favored Servants,
she took her place where she pleased, and the rest as they were accustomed,
which done, the Eunuch with a well tuned voice, unto the Lute sung this
following, Care away, CAre, Care go pack, thou art no mate for me,
thy thornie thoughts, the heart to death does wound:
Thou make the fair, seem like a blasted tree,
by thee green years with hoarie hairs are grownd.
Which makes me sing to solace mine annoy:
Care, Care, adiewe, my heart does hop for joy.
Care, Care, adieu, thou rival of delight,
return into the Cave of deep despair:
Thou art no Guest, to harbor near my spright,
whose poisoned sightes infect the very Air.
Wherefore I sing to solace mine annoy:
Care, Care adieu, my heart does hop for joy.
Care, Care, adieu, and welcome pleasure now,
thou wish of joy and ease of sorrow both:
To wear thy weed, I make a sollemne vow,
let Time, or Chance be pleased, or be wroth.
And therefore sing to sollace mine annoy:
Care, Care, adieu, my heart does hop for joy.


The note of this Song was far better then the ditty, but for that it
answered the determination of the company, it passed for current. Whereupon
Madame (quoth Fabritio) if it be your pleasure, One square breaks no custom.
we will this day varry from our wonted course, and according to our Theme
begin with some mirth, to sharpen our wits for grauer discourses, we have
time enough besides, to beat out the passage to Platoes Paradise.

Use your discretions (quoth Queen Aurelia) and by her commandment Bargetto
was appointed to begin the exercise, who obeying, reported this following
adventure of Friar Inganno.

The adventure of Friar inganno, reported by Mounsier Bargetto.
IN a Village among the Appenine Mountains, not far from the place where S.
Frauncis lies intombed, there sometimes dwelled a fair young country woman
named Farina: and for that her house was in the hye way to S. Frauncis holy
Relics, she was many times visited with Friars of his order, who were
entertained rather for their habit the their honesty, for the poor ignorant
people reverenced Saint Frauncis as a second Christ, for whose sake they hold
his Disciples, not inferior to Saints: among many that visited Farinas house,
Friar Inganno a smugge Chaplain, ever sealed his blessings upon his dames
lips, and yet without suspicion of the husband, or dishonest intent of the
wife: for such greeting was ever taken for a holy favor.

Upon a time after Friar Inganno had well beaked himself, with a warm fire,
It is said S. Francis subdued incontinent desires, by tumbling naked in frost
and Snow.
and a good breakfast, the spirit that Saint Frauncis was driven to conjure
down, by tumbling naked in the frost and snow, tempted his Disciple with such
sweet motions, as he was minded wilfully to abjure heaven, rather then to
deal so roughly with ye devil. And taking advantage of the good opinion the
ignorant held of his holiness, and was so bold with Saint Frauncis (his
Master) as to make a wanton match in his name: A premiditated sin.
so that after he had a while considered of his persuasion, The trick of a
knauish servant.
upon a quiet opportunity: Blessed art thou (quoth he) among the Appenine
country women, for Saint Frances from heaven has beheld thy charitable usage
of his Disciples, and the last Night, A gentle persuasion.
after I had prayed with great devotion before his Image, I beheld him in the
Majesty of an Angel, fair, young, lusty, and in every proportion like my
self, and nothing at all, like his meagre Cripple Image: So that I was in
doubt of being transformed out of my self, till with a meek voice, he said:
Be not dismayed, I am thy Master, Inganno, and am come to bestow my blessings
upon the good Appenine dames, that for my sake cherish you my Disciples: But
with an especial Affection, I will visit the good Dame Farina: And for that
her Feminine weakness can not endure my heavenly presence, I will many times
borrow thy earthly shape: and in my name go salute Farina, and show her that
this night, in that her Husband is from home, I mean to visit her: will her
to leave open the Doors, because I purpose to come as Friar Inganno, and not
as Saint Fraunces.

This is his message, therefore as I began, I end: Ignorance hears every tale
as truth.
blessed art thou among the Appenine country Dames: The poor woman, as
apparent as this treachery was, had not the power to mistrust, Flattery eate^^
the bread o^ the Just.
but gave the Friar a good alms for his news, and said she would attend Saint
Francis blessed will.

Away goes the Friar, with a light heart, and a heavy Cowle: but God, to
punish his lewd intent, and to preserve her from sinning through ignorance, so
tickled her heart with joy of this blessing at hand, A note of little secrecy
in a woman.
as to welcome Saint Frances she must needs have ye Belles rung: The Priest of
the Parish hearing the cause, smelt out the Friars cunning, and was glad to
take one of those Beggars in a Pitfal, Envy sets hatred between fellows of
every vocation.
that with glorious lies had robbed him of his Parishioners devotions, and
withal, persuaded her with such reasons, as she was fully resolved of the
Friars deceit: And to be avenged, by the Parsons direction, she caused Leayda
to lie in her Bed, a Maid so ougly, sluttish and deformed, as through the
Parish, she was called the Fury of Lothsomenesse. About ten of the clock,
finding the doors open, Friar Inganno mounts into Farinaes Chamber, and
without light or leave, An unwelcome salutatio^
leapes into her bed: but he had not blessed Leaydaes lips, before the
Priest, Farina, and others entered with Taper and Torch-light, singing Salve
Sancte Francisce: And kneeling about the Bedsides, sung Sancte Francisce ora
pro nobis.

The poor Friar, Pleasure in others increases sorrow in the afflicted.
like a Fox in a grin, being both intrapt, and imbrast by a Hag of hell, cried
from his heart: A dolor inferni, libera me Domine.

After the Priest and the rest of the company, were weary of laughing, and the
Friar almost dead with weeping: It is an office of charity (quoth the Priest)
to put Saint Frances again in his Toombe: for it is so long since he was in
the world, Envy and rude people are not pacified with prayers of the afflicted.
that he has forgot the way back into heaven.

The Friar leering like the thief that hung on the left side of Christ, took
all with patience: for well he wist, Prayer booted not.

Well, for that night, they bound and stripped him, like a dead Coarse: Rude
people, extreme reuengers.
and in stead of sweet Flowers, laid him in a bundle of Nettles.

The next morning the rude country people (who in revenge are without
civility or order) cruelly scourged the poor Friar. And (setting him the
forenoone naked in the Sun) anointed his body with honey: so that the
Hornets, Wasps and Flies, tormented him with the pains of hell.

In the afternoon, with a hundred Torches, Tapers, and other waxen lights,
this rustic multitude carried second Saint Frances unto his Toombe: The best
way to win the communalty.
and had not other Friars used mild and plawsible requests, in his behalf,
they would surely have buried him alive: for threatening, increases a tumult:
when fair words, may peradventure stay it.

The poor Friar discharged from the hands of these ungentle people, learned
afterward to be more wary: but for all this punishment was nothing the
honester. For among men of his Habit, remains an opinion, that the faults,
which the World sees not, God punishes not.

After the company had well laughed at Friar Ingannoes penance, Queen Aurelia
asked master Doctor, the Archdetracter of Women, how many such stories he had
read of the religious Dames?

None (quoth he) that has been so sorely punished, but of a number that have
as highly trespassed.

What (quoth Helena Dulce) by such subtle practices? Men offend subtly, and
women simply.


No (quoth the Doctor) but through simple affection.

Well (quoth Aluiso Vechio) their evils are written in their foreheads, Women's
evils are writ in their foreheads.
that slanderous men's tongues may read and enlarge them. And your great evils
are buried in the bottom of your hearts, that unless the Devil mean to
shame you, the world knows not how to blame you. Men's faults lie hid in their
hearts.


This was the Gentlewomens day, wherefore the civil Gentlemen would not offer
to cross them much: so that following their advantage, A civil courtesy in a
Gentleman.
Madame (quoth Isabella) with your favor and patience, I will report an
History, that open such a heinous treachery done by a man as shall take away
all possibility from a woman to commit so impious an Act.

Queen Aurelia willed her to proceed, and the whole company seemed to be
attentive: whereupon Isabella reported as follows.

The rare History of Promos and Cassandra, reported by Madame Isabella.
AT what time Coruinus, the scourge of the Turks, This history for rarenes
thereof is lively set out in a Comedy, by the reporter of the whole work, but
yet never presented upon stage.
raygned as King of Bohemia, for to well govern the Cities of his Realm, he
sent diverse worthy Magistrates: Among the rest, he gave the Lord Promos the
Lieutenantship of Iulio: who in the beginning of his government, purged ye City
of many ancient vices, and severely punished new offenders.

In this City there was an old custom (by the suffering of some Magistrates
grown out of use) that what man soever committed Adultery, should lose his
head: A hard law for incontinent persons.
and the woman offender should ever after be infamously noted by ye wearing of
some disguised apparel: For the man was held to be the greatest offender, and
therefore had the seuerest punishment.

Lord Promos with a rough execution, revived this Statute, and in the highest
degree of injury, brake it himself, as shall appear by the sequel of
Andrugioes adventures.

This Andrugio by the yielding favor of fair Polina, trespassed against this
ordinance, who through envy, was accused, and by Lord Promos condemned to
suffer execution.

The woeful Cassandra Andrugios Sister, prostrates her self at Lord Promos
feet, and with more tears then words, thus pleaded for her brothers life.

Most noble Lord, and worthy Judge, vouchsafed, me the favor to speak, whose
case is so desperate, as unless you behold me with the eyes of mercy, the
frail trespass of condemned Andrugio my Brother will be the death of
sorrowful Cassandra, his innocent Sister I will not presume, to excuse his
offense, or reproach the Law of rigor: for in the general construction, Law
adiudgeth, by the general offense
he has done most evil, and the Law has judged but what is right: But
(reverent Judge, pardon that necessity makes me here tell, that your wisdom
already knows.) The most Sovereign Justice is crowned with Laurel, although
she be girt with a Sword: And this privilege she gives unto her
Administrators: that they shall mitigate the severity of the Law, Justice is
more renowned by lenity, then severity.
according to the quality of the offense. Then, that Justice be not robbed of
her gracious pity, listen good Lord Promos, to the nature of my Brothers
offense, and his able means to repair the injury. He has defiled no
nuptial Beb, the stain whereof dishonors the guiltless Husband: He has
committed no violent Rape. In which Act the injured maid can have no amends.
But with yielding consent of his Mistress, Andrugio has only sinned through
Love, and never meant but with Marriage to make amends.

I humbly beseech you to accept his satisfaction, A good cause to move pity.
and by this Example you shall be as much beloved for your clemency, as feared
for your severity. Andrugio shall be well warned, and he with his Sister woeful
Cassandra, shall ever remain your Lordships true Servants.

Promos ears were not so attentive to hear Cassandras ruethful tale, as his
eyes were settled to regard her excellent Beauty. And Love, Love favors no
degree
that was appointed Headsman of Andrugio, became now the Sovereign of his
Judges thought. But because he would seem to bridle his passions he answered:
fair Damsel, have patience, you importune me with an impossibility: he is
condemned by Law, then without injury to Law, he cannot be saved. Princes
prerogatives are above Law.


Princes and their Deputies Prerogatives (quoth she) are above the Law.
Besides Law, truly construed, is but the amends of injury: and where the
fault may be valued, and amends had, The true intet of the Law.
the breach of the law is sufficiently repaired.

Quoth Lord Promos, your passions moves more then your proofs: and for your
sake, I will repreeue Andrugio, A good turn upon an evil cause.
and study how to do you ease, without apparent breach of Law.

Cassandra recomforted, Authority in evil Magistrates is a scourge unto the
good.
with humble thanks received his favor, and in great have goes to
participate this hope, with her dying Brother: But oh that Authority should
have power to make the virtuous to do amiss, as well as through correction to
enforce the vicious to fall unto goodness.

Promos is a witness of this privilege, who not able to subdue his incontinent
love, and withal, resolved that Cassandra would never be overcome with fair
words, A monstrous request.
large promises, or rich rewards: demanded the spoil of her Virginity, for
ransom of her Brothers liberty. Unless they be reprobate, good example may
reform the wicked.


Cassandra imagined at the first, that Lord Promos, used this speech but to
try her behavior: Answered him so wisely, as if he had not been the Rival of
virtue, he could not but have suppressed his lewd Affection, and have
subscribed to her just petition: But to leave circumstances, Promos was fiered
with a dicious desire, which must be quenched with Cassandraes yielding love,
or Andrugio must die.

Cassandra moved with a chaste disdain, departed with the resolution rather to
dye her self then to stayne her honor: And with this heavy news, greeted
her condemned Brother: poor man, alas, what should he do? Life was sweet:
but to be redeemed with his sisters Infamy, could not but be always unsavory.

To persuade her to consent, was unnatural: to yield to death was more
grievous.

To choose the least of these evils, A hard choice of two evils.
was difficult: to study long was dangerous.

Feign would he live, but shame closed his mouth when he attempted to persuade
his Sister.

But Necessity, that mastreth both shame and fear, brake a passage for his
imprisoned intent.

Sweet Cassandra (quoth he) that men love, is usual, but to subdue affection,
is impossible: and so thorny are the motions of incontinent desire, The force
of necessity.
as to find ease, the tongue is only occupied to persuade. The purse is ever
open to entice, and where neither words nor Gifts can corrupt (with the
mighty) force shall constrain, The force of Love.
or dispight avenge. That Promos do love is but just, thy beauty commands
him. That Promos be refused is more just, because consent is thy Shame.

Thou may refuse and live: but he being rejected, I die: For wanting his
will in thee, he will wreake his teene on me.

This is my hard estate: My life lies in thy Infamy, and thy honor in my
death. Which of these euilles be least, I leave for thee to judge.

The woeful Cassandra answered, A hard fortune
that death was the least, whose darte we cannot shun, when Honor in deaths
despite outliueth time.

It is true (quoth Andrugio) but thy trespass will be in the least degree of
blame: Death is to be preferred before dishonorable life.
For, in forced faults, Justice says, there is no intent of evil.

Oh Andrugio (quoth she) intent is now adays little considered: thou art not
condemned by ye intent, but by the strickt word of the Law: The venomous nature
of Envy.
so shall my crime be reproched, and the forced cause pass vnexcused: and such
is the venom of Envy, one evil deed shall disgrace ten good turns: and in
this yielding, so shall I be valued: Envy, Disdain, Spite, The virtuous are
assured of many enemies, and incertaine of any friends.
Malice, Slander, and many more furies will endeavor to shame me, and the
meanest virtue will blush to help to support my honor: so that I see no liberty
for thee but death, nor no ease for me but to hasten my end.

O yes (quoth Andrugio) for if this offense be known, thy fame will be
enlarged, because it will likewise be known, A cause that may excuse the
breach of honor.
that thou receiuedst dishonr to give thy brother life: If it be seceret, thy
conscience will be without scruple of guiltiness. Thus, known, or unknown,
thou shall be deflowred, but not dishonested, and for amends we both shall live.

This further hope remains, that as the Gilliflower both pleases the eye and
f^edeth the sense: even so the virtue of thy chaste behavior may so grace thy
beauty, A faint hope.
as Promos filthy lust, may be turned into faithful love: and so move him to
salve thy honor in making thee his wife. Or for conscience, for bear to do
so heinous an injury.

Sovereign Madame, and you fair Gentlewomen, (quoth Isabella) I entreat you
in Cassandraes behalf, these reasons well weyed, to judge her yielding, a
constraynt, and no consent: who weary of her own life, and tender over her
brothers, with tears of her lovely eyes, bathed his cheeks, with this
comfortable sentence.

Live Andrugio, and make much of this kiss, A loving kiss.
which breaths my honor into thy bowels: and draws the infamy of thy
first trespass into my bosom. The sharp incounters between life and death
so occupied Andrugioes senses, that his tongue had not the virtue to bid her
farewell. To grieve you with the hearing of Cassandraes secret playnts, were an
injury, virtuous Ladies, for they concluded with their good Fortune, and
everlasting fame: But for that her offense grew neither of frayltie, A good
consideration in Cassandra.
free will, or any motion of a woman, but by the mere inforcement of a man,
because she would not stayne the modest weeds of her kind, she attyred her
felfe in the habit of a Page, and with the bashful grace of a pure Virgin,
she presented wicked Promos Andrugioes precious ransom.

This devil, in humane shape, more vicious then Heliogabalus of Rome, A
damnable offense.
and withal as cruel as Denis of Sycil, received this Jewel with a thousand
protestations of favor. But what should I say? In the beginning of his love,
Promos was Metamorphosed into Priapus: and of a Feende what may we expect, but
vengeance heaped upon villainy? And therefore let it not seem strange, ye after
this Hell hou^d had dishonored Cassandra he sent his warrant to the Gayler
privily, to execute Andrugio, and with his head crowned with these two Briefes,
A villainous ingratitude.
in Promos name to present Cassandra.

Fair Cassaudra, as Promos promised thee:
From Prison lo, he sends thy Brother free.
This was his Charge, whose cursed will had been executed, had not God by an
especial providence, at the hour of his Death, An especial providence of God.
possessed Andugio with the virtues of the two brave Romans, Marcus Crassus,
and Marius, the one of which, by the force of his tongue, and the other by the
motions of his eyes, caused she Axe to fall out of the Headsmans hand, and
mollified his cruel mind.

With like compassion the Gayler (in hearing Andrugioes hard adventure) left
his resolution: And upon a solemn oath, to live unknown, yea to his dear
Sister, he gave him life, and in the dead of the night, betook him to God,
and to good fortune: A sign of an honest nature.
which done, this good Gayler took the head of a young man new executed, who
some what resembled Andrugio: and according to leawd Promos commandment made
a present thereof to Cassandra. How unwelcome this Present was, An vnwelcom
present.
the testimony of her former sorrows some what discover: but to give her
present passion a true grace, were the talk of Prometheus, or such a one as
has had experience of the anguishes of hell.

O quoth she, sweet Andrugio, whether shall I first lament thy death, exclayme
of Promos injury, or bemone my own estate, deprived of honor? and which is
worse, cannot die, but by the violence of my own hands. Alas, the least of
these griefs are too heavy a burden for a man, then all joined in one poor
woman's heart, cannot be eased but by death: and to be avenged of injurious
Fortune, I will forth with cut my Fillet of life. But so shall Promos
lewdness escape unpunished: what remedy? I am not of power to revenge: to
complain, I express my own infamy, but withal, proclaim his villainy: and
to hear his lewdenes reproved, would take away the bitterness of my death. I
will go unto the king, who is just and merciful, he shall hear the ruthful
events of Promos Tyranny: and to give him example of vengeance, I will seal my
complaints with my dearest blood.

Continuing this determination, Cassandra buried her imagined brothers head,
and with speed iornyed unto king Coruinus Court: before whose presence when
she arrived, her mourning Attire, but especially her modest countenance moved
him to behold her with an especial regard.

Cassandra (upon the grant of audience) with her eyes ouercharged with tears,
A mischief well prevented.
reported the already discoursed accidents, with such an appearance of grief,
as the King and his Attendants were astonished to hear her: and sure had she not
been happily prevented, she had concluded her determination, with chaste
Lucretias destiny. A noble favor.
The King comforted her with many gracious words, and promised to take such
order, that (although he could not be revived) her Brothers death, should fully
be revenged, and her crased honor repaired, without blemish of her former
reputation.

Cassandra upon these comfortable words, a little succored her afflicted heart,
with patience attended the Justice of the King: who with a chosen company,
made a Progress to Iulio, and entered the Town with a semblance of great
fanour toward Promos: A necessary policy.
by that color, to learn what other corrupt Magistrates ruled in this City:
for well he knew that Birds of a feather would fly together, and wicked men
would join in affection, to boulster each others evil.

After this gracious King had by heedfull intelligence understood the factions
of the people, unlooked for of the Magistrates, he caused a proclamation to be
published: in which was a clause, that if any person could charge any
Magistrate or Officer with any notable or heinous offense, A royal grace.
Treason, Murder, Rape, Sedition, or with any such notorious Crime: where they
were the Judges of the multitude, he would himself be the Judge of them, and
do justice unto the meanest. The clamors of the poor, and the consciences of
the rich, like Hell. Sorrow and Shame, the attendants of Cassandra.


Upon this Proclamation it was a hell to hear the exclamations of the poor,
and the festered consciences of the rich appeered as loathsome as the River of
Stix.

Among many that complained and received judgment of comfort, Cassandras
Process was presented, who lead between sorrow and shame, accused Promos to
his face.

The evidence was so plain, as the horror of a guilty conscience reaued
Promos of all motions of excuse: so that holding up his hand, An unusual place
for a Judge.
amongst the worst degree of thieves, the little hope that was left, moved him
to confess ye crime, and with repentance to sue for mercy.

O (quoth the King) such especial mercy were tyranny to a common wealth. A
necessary regard in a Prince.
No Promos no, Hoc facias alteri, quod tibi vis fieri. You shall be measured
with the grace you bestowed on Andrugio.

O God (quoth he) if men durst bark as dogs, many a Judge in the world
would be bewrayed for a thief: It behooves a Prince to know to whom he
commits Authority, least the Sword of Justice, appointed to chasten the
lewd, Princes bears the blame of evil Officers extortion.
wound the good: and where good subjects are wronged, evil Officers receive
the the benefit, and their Sovereigns bears the blame.

Well, A just judgment.
wicked Promos, to scourge thy impious offenses, I here give sentence, that
thou forth with marry Cassandia, to repair her honor by thee violated, and
that the next day thou lose thy head, to make satisfaction for her Brothers
death.

This just judgment of the good king, in the first point, was forth with
executed: The good prorect the lewd.
But sacred is the authority, that the virtues of the good are a Shield unto
the lewd. So sweet Cassandra, who (simply) by virtue overcame ye spite of
Fortune: The duty of a wife, truly shown.
in this marriage was charged with a new assault of sorrow, and preferring the
duty of a wife, before the natural zeal of a Sister, where she before
prosecuted the revenge of her brothers death, she now was an humble suter to
the King for her Husbands life.

The gracious King sought to appease her with good words, but he could not do
her this private favor, The common weal, is to be regarded before private
honor.
without injury unto the public weal: for though (quoth he) your suit be
just, and the bounden duty of a wife, yet I in fulfilling the same, should do
unjustly, and (generally) iniure my Subjects: and therefore good Gentlewoman
have patience, and no doubt virtue in the end will give you power over all your
affections.

There was no remedy, Cassandra must depart, cut of hope to obtain her suit.
Sieve bonum. sieve malum, Fama est.
But as the experience is in daily use, the doings of Princes post through the
world on Pegasus back: And as their actions are good or badde, so is their
same. With the like speed, the Kings justice, and Promos execution was spread
abroad: and by the tung of a Clown was blown into Andrugios ears, who till
then lived like an Outlawe in the Desert woods.

But upon these news, covertly in the habit of an Hermit, Good motions,
proceed from the soul, and evil from the flesh.
by the divine motion of the Soul, who directs us in things that be good, and
the Flesh in actions that be evil: Andrugio goes to see the Death of his
Capital enemy: But on the other part, regarding the sorrow of his sister, he
wished him life as a friend.

To conclude, as well to give terror to the lewd, as comfort to his good
subjects, the King (personally) came to see the execution of Promos: who,
guarded with Officers, and stre^gthened with the comfortable persuasions of his
Ghostly fathers: Among whom Andrugio was, meekely offered his life, as a
satisfaction for his offenses, A grateful part.
which were many more then the Law took knowledge of, and yet to say the
truth, such was his Repentance, as the multitude did both for give and pity
him: yea, the King wondered that his life was governed with no more virtue,
considering the grace he showed at his death.

Andrugio beholding this ruthful Spectackle, was so overcome with love toward
his Sister, as to give her comfort, he franckly consented a new to emperill his
own life: And followinge this Resolution, in his Hermits weed, upon his knees,
he humblye desired the King to speak: The King (graciously) granted him
Audience. Whereupon (quoth he) regarded Sovereign, if Law may (possibly be
satistied) Promos true Repentance meriteth pardon.

Good Father (quoth the King) he cannot live, Murder asks death, and no
other satisfaction.
and the law satistied, unless (by miracle) Andrugio be revived.

Then (quoth the Hermit) if Andrugio live, the law is satissied, and Promos
discharged.

I (quoth the King) if your prayer can revive the one, my mercy shall acquit
the other.

I humbly thank your Majesty (quoth Andrugio) and disconering himself, showed
the preuidence of God, and the mean of his escape: and tendering his Sisters
comfort above his own safety, he prostrated him self at his Majesty's feet,
humbly to obey the sentence of his pleasure. The King upon the report of this
strange adventure, Princes are bound to their word
after good deliberation, pardoned Promos, to keep his word, and withal,
holding an opinion, that it was more beneficial for the Citizens, Of two, the
least evil is least dangerous.
to be ruled by their old evil Governor new reformed, then, to adventure
upon a new, whose behauiours were unknown: And to perfect Cassandras joy, he
pardoned her brother Andrugio, with condition, that he should marry Polina.
Thus, from between the teeth of danger, every party was preserved, and in the
end established in their hearts desire.

Madame (quoth Soranso) your good conclusion has likewise preserved us from a
great danger, Ruthful tales, raises remorce in the hearers.
for had you ended with the sorrow you began, we had been al like to have been
drowned in tears.

Indeed (quoth Katharina Trista) you men have had cause sufficient of sorrow,
by hearing your kind reproched with such monstrous evils: By example of evil,
the evil are feared. By example of the good, the good are strengthened.
and we women free passage to lament in beholding none but cross fortunes to
succeed the good endeavors of a virtuous Lady.

It is true (quoth Fabritio) but to participate of their joy, we men have
learned out of Promos example of evil, for fear of his like punishment of
evil, to do well: and you women by example of Polinas vice, and Cassandras
virtue, are both warned and encouraged to weldooing.

Indeed (quoth Queen Aurelia) there are many Moral precepts in either
History to be considered: Good order is to be kept among such as have been
late sick.
which I hope the company have so regarded, as there needs no repetitition
And further, because I will not be too bold of the victory, over my late
distemperature: we will here end: And therewith she arose, and retired into
her Chamber: with charge that the company should attend her in the same place
until Supper, who obeying, entertained time every one with their special
fancy.

The question that arose at Supper upon the fourth days exercise.
MAny pretty nippes, passed between the retired Company, this night at
Supper, as well on the Gentlewomens part, as of the Gentlemen's, insomuch as
presuming upon this Days honor (when the Table was ready to be taken away)

Aluisa Vechio took upon her to maintain a woman to be a creature every way,
as excellent and perfect as man. Comparison breeds contention.
For natural shape (quoth she) they are more beautiful, of a better
temperature, and complexion then men. In valiant exploytes, what difference
was there between Semiramis and her Husband Ninus? between the Amazon women
and Alexander. For constancy of mind, Excellent virtues in women
did not Loadice embrace death? with less fear then Mithridates her Husband?
Asdruballes Wife, then Asdruball himself? And what man has kept a constant
resolution of death, so long as Lucretia. In Virtues, you men that read
Histories and Cronicles of all ages, shall find women renowned for learning,
government, and policy. In Mecanicall Arts, there are Women likewise
experienced. In the virtue of Divining, what man has come near the Sibils? To
be short, what man has been so perfect in any virtue, but histories make
mention of a woman as perfect?

Yea (quoth Dondolo) but there be so few of these women, Cauillers never
answer directly.
as an easy wit may remember them.

But it will cumber your tung to report them, quoth Katharina Trista.

The other Gentlemen although they were willing to give place unto the
Gentlewomen in small matters, A disgrace in honor, a Gentleman may not bear
with.
yet this comparison of equal sovereignty, nettled them a little. In as much,
as Soranso answered, Madame Aluisa, you have made a bold comparison, and but a
bare proof: Where you vaunte to be more excellent in shape and more delicate
in substance then men.

It is an over ruled question, that Women receive perfection by Men, Aristotle's
problemes.
and Men imperfection by Women: then by how much the virtue is of more emprise,
that is simply of it self, then that which is compound of an other: by so far
we exceed you in this perfection.

Your honor of valia^tnes died with your examples, and although there has
been Women learned, and experienced in Mecanicall crafts, Extraordinary
things, are not to be compared with ordinary.
yet to hear a Woman plead at the Bar, preach in a Pulpit, or to see her
build a house, is a wonder and no example in use. How short your divining
Sybels come of the credit of the Prophets in the old Testament, is no question
disputable: Life is precious.
For your constancy at death, you know not how precious life is, which makes
you rash and not constant: and in truth what you have frowardly determined, you
will not be forbidden. As she that had her Tung cut, for calling of her husband
Thief, would yet notwithstanding, make the sign of the gallows.

Well sir (quoth Queen Aurelia) Epicarias obstinacy, Epicaria in the trembling
pas, sage of death, was constant.
who endured to be rent in pieces, before she would confess the conspiracy
against Nero, would have been holden for a virtue of staidenesse in a man.

And what say you of Leena, PLIN. Lib. 34. Cap. 2.
that bit off her tung, and spit it in the Tirant Hippias face, because she
would not bewray a conspiracy against him.

Madame (with your favor, quoth ye Doctor) had she not had this foresight, An
envious Suggestion.
it had been like the Athenians should have been driven to have made a brazen
bell, as a Monument of her talk: rather the^ a tungles Lio^nes, as they did in
honor of her silence, for had she not mistrusted her imperfection, she would
never have committed that tyranny upon her self.

Had her tung been venomed with your malice, it is like (quoth Queen
Aurelia) that the Athenians had verified your slanderous opinion: herewith she
looked a skawse, upon her favored servants, as who would say, I check the
omission of your duty, in not defending of my right. Upon which warning, and
especially, for the excellency of this sex, A man may praise a woman without
reproching a man.
quoth Ismarito, a man may do justice unto an other, without injury to
himself: and sure without ye reproach of men, a man may comme^d ye excellency
of women: in whose behalf (although I will not condemn Sir Soransos reasons)
yet in my opinion, he erred in the first Article, where he touches the
perfection of Men, and the imperfection of Women: for neither of themselves are
perfect, Chaste talk ought especially to be used in the presence of women.
Aris. Prob.
nor may have essential substance without the other: But to dispute of this
secret in nature at large, were unpleasing to their chaste ears, and breefey
too mistical for their understandings. But who so is so curious in search, let
him read yt Philosophers probleames, with an impartial judgment, and he shall
find the^ in substance every way as perfect as meu: and in yt opinion of the
eye, The quality, and not the quantity commends.
of al yt senses who is ye most perfect judge, they far excel man in pureness of
complexion: where exception is taken to ye few in number, of fingulerly well
qualified women, I affirm yt it is not the quantity, but the quality yt
commends: a little salt relisheth more then a great deal of sugar, Judith with
her own hands, atchiued a more honorable conquest, then all the Cilisions
besides.

Alexandra ye wife of Alexander king of ye Jews, (when ye uncivil multitude
were ready for his tyranny) to make ye intrails of dogs, a sepulture for his
dead body, yea and to be further aue^ged, to murder his two Sons: by her
sweet behavior so mollified their cruel hearts, as loosing their resolutions,
they gave her husband an honorable burial; and prostrated themselves at her
childrens feet: which pacification ye strength nor wisdom of her counsel could
not obtain. Eua.
By what instrument did God first show ye vigor of his ve^gance? by a woman.
And by what instrument did he show ye virtue of his mercy? Our Lady.
by a woman. Sovereign virtue is Femenine, and (I blush to tell it) Yrkesome
Vice is Masculine. The Ladies laughed outright, to hear Ismaritos difference.
But Soranso half angry answered, that if Ismaritos countrymen were of his
mind, they might be ashamed that they were so effeminate.

Pardon me, Where an injury in words, may be revenged in words, a Gentleman is
not bound to his sword.
quoth Ismarito, it is their commendation to yield unto women, and to conquer
men.

Tush, tush (quoth Bargetto) to nip himself by the nose, Ismarito is to be
pardoned, for his Captain S. George, is shackled in a woman's garter.

It is true (quoth Ismarito) but thus fettered, he has many times chased S.
Michael to his Mount.

Fabritio fearing that these crosses would turn to the Devils blessing,
Discreet standers by pacifieth contentions.
studied how to accord this contention, and with that intent (quoth he)
Ismarito, you have well deserved to kiss these Ladies hands, for your
honorable commendation of their sex: Virtue and vice, both Feminine and
Mesculine.
But where you say Virtue is the Feminine, and vice the Masculine, both men and
women are understood in either. The old Divines, took Virtue to be God, and
Vice the Devil, and either to be both Feminine and Masculine. Orpheus said,
that Jupiter and Pluto were both Male and Female. It is also read in Scripture:
That God fashioned both man and woman to his own likeness. Moreover this word
Homo, signifies both kinds: so that since Man and Woman, are not simply of
themselves, but compounded one of an other, I blame this unnatural contention,
for excellency, for neither can obtain Sovereign victory, without doing
injury to themselves. The head among some is taken for the Man, Note.
and the heart for the woman, (for both are of an indifferent gender) and all the
other members indifferently at their commandment.

Queen Aurelia, with a smiling countenance, answered that she was content,
that a Man should govern as ye head, and women direct as the heart, and because
we will not do injury unto our natural virtue of Modesty, we will give place
to you, Modesty an natural virtue in a woman.
in contention for Soueraignties, and bind you to serve us for our virtues,
and therewithal in rising, she broke of this controversy.

After Supper, there was a little time bestowed in hearing of sweet music,
but for that Queen Aureliaes late distemperature grew of over watching: the
company this night went unto their lodging in a good hour.

MADONA AVRELIA, Her fifth days pleasures.
Containing a brief discourse, touching the excellency of Man: and a large
discovery of the inconveniences of over lofty, and too base Love: with other
moral notes, needful to be regarded.

THe last nights good hour of repose, was the cause of the companies this
days early rising: who by nine of the clock entered the great Chamber, armed
for any lawdable exercise. And after an accustomed duty of salutation
discharged, every man bethought himself of some pleasing matter, to entertayne
the present time. Soranso and Ismarito were severed from the rest of the
company, upon private discourse: which being ended, Soranso casting his eye
aside, beheld in the hangings, the picture of Ixion, herdled to his tormenting
wheel. See yonder, The Fable of Ixion.
quoth he, the worthy scourge of Ambition, and withal reported the Fable, of
his presumptuous making of love to Juno.

Nay, quoth Ismarito, Ixion is rather the example of Vayne-glorie punished: To
be proud in virtues, is commendable.
for Jupiter so well allowed of Ixions hie mind (in that he represented his
Image) as he raised him from Earth to Heaven, and because he should not perish
in his affection, he satisfied his desire with the embracement of a counterfeit
Juno, The scourge of vainglory.
and so sent him back unto the Earth: where vain glorious Ixion Proclaimed,
that he was the Minion of Juno, and had Acteoned Jupiter: for which arrogancy,
Jupiter threw him to hell, with this pictured vengeance.

Questionless, quoth Soranso, this imagination of the Heathen Poet, could not
but be the travel of a divine spirit, it exposes such needful matter, for
Christians to contemplate of.

You need not doubt of your opinion, The soul trauaileth to bring forth
divine monuments in the heathen.
quoth Ismarito, for after God had created Adam after his own Image, he
scattered the seed of Adam upon the face of the whole world, and wheresoever
the essential form of Adam was, there was also the Image of God, which in the
most barbarous and Heathen creature, labors to bring out hie and excellent
things.

I beseech you, quoth Soranso, to enlarge this discourse. I am not so simple to
believe that we are like the Image of God in our outward shape: yet my
knowledge is not perfect, in what virtues we resemble the Image of God.

Referring you, A discreet exordium, for young men that argue.
for your better knowledge, to grauer judgments (quoth Ismarito) I will only
to satisfy your request, say what I have read, and what in my opinion,
stands with reason.

In our exterior body, to say we resemble God, were a gross ignorance: The
excellency of man through the virtue of the soul.
but in that our soul is closed within our body, and gives life, and moving,
to the whole body: it is no absurdity to conclude the less within the greater,
to show how the soul resembles God: who consists in a Trinity.
Notwithstanding she is but one; yet she comprehends in her three dignities,
to wit, Intendment, Wit, and Memory, And as the son is ingenered of the
Father, Three dignities of the soul.
and the holy Ghost proceeds from both: even so Will is ingendered of
Intendment, and Memory proceeds from both: and as the three persons of the
Trinity, are but one GOD, so the three powers of the soul, are but one soul:
and in that man is created in this sort, Man is formed straight, because he
should behold heaven and contemplate on great matters.
according to the Image of God, because he should resemble his creator in
excellency, he is formed straight and not curbed: to behold the earth, not
thereby to show a difference between him and other brute Beasts, but only
because he should raise his spirit, and heave his eyes to heaven, his
original, to contemplate of divine and durable things, and not of earthly and
such as perish. And sure the Monuments, that to this day renown heathen
Alexander, Julius Caesar, Scipio, Haniball, and many other stout warriors,
Plato, Pythagoras, Socrates, Solon, and many thousand grave Philosophers, were
the exercises of the soul, who in her function is always occupied, to make
men shine like Angels. And doubtless the exploits of man would be wonderful,
and glorious, Three evils or defects of the body.
were not the passages of the three powers of the soul, Intendment, Will, and
Memory, stopped with these three evils or defects of the body: Ignorance, of
that which is good; Covetousness, of that which is evil; and the Infirmity and
languor of the body. These be the evils that eclipse the excellency of many,
who other wise would appear more glorious then the Sun, Moon, Stars, and
Crystal Firmament, into whose motions, reuolutions, and influences, his
knowledge foreseeth: or the earth with all her fair furniture which he
governs, and therefore he is called Microcosmos, for that in excellency, he
egalleth the beauty of the whole world.

Sir, quoth Soranso, you have enchaunted my ears with such a pleasing regard,
as if you were as tedious in discourse, as I would be attentive in hearing, we
should both lose our dinners, without any great repining: but in adnantage I
beseech you, what may be the remedy of these three evils, which thus obscure
the excellency of man?

Three sovereign remedies, quoth Ismarito, to wit, Three remedies against
the 3. evils of the body.
Wisdom, Virtue, and Necessity, which to chase the other three evils, are
thus ordered: Wisdom against Ignorance, Virtue against Vice, and Necessity
against Infirmity. Wisdom is to be understood according to the condition of
the things wherein we be ignorant. Virtue is an habit of the soul, which
without great difficulty cannot be shaken out of his place and subject: By
Necessity, The original of al Arts and Sciences.
absolutely is intended, a supply against those wants, with which Infirmity
has charged us, as if we be lame, to have horse to ride: if we be sick, to
have medicine: if our bodies be weak, to have nourishing meats, etc. And by
these three remedies, all Arts and Disciplines have been invented, to acquire
Wisdom: Theorique, which is contemplative, Theorique.
and consists in these three parts, Practice.
Theology, Physic, and Mathematique, was found for Virtue. Practice, which
is active, and divided, Mechanichall crafts.
into Solitary, Private, and Public, was put in use. And for Necessity, all
Mecanicall crafts were invented. These three virtues if we embrace them, will
chase the other three both out of our body, soul and remembrance. You have
given me a short sweet reason quoth Soranso. And a long remembrance of my weak
understanding quoth Ismarito: but for that I have made this Sermon, upon your
importunity, your courtesy I hope will pardon me, as well as your wisdom
will correct my errors.

I had thought Ceremonies had been in disgrace, Courtesy is comme^dable, but
superfluous savors of flattery.
among you Englishmen, quoth Soranso: but I find you superstitious in
courtesy, and therefore will take no example by you: but let it suffice, I am
your friend, and will deserve this favor, in any reasonable service.

By this time, Dinner was ready to be set upon the Boorde, and Queen Aurelia
came again unto the open view, whose presence was as welcome unto the general
company, as the clear Sun (after rough storms) to the wether-wearied
Saylour. After she had acquitted the courteous salutations of the whole troup,
she first took her place, and then the rest as they pleased, or were
accustomed. At this Dinner there passed much pleasant Table talk, impertinent
for this report: which being done, at the accustomed hour, Queen Aurelia
sent for the chosen company, who placed in ye drawing chamber: the Eunuch
knowing his charge, tuned his Lute, and sung this following Sonet.

WHo prickles fears, to pluck the lovely Rose,
By my consent, shall to a Nettle smell:
Or through faint heart, who does a Lady lose,
A droyle I wish, or to lead Apes in Hell.
On Thorns, no Grapes, but sour Slowes do grow:
So from base love, a base delight does flow.
Then mind crown thou, my thoughts above the sky,
For easy gaynde, the Conquest is not sweet:
My sancy swift, with Icarus wings does fly:
Yet fastened so, as fire and frost may meet.
For pleased am I, if hope return but this:
Grace is obtaynde, thy Mistress hand to kiss.
A Grace indeed, far passing all the joy,
Of egall love, that offers wish in will:
For though her scorn, and light regard annoy,
Despair of grace my fancy cannot kill.
For why: this joy all passions sets in rest:
I daily see my mistress in my breast.
Whosoever invented this Sonet, quoth Queen Aurelia, deserves to be well favored
of his Mistress, in that he kept her so carefully in his bosom.

Nay quoth Dondolo, if his eyes were so subtle, as absent, he could see her
behavior, his affection were more dangerous then his service necessary.

We give you to know, quoth Isabella, that we wey not though our Husbands, a
hundred miles off, know our behauiours at home.

I think so, quoth the plain Doctor, for so far off they may (sigh at their
own mischance, but) not chasten your amiss. Perchance they should not be
charged with such injury, as this company should be (quoth Maria Belochi) if
we would offer to answer your envious suggestions.

Ladies I speak not with intent (quoth Soranso) to make a question of your
behauiours, but admit you of al creatures the most perfect: yet for that you
have motions, as well bad, as good, you may many times make show of evil, and
yet not do amiss, which if your husbands be so quick sighted, as to perceive,
they will judge by their own eyes, and not by your hearts, and so from
shadows may grow evil effects.

If their sight be so quick (quoth Francheschina Sancta) then, though by
anegligent trespass, their wives sometime give them cause to sigh, with a number
of loving vsages, they will give them daily occasion of rejoicing.

I grant as much (quoth Soranso) but this will follow, The evil of Jealousy.
the Husband will turn his own mistrust, to his Wines sorrow, and receive her
good usage to his own private comfort.

Indeed (quoth Aluisa Vechio) the love of a ielous husband, is sauced with
such froward motions, as I had rather be matched with him that regards me not
at al, then with him that loves me too much: for of the one, though I am not
beloved, yet I shall not be much crossed: of the other, I being too much
beloved, I shall never be in quiet.

I am not of your mind (quoth Helena Dulce) I had rather have my Husband
ielous, Hard is the difference, between a careless and a ielous Husband.
then careless: for being careless, no good usage will reconcile him: and
being ielous, the wife may study out how to please him.

Yea, but (quoth Katharina Trista) Men are so easy conceited, that if they
perceive a woman studieth how to please them, they straightwayes imagine, she
will likewise study how to deceive them: and therefore, God shield me from a
ielous husband. I have heard, the white streaked Carnation Gilleflower was the
Metamorphos of a fair Gentlewoman, beheaded by her husband upon this ielous
thought, that his wife being so fair, could not but be beloved of the Gods,
Ovid. Metam. lib. 10.
although he had no cause to suspect men. And where have ye a larger example
of Love then the adventure of Orpheus, who by extreme sorrow and suit,
recovered his Wife out of hell, Eurydice.
and by over ielous Love sent her thither again?

Doctor Mossonigo was smiling out a scoff, Prevent a scoffer, and he becomes
a Sotte.
upon this tale, which Queen Aurelia intercepted, by ending of the
Gentlewomens contention. By your talk of hell (quoth she) I see we are out of
the way to Platoes Paradise: and therefore, good, we turn back again.

Indeed Madame (quoth Fabritio) if we travel still, to choose the least of
evils, it will be long before we come to the Fountain of goodness.

Me thinks (quoth Isabella) the Sonet, which moved the late Question, A
Commendation of lofty Love.
directs a fair way to happiness in marriage: for it comme^deth lofty Love,
And if, according to the old Proverb, The best is best cheap: this adventure
gives hope, and promises good Fortune.

It is true (quoth Soranso) and I dare undertake to approve it, the happiest
estate in marriage.

Dondolo, because he would not be disgraced, by marying a Burgoys fair
Daughter of Rauenna, offered to prove the contrary.

Queen Aurelia licensed them to show their reasons.

Whereupon, quoth Soranso, to give great Ladies and Gentlewomen of calling,
their true right and honor, who lightly marry not their Inferiors in
reputation, but for some especial virtue that does commend their choice, and
clears the blemish of her husbands baseness? I must confess, hat he which
raises his thought so hie undertakes (no doubt) a tedious suite: his delays
will be grievous, and his Soliciters will be well rewarded, in what sort so
ever he be regarded. But what of this? Quo quid difficilius, eo pulchrius:
Peril makes honor perfect: the stinging of the Be mends the sweetenes of
Honey: Roses best refreshe oursences, when we prick our hands to reach them:
The evil of a thing, commends the goodness.
He that crackes the Nut, thinks the kernel sweetest. The reason is, not for
that the goodness of a thing, is the better, for the evil thereunto belonging:
but, for that the remembrance of the evil, makes us hold the good in more
reputation: especially in love. The affection which is forced with tears,
won with sighs, gaynd with expense, and compassed with sorrow, is held most
pleasant, most perfect and of longest continuance. Again, easy gotten
good-wil, becomes in a while loathsome: the cause is, as I conceive, for that
the pleasure was never seasoned with pain. Once a man, in loving his better,
to increase his passion, shall lack no occasion, both to seek, sue, sigh and
serve: and yet, to feed his hope, he shall want neither fair looks, good
words, nor possibility of favor. For, for to obtain a great Lady, acquireth
many circumstances, not for that she is precise to love, but for that she is
wise, (or would be so thought) in her proceedinges. But whether she love or
no, Ovid says, there is no woman, but will endure the demand: she is contented
we service to be courted: Love spares no degree.
and in recompense rewards with good countenance. But which most sustayneth
hope, the example is in continual use: that love spares no degree,
transgresses every law, and brings the mightiest in bondage to the meanest.
King Cofetua, the Affrican, became enamoured of a Beggar: fair Venus espoused
ill favored Vukane: Pigmalion doted upon an Image: Narcissus was drowned in
embracing his own shadow, and mighty Jove, many times, cast aside his
divinity, to dally with simple country trulles: then, why should the affected
(how bace soever his estate be) despair to attempt a great Lady, when his
warrant is signed with so large Authorities? But whether he speed or fail: be
accepted or rejected, well entertained, or ill entreated: the imagination, that
time will inuest his desire with delight, Hope to compass great matters
comfort more then the possession of trifles.
is to the affected a Paradise, far excelling the possession of equal love:
But if in the end, her affection, or his good fortune, concludes his wish in
desire: her love, which cannot choose but be great: in that she marieth beneth
her calling: And her Ability, which allured at the first, with his inabilitie:
to realish both, cannot but make the Husband fortunate, and the Wife well
pleased: for that in recompense of this advancement, she may presume somewhat to
rule her head: Reproof of lofty Love.
but, which most contents, she shall have the satisfaction of her fancy a bed.

If a house were as soon builded, as the Plot is drawn (quoth Dondolo) Shepherds
would disdain to live in Cotages: eue^ so, if every man could as soon compass
a Lady for himself, as he can report the fortune of other: there must be an
Act to make Ladies; or Lords must be glad of mean women. But admit, by the
example of other men's aduancements, yt the meanest may be raised, by the
yielding fancy of ye mighty: I prophecy that such an vpstart, had more need
of ten eyes, toward the malice of his Wives kindred, the^ one tung to move her
to kindness. A woman cannot mislike affectionated proffers, One kinsman has
an interest in another honor.
because they proceed of love: But her kindred disdaineth his attempt, for
that the conclusion tends both to their and her dishonor: A woman seeing her
servants passions, cannot but sustain him with pity, her kindred seeing him
in good way to be beloved, will lie in wait for his life: For though she may
dispose of her affection, her kindred has an interrest in her honor, which if
she consent to stain, or deminish, she does injury to her whole house.

The Cardinal of Aragon, An inhumain part.
aduenged the base choice of his Sister, the Duchess of Malfy, with the death
of her self, her Children, and her Husband: and alleged in defense, that he
had done no injury to Nature, but purged his House of dishonor: for Nature
(quoth he) is perfect, and who blemisheth her is a monster in Nature, whose
head, without wrong to Nature may be cut off.

Yea (quoth Soranso) but, this Cardinal, for all his habit, Defense, etc.
and gloss of Justice, is for this act so often regestred for a Tirant, as I
fear me he will never come among the number of Saints: but the example of
these marriages are usual, Reproof, etc.
and such ensuing vengeance is but rare, and besides her especial contentment,
a woman loses none of her general titles of dignity by matching with her
inferior.

In deed (quoth Dondolo) in common courtesy she enjoys them, A woman that
abaseth her self in Marriage, in law loses her reputation, but not in courtesy.
but in the strickt construction of the law, she is degraded. And by this mean
is bound to intertaine the meaner, with familiarity, least they (being proud,
or reputing her scornefully) do cross her over the thumbes with the follies
of her fancy. But admit the mean servant marry his Mistress, and escapes the
malice of her friends: which success, one among ten such suitors hardly
attaineth. The natural desires of a woman.
Let him yield to pay this rent for his good fortune: to suffer his wife, to
rule, to direct, and to command his own determinations. And where she
orders: the uncontrolled Wife, desires to be served with pomp, and to be
set forth with pride: which the ruling Husband would repress, as well for
saving his wives honor, as for sparing his own pursse.

The uncontrolled wife desires to walk at liberty, and to be visited of
many: of which the ruling Husband, would bar her: as well to preserve his
mind from mistrust, as to keep his Chimney from being fired.

The uncontrolled wife disdayneth the Country, and destreth the City: which
the ruling Husband would mislike, for that in the Country, the exercise of
huswiferie inlargeth his Wives estunation, and in the City, idleness
hazardeth her reputation.

The uncontrolled Wife desires without check to prattle, and without
discretion to govern: which the ruling Husband in no wise would allow, for
that many words is a blemish to his wives modesty, and the rule of his Wife is
warrant sufficient, for the wise to ouerrule him for a Woodcocke.

Many other vanities follow the desires of Women: which a man thus aduanc'st,
must forbear to chasten, least he expose himself to a thousand dangers: for
the wife taking pepper in the nose, will suffer him, (yea perchance, agree to
make him) a pray, to the displeasure of his enemies: I mean her able friends
and kindred: which bondage is not within the Paradise Plato speaks of: For
according to the opinion of sundry Philosophers, as Nature will not be
controuled, for that she creates: as Fortune is won with no prayers, because
she is blind, and shoots at adventure: no more does marriage allow of
inequallitie, because her will is to divide her benefits, and blessings among
the married with indifferency.

To this end Marriage is likened to Sienes grafted in a stock of contrary
quality: for as by growth and good order, Judgment in reproof of lofty love.
they both become of one nature, even so, man and woman united in this
honorable estate, with good usage, become of one disposition. Again, as
Sienes thus grafted without special Husbandry, while they be tender, come to
no proof: even so man and woman, thus joined in Matrimony: unless in the
prime of their Marriage, with equal care, they love and cherish one another, in
the waine of their years, the sweet Fruits of wedsock will be blasted with
repentance.

Segnior Fabritio, to conclude Dondolos opinion, with his own judgment, said
in truth, that Marriage could not away with such servitude: as the Husband, who
is wise and the chief, should obey the wife, who in common construction, is
simple, weak, and the inferior. And where a rich woman (as Dondolo has said)
Marieth her poor Servant, because she is the cause of his advancement, she will
look to govern: which if she do, her indiscretion will move others to
speak, and her husband to sorrow: and if he challenge the privilege of a
husband to direct, he shall be bound to a life more bitter then Death. Not, but
that in respect of his former estate, he may endure these crossings of his
wife, but because, as he is grown in estimation: so is he grown in hautines
of mind, and can now worse brook an unkind word, then in times past, an
imurious deed. And therefore in Dondolos behalf, I do judge Soranso to be in
an error.

I will not dispute against the authority of your judgment (quoth Soranso) but
at adventure if younger brethren err in marriage, God send the^ to stumble upon
no worser fortune. Men must have regard how they blame, least they bite the^
selves.


Queen Aurelia, who regarded, that Dondolo was somewhat too lavish, in
painting out of the natural desires of a woman, knew as well how to set forth
his follies and oversight: and therefore to take a modest revenge (quoth she)
If happiness in Marriage consists so much in the Lordly rule of the husband,
then where a man marieth his inferior in reputation, there is a likelihood of
good agreement: wherefore Segnior Dondolo, because I think you married your
wife, with the same Judgment, with which you manifested the inconveniences of
lofty Love: I beseech you, show us the blessings of this inferior choice.

Soranso, and the rest began to smile, to hear this commandment: for well they
knew Dondolo was intrapt with a slander of his own reputation: but Dondolo,
although he were a little gauled, set a reasonable flourish upon his bace
fancy: and therefore (quoth he) as it is already adjudged, Defense of bace
love.
if a man marry above his calling, he must bear with his Wife in folly, as
much as she was blinded in fancying of him: which bondage marriage can hardly
endure: then if he match with his inferior, if contraries have contrary
qualities, per consequence: she will be as lowly, as the other is lofty: as
pacient, as the other is proud: and as dutiful, as the other is disoainfull:
if the other prodisgally spond, because her portion is large, she will we
huswiferie spare, because her substance was small: if the other presume,
because of her Gentry, she will seek reputation, with her good conditions:
and if the other bolster her faults, with the countenance of her able Friends,
A rich dowry with a woman.
she doing amiss, will cry her husband mercy, because she lackes
succorers, to sustains her evil: a course, as Plato says, that makes the
dowry of the poor virgin of greater vallue then the possesions of a rich
Lady.

You are nothing deceived in the course (quoth Faliero) but much mistaken in
the creature. Reproof, etc.
As touching your Contraries, I mislike your Consequent: for fire and Water
have contrary working, and unorderly used, both hurtful: prodigallitie, and
covetousness, are contraries, and necessary: even so, the courtly dame, and
the Country droyle, as they are contrary in calling, so are they contrary in
conditions: and so they may be matched, neither profitable.

A Diamond is blemished, by the setting in Brass, and a Flynt not the
beautifuller, for being garnisht with Gold: even so, the honor of a woman, is
Cclipst, in matching with her Servant, her slave, or her inferior: for that
Strangers will value her by her Fortune, although her haughty nature, will not
lose the name of her reputation: neither is the estimation of a Kitchinstuffe
enlarged, by marrying with a Courtier: for that the best will d^^^aine her
baseness, not so much for her birth, as her bringing up: yet, presuming on her
Husbands calling, Kytte will to kind.
in pride she will perch with the highest: which Sovereignty in the one, and
saucines in the other, separats pleasantness from their husbands, and quietness
both from themselves and their households: where, as if the Gentlewoman marry
with a Gentleman, and a Kitchinstuffe with a Cook: the one with duetifull
regard of her husband may hold her reputation, and the other shall not be
driven, to dissemble with their kind.

Well, let this suffice, to refell their suggestions, that think pleasantly to
spend their days, by marrying either their better or inferior.

Now, touching the general disposition of such women, as from the cart, are
raised unto this account: they will use the better sort with strangeness,
because they lack the order of honest courtesy to entertain them, and with
the basest will be familiar, because the rudenes of the one answers the
ignorance of the other: so that it is more requisite for him that is thus
married, to watch his wives going into the Stable, for fear of his horsekeeper,
then in her Parlor, to eye her behavior, in entertaining the Gallant.

Examine King Astolphus, what constancy he found in his three halpenie Iuell,
whom he had turned out of Sheeps russet, into Cloth of Silver: in such honors,
had no otherwise altered her manners, but that she thought the lips of a
Captain was as sweet as a Kings, and therefore in all her bravery, she fell
to her kind.

If this suffice not, hear the usage of Bianca Maria, The fall of Maria Bianca
is written by the Author in his book, entitled, the Rock of Regard.
daughter and only Heir of Giaccomos Scapardon, a notable Usurer of Baetta.
Biancas beauty made her sufficiently known, but her Fathers bags made her
wonderfully desired: so that both joined together, aduanst her from a shop
Maid, first, to be the wife of Vicount Hermes: after whose death, clyming up
to further honor, and declining in honesty, she esppused the Count of
Zeland. Long after the second Marriage, she dailyed not with her disposition,
which was rather in an open shop, to be courted with men, then in a secret
chamber to be accompanied with waiting women: so that following her immodest
fancy, with a few Prentices, she fled from her husband to Padua, where she set
up for herself: and thus she unworthily raised to be a Countess, wickedly,
and wilfully fell to be a Eourtesan.

Andrea Zeno, a Gentleman of Venice, was as fluttishly served with Via a Cooks
daughter, who upon her Marriage day, made an easy way for her husband, with no
better man, then a Carpenter.

If you covet more Authorities, to approve so common a mischief, read Ovid
Metamorphosis in Latin, Segnior Lodouicus Regesterin Italian. Amadis de Gaul
in French, Aucthorities for amorous Histories.
and the Palace of pleasure in English, where you shall find store of
Histories to the like purpose.

Sir (quoth Dondola) without offense, either to your person or your proofs
(for that the one I love, Defense.
and the other I allow) to confirm my opinion, I can likewise summon women as
base as these in birth, and as high as these in fortune, which with their good
behauiours gave a grace to their reputation Chaste Epethia, the well beloved
wife of Harmo Prince of Garthage, was a Sailors daughter. The virtuous
Virginia, espoused to Sextillius a worthy Senator of Rome, was a Laundres.
Both these were beautified with such singular virtues, as while they lived,
their honest lives instructed the greatest Lady, in points of honor: and being
dead, the remembrance of their worthiness is a special commendation to the
whole sex of women.

Sir (quoth Faliero) as the Proverb goes: Reproof, etc.
One or two Swallows proves not Summer: two or three may thrive by Dice, yet
is dycing ill husbandry: because for the enriching of a few, it beggereth
many: so, though two or three worthy Parsonages were well wiued out of worthles
parentages; a thousand, following the same course, have had a contrary fortune:
and where the knowledge of evil is more then the possibility of good: virtue
warrants not the venture: In war, the miraculous escape of two or three rash
persons, is no safeconduct, for every man to run upon the pikes: yet I grant
that in war, desperate men are needful, for the safety of the discreate, and
so are homely women necessaris for their service: but if you will use either to
your benefit, encourage the one with great pay, and the other with good wages:
for if you commit a charge to a harebraine Souldior, his temerity in one hour
will hinder more, then his years hazard did further. And as I have said, if
you make of your Kitchen-maide, a companion, her pride in one days liberty
will anoy more, then her seven years love will comfort.

Seeing the company begin to smile, I am satisfied quoth Dondolo.

But how? quoth Aluisa Vechio: do you repent you of your bargain, or disallow
of Falieros proofs?

Neither quoth Dondolo: For in general choice, this course is out of the way
to Platos Paradise: but for that my especial Fortune is good, I am pleased.

Yea, quoth Soranso, or if the contrary had happened, this might have comforted
you, that your wife should not have been the only blamed woman in the Parish,
nor you the sole unfortunate man.

Well, quoth Fabritio and Isabella: A confession is a pretty Judgment.
There needs no further judgment in this question, then Dondolos confession
and his yielding to Falieros proofs.

We have in this exercise taken three sundry ways, (quoth Queen Aurelia) and
yet never a one the right way to our Paradise: and now it is too late to travel
any further. Therefore we will refresh our spirits with a little Music, and so
adiourne our further controversies until to morrow: but as the Eunuche was a
tuning his voice, to have fulfilled his Ladies commandment, knowledge was
given of certain honorable Personages ariuall: by occasion whereof, the
company left their determination to furnish the great Chamber.

The witty device of Segnior Philoxenus, to give certain Comedians a Theme,
to present some pastime in action, the fifth night after Supper.
BY that time Supper was done, certain Commedians of Reuenna, presented their
service to Segnior Philoxenus, and his honorable company, who are not tied to
a written device, as our English Players are, but having certain grounds or
principles of their own will, Extempore, make a pleasant show of other men's
fantasies: so that to try the quicknes of the Gentlemen, and Gentlewomens
wits, to give the Comedians a theme, Segnior Philoxenus, demanded the
meaning of certain Questions.

Segnior Soranso, quoth he: what passion is that, that tormenteth a man most,
and has least power to overcome?

To think of a Woman's Inconstancy, quoth Soranso: 1. Inco^stancy.
which grieueth every man, and cannot be subdued by women themselves.

Madam Aurelia, (quoth Philoxenus:) What thing is that, which most delights,
and most deceives a Woman?

A man's dissimulation (quoth Queen Aurelia:) Which has such a sweet passage,
2. Dissimulation.
through his Tongue, as it delights like the Sirens Songs, and yet turns to
as deceitefull a conclusion, as the Crocadiles Tears.

This yet was but quid pro quo: so that neither one part nor the other was
displeased.

The modest laughter being ceased, Segnior Philoxenus demanded of Ismarito,
what was the cause of most Devotion? and yet the greatest replenisher of Hell.

Ignorance [quoth Soranso] which causes men to worship Stones, 3. Ignorance.
and dishonor God.

Madam Maria, what is that (quoth Seginor Philoxenus) that of men is least
esteemed, and of God most regarded?

Chastity [quoth Maria Belochy] which is precious before God, 4. Chastity.
and a laughing stock among men.

Doctor Mossenigo [quoth Segnior Philoxenus] among men who is the most cruel?

A Dycer [quoth the Doctor] for he teareth God inpeeces. 5. A Dicer.
This answer, was both true, and moved new laughter: although it were
propounded to discover the nature of the Envious, 6. Envy.
who murthereth the living, and the fame of the dead.

Madam Lucia [quoth Segnior Philoxenus] wherein does a man please a woman best,
and displease himself most?

The modest Gentlewoman began to blush, and with great difficulty resolved
this Question.

In the end, by the tongue of Aluisa Vechio (quoth she) in giving of her, 7.
Will.
her Will.

It is true (quoth the Doctor) for her delight is to govern, wherein her
discretion gives others cause to laugh, and her husband to hang the lyp.

Segnior Dondolo [quoth Segnior Philoxenus] what is the greatest friend to men
at liberty, and the most enemy to such as are condemned?

Hope [quoth Dondolo,] which incourageth men at liberty, to attempt great
matters, 8. Hope.
and makes such as are condemned, unprepared for death.

Madam Helena [quoth Seignior Philoxenus] what is that which wounds the
heart, and yet is worshipped of the eye?

Beauty, quoth Helena Dulce, for it pleases a man's eye, 9 Beauty.
and pearceth his heart.

Segnior Bargetto, quoth Segnior Philoxenus, What is that which owes most and
pays least, and of all evils is the worst.

Ingratitude: (quoth Bargetto) For that Monster receives good turns, and
pays vengeance. 10. Ingratitude


Madame Franceschina, (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) What is that, which in loving too
much, baneth with Hate?

Jealousy, (quoth Franceschina Sancta) which by overmuch loving raises
Suspicion: Suspicion moves Contention: 11. Jealousy.
and Contention turns to mortal hatred.

Segnior Faliero, I demand (quoth Philoxenus) who he is, that profits his
friends, but by death: is a Steward for other men: and makes his account
(only) with God?

A Covetous man, (quoth Faliero) who while he lives, is enemy unto himself,
12. Covetousness.
and therefore unlikely to be friend to others: also is but a Steward of his
goods he gathers, for he spares for others, and spends little or nothing
upon himself: and at the judgment day, before GOD, must make account of all
his deceit.

Madame Katharina, quoth Segnior Philoxenus: what is that, which is coldest
clad in Friese, and warmest tired in precious stones?

Pride, quoth Katharina Trista, which has no grace but in bravery.

Lovely guests, quoth Segnior Philoxenus, you have so lively diuined my meaning
in your sharp answers: as I expect wonders of your daily disputation.

Sir, quoth Fabritio, we hitherto have but exposed, and refelled errors.

If you have done so much (quoth Philoxenus) you have made a fair passage for
the glory of Truth, Virtue is commended by vice.
which by the refelling of Error, you shall find: for every virtue is
commended by his contrary. A Diamond seems the fayrer, for his foil. Black
best fetteth forth White: Good is most praised in the reprehension of evil:
and Truth in the highest degree is renowned by the refelling of error: and
therefore follow your purpose, the conclusion cannot but be profitable.

Here Segnior Philoxenus stopped his digression, and commanded the Comedians
to bethink themselves of some action, that should lively express the nature
of Inconstancy, Dissimulation, Ignorance, and the rest of the passions before
named: Which charge being given, while the Actors were attyring themselves for
the Stage, Queen Aurelia, and her attendants, took their places, with such
advantage, as every Gentleman had liberty to devise with his Mistress.

After the Comedians had put themselves in order, they patched a Comedy
together, and under the recited names, showed some matter of Morality, but a
great deal of mirth: who with their pastime, kept the company up so long, as
drowsy sleep, which delights in nothing but silence, arrested the greater
part of them, and carried them close prisoners unto their chambers.

MADONA AVRELIA, Her sixth days pleasures.
Containing many needful regardes for a Gentleman: with a discovery of the
inconveniences of Marriages, where there are great inequality of years.

THe cheerful Sun which comfort every earthly Creature, as the Lantern of
broad day, so enlightened every Chamber of Segnior Philoxenus Palace: as the
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, to be avenged of the injury of Night, (who being
the mother of confusion, had separated them from their companions of pleasure)
hastily rose and attyred themselves: and (like unto Partridges, that howsoever
they are severed, know (and retire unto) their meeting places) presented
themselves in the great Chamber. The offce of civil courtesy discharged, such
as were coupled, entertained Time, with the device of their especial fancies:
others, contemplated of their private affairs: and Ismarito among the rest, in
a quiet place, was reading in Peter Mesier his Cronicle of Memorable things:
The rare History of Tamberlaine the Great, Tamberlaine the great, in the
beginning a Pesaunt.
surnamed Flagellum Dei, where he much admired the virtues of the man, who of
alabouring Pesant, or (in the best degree) of a poor Soldier, by his virtues
and invincible valor, became a great Monarch: Yea, and while Tamberlaine
lived, was as much feared as Alexander. But Ismarito, more lamented, that so
mighty a Monarchy, erected by the Father, should end by the envy, and civil
dissension of the children.

Segnior Philoxenus (after he had given a Bongiorno, to the company, seeing
Ismarito, not chayned to a companyon, determined to give his solitariness, a
disgrace, by co^uersing with him, in some Gentlemanly Discourse: He is not
alone that has good Books.
but finding him accompanied with so sweet a companion, as Mesiers Cronicles,
Segnior Ismarito, (quoth he) you have deceived my imagination, which persuaded
me that you were solitary, and therefore bound me (in courtesy) to visit
you. But seeing the great personages, with whom you devise, I envy your happy
contemplation.

But your Envy (quoth Ismarito) is like that of Mutius Sceuola, desirous to
excel the better sort in virtue, as you exceed the Rakehell multitude in
courtesy.

This encounter, and a little other private talk ended, A most famous library
in the Dukes Palace at Florence, left by Cosmos de Medicis.
Segnior Philoxenus lead Ismarito into a fair Library, beautified with such a
number of goodly Books, of all Sciences, Laws, Customs, Gouerments, and
memorial Monuments, as well ancient as modern, as it came very near in
excellency, to ye famous Library of Cosmos de Medicis, in Florence: who
imitated in his Monument, Ptolemey, surnamed Philadelphus: who had ye seventy
interpreters of ye Jews to tra^state the sacred Bible, into ye Egyptian
language, and with great diligence, sought to have the several Copies of all
Books.

After Ismarito had well regarded the orderly sorting of of these Books, and
how by a short Calendar, a Man without great pain, might turn unto any hard
Question, in any Science, and have large resolutions, and had taken a note of
the title of certain Books that he had not seen, and yet necessary to be
read.

Segnior Philoxenus lead him into his own private study, It belongs to a
Gentleman to be severe in many things.
which was furnished with Summaries, or abridgements of all Sciences: which he
studied with such a judgment, as there was no Art, wherein he had not a
special knowledge which in argument he exposed, with so good a wit and
memory, as many times, he grounded Masters in that Science. And for that in
all his actions he was the true pattern for a Gentleman to imitate, in honor
of whom, and for the benefit of such Gentlemen, as will follow his example,
in virtue I am bound to set briefly down, the chiefest cause of his study.

First and principally, Divinity.
for the comfort both of his body and soul. In Theology, he read those
books, that cleared the mistes of Ignorance, and unmasked the deceipts of the
superstitious Monks, Friars, etc. And contemplated in the sweet comfort of
those Authors, that expounded the hard passages of the Scripture.

And for that Health is the most precious Iuell of the world, Physic.
knowing the Constitution of his own body, he studied so much in Physic, as
without the direction of Doctors, he knew what meat and Medicine agreed with
his nature.

To minister Justice unto the ignorant multitude, and to keep himself out of
the Forfeits of Law, Law.
he studied the civil Law, and specially, the Statutes of his Country: And
(questionless) the Gentleman, that is ignorant in the Laws of his Country,
is an enemy to himself, and a Cipher in the common weal.

In Military knowledge he was experienced, as well by service in the Field,
Art Military.
as in reading Vegetius and other Authors in his study. And some travel in this
Arteie needful, as well as commendable for a Gentleman: for it is not in ough
for him, to be Togatus, as a Roman Orator, nor Paliatus, as a Grecian
Philosopher: in that he must as well in the field look his enemy in the face,
as embrace his friend in the house: and therefore, though he bare a Pen in his
ear, to write his own commentaries, he is bound to wear a Sword by his
side, to do his Country service.

For Government and Civil behauiours, Morality.
he read Plutarches Morals: Gueuaraes Dial of Princes: the Courtier of Count
Baldazar, Castillio: and others. And (in truth) it is not so necessary, to be
well borne, as to be well quallited, and of good behavior: wherefore, the
study of Morality is very needful for a Gentleman.

He (likewise) studied Cosmographie, Cosmography
and had therein commendable knowledge: which study cannot but much please and
commend a brave minded Gentleman: For by the virtue thereof, he shall be in his
Study, able to suruaye the whole world: and with an agreeable discourse, shall
bound out a Stranger his own Country.

He was a good Historiographer, Historiographie.
and had read many rare Chronicles. How pleasing this study is to a Gentleman,
is lively expressed in his own nature, greedy of news. And where may he have
better intelligence, then Cronicles? in which quietly in his own Study, he
may receive knowledge of Acts done throughout the whole world.

He was a good Herald, and had read much in Armorie: Armorie.
an Art most needful for a Gentleman, in that it is the cognizance of
himself. And in my opinion, he that is not able to blason his own Arms, is
not worthy to bear them.

These Gentlemanly studies he used, intermedled with others of more pleasure,
which I had not leisure to regard, nor memory to bear away: but in all: is
actions, and behauiours, he exposed a Gentleman so perfect, as in regarding of
him, but one half year, Segnior Philoxenus a perfect Courner
a man might have noted down a Courtier, not inferior to that of Count
Baldezar.

By that time Segnior Philoxenus had sufficiently fed Ismaritoes eyes, with
this honorable favor: ye sound of the Trumpet gave knowledge of dinner, so ye
Ismarito was driven to leave that earthly Paradise, to attend honorable
Philoxenus into the great Chamber: against whose coming, the Table stood
furnished with many dainty dishes. And Queen Aurelia, and the rest of the
company were ready to salute him: which courtesy performed, she took her
appointed place, and the rest as they pleased.

Toward the latter end of this dinner, a mean fellow, guarded between two
Furies of the Kitchen, was brought coram nobis, for some petty pilfering in
the Scullerie.

Segnior Philoxenus referred his pain to the judgment of the Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen there present.

Some of the Gentlemen appointed him some pleasant pain in the office where
he did the trespass: some other of the Gentlewomen, overcome with a natural
pity, accepted his tears in satisfaction, Women are too pitiful to be Judges.
and so discharged him: But the Doctor more rougher then the rest, took him up
so short, as the poor fellow was driven to say, Sir, where you may help,
hurt not: The Doctor, to satisfy his request, and to keep his first
determination, A scoffer is many times smitten with his own weapon.
answered, To help to hang a Thief, is no hurt to the common weal, your
petition shall be signed. The rascal Thief hearing this severe judgment (as
the Italians are naturally quick witted) replied: If chief Magistrates should
set their hands to this Justice, There would be more Lawyers hanged for
stealing of houses, then Rogues for robbing of hedges. The answer of the
Doctor, and the reply of the poor fellow made the company so merry, that for
the pastime the trespasser had made them, they remitted the punishment of his
offense.

The laughter quieted: in the commendation of his countreymans capacity (quoth
Soranso) Master Doctor, this poor Snake, spoke true Italian.

Yea (quoth the Doctor) but he lackes the virtues of the ancient Romans:
Italians are wise, but evil conditioned.
covertly expressing thereby, that their wits were good, but their conditions
were evil.

Bargetto envying the favors Ismarito received, and for some private grudge,
Envy evermore quarelleth with those that are favored.
about crossing in argument, sought by some pleasant scoff, to raise an unkind
quarrel: and with that intent (quoth he) Segnior Ismarito, I drink unto you,
with a better affection, than I bare you in my sleep, for I dreamed, with my
Rapier drawn, I chased you to your Chamber.

Ismarito, quickly answered, Quarellers seek their own miscerefe.
I pleadge you (Segnior Bargetto) but with less fear then you supposed to be
in me when you were asleep: for men after they are awake, expound dreams by
contraries.

Bargetto deceived of his expectation, was driven by patience to salve the
wound he had given himself.

But Segnior Philoxenus, A wise foresight in a Gentleman.
to take away the cause of after kindness, reaued the company of leisure to
judge of Bargettoes quarelling dream, or of Ismaritoes cross exposition, by
keeping of them exercised with a new device.

Indeed (quoth he) Dreams are uncertain, and therefore not to be regarded,
but there is a true kind of divination in Palmestrie, and so in looking in
Maria Belochies hand, Palmestrie, a pretty idle quality for a Gentleman.
he used certain names of Art, and gave a voluntary pleasing Judgment:
which fiered all the Ladies and Gentlewomen, with an earnest desire to know
their fortune: and by this means, theremembrance of former questions was taken
away. Wherein Segnior Philoxenus wisdom may be a president for other Gentlemen
that hear quarrels a breeding, to smoulder them in the shell: for men that be
angry, A necessary note for a Gentleman.
are bound to their passion, when such as are not moved, have liberty to
pacify with discretion.

Thus, with their spirits well pleased, Queen Aurelia and the rest of the
company, rose from the Table, and after ordinary courtesy ended, they paused
a time by the Fire to put their wits in order, for the following disputation:
who at the ordinary hour entered the drawing Chamber, where the Eunuch ready
to discharge his duty, unto the Lute sung this following Sonet.

Regard my love, but not my frosty hayres,
Although fair Dame, the least may move content:
For Love, Faith, Zeal, stands firm in aged years,
When light green youth, is fickle in intent.
The aged knows the leaves and fruit of youth,
The leaves they leave, and with the fruit do love:
The sayings of old age, are indged truth,
Let love and truth, misliking then remove.
What though my chin be clothed all in white,
White in your cheeks, the chiefest color is:
Which fair dye does make you seem so bright,
As men hold you the source of beauties bliss.
Sweet Mistress then, of all the fair, the Flower,
Let not condemn, what does your self commend
Ruth seems your face, let rigor not devour,
His love, and life, that lives and dies your friend.
This Sonet, moved the company to smile, not because the invention was
vnwittie, but in that it was the fruits of Doctor Mossenigoes Muse, who to
revenge upon himself all the injury, which he had done to the sex of Women,
became enamoured of Katherina Trista, the waspishest Damosel among the whole
troop of Gentlewomen: But knowing the Doctors Philosophy, could not so subdue
his affection, but that time would make them all sport and him smarte, they
dissembled their knowledge of his folly, as deeply as he covered the passions
of his fancy: notwithstanding to raise some speech, and to set the Doctor a
work with hope:

Quoth Aluisa Vechio, this Sonet prophesies a happy life to a young woman,
and much comfort to an old man if their fortunes be so good as to be married
together. And if I had as good a passage for my opinion, as I have Reason to
maintain the same: I would think to prove this couple worthy of a place in
Platoes Paradise.

Among so many good Orators (quoth Queen Aurelia) you cannot want an advocate.

Whereupon Katharina Trista, with a false eye, coniured the Doctor in this
question, to maintain his Lone: who thus enjoined, took upon him to maintain
Aluisa Vechioes opinion.

Queen Aurelia licensed him, and no adversary appeared to discourage him:
whereupon (quoth he) where an old man marieth a young woman, the contentment
seems to be much, Defenses where an old man marieth a young woman.
and the comfort more: my reason is, the old man has not only chosen a wife,
to recreate him as a companion, but a Cook to prepare chosen meats for his
impaired appetite, and a Staff to sustain his Age. The young wife also may
hold her self happy in this fortune: for she has chosen one whom she may
not only rule, but command: and for a little pains, who will leave her
possessed of a great deal of living. And this is most certain, that cruel and
wild Creatures do most hurt, where their will is most resisted: and have great
compassion, where they find no proffer of repulse: The Lion in his greatest
hunger, hurts not the wounded Sheep: the Crocadile with tears washes the
blood from a murdered man, and the raging Sea refreshes the yielding Reed:
much more, a woman (that by nature is beautified with pity) if she rule
without check, will glory in the good usage of her Husband: and this is in
daily use, that the old man in assemblies, finds his young wife modest in her
speech, bashful in her looks, and nice in occasion of suspicion: and whether
this behavior proceeds of desire to be praised, or of fear to be blamed, I
conclude the cause with her commendation: for that to do well in hope of
praise, comes of the encouragement of virtue: and to do well for fear of
reprehension, is the sign of a good inclination.

By Saint Anne Sir (quoth Soranso,) you well deserve a Fee, (especially,
Reproof, etc.
of the young wife) in that you so cunningly have colored her oversight, and so
Clarkely have commended her good usage of her old Husband: but your Suggestion
tends to as small effect, as the Fortune is evil, of a couple thus unequally
matched: for that common reason will refute your weak opinion, and daily
experience records the miseries of the other.

What likelyhoode of continuance, has the House whose ground work is rotten,
although the prospect be beautiful and strong? God wot the feeblenes of the
Foundation will overthrow the firmness of the upper frame.

Compare this unequal estate in Marriage, with this oversight in building, and
you shall find the discord as great between the one, as the ruin and decay
speedy in the other. The good and able Government of the Husband, is the
foundation and ground work of Marriage, and the beauty of the Wife, the
blessing in having of Children, and the benefit of possessing livings are the
outward buildings of marriage: And as they are pleasant in the eye of the world,
even so they greatly please the minds of the married, and give a singular grace
to this honorable vocation. But, if the Government of the Husband be enabled
with age: (as in truth) Old Age is no other then a second Infancy:

In whose desire, direction, discretion, and delight, there are imperfections:
The beauty of the wife will be blasted with sorrow, for the insufficiency of
her Husband: evil Education will accurse their blessing in having of children:
and negligence will waste their benefits of living. You hold a young wife a
companion to recreate an old man, but he shall find her a corsiue that will
consume him to death. A young man concludes, the sweetest solace in love with
sighs: it is the^ like, an old man ends it with tears: And God he knows,
he often weepeth more of desire to please his wife, then of any devotion he
has to wantonness: yet is all his pains to a fruitless purpose, for that
the Game finisheth in his grief, and neither began nor ends in his wives
contentment.

You are too quick in advantage Segnior Soranso, Defense, etc.
(quoth the Doctor) old Wine though it be dead in the mouth, yet is it warm
in the Stomach, when the new fumes in the head, but comfort not the heart.
Dry wood makes a bright fire, where green bows consume half away in Fume
and Smoke.

The Sun rises watrishly, and is long before it gives heat, where, in the
afternoon it scorcheth the face: So a young man deuideth his love into a
hundredth affections, and every fancy pleased, there will but a little fall to
his wives share: where an old man's love is settled and his fancy is fixed upon
one: And as the recited examples, in age are in best heart: so to prove an old
man's sufficiency, there is a common Proverb: Graie hairs are nourished with
green thoughts.

Now, to content his young wife, she shall have no cause to suspect his Affection
abroad, and shall not lack to be beloved at home.

Moreover, which delights a young woman, (who naturally is ambitious) she shall
take her place, according to the gravity of her Husband, and not as her young
years requires.

And to conclude, to give her an honorable name, the most precious Iuell with
which a woman may be beautified, she shall receive grave directions from her
husband: and through the sweet delight she takes in hearing her good
gouerme^t commended, we will put them in execution.

Doctor Mossenigo replied not with this vehemency, for any delight he had to
commend this unequal estate in Marriage, but to flatter Katharina Trista with
an Ambitious hope of great reputation, in matching with his aged self: but she
(that knew a leg of a Lark, was better then the whole carcass of a Kite)
would none, God thank him.

And to make him horn wood (if he perseuered in his opinion) in Soransoes
behalf (quoth Bargetto his ancient crosser) Master Doctor, there is more
pride in your words, the^ substance in your proofs: your hearty old Wine must
be drawn out when it is broached, your dry wood is but a blaze, and your hot
Sun does but sweat for sorrow, that he is going to cowche in the dark Caves
of Tartessus. Reproof, etc.
But as touching old men, they may well be sufficient in green thoughts as
you term them, but I am assured that in deeds they are weak and withered, and
therefore a man cannot speak too much evil of this excess in dotage:
withered Flowers are more fit for a Dunghill, then meet to deck a house: old
rotten Trees are needful for the fire, but unnecessary to stand in an
Orchard: even so, old decayed creatures are comely in the Church, but
unseemly by a young woman's side.

The old man which marries a young Wife is sure of this sour sauce, to
relish his sweet imaginations: The mischances of an old man yo^gly married.
his beloved wife (howsoever she dissembleth) disdaineth him: his neighbors
all to beflouteth him, and soothing Parasites beguileth him: common opinion
will counterfeit him like Acteon, not so much for the fickleness they see in
his wife, as for the infirmities they know in himself. And breefely, to
conclude his joy: A young wife is death to an old man.
he may (perchance) live two years with his fair wife: but the mischaunce of
his Children, will remember his infamy, for ever: Green Iuy, which catches
an old Tree, makes quick work for the fire: and the imbracements of a fair
woman, hastneth an old man to his Grave. And although it be a heinous wrong,
causeless to condemn the wife: An honest woman is lightly slaundered by the
imperfections of her Husband.
yet this will be the opinion, she killed her Husband with thought, to hear
and see how she trespassed, both against his and her own honor.

Foul fall such a Marriage (quoth Maria Belochy) where the virtuous Wife shall
be slaundered, through the imperfections of her Husband.

It is some wrong (quoth Fabritio) but she might have foreseen the mischief,
Repentance to late.
while she was free.

Well (quoth Queen Aurelia) upon this knowledge of mischaunce, The wise are
warned by the mischances of others.
our company, are sufficiently warned. Proceed in judgment, as you allow
eithers opinion.

Whereupon, Fabritio with Isabella, with one accord, gave sentence against
Doctor Mossenigo, in these words, An old man amourous of a young woman, is an
enemy both to his health and reputation, for the causes aforesaid.

The rest of the company smyled to hear this judgment, but the Doctor brake
forth many a secret sigh, not for ye disgrace he took in his pleading (for he
defended an ill matter, with color sufficient) but in that he knew this
verdict would always be a bar in his suit.

While the Doctor and Soranso argued: Queen Aurelia espied in the Cloth of
Arras, A Rhinocerot.
a beast fourmed like an Unicorn, save that he bare his horn in his nose:
which beast sleeping, laid his murdering horn in a young Maidens lap: and
after the question was decided, she demanded what ye beast was? and what the
mystery signified: but the meaning was as strange as the sight, to most of the
company.

In the end (quoth Ismarito) Madame, The Metamorphose of Rinauius, a Gentleman
of Naples.
I have read of a gallant young Gentleman of Naples, named Rinautus, that was
Metamorphosed into such a Beast, by this adventure: passing through the Island
of Circeiu^ [that Homer speaks of] which is now annexed unto the Continent,
he was espied of Circes, who inhabited that Island. This wrinckled ill-fauoured
witch, at the first sight was surprised in love, with the goodly shape and
beauty of this seemly Gentleman, but for all her charms and inchauntments,
her art failed, either to force him to love, or to free her self from loving:
for, notwithstanding she was a Goddess, he disdained her ouerworne foul, and
withered visage, and she presuming of her sorcerie, powered fresh Coals upon her
kindled desire, in hope that necessity would force him to consent to the
request, free will contemned: but Cupid (to whom such power only belongs) to
scourge her presumption, in such sort hardened Rinautus heart, that all Circes
suit and sorceries tended unto a fruitless success. Insomuch, as in her rage
she turned him into a Rhinocerot, a beast of unconquerable force, who in his
nose bears a horn much like to the Unicorn: But notwithstanding he was thus
transfourmed (as King Nabuchadonizer, in the form of an Ox, retained the
spirit of a man) so he in his altered shape nourished his ancient disdain of
ill favored Circes, and to be fully avenged, with all his force pursues old
Creatures, and such as he ouertaketh he goreth to death, yet is he by this
policy subdued: Place a fair Maid in his walk, and forth with he will
with a loving countenance repair unto her, and in her bosom gently bestow
his murdering horn, and suddenly, (as one ravished with co^tentment) he
falls a sleep, by which means he is slain before he recouereth the use of
his force.

The company laughed well to hear this strange Metamorphosis.

In the end (quoth Queen Aurelia) I would Master Doctor had heard this
history, when he so inuayed against Beauty, perhaps he would have been
afraid of her vengeance, seeing her power able to conquer sauadge and wild
beasts.

But the Doctor glad of this advantage, Evil men care not for conscience, so
they have a color for their offenses.
not unlike the cunning Lawyer ye buyeth Robin hoodes penniworthes, and yet
with some nice forfeitures, threatens ye seller with continual bondage, and
many times brings back his money, and keeps his bargain, not caring for
his Conscience, so that he have a color for his offense: or as the wisest sort
of Atheists, that (live as though they hoped neither after Heaven, nor feared
Hell) yet confess God with their mouth, because the contrary would make them
hated of men: so he by this tale found out both a warrant to maintain his
former blasphemy, and to excuse his present folly in Love: And to authorize
either: Madame (quoth he) the inchaunted Beast approves mine opinion of
Beauties power, and his Death is a greater witness of her cruelty, then is
Doctor Mossenigo, The force of Beauty.
who confesses that men in vain prescribe remedies for the Affected, or
receites to preserve men from the infections of Beauty.

You are welcome under our Lee [quoth Aluisa Vechio.]

But to take away all hope of good intertainment, (quoth Catharina Trista) no,
No affliction, but has his remedy.
no, Master Doctor, you deceive your self: Beauty, neither retains the
power nor poison which you speak of, and with you, Ovid and all the amorous
Poets are mistaken: who say, Affection arises from Beauty, and not of the
free will of man. But say you all what you please, good foresight will contrary
your opinions. There is no sore, but has his salve: no grief, but has his
remedy: nor no danger, but may be forstoode, either by prayer or good endeavor.

Indeed (quoth Faliero) Socrates altered his inclination by study of
Philosophy: Examples to be regarded.
The Ninevites preserved their City by prayer: and Virbius doubled his life
by mastering of his disposition.

Floradin be witched with the love of fair Persida, Idleness nourishes, and
exercise remedieth love.
his dear friend Pericles Wife, worte in a Table book, fie Floradin, fie, she
is thy friend Pericles Wife: and so often as idleness presented him with this
passion, he read his written remembrance: and by some honest exercise, removed
his imagination.

This is not your day Master Doctor (quoth Soranso) I believe there is some
unkindness between Saturn and Venus, by the envious aspect of some other
Plannet this hour.

It may be (quoth the Doctor) by the flattery of Mercury, Flattery, the
enemy of truth.
who is evermore enemy to the plainenes of truth.

Well (quoth Queen Aurelia) let us leave this by-matter, and consider better
of Ismaritos Metamorphosis, me thinks it prophesies much mischaunce to an
old widow, which marieth a young man, and no great pleasure to ye young married
Bacheler.

Marriage commended between an old woman and a young man.
O good Madame, say not so (quoth Soranso) for in this fortune, lies a younger
Brothers welfare: and the cause that makes happiness accompany old women to
their Grave.

Reproof, etc.
It may well be to their Grave (quoth the Doctor) but it brings sorrow into
their House, and makes their life more impleasant then death: and if Soranso
follow this course, perhaps his day will be no better then Doctor Mossenigos.

Queen Aurelia smiling, said, she feared this contention would bring the
company to hell gates. Yet quoth she, in that I imagine the way will be
pleasant, I license you to persevere in your purpose.

Upon which warrant (quoth Soranso) to maintain that to be true, Defense, etc.
which I have already alleged in the commendation of this estate in Marriage.
This further reason (in my conceit) you will neither disallowe, nor the married
couple shall have cause to mislike: which is where a fresh young gentleman,
either of small living, or far spent with lustines, A good exchange of
Merchandise.
lights of a rich old widow, for that both their desires in this fortune
shall be satisfied. He shall have plenty of Coin, the only Grace he lacked, and
she the possession of a goodly Personage, the cheifest Jewel* she loves: which
exchange of Merchandise cannot choose but continue their liking, and raise much
contentment.

Clean contrary (quoth the Doctor) for ye follies of a young man is sufficiently
punished, by marying an old woman: and the sins of an old widdowe are fully
plagued, in matching with a young man: for that (contrary to your suggestion)
neither can inioye the cause of their Marriage, without annoyance to their
minds: for his liking is fastened on her riches, which she will not but by
necessity leave: and her love is settled on his person, which for her pleasure
he disdaineth to punish. The evils in an old widow.
The unfortunate yongman knows not what grief he ioynes to his gain, in
matching with an old widow, till that experience breaks them forth in
sighs: If his wife be rich, she will look to govern: if she be poor, he is
plagued both with beggerie and bondage: if she be proud, she will hide her
ability to maintain her pomp: if she be testie, he is forced to patience: if
she be ielous, he can hardly endure her rages. And to conclude, if the old
doting widdowe be free from one of these faults, she is tied to forty evils of
less sufferance: for if her Husband command her will, she straightwaies
says, her other Husband was more kind: if he chance to dine from home, she
wills him to sup with his harlots: if he spend beyond her allowance, thus she
reuiles him: A Beggar I found thee, and so thou will leave me.

To chastise her talk, sets an edge of her tung: to suffer her in her rage,
makes her railings irreuocable.

By your words, Master Doctor [quoth Lucia Bella] the wife is the greatest
cause of this contention, aad yet in common opinion, the Husband is most blamed.

Madame, you are too hasty in an advantage, I meant no such partiallity (quoth
the Doctor)

Yea Madame (quoth Bargetto) Master Doctor is now so conquered, as his tung is
the Trumpet of your pleasure.

It is so (quoth the Doctor) to sound out those things which are true: PLATOES
Hell in Marriage.
and in truth the young Husband often times makes the evils good in deeds,
which the old wife uses but in words: for no longer then she feeds him with
Coin, shall she enjoy his company: if she rob not her Children to enrich him,
she shall lack no froward looks, nor foul usage: if she put him in possession
of her living, he straightwaies dispossesseth her of his love, for having what
he sought, he will else where be enamoured. And uprightly to speak, she lacks
neither occasion to lament, nor cause to be enraged: for who is so patient, as
can dissemble her insufferable passions? both to be spoiled of her living, and
to be eryled from that she loves. And in very truth, so egall are their
evils, as it were a hard matter to judge, who deserves least blame, or most
excuse: she reproacheth him of Beggerie, whoredom, Unthriftiness, ill usage:
and of the ruin both of berselfe and her Children. He blames her of old age,
ielosie, curstness, scowlding: and for hiding of her goods, which he has
bought, with doing injury unto his person. If she be determined to be merry,
he (scornfully) tells her, that it is as sightly, for a toothelesse Mare to
eat Marchpane, as for such a wrinckled Mumpes to fall a bylling. If he come in
well disposed, and affably entreats her, she calls him dissembling
hipocrite, and says, he saluteth her with his tongue, but his heart imagines
of his minions abroad: she runs to the neighbors to complain: in the
mean while he sends her corn to the Market, and her cattle to the Fair.
If the friends of good will, or neighbors of charity, labor to accord their
contention (as she imagines to shame him) she thundreth out a thousand
injuries that he does her: for her own praise, she says, that of pure love
she married him with nothing: and to reproach him, she swears, he has spent
her substance, and hates her person: To show her own good huswiferie, she
tells that she works all day at her Distaffe: and to blase his unthriftiness,
she she weth how he plaieth away her gains at Dice: she cries out, that
(perforce) he takes what he openly finds, and privily steals what she
secretly hides.

These, and many more complaints, she prefers against her husband, with the
vehemency of a woman's passion.

Her husband, that knows how to be revenged in deeds, (for his own credit)
is more mild in words: he lays all these blames upon her own crooked
disposition: who though she be so old, as a man can hardly love her, yet with
a cankred ielous froward nature, she would force a man to hate her: but what
remedy, since his fortune was so hard? he would starve her with patience: and
only add this S^^^age to his L^ta^^^: A praua muliere, good Lord, (...).

These dr^e scoffs sets her heart in a light fire, and (save that she has not
so many colors like) unto Iris, thundreth out the venom of her cankred Spirit
in reuilings, and raylings against her husband: and (to say truth) her case is
to be pitied, as much as her tongue is to be blamed: for iniutie is not so
grievous unto (...), as to sie his adversary soothe his trespass with an
honest ^ho^.

But to my purpose, A great cause of impatience.
her husband crosses her with a quiet answer: you may see friends, says he,
wild fire will burn in water, drink will make the Dropsy dry, and mildnes
in me, moves madness in my wife: by her example here you see my life at home,
as tedious as hell: then (perhaps) some ^lou^ing Merchant says: like enough,
and the she devil wears the hours.

Thus with their own mischiefs, they grieve their friends, delight their
foes, and weary their Neighbors, in according their debates: and if they be in
the morning quieted, and go home: in peace, at Noone like enemies they are
ready to throw the house out at the window: a slut like the fury of
lothsomnes, shall bring in dinner, because the ielous wife, dare not trust her
husband with any maid that is hansome: the husband offended; throws the
Platters at her head, and asks if she mean to p^yson him: the wife takes
pepper in the nose, and says, if he had not married her, he would have been
glad of the worst morsel there.

The husband replieth, that if he had not been so mad, the devil would not
have married her.

Then begins the old Music, tu^ed perchance with a rap or two of the
lips, and when they have brawled their fill, she runs and bemoneth her
self at her neighbors, and he goes and makes himself merry with his
Mistresses.

In sooth, Defense, etc.
master Doctor, it feemeth to me (quoth Sir Soranso) that you have very
substancially proved my opinion: for Marriage equally deuideth her blessings,
and mischances, between the married: and as far as I can see, neither of
these knows, who has the better or worse bargen: there are raylings and
unquietness of both sides but what of that, pleasure is best seasoned with
pain: and though they sometimes jar at home, they agree well when they are
separated among their neighbors. And although you have stretched their
debates, upon the rack of vengeance: yet at adventure, I wish my self no worse
bestowed, then murie an old wealthy Widow, I do not think, but by good
usage, to continue her first affection given, even unto dir very Grave.

You will kill her with kindness, (quoth Maria Belochie.)

Yea, Madam, (quoth Soranso) if her nature be so froward, as to die with good
usage.

In deed Ladies quoth the Doctor, there are some men, that entertain their
old wives, with such a fair show of flattering love, as they be witch them
even to their latter gasps. But at what rate does she purchase this
kindness? O even with the undoing of her self and Children: yea, A most
wicked policy.
and which is worse, it is the pollitie of Father in laws, to dandle the
infancy of their wives Children, in the lap of ignorance, to this end, that
being of lawful age, they may with less fetches boguile them of their living:
so that the unfortunate child knows not whether he may more bemone his loss
of living, or lack of good bringing up: Senecas opinion that children were
better to be dead borne then ignorant of good letters.
and in my judgment, of both the evils, want of education is the greatest: for
learning and virtue purchases living, and living corrupts, but coyneth not
good conditions: and as Seneca says, liberty without learning is a bondage to
the mind: and further, the Child were better to be dead borne, then barren of
good Letters, for that ignorance is a grave which burieth life.

Master Doctor (quoth Queen Aurelia.) me thinks your words do too much
wrong to the wife, though they cannot sufficiently blame the husband. I grant
that father in laws esteem their own profits, before their wives childrens
preferments: but yet (I suppose) Nature does direct the natural Mother, to
eye their good bringing up, Things that are best esteemed.
who with much sorrow brought them foo^th: for as the Proverb geeth) things
that are dearly bought, are of us entirely beloved, and nothing is more
dearly purchased, then what is attained with the hazard of life, which venture
the Mother makes, before she is assured of her Child: then this cruelty to
wards her Children, to satisfy the will of her second husband, will make
indifferent men hold her an unnatural Mother, whether her husband esteem her
a dutiful wife or no.

Oh good Madam, Reproose, etc.
quoth the Doctor, how can the hen succor her Chickens, when she her self is
at the mercy of the Kite? how can the Conny preserve her Rabets, when the
Ferret is in possession of her Burrowe? and how may the unfortunate Mother,
Foster her shiftlesse Children, either as she should or would, when her fancy
or folly has enthralled her to a second husband, whose power is to direct, and
displeased, to check? This severity of Father in laws, has bred much
division in marriage: but still the quarrels are concluded, with the detriment of
the Children: for the unhappy wife, is bound to one of these two evils, either
to agree to the tyrannizing of her entrails, A hard extremity.
or to yield to her own continual sorrow and quietness: and where the case
is so desperate, it may be lamented, but not wondered at, that necessity break
the bounds of nature.

To stay this mischief (quoth Helena Dulce) honorable is the custom of
Spain, An honorable custom of Spain.
where the virtuous dame holds the second marriage, a retrograding of her
reputation, and a wrong to her deceased husband: for by this staidness, she
is in possession of her liberty, and has the disposing of her living.

I hold this precise custom (quoth Dondolo) more profitable then necessary:
for the penance were too hard, yea, impossible to be endured, that the lusty
young Widow, should be constrained to a Virgins chastity, for as Ovid
deuineth: I that sometimes of Nuptial rites,
Have taste the pleasant toys:
Now cannot choose, but call to mind,
Dame Venus sugared joys.


But if the aged widow, could live within this law, it would bring honor to
her years, and happiness to the end of her life. What better husbands may
she have, then her own Children, whom she may both command and control,
Meet husbands for aged widdowe.
whose duties are to labor in her causes, and to unburden her heart of cares?
And when she departs this life, where may she better dispose her living,
then upon her own Children, whom to relieve, she is coniured by nature, and
to bring up in good nurture, bound in conscience: But from the beginning so
rife has been the dotage of widows, that when their feeble legs faintely
supporte their consumed bodies, when at high noone, their mistie eyes hardly
discerns the high way, and when (forced) through lack of teeth, they swallowe
their meat, their lips notwithstanding, take delight in kisses, and their
minds thirst after wantonness.

Men's follies are as great as Women's simplicities, in this oversight in dotage
(quoth Queen Aurelia) but I think it necessary, that here we stay our
journey, least we enter into hell before we be a ware: and therefore Segnior
Fabritio, I pray you let us have your sentence, to ouerrule this question.

Madam (quoth Fabritio) the evil of this inequallitie in Marriage, is both so
ancient and so common in use, Experience is a judgment it self.
as there needs no other judgment, then experience of our neighbors
mischaunces, but to succor the injured Children, A worthy law, made by
Laertius.
I would that one of Laertius laws were common to the whole world: which is,
where the Tenant sued his Lord, Servant his Master, or the Child his Parents,
that Judges themselves, should forth with look into the Process, and
determine the same, for it is vehemently to be supposed, that these suits are
forced upon vehement injuries, otherwise the Servant would fear to sue his
Master, who has power moderately to chasten him: the Tenant would quake to
unquiet his Lord, who has many means to cross him, and without whose grace
he may never live in peace. Shame and duty (in any sufferable matter) would
make the child forbear to molest his Parents, for (but where his cause is
known) Report like a two edged Knife, would (besides his injury) wound him
with blame, and omission of duty. Therefore, where the least of two dangerous
evils, foreeth the above said to sue, it is much to be lamented, that delay,
countenance of friends, corruption with bribes, and other supporters, which the
rich has, should torment the poor complainant, more then his original
injury.

Your reason is but just, quoth Queen Aurelia, and the rest of the company:
who weary with the multitude of the recited mischances, here broke off the
disputation, and went and reposed themselves in the great Chamber.

The speech which passed the sixth night at Supper, between Segnior
Philoxenus, and his Honorable Guestes.
ACcording to the order of Merchaunts, who at the latter enoe of the year,
survey their accountes, to see what fortune and mischaunce they have received
through the whole year past. Segnior Philoxenus (toward the latter end of
Supper) smilinglie demanded an account of the benefit of the chosen companies
six days Disputation.

Sir (quoth Soranso, It is no striving against the stream.
with a modest merry countenance) we are like to present you a Banckrupts
reckoning, who the longer he occupies, the worse he thriueth: so we these
six days, have travailed to find out a way, to the Paradise in marriage, and
every day we have been further and further off, of our determination, one day
we thought that the wealthy matches of Parents would have speeded our journey,
but there, lack of love in the Children, cast us behind hand: another day, we
imagined that free choice in the children, would have directed us to happiness
in marriage: but want of maintenance and frowardnes in the parents, marred this
match. In lofty love we found danger: in base love lothesomnesse and
inconstancy: and where there is inequality of years, fume and smoke of hell:
so that now we shall be driven to renounce our profession: and run away with
the Banckrout, least (if he stay, as he is chopped up in prison) so we, if we
proceed any further be drowned in the river Stix.

If you frauaile with as much pleasure, as you report your adventures with
ease, quoth Segnior Philoxenus, I wonder but a little though error carried you
to hell gates: but to encourage you to persevere in your first purpose, let this
comfort you: that things when they are at the worst, begin again to amend. The
Fever gives place to health, when he has brought the pacient to deaths
door. The Be, when he has left his sting in your hand without danger may play
with your eye lidde: so, when all the inconveniences of marriage, are in your
ears, you may very well receive her into your heart: The thriuing unthrift
proves the best husband.
and to conclude your benefit with your own example, there is no such husband
as the unthrift, when he fasteneth upon the world: for in spending of other
men's goods he learned how to spare his own, when he gets them: so in the
pleasant beating out of these inconveniences, you know what makes marriage
bitter, and the grief known, the remedy is easy.

With your favor, Sir, quoth Dondolo, to be sick is common to all men, but
to restore to health, under God, is the office of the Physician: so we all
know by our own travail, the infirmities of marriage, but to find out the
blessings, must proceed from your sound directions: which favor to obtain we
are all earnest suitors.

Your request is so just, quoth Segnior Philoxenus, that if I were able (as I
am not) to better your judgments, I would not be dainty in this pleasure: but
for that the more the opinions are, in the end, the more profound the sentence
is: I will too morrow (in part, to satisfy your demand) join with you in
your ordinary sweet exercise. Perchance you have ended all the inconveniences
in the old year, and I may begin the new year, in helping to bloome the
blessings of marriage.

Queen Aurelia and the rest of the company, affectionately thanked Segnior
Philoxenus for this high favor: and so rose from the Table, who after a little
pausing, dansing and devising, at their pleasures, went unto their lodgings.

MADONA AVRELIA, Her seventh days pleasures.
Containing a Discourse of the excellency of Marriage: with many sound Laws
and directions, to continue love between the married: with the rare History
of Pyrigeus and Pieria, reported by Segnior Philoxenus: and other good notes of
regard.

LIke as when the royal Army, lies encamped before a Town of war, the
sound of Trumpets, noise of Drums, and neying of Horses, does awake the
Soldiers and Citizens, before Aurora be willing to leave the sweet
embracements of her husband Tithon: so, even with the departure of the day
star, in honor of the New year, the Trumpets, Drums and Flutes, sounded
through every small passage, into the lodgings of Segnior Philoxenus Palace,
such shril salutations, as the company envying the confusion of night, broad
waking, attended the mornings light, to apparel themselves: who in their most
brave and sumptuous array, by nine of the clock, made the great Chamber resemble
a fair Garden in May. In the imbroderies of whose Garments, Flowers and
fancies, were so naturally and artificially wrought: some of Pearl, some of
gold, some of Bugle, every one according to their own humor: moreover, every
Gentleman's head was armed with his mistresses favor, and every Gentlewomans
heart, was warmed with her servants affection.

In the most sovereign place of the great Chamber, Ianus, God of Time (as the
Poets feign) was hung up in the likeness of a Serpent, winding his body into a
circle and holding his tail in his mouth, The year ends and begins in
(...) self.
expressing under this figure his revolution, who through his continual motions
inuironing and compassing the world, retourneth into himself, and ends and
begins in himself: and in joyful token of the new year, he was garnished
with many sweet flowers, garlandes and devices: some artificial lively
counterfeited. Segnior Philox. although he hated superstitions ceremonies, and
shund them, yet he honored ancient laudable customs, Ancient ^ustomes are to
be kept.
and kept them: who according to the custom of the country, presented every
one of his guestes with a rich new years gift, which explayned some moral
virtue. The virtues of the mind are more glorious then any outward garment.
Custom in Italy in giving of new years gifts, contrary to the custom of
England. The original of new years gistes.
Among the rest he gave his sister Queen Aurelia, a fair plain tablet, which
opened, represented the picture of a fair Lady, garnished with many precious
stones: covertly expressing thereby, that gorgious apparel was but base and
counterfeit, in respect of the brave virtues of the mind. This order the
Italians use, the best gives new years gifts to his inferior friends, and
in England clean contrary: the tenant gives his Lord, the mean Gentlemen to
Knights, Knights to Barons, Barons to Earls, Earls to Marquesses, and Dukes
to their sovereign Prince. But it seems the Englishmen, observe this custom
more near the original then the Italians: for the founders thereof were the
ancient Romans, who bound their Knights the first day of January, in the
Capitol, to present their new years gifts, to Caesar Augustus, were he
absent, or present: but so many countries, so many customs. And (to my
purpose) Segnior Philoxenus, thus bountifully solemnized the use of his own
Country. This memorable courtesy performed, Segnior Philoxenus, with some of
the grauer company, went before unto the Chapel, and Queen Aurelia and her
attendants, followed with such a glittering show, as the Priests needed no
other Tapers to see to say service by, then the glimmering reflections of the
Gentlewomens eyes, and the precious stones they wore in their Jewels: and in my
opinion, God was better pleased, and more honored with the bravery of the
company, then with the babbling and ceremonies of the Priest: who in the honor
of the New year, sets forth his relikes to the best show: By that time Service
was ended, and the company returned: the Tables were furnished with many
dainty dishes, to wreake her hunger of some few whereof, Queen Aurelia took
her Royal place, and the rest of the company, as they pleased. This Dinner was
spent in discourse of certain ceremonies and old rites used in times past, in
the celebrating of God Ianus feast, too tedious, and (withal) impertinent for
this discourse.

When dinner and a little other pausing talk was ended, the company arose: and
Queen Aurelia with the reverent Salutations of the whole troop, retired into
her own Chamber, till the hour of Disputation sounded.

About which time, she, with Segnior Philoxenus, and the rest of her
Attendants, entered into a most delicate Banqueting house, Segnior Philoxenus
banqueting house
where, upon the walls, in so good order, and representation of Nature, were
painted al manner of fruits, Flowers, Vines, Arbors, and causes of pleasure,
either in Orcharde or Garden: as a man (without blushing) might have adventured
to gather upon the bare Walls, a Pomegranate, a cluster of Grapes, a
Gilliflower; or such like: had not the dead of Winter reaued the likelihoode,
that they should be perfect.

After Queen Aurelia, and the rest of the company, had taken their places, in
this earthly Paradise: Segnior Philoxenus (secretly) willed the Eunuch to
chaunt out the praises of Hymen: who obeying this Charge, tuned his Lute, and
to asweete Note, sung this following Sonet.

EVen as the Vine, that claspes the tender Elm,
Among green leaves, his purpled Grapes does bear,
When (wanting props) himself does ouerwhelme,
And for the fire his Branches does prepare.
So two in one, with Hymen's rites fast bound,
Of their sweet love, live always in the seed:
When death, or time, the single does confound,
Which ruin of fame, the barren thought does breed,
Sweet Hymen then, thy Godhead I adore,
And bow my self, by thee to be controlde:
In folded arms, my Spouse my eyes before,
Yields more content, then Diamonds, Pearl, and Gold.
In quiet home, unchecked, to rule and live,
What life more sweet? what hearts ease like to this?
Or through mischance, my mind when care does grieve,
What Medicine is better then a kiss?
At unawares, given by a loving wife,
O none, nor state, like to the married life.
This Sonet ended and well considered; Among the just, promise is kept.
Sir (quoth Queen Aurelia to Segnior Philoxenus) to be reuonged of the injury
of our former disputations, who have painted Marriage with a thousand
inconveniences, I beseech you, and bind you by your promise to blazon the
blessings and excellency of this sacred institution: that she who is divine,
To praise or blame, is a qua litie of wit, but to direct is a work of judgment.
may have her due praises, and we that are ignorant, may know how to receive
her benefits, and with the same to honor her.

Madame (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) you charge me beyond my promise, and bind
me to an impossibility: I promised but to join with this quick witted company
in opinion, which I am ready to accomplish.

To blaze the excellency of Marriage, is a work of no great difficulty,
because her virtues illustreth the same through the whole world, but to direct
the married is a labor of Art, wit, and experience: in the first whereof I am
ignorant, in the second vnpersect, and to the third a stranger: so that as I
am sorry to iniure your expectation, so am I loath to expose my iusufficient
judgment.

Sir (quoth Queen Aurelia) if we were not assured of a liberal contentment, in
contemplating of your weighty censure, We have in terest in another man's
virtues.
we would receive your modest refusal, for just excuse. But for that we have
all an interest in your virtues, and you should be enemy to your own honorable
commendation in keeping of them close prisoners in your breast (although you be
Lord of the Palace) yet I, Princes commandments must be obeyed
as Souer aigne of the Civil Pleasures, command you to give ceremonies a
disgrace, and sincerely to obey my will.

Madame (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) so strickt is your charge, Of the
excellency of Marriage.
as I must adventure of this weighty labor, hoping, that as by authority you
command my opinion, so by the motion of some one of your virtues, you will
pardon my errors.

Upon which encouragement, to obey your will, I say, and approve by sacred
authority, that this holy institution of Marriage was erected by God, Marriage
instituted before the fall of Adam, by God in the carthly Paradise.
in the earthly Paradise, before the transgression of Adam, when he joined him
to Eve, with these words of blessing, Increase, multiply, and replenish the
earth. Again, after Adams fall, and the deluge: to streng then his first
institution, God commanded the good Patriarch Noah, to in crease and multiply
the earth anew. Moreover, God would have no more women then men, A confirmation
of the first institution by God.
in his Arc, to show there should be a Sympathy in number, as well as a
greement in love between man and wife: for if the one might lawfully have many
Wives, and the other many Husbands: How should this express commandment of
God be unviolated? You shall be two bodies in one flesh, Man and wife are two
bodies and but one flesh.
and no more.

Compare the joy, honor, and reverence, given unto Marriage, by the delight
that proceeds from any other cause, and you shall see her gleame like a
blazing Comet, The joy of marriage shines above all other delights.
and the other but twinckle as an ordinary star.

Gorgeous and rich apparel delights the Gazers eye: and (perhaps) offends
the wearers heart: where Marriage in homely attire is every where honored, and
reaueth unquiet wandering thoughts, Children are the mostrich Iuels in the
world.
from the Married: to abound in riches, is a glorious fortune, but they charge
men with a double care, extreme in the getting, and fearful in the keeping:
the Married have as great, or greater riches in their Children.

When the stately Dames of Rome bragged of their Iuels, Cornelia boasted that
hers excelled them all. A Lady of the company, seeing her set forth with none
that was precious, demanded where her Iuels were? Yonder quoth Cornelia, and
poynted to her children.

When certain most rare and precious Jewels, This Ioell was her son
Alexander.
of King Darius, and his wives, were presented to Olympia, mother of Alexander
the Great, she bestowed them upon her Ladies, as too low prised for her
wearing, who was continually adorned with a Jewel, in value, as rich as Asia,
Affryca, The blessing of Children is a double life
and Europa. And sure Queen Olympia, and Lady Cornelia, gloried not in their
Jewels, without reason: for gold, and precious stones, set but a gloss upon
beauty, when virtuous children give a new life unto their parents.

The administration of Justice, and authority, Offices of Justice appertain to
the married.
in a common weal, are the proper offices of the married: for that the care of
wife and children, presupposes them to be settled: when the vninaried, though
their wits be good, The sweet Sympathy between the married.
rayseth a suspicion in the wise, that their thoughts are vagrant. The unmarried
has no agreeable companion to participate of his pleasure, or to lessen his
sorrow. The Married has a companion of his own flesh, of his own will, and of
his own Spirit, so wrought to his own affection, that between them there is
seen two bodies, and but one thought perceived: The Married joy alike, sorrow
alike: are of one substance, one concord, Love to our Parents, reverent
one wealth, one poverty, companions at one Board, and in one Bed. The love we
bear unto our Parents, Love to our brethren, natural.
is (or ought to be) reverent and dutiful, because they gave us life: unto our
Brethren, natural, because of the priuitie in blood: to our friends,
affectionate, by certain motions and consents of the mind. Notwithstanding,
Love to our friends affectionated.
that these Loves be thus great, yet are there diverse causes to lessen them.

But bet ween the married, no mischance, or infirm fortune, is cause
sufficient of hatred: for none governed by reason, Love between the married
irrcuocable.
is so inhumane, as to malice his own flesh: Compare their several affections
by sorrow, and you shall see the weakness of the one, in regard of the
strength of the other. The greatest moan we make for the death of our Father,
Brether, A good mean to try the love of the married.
or Friend, appears in sighs, or (most vehement) in tears: whereas if we
our selves are but a little wounded, we cry outright: so that by how much we
exceed in sorrowing our own mischances, The ring a trial of the love between
the married.
above another man's: by the same reason, so much we love our selves more than
another. The King that is given by the husband, and put on the wives finger,
ought to be of gold, to witness, that as gold is the most precious of Metals,
so the love of the married exceeds all other loves.

To which effect, Another figure of the ring.
Propertius says, Omnis amor magnus, sed aperto in coniuge mayor: Moreover,
the close joining of the ring, is a figure of true unity of the married:
between whom there should be no division in desire, nor difference in
behavior. Christ was borne of a married woman.
To honor this holy iustitution of God, God would have his only begotten
son, to be borne of a wife, perfectly married, save that she was not carnally
soyled.

Licurgus the good King of the Lacedemonias, Licurgus law for the unmarried.
so reverenced this sacred estate, as he made a Law, that what Lacedemonian
soever were unmarried, after the age of thirty and eight years, should be
chased and hissed out of all public plays and assemblies, as one unworthy to
be seen: and that in the cold winter, he should (naked) endure the reproaches
of the people: and withal, was bound to confess, how he justly suffered that
punishment, as a Mispriser of Religion, a contemner of Laws, and an enemy to
nature. The Romans were not so severe: The Law of the Romans, for the
unmarried.
but yet the aged unmarried, were condemned (according to their ability) to pay
unto the Treasurer, for public use, a good sum of money.

Plato in his Laws enacted, that the unmarried should execute, Platoes laws
for the unmarried.
no honorable Office, Estate, nor dignity in the common wealth.

The good Emperor Alexander Scuerus, although he married rather to give end to
his mother Mammeas importunities: then (as he thought) to begin a more happy
life: yet fair Memmia, his wife, so naturally accorded with his disposition,
as when she died he would often renew his sorrow, and remember her virtues in
these words. Alecander Scuerus love to Memmia his wife.
So great a Treasure as I have lost, a man seldom finds: Death were gentle
if he took nothing but that which offends: but, oh, he has reaued the
better part of my self.

How wonderfully was the love of Paulina, sage Senecaes wife, who opened her
Veins, not only, Paulinaes rare love to her Husband Seneea.
with an intent to accompany him to death, but also with a desire to feel her
husbands manner of death.

Quintus Curtius recites, that King Darius, with an vnapauled Spirit, The
precious love of king Darius to his wife.
took his overthrows by Alexander the Great, the ruin of his kingdom, and
the danger of his Royal person: But having knowledge of his wives death, he
wept bitterly, showing by this sorrow, that he loved his Queen far above his
Crown.

King Admetus, being fore sick, received this answer from the Oracle: that if
he lived, his best friend must dye: The divine love of king Admetus wife.
which when the good Queen heard, she presently slew her self, and in the
trembling passage of death, censtantly said: To give King Admetus life, his
Queen and dearest friend does dye.

Tiberius Graccus finding two Serpents in his chamber, The exceeding love of
Tiberius Graccus toward his wife.
went to the Augurs to know what they diuined? Who answered, that he was bound
to kill the one of these two Serpents: if he slew the male he should die
himself: if he killed the female he should lose his wife: who (murderer of
himself) slew the male, and saved his wife: and so by his rare love, raised a
question, whether his wife were more fortunate in having such a husband, The
wonderful love of Queen Artimesia, toward her husband Mausolus.
or unhappy in loosing of him? One of the seven wonders of the world is an
eternal testimony of the love which Queen Artimesia bare to her husband
Mausolus, who for to engraue his dead Coarse, erected a Sepulcher, so royal
and sumptuous, as took away the glory of all Princely Toombes before her time,
and left no possibility for any (in time to come) to excel the same: One of
the seven wonders of the woilde.
but holding this too base a mansion for his kingly heart, she dried the same
to powder, and spicing her wine therewith, she buried it in her own bowels: and
to crown his fame with an everlasting memory, for that yt ruin of his
Sepulcher was subject to the injury of time, with great rewards she encouraged
Theopompus, Theodectes, Naucrites, and Isocrates, four of the most famous
Orators of Greece, to renown his virtues. Among whom, Aul. Gel. in lib. de
nocti. aiti.
Theopompus (as we read) received the triumph of victory in that learned
skirmish.

I could report many other authorities of inseperable Love between the
Married: the least of a hundred whereof, would equal the friendships of Titus
and Gisippus: or of Damon and Pithias, the two wonders of men's affections. But
for that I know the able wits here present, can cloth my naked proofs of the
excellency of Marriage, and of the divine Love between the married, with many
other sound reasons, I will give place Madame, that you, and the rest of your
Ingenious company, may do better service to the one, and Justice to the other,
desiring that, that which is said, may discharge my promise, though not
satisfy your expectation.

Sir (quoth Queen Aurelia) if you give us good laws to preserve Love among
the married, as you have with precious authorities set forth the excellency of
marriage, and the divine operations of her blessings, with a full performance of
your promise, you shall bind us all to be your Debtors.

Madame (quoth Philoxenus) you set me to a very hard task: the Rose, is
Hostess, as well for the Butterfly as the Be: the Sun shines, both upon
the good and bad: yea, Christ himself, was (as well) Master to a Thief, as to
a true Disciple: Even so divine Marriage, cannot have but some Deuilish
Subjects, whom Examples will not fear: much less, may Laws keep in unity.

I grant (quoth Queen Aurelia) the evil are fearelesse of the Law, until
they be scourged with the vengeance thereof: The Law is a scourge to the evil,
and comfort to the good.
but the good embrace Laws, as their Directors in Virtue, and defenders from
danger: for whose benefit, I entreat you now, with as large a power, as I
lately commanded you: that (in this behalf) you will commit some counsailing
Laws, to our attentive memories.

Madame (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) to show that your Virtues have as great
power to command me, as your authority to enjoin me: I will set down my
own imaginations, to preserve (and multiply) Love, peace, wealth, and Joy,
among the Married: leaving the same to be perfected, by the hearers better
judgments.

Household Laws, to keep the Married in Love, Peace, and Amity: Reported by
Segnior Philoxenus.
THe satisfaction of fancy, is the sowrce of joy in Marriage: But, there be
many means to damme up the course of delight, between the Married, if the
match be not made, as well by foresight, as free choice.

The Office of forsight, is to prevent following mischa^ces: Marriage consists
as well in foresight, as free choice.
and (advisedly to consider) if present ability, will support an Household, and
(according to their calling) leave a portion to their posterity.

In this point, the experience of the Parents, is to be preferred before the
rash imaginations of the son: for the aged Married by proof know, that in
time many accidents of mischance, will hinder the endeavors of the best
husbands.

The office of Foresight, is like wise to considrr, Equality in years.
of the equality in years, least the one growing, and the other declining in
perfection, after a while repent when remedy comes too late: the Rose full
blown, seems fair for a time, but withers much sooner then the tender Bud.

It is the office of foresight, Equality in manners.
to consider of the equality of bringing up, least a diversity in manners
between the married, make a division of desires: for Spanielles and Curres,
hardly live together without snarling.

And it is the office of foresight, Consent in religion.
to see that there be a consent in Religion between the married, for if their
love be not grafted in their souls, it is like their Marriage will be infirmed,
with the defects of the body.

The office of free choice, is the root or foundation of Marriage, Free choice
in satisfaction of Fancy.
which consists only in the satisfaction of fancy: for where the fancy is
not pleased, all the perfections of the world cannot force love, and where the
fancy delights, many defects are perfected, or tolerated among the married.

When marriage is selemnized, there are many things to be observed on the part
both of the husband and the wife.

The Husband is to consider, A man's house is a petty common weal.
his house is a petty Common wealth, whereof himself is chief, and his
servants Subjects: therefore, for the welfare both of himself, and householde,
it is needful that he set down such orders, as God may be glorified,
himself profitably served, the good servant well rewarded, The office of a Wife.
the evil chastened, and the neighbor pleased: And as it is the Husbands
office to set down these orders, so it is the Wives duty to see them
executed.

The charge of the Husband, The husbands care apportaineth to things abroad.
is to get abroad for the provision of his householde: and the Wife is bound to
spare at home, toward the maintenance of her Children.

The office of the Husband, is to see his ground tilled, his Cattle cherished,
his fences sound, his laborers work, and their wages paid.

The duty of the Wife is to see her Garden weeded, The Wives charge is
huswifery within door.
her Vines cut, and in her Orchard her fruit trees pruned: within doors her
house well ordered, her Maidens busied, her Children instructed, the friend
entertained, and the Tables well furnished. And in this Oeconomie many women
have so excelled, as Socrates affirms: that he learned of women more Moral
Philosophy, Moral Philosophy to be learned by women.
then natural reason of Anaxagoras and Archelaus: wherein Socrates testifies
no more then their worthy sex deserves: for many women govern their Families
with such Prudence, Temperance, Piety, and other commendable virtues, as may
well instruct the wisest.

The Husband ought to beware, Lascivious talk to be shunned of the husband.
that in the presence of his wife, he uses no filthy lascivious talk: for
besides the witness of his own indiscretion, he makes her a passage for many
an unhappy thought.

The Wife ought to be nice in occasion of suspicion, The wife ought to be nice
in cause of suspicion.
for her husband that see'th open cause of mistrust, cannot but fear that in
secret he receives injury: and ielowsie though she proceeds from exceeding
love, yet is she the greatest enemy of the married.

The Husband is bound to keep his wife in civil and comely apparel, Comely
apparel the Husband should give his wife.
as well to make her seem beautiful unto himself, as to prevent the reproach
of the neighbor: for this has been an ancient custo me among the Romans,
and it is to be feared, that if the Husband break it to spare his Purse, the
Wife will repair it, though she gage her person.

The Wife that will please her Husband, Clean linnea commendable in a wife.
and make a great show of a little, though her Gowns he plain, in her linen
she must be curious and fine: for otherwise, were she attired all in Silk: if
her sleeves, Partlet and other Linen be coorse, torn, or sluttishly washed,
she shall neither be praised of strangers, nor delight her Husband.

The Husband after householde iarres, The Husband must beware of sullennes.
if the wife seem to be sorry, he ought not to be sullen: for if she perceive
him of a froward nature, it is like in other such squares, she will be
negligent to please him.

The Wife, if she offend her Husband, The wise must be amiable toward her
husband.
by some ignorant trespass, she must please him with a loving countenance:
least if he find her of a crooked condition, he will take delight to cross her
with continual foul usage.

The old Husband, A law for a young woman's old Husband.
is to accompany his young Wife with grave Matrons, and to set her forth with
costly civil attire, that seeing the reverence and honor that is given her
for her Husbands gravity, she will study how to please him, though she
displese her owue disposition.

The young wife that has an old Husband, A regard for an old man's young wife.
is bound to make much of him at home, for the reputation she receaueth in his
life, and for the wealth she is like to have by his death: and abroad must be
sober in her behauiours, discreet in her talk, and no harkener to young men's
tales, least her own lightness make her openly infamed, where her Husbands
imperfections could cause her but to be secretly suspected.

The young Husband is to bear with his old wife in her will, as well for the
reverence due to her years, A regard for an old woans young husband.
as for the advancement the love brings to himself: least the neighbors
term his wife an unfortunate old woman, and him-himselfe a naughty, froward,
vile natured young man.

The old wife, to give excuse to her dotage, A regard for a young man's old
wife.
must in open assemblies, commend her young husband of modest and stayed
government: and secretly to be lovingly used, must kiss him with Midas
lips: for if she fill not his pursse by fair means, with foul entreaty he
will be his own Caruer: if she complain, she joins but scorn to her own
mischance.

Generally, Modest familiarity not to be forbidden the wife.
the Husband ought not to forbid his Wife, in assemblies modestly, to
intertaine time, in devising with the better sort: for in such ielous
restraint, he shall leave a suspicion, that he enioyneth her this open
pe^nance, for some secret trespass, and so both slander himself, and infure
his Wife.

The wife should have an especial care, Light company to be shunned of the
Wife.
to shun the company of light Women: for the multitude, though they can charge
her with no misdemeanour, yet they will condemn her honor, by the known
evils of her companions.

Many other needful directions, may be given to preserve unity in Marriage
(quoth Segnior Philoxenus) too cu^bersome for me to report, and too tedious
for this honorable company to hear, whose patience I have already injured too
much: but finding my error I end my tale, and remain ready to make
satisfaction in some other service.

Sir (quoth Fabritio) the end of your tale puts us in remembrance of our duty
and your right, which is for this honorable favor, to remain your indebted
servants, to embrace your counsels, and to commend (and submit our reasons) to
your learned Censure.

It is your favor and not my merit (quoth Segnior Philoxenus)

Sir, (quoth Queen Aurelia) I will bear the blame of this days importuning of
you, and you alone shall have the honor in granting of my requests, who to ye
former joins this one more favor, which is, that you conclude this your
worthy exercise, with some rare history at large.

Madame (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) this is the least of your commandments,
considering that Histories make mention of thousands, who in their inseperable
loves have sounded the excellency of Marriage, wherefore I obey your pleasure.

The worthy, History of Phrigius and Pieria Reported by Segnior Philoxenus.
IN the Register of Fame, wherein the Monuments of the virtuous are Cronicled,
as presidents for their posterity, I read, that in the famous City of
Miletum in Ionia, as sovereign Prince and Governor, there reigned a worthy
Duke called Nebeus, who to comfort and support his aged years, had to his
Son and only heir, Phrigius, a young Gentleman of such rare towardliues, as
it may be a question, whether he were more beholding to Nature for the
perfections of his body, to Virtue for ye qualities of his mind, or to Fortune
in suffering him to be so nobly borne.

In Myos a neighbor City to Miletum, there was also a Prince of much
renown, named Pythes, whose Daughter and heir was fair Pieria, by whose
virtues all Ionia was renowned. The ancient envy between the Citizens of
Miletum and Myos, was turned into amity: and the open war between Duke Nebeus
and the noble Pithes, was peceably and honorably ended: All such happy
events, succeeded this following adventure. Upon the Festiual day of Diana, the
Citizens of Myos, without ye injury of Soldiers, might lawfully repair to
Miletum, to sacrifice to Diana, upon which safe conduct, with many other Ladies
and Gentlewomen of Myos, fair Pieria waighted on her Mother to Dianas Temple,
whose rare beauty was such, as dazeled the eyes of the beholders, like the
reflections of a Mirror, placed against the Sun.

Among many that loved, and few or none that saw possibility of grace, such
was the renown of her chaste disoain, young Phrigius beheld Pieria with such a
settled eye, as Dianas Temple sheelded him not against the Arrows of Love: but
as a wounded Stag at the first seems little dismaide: so Phrigius with an
unappalled cheer, returned to the Takes Palace, and as a pledge of truce, he
sent his heart to Myos. The Ceremonies and Sacrifices of Diana ended, the wars
renewed, the wonted Massacres, Murders, Rapines, and outrageous cruelties
practiced by the Soldiers of either part: insomuch as Law gave place to
Arnies, equity to violence, and all public order was perverted, and upon the
point to be destroyed. The Captains of Myos encouraged their Soldiers of the
one part, but the Soldiers of Miletum were driven to comfort their Captain
with a threatening of disgrace. But ah poor Phrigius, what answer should
thou make? to see thy Soldiers slain, and thy cities spoiled, without
proffers of rescue were dishonorable: to bend thy forces against thy own
heart, were unnatural: to make the best choice of these two evils, required
leisure, and judgment. And therefore advisedly to consider of his estate, at
this time Phrigius satistied his soldiers with hope of some speedy venturous
exploite, and dangered not his enemies, with the proffer of any violence: so ye
either power kept their trenches peaceably, but yet with this indifferent
peril, that they attended opportunity, to make the one conquerors, and the
other Captives: for the long civil contention, had now made the estate of
either as desperate, as ye fortunes of two that have their substance upon the
chance of Dice, the one to have all, the other to be undone.

When Phrigius had with stender hope thus quieted the acclamations of the
people, he retired himself into a solitary Chamber, to be the sole companion
of his outrageous passions, with whom he thus devised.

Ah traitorous eyes, betraiers of my whole body, the scourge of Miletum, and
enemies of my honor: the vengeance of Oedipus is too gentle for your injuries:
what do thou say? oh blasphemous tung, rival of humanity, calumner of
Beauty, and hinderer of thy Countries peace: thou reprocher of virtue, and
Phrigius welfare: know to thy shame, the perfection of my eyes have constantly
beheld Pieria, whose divine beauties, emblemed in humane shape, dazeleth the
youngest sight in Ionia. Then to revile them thus, thou tirannisiest nature: to
demand why I love and serve Beauty, thy question is blind, and deserves a
double answer: But aye me, though my eyes and loueh aue done but what is
just, Fortune has dealt too rigourously with me, to render my heart captive to
his Daughter, who is the rival of my Father: what hope may I give to my
affections? when possibility of comfort is taken away: the Parents are ready
to sheath their Swoords in one an others entrails: is it then like the
Children shall embrace a mutual affection? O no: for though mild Venus
consent that they love, wrathful Mars will sever their affection. O cruel
War, thou art not improperly called the scourge of God, The vengance of War.
for in thee is contained a greater vengeance then might be imagined by man:
thou armest the Son against the Father, the Uncle against the Nephewe, the
Subject against his Sovereign: Thy drink is blood, thy food the flesh of
men, thy fires are flming Cities, thy pleasures spoiling of Widows, rau
ishment of Virgins, subversion of Laws and public benefit: thy Judges,
Tyranny and Injustice: and where thou remainest, her known enemy is not so
dangerous, as the fained friend.

But why exclaim I of War, who double Crowned Alexander with the riches of
Asia and Africa? who honored Caesar with imperial triumphs? and rewarded
Hanniball for the travails of his life, with renown after death? by whom
Millions of men are registered in ye life book of Fame: and through whom
Phrigius gives expectation of benefit to his Country, comfort to his aged
Father, and honor to his posterity.

I received my wound in the time of peace, nay in the Temple of Diana, shall I
then exclaim of Peace, and vpbraide Chastity? foul fall the heart that should
move, and shame woorme the tung that pronounces such blasphemy: O blessed
peace, thou fast chainest Treason, Tyranny Murder, Theft, and Wrath, with all
disturbers of common tranquillity, and in the highest dignities, placest
Justice, The blessings of peace.
Piety, Temperance, Concord and Love, with many other Morrall vartues, by
whom the lewd are chastened, the good are cherished, and Commonweals
prosper and flourish. O Chastity, thy divine virtues deserve a better Trumpet,
then my injurious tung: thy excellency is written in the browe of Pieria. And
is Pieria the Deputy of Diana? O yes: and Phrigius the servant of Venus? too
true: is it then impossible they should agree in affection? yea sure. O
unfortunate Phrigius, through peace which receiuedst thy wound before Dianas
Alter, and by cruel war art separated from the Surgion that should cure
thee. These sundry conflicts Phrigius had with his bitter passions, which
pursued their advantage, with such thornie fears, as if he had not been
suddenly succored, by the advice and comfort of Lord Miletus a favored
Counselor to Duke Nebeus, and an assured friend to his son Phrigius, he had
been like to have yielded to despair. Miletus was glad to see him thus
affected, and sorry to behold him so dangerously afflicted: for in this love
he foresawe an end, of the ancient envy and enmity, between the Citizens of
Miletum and Myos: whose civil Fraies had buried more young men in the Feeldes,
then aged in the Churches and Churchyardes. Therefore to confirm his
affection, and to comfort him with hope: Lord Phrigius quoth he, to blame your
affection, were cruelty and no sound counsel: for you love Pieria the Paragon
of the world, to discomfort you with an impossibility of her favor, were
clean against the possibility of your fortune: for besides that, your person
alluringly pleases, your authorities command: yea Pithes cannot but rejoice,
Pieria consent, and all Myos desire is to solemnize this Marriage.

My self and the grauer sort of the counsel, will motion the matter to the
Duke your Father, who I trust will hold the affection of his son, rather to
proceed from the justice of Diana, then the injury of Cupid. Who regarding
the zealous offering^ o^ Pieria, agreed that you should be wounded, that Pieria
might have the honor to cure you, in whose virtues all Ionia hops to be
blessed. Therefore, to make your affection known, in some pleasing Letter, to
Pieria commend your service, and to deal with both your Fathers, refer the
care to me: How sweet the smallest hope of grace is to a condemned man: or the
least word of comfort, from the Physician to the infirmed patient: the sudden
change of Phrigius moan, truly manifests: who now began to look
cheerfully, and with hope appeased his passions: so that imbrasing Miletus,
he committed his life to the fortune of his discretion: and while his passion
was quick, he presented both love and service to Pieria, in this following
letter.

Phrigius Letter to Pieria.
Fair Pieria, since it is a common thing to love: and a miracle to subdue
affection, let it not seem strange, that I am slave to your beauty, nor
wonder though I sue for grace. The wounded Lion prostrateth himself at the
feet of a man: the sick complains to the Physician: and (charged with more
torments) the lover is enforced to seek comfort of his Mistress. To prove
that I love, needs no other testimony, then the witness of your rare
perfections, and to give me life is the only work of your pity. Wherefore
[Madame] since the virtue of your eye, has drawn away my heart, as the
Adamant does the steel, I beseech you that my heartles body may so live by
your ruth, as I may have strength (as well as will) to do you service: and let
it suffice for more honor of your triumph, that by the power of beauty, your
virtues have atchiued a more glorious conquest, then might the whole strength
of Myos, and which is more, of a puissant enemy, you have made so perfect a
friend, as Phrigius shall hold himself in no fortune, so happy, as to
encounter with the opportunity, to do Pieria and her favorers service, or
their enemies damage: if which amends may repair all injuries past, I shall
hold the safeconduit blessed, that licensed you to enter Myletum: if greater
ransom be demanded, it must be my life: which [if it be your will] shall forth
with be sacrificed, notwithstanding, in such cruelty, Dianas Temple shall be
profaned, before whose Altar, I received my wound from the eyes of fair
Pieria: but holding it impossible, that a stony heart may be enemy to so many
Graces as live in your face: I Balm my wounds, with hope that I kiss your
gracious hand: and that your answer will return an acceptance of service.

He, whose heart waighteth on your beauty. PHRIGIVS.


THis Letter sealed and subscribed: To fair Pieria, Triumph after victory:
was delivered unto a trusty Messenger: who (having safeconduit, to pass
through both the Armies) in good hour, arrived at Prince Pythes Palace: and
in the presence of her mother and other friends reverently kissing the same,
delivered Pieria, with Phrigius loving commendations, his letter. Who so in the
Springtime, in one moment had seen rain and sunshine, might again behold
the like change in Pierias troubled countenance: who found no less joy in
reading the letter, then cause of wonder, in beholding the superscription, who
(by the consent of Diana, to bring peace into Myletum) was by love, with the
self same Arrowe, and at one instant wounded in as deep affection, as
Phrigius: notwithstanding, bound to no desire so much, as to the direction of
her parents, she showed them this letter: who weary of the wars, and
embracing this mean of peace, after they had advisedly considered the
contents: to comfort Phrigius, without injury to Pierias chaste behavior in
her name, they returned this answer.

Pierias answer to Phrigius Letter.
SIr Phrigius, I received your Letter, and as I confess, that your praises so
far pass my merit, as I wonder at the error of your judgment: so, I doubt
whether so honorable a personage, as your Lordship, can yield your service to
so mean a Lady: or if love were of that power, whether you would obey, to be
servant to her, whose Fathers rival, your parents, and you are: but on the
other part: I entertain a faint hope, that you are not so much enemy to your
honor, as to leave in your Adversaries possession, a monument of Dissimulation:
upon which warrant, and your free offer of service: I bind you, by a courteous
request, to endeavor to conclude a speedy peace: that I may without danger of
hostility repair to Dianas Temple: in compassing of which gracious league, you
shall receive great glory: the country much quiet, and I whom you wish such
welfare, shall be bound to do you any honorable favor.

Pieria of Myos.


This answer sealed, and subscribed, To my Lord Phrigius: delivered by the
hands, and blessed with the loving countenance of Pieria, was returned to
Phrigius, by his own messenger: who, after he had read and reread this Letter,
(not for that the Contents gave him any assurance of love: but for because,
they commanded an employment of service) he comforted his spirit, with hope,
that his endeavor in this charge, should both reaue all doubt of dissimulation,
by him, and smoothe Pierias Browe, of Chaste disdain: and to further a happy
end of the Countries calamity. In the beginning of Phrigius contentment,
Lord Miletus had so dealt in these affairs, as in short time Duke Nebeus, and
Prince Pythes came to parle of peace: and while the counsels of either part,
considered upon the Articles of agreement, safeconduit of Tratick was given to
the inhabitants of either City.

How sweet the friendly incounters, of these ancient enemies were: is the
office of him, that has been scourged with wars: The virtue of Peace.
who, though they were but in the estate of repriued men, yet the hope of
assured peace lightened their hearts of former sorrow, and replenished the place
with gladness.

Fair Pieria, now safely repaired to the Aulters of Diana: and Phrigus, more
of desire, to salute his Mistress, then of zeal to sacrifice, to Chastity:
feigned many devotions, to visit her Temple: where these Lovers, for the
reverence they bare to the place, forbear to encounter in any speech of love:
yet if Diana, would have published their thoughts, she should have confessed,
that the most deuotionate of them both, in their hearts, honored Juno, in the
eye of her own Image and aulters. But Diana, though she be the Sovereign of
single Nymphs: yet is she friend to Juno, and the Chaste Married: and only
enemy, to Venus and the wanton sort: so that she took in worth, this light
trespass: yea, held her self honored, that her sacred Temple, should be the
original cause of Myletum and Myos peace and amity: and the end of their
ancient envy, and enmity. Wherefore, to conclude the begun agreement, she
sent Concord and Charity, to chain up grudge and dissension.

Duke Nebeus and Prince Pythes, freed from the vexation of these furies, with
affable and friendly intertainment, reasoned of their affairs: and while the
Parents parled of their common profit: the children, upon lawful oportunities,
devised of their private loves: but yet with such a dutiful regard of their
friends consent, that although their hearts were linked together, by free
choice, the clapping of hands was referred to the foresight of Parents: who
burying former injuries, in the cave of oblivion, made an Edict of Amity,
sealed, The power of virtuous love.
and strengthened, with the marriage of Phrygius and Pieria, Heirs of eithers
renown and dignity. Behold here the work of love, grafted in the honorable
hearts of the virtuous. The wrath and storms of war, is turned to calm and
temperate peace: the blossoms of enmity are altered into fruits of amyty: and
the root of malice grown to the tree of pity. The Nobles in honor of this
marriage, lauisht out their treasure, in all their triumphs and shows to be in
good equipage. The meaner Gentlemen, by exceeding cost, learned by experience,
how afterward to spare. The Citizens with gifts of great imprize, presented
their dutiful affections. The learned eternised this marriage peace, in tables
of memory. The Clergy song Himnes of joy, the common people rung the Belles,
and every sort showed some token of delight. So that Phrigius and Pieria, after
the deaths of their aged fathers, were crowned with the dignities of Myletum
and Myos, and all their happy life, were honored with these acclamations of
their subjects. Live, blessed Princes: the appeasers of Jupiters wrath, by
whom War, the Monster of humanity, is fast chayned: and peace the sovereign
of moral virtues, Triumphs in the Capitals of Ionia: live blessed princes,
and long enjoy the hearts of your subjects: In your virtues who have multiplied
wealth, and to do you service are ready to spend their lives.

This zeal and reverence of their subjects, Phrigius and Pieria many years
possessed, between whom there was such equallitie in disposition, as fortune
knew not, by any accident of joy, or mischance, how to sever their desires. And
when the time came, that the heavens (envying the glory of the earth) in
possessing this divine couple, charged nature to render their right. Who
obaying the will of Jove, sent sickness to summon both Phrigius and Pieria, and
licensed death to do his worst. And (as there yet remains an opinion in
Miletum) as their loves began in one hour, so their lives ended in one moment:
whose spirits Metamorphosed into white Turthes, took their flight toward that
heavenly Paradise. Where I wish al faithful lovers, and this lovely company,
abiding places.

Segnior Philoxenus, by the virtue of this days exercise, the only travel of
his learned wit, so raised the hearts of the company, with the desire of
Marriage, that Lucia Bella, who, in the beginning of Christmasse, was determined
to have been a vestall Nun, now confessed that they were enemies to Nature,
and not worthy the society of men, which scandalized, or scorned this sacred
institution. The rest of this honorable company, by plausible speeches,
confirmed Lucia Bellas opinion, or by silence showed a willing consent. And to
conclude the exercise, (quoth Queen Aurelia,) Segnior Philoxenus, your sweet
virtues, have described so divine a Paradise, as our souls cannot but long
after this holy institution, and our hearts honor your perfections, by whose
bounty this company is not only highly entertained, but by your most precious
treasures richly enriched. Madam (quoth he) the virtue you speak of, belongs
to marriage: the benefit to this gracious assembly: and the bare words, to
Phyloxenus. Such bare words (quoth Fabritio) deserve to be registered among the
life deeds of memory. Upon this judgment, Queen Aurelia arose, and the
company performing the office of reverent courtesy, returned into the great
chamber to salute some other of the New years Pleasures.

The Device of a stately show, and Mask, the seventh night, by Segnior
Philoxenus, to honor Queen Aurelia, and the other Ladies and Gentlewomen.
Upon New years day at night, about nine of the Clock, in an enclosed place in
the great hall: after Queen Aurelia, and her chosen attendants, had danced
certain solemn Almaines, appeared a high Mountain, the Forrtestery whereof was
of fair Bay trees, Pomegranate, Lymons, Orenges, Date trees, and other fruits
of most pleasure: among the Mossy rocks appeared Snailes, Lysards, Moles,
frogs, Greshoppers, and such like vnuenimous vermin, and by the fountains
which run aslant the side of the Mountain, Lions, Unicorns, Elephants,
Camelions, Camels, and other beasts of honor, as if they were appointed by
Nature, to guard those sacred streams, from being troubled with the rascal
multitude of Cattle, which domestical desert was perfected with such art, as
nature confessed her excellent cunning to be vanquished by man's industry. This
Mountain which resembled some wilderness in Arabia, dewed with the pleasant
springs of Africa, by a still motion, removed toward the upper end of the
Hall, into the full presence of Queen Aurelia, and the most stately company.
In the midst of this Mountain was an Arbor of sweet Eglentine, intercoursed
with Roses, and fully shadowed with ye spreading branches of the purples Vine:
in which upon a stately throne sat Diana attired all in white, and at her
feet were the nine Muses, clothed in several colors, according to their
several qualities, sounding heavenly harmony, hoth with voice and instrument:
out of this arbor sprang a Bay tree, in which was the Hyen, which at pleasure
being both Male and Female, expressed the full power of virtue: who though she
has the form and habit of a woman, yet is her essential substance compounded
of both kinds. At the foot of this hill was the Monster Envy armed with fire
and sword, to hinder their passage, which adventured to clime the Mount: a
Forest Nymph clad all in Flowers, in a short speech declared, that Diana and
the Muses, who in the golden age had their Palaces in the Forests, Mountains
and Rivers of pleasure, throughout the whole world: now by the injury of
time, were driven to their Sanctuary of Parnassus, at the foot whereof the
Monster Euny kept, to hinder the passages of such as attempted with their
renown, to set those Ladies at liberty: who hearing by Fame, the glory of
this honorable company, were arrived by hope, that the virtue of some of the
troop, should redeem them from captivity, and therefore, she summoned the
knights present, to make trial of their valors, and the Ladies of their
virtues: which said, she retired back into the mountain: the gentlemen and
ladies, having a cunning foreknowledg of the intent of this show armed
themselves, with sundry attempts to overcome this mo^ster. Soranso, Dondolo,
Ismarito, and Faliero, drew their rapiers, and assailed Envy, but dry blows
auailed not, so that they were conquered, and committed to the gayle of
Tediousnes. Maria Belochie, Franceschina Sancta, Lucia Bella, Helena Dulce, and
other Ladies, and damsels, endeavored to charm him, with the sweet sound, and
heavenly impressions of Music. But Envy more wary then Argus, and less
pitiful then the tormenters of hell: the first whereof, was overcome with
Inachus Oten Pipe: the other moved to ruth with Orpheus passionate Music (to
show himself composed of all the vennom of hell) could not be conquered, by
the sharp swords of the knights, nor would not be entreated with the sugared
harmony of the fair Ladies: but amidst this Monsters Triumphs, there was a
voice heard in the Mountain: Non vi, sed virtute: whereupon, Queen Aurelia,
with a Myrrour, devised by Segnior Philoxenus, peaceably made toward Envy,
which monster, presuming of his force, lifted his Club against this virtuous
Dame: who, by the reflections of the Concaue Superficies, of this Myrrour,
daunted with the fear of his own weapon, imagining that he stroke himself,
recoyled back with such haste, as he fell down: whereupon, Segnior Philoxenus,
feasing on his club, Envy is murdered with his own weapon
and laying him on therewith, and: As Phallaris did to Perillus: die with the
weapon thou preparest for other.

In triumph of this glorious victory, Diana sent down the Nymph Chlora, to
salute Queen Aurelia, with this Present: which was a shield, wherein was
quartred, four several honors.

The first. VERT: A looking Glass of Crystal. The second. AZVRE: A pair of
Balance Argent. The third. OR: A Pyller of Porphier. The fourth. ARGENT: A
standing cup of Ruby Rock.
The Mules themselves came also down, and crowned her with a garland of Roses,
parted, perpale, Argent and Gules: and electing her for their Sovereign, to
comfort the five Knights that were discomfited by Envy, two and two leading a
Knight between them, daunced a stately Almayne of xv. which ended: they
bestowed a favor, and certain Latin verses, upon every one of the Knights:
and returned unto their Mount. The silver pen, and verses delivered by Vranie
to Ismarito, standing in the forefrunt of this book: the rest for that they
were proper unto themselves, and impertinent for this matter, I omit: By this
time, the Cock was ready to sing his midnight song: and the company (fully
satisfied with pleasure) departed unto their lodgings, to spend the rest of the
night in contemplation and sleep.

FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by Richard Iohnes, at the sign of the Rose and Crown,
near Holburne Bridge. 1593.

printer's or publisher's device R I

HEB DDIM HEB DDIEV




