THE TREE OF HVMANE LIFE, OR, THE BLOOD OF THE GRAPE.

PROVING THE Possibility of maintaining humane life from infancy to extreme
old age without any sickness by the use of Wine.

By TOBIAS WHITAKER Doctor in Physic of London.

LONDON, Printed by I.D. for H.O. and are to be sold at his shop in Pope's Head
Ally. 1638.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
IF I would have made any particular Dedication, I could stoop no lower then a
Prince: the subject meriteth as much, had it been handled accordingly: and if
it had, yet I durst not fly so high, though Riolanus takes boldness to tell
Henry the fourth of France, that the faculty deserves the patronage of a
Prince, both in respect of antiquity, necessity, subject, and office; For
Antiquity a twinne with the Divine, for so soon as the soul was breathed
into man, it was then Corpus humanum vivens and sanabile, and so the subject
both of Physic and Theology: for had Adam never sinned, yet must his body
have been preserved and maintained by diet, which is part of physic. But after
his fall so violated his equal temper, that as then he became subject to
mortality and natural decay. Then came in the necessity of medicine, and ever
since for this necessity sake, has the Almighty commanded an honor to be
given to the Phisician, for he has created him an Angel of mercy. Also in
respect of the subject about which this art is exercised, it rightly
challenges precedence of all other faculties (except Theology) for it is the
body of man: a world, a wonder, the image of God himself, and such a piece of
architecture, as the Almighty would not vouchsafe to frame without a Council.
The office then of preserving and maintaining it, must needs be high and
eminent, and may well befit a King to exercise: Such esteem it had obtained
when Avicenna, Isaac, and other Princes were Phisicians: nay, the faculty has
crowned some to this day with title of Prince, witness the house de Medicis.
And if I should say it comprehends all other faculties I dare attempt the
proving of it. First in respect of government as Agents they ought to be obeyed
in practice, even by Princes, for they are subject to sickness and must die
like men; and Judges which have power to condemn poor malefactors or others,
yet they must receive their sentence of death from the Phisician, if they come
to a fair and timely end. And as they make laws for the well ordering and
governing the Republique. So does the Physician prescribe rules, for the
preservation of harmony throughout this little world, but ab quantum mutatus ab
illo! (...), was his Motto in Homer. Now if Stercus and Vrina can be picked out
of the vanities of Cornelius Agrippa, it shall be thrown upon the purple robes
of the Physician, by the ignorant or impudent. For Science has no enemy but
ignorance, nor is vilified among any except pigritious and impudent persons.
Then let the ignorant prattle, still the Physician shall be the instrument of
all common good in a Republique, and if no valetudinarie man of any condition
be able to effect any solid good, either to his King, Country, or self, as
he is not, and the power of restoring and healing him, be given principally to
the Phisician. And if also upon that prolongation of life, if upon but one
hour or moment eternity does or may depend, then consequently the Physician
must be acknowledged an instrument of salvation, principally to the body,
accidentally to the soul. What if I shall seem in the eyes of others to
advance my faculty, higher then their judgments will embrace? yet can I not
justly deserve a frown, where a probable truth is manifest: nor is my
intention, hereby to undervalue any person or judgment, nor overvalue my own,
whatsoever Cicero shall affirm to the contrary in these words Nemingem unquam,
neque Poetam, neque Oratorem fuisse, qui quenquam meliorem, quam se
arbitraretur, but rather to vindicate my faculty of those contempts and
disparagements, which various dispositions cast upon it. What I have written
concerning the subsequent subject, begs neither acceptance, nor encomiastick
favor, nor do I quit my self of temerity; Suffenus will be a companion for
the best learned, and some wantonness will escape the tongue and pen of the
wisest man, in this or that thing. Therefore I do fear no frown (except from
my natural Prince) and those whom he has commanded me to fear and obey, and
thus as a loyal subject I do. In testimony whereof I have endeavored to open
this mystery of life and health to my King and Country. If I have frustrated
any expectation in the handling of it, let my velle be accepted, in magnis est
voluisse satis.

THE TREE OF LIFE; OR, THE BLOOD OF THE GRAPE.
THis subject is blood, in that is life; it is of the Vine, and that the plant
of life; And if I should say a Species of that in Paradise; my opinion might
not in all places, and amongst all persons be rejected: magis and minus, may
be the difference; for as that was called the Tree of life, so is the Vine, and
they do not only agree in the appellation, but in their nature and effects
also. In testimony hereof Aselepiades the Physician, both to my former
distinction, as also to the appellation affirms, The nature of Wine to be
nearest to the nature of the Gods, and their nature is incorrupt. Secondly, he
advises the application of it to unsound bodies to reduce them to a sound and
incorrupt temper, and in some sense to eternity, for such a state there is in
this world as will be more plainly demonstrated in our following discourse.

How necessary then is this subject, and how difficult to explicate? Necessary
because life is short, difficult because art is long: yet if by this Act I
shall be an instrument, to protract life and abreviate art, not only show the
plant, but teach the use, it may prove worth my labor and Countries
acceptance.

How ever reason and Philosophy shall be my guide, neither Hippocrates nor
Galen nor any other authority, further then they are my own, and agree with
reason and truth. As for the abbreviation of art, preservation of life, and
restoration of health; we will comprehend in a small circle, and render in a
few words, the sum of all Classick Writers, to this purpose, especially the
Fourteen books of Galen his method of curing, and Six of health preserving:
and in these few words expressed (viz.) Diet and Medicine: for thus chiefly and
substantially, and by these two ways are life and health extended and
restored, quantity, quality, and manner of application in them observed.
Quantity, as it is vsque ad vasa and ad vires; Quality, as it corresponds with
humane bodies in general, or with this and that individual.

Lessius seems to me to dote more upon quantity ad vasa, then any other
thing conducing to the preservation of life, and yet such a quantity as is not
ad vasa, as if Satiation were the Usher of diseases, corruption and mortality:
which I suppose differs very much from the sense of Galen, (that is) to
prescribe a pondus or straight weight and measure of nutriment to all tempers,
and such a weight not to be exceeded upon any occasion. But if he be
understood to speak only to men in religious Orders, and such as impoverish
their bodies to elevate their minds to pious thoughts and exercises, then his
Twelve ounces will be better understood and little blamed: but in a physical
sense cannot stand with the principles of art. For Hippocrates and Galen both,
will tell him diseases are cured by contrarieties. Inanition by fasting, must
be cured by repletion in feeding; and this inanition may be extreme or not
extreme, and then no constant Pondus ought to be observed. But if I understand
those Worthies, then thus I explicate their doctrine in this point, and so will
leave the Iefuite to his own order. As for the quality of aliment, that it be
Homogeneall, pleasant and familiar to humane constitutions and tempers, not
only in general, but also to every individual, is a point that the Ancients
were strict observers of, and not without much discretion. For the judgment of
a Physician is most seen in his election of aliment in quality answering the
temper of the body. For though a disease must be cured by his contrary, yet the
temper of the body must be preserved by its own Simile; as heat by heat, and
moisture by moisture: but the degree whether more or less intense is judicated
by nature, and to be ordered by the Physician; But this is a paradox to vulgar
practicers, who argue falsely upon a true ground, for when Hippocrates says,
Contraria contrarijs curantur; they like an ignorant Jury will run altogether
upon contraries, both in curing, and also in nourishing, according to my
Simile, making no difference between honesty and dishonesty, or contrary and
contrary. It Is true, contrary remedies must be, and are most rationally
administered in affects of the body, because a crooked stick must be bent as
far the other way to make it straight, according to Aristotle. But if
contraries shall be adhibited to a harmonious temper it is the cause of discord
and conflict in Nature. As for example: In a hot and moist temper to use a cold
and dry diet; Therefore it appears plainly that the quality of aliment ought
to be most observed; But for Quantity that is left to the free choice of
Nature, because natural choice is never ultra capacitatem recipientis.

But to speak more fully to Lessius, who in a religious way disputes
principally for temperance; yet so severely that I must tell him, as a
Physician, the Fathers of our Art prefer excess (so it be not in the highest
degree of excess) before such temperance, and of two evils the least: For they
lay it down Canonically that all affects of plenitude or fullness, are safer
for the body then diseases of emptiness: And I apprehend much reason, and
variety of reasons in this axiom.

First, because universal evacuation is sooner effected then repletion;
Secondly, because accidents of various forms cannot be avoided, for they are
infinite, and the least affliction falling upon an extenuate or lessiate body,
for want of a sufficiency of excrementitious humors to move in, gives not
only a dangerous assault to the radical spirits, but without sudden resistance
of art, must tyrannise nature before enfeebled and kept under cannot of it
self resist to expel it. Which mere resistance of nature or labor to expel
noxious humors does beget a Fever, and that only ex conatu natura (according
to Christophorus a vega) natural heat is fired and not otherwise, by the
ascent of putrid fuliginous vapors to the heart, or if medicine be adhibited,
yet such a body must suffer from both and life be shortened.

Contrarily, where there is a sufficient quantity of excrementitious humors
for diseases to involve themselves in, there are they retained with less
danger or oppression to the radical spirits: and removed by medicine with as
little offense, as I shall demonstrate more Philosophically in this manner.

Alberius (amongst other Philosophers) does constitute a twofold moisture in
mixed bodies; One which he calls Humidum continuans, and from this
continuating humidity proceeds an unction of parts for otherwise they would
be altogether dry and consequently disunited: But there is no natural body
void of this humidity, though never so hard or dry, but has a sufficient
moisture to conjoyne their parts together inter se: and every Alchymist proves
this truth by practice, and daily extracting oil out of the hardest and dryest
bodies. Therefore this humidity is rightly nominated by some Physicians
Oleaginosum Humidum, oily humidity consisting of ayrie and aqueous moisture.

The other humidity is Humidum quasi nutriens, as it were the nourishing
moisture, and this is a watrish humidity in the mixed body, nothing advantageous
to the continuation of parts, and is easily resolved because of its tenuity, so
is not the oleaginous, because of its crassitude: So that where a proportion of
excrementitious humors, by reason of a severe diet is wanting in the body of
man, both disease and medicine must needs be more powerful over the fixed
moisture and heat, which is the ligament of life.

Contrarily where there is a second moisture to entertain, either effect or
medicine does less harm. But I intend no controversy with Lessius, therefore
I will return to my proper subject, and show how every temper may be preserved
void of all distempers, or such as arise out of the material principles of
nature by the true use of wine, and also pove it to be an excellent remedy,
applied according to proper judication, and may prove specificall in diseases
of every nature, arising out of the aforesaid principles, passing as dilucidly
and briefly as may be through all the parts of this discourse.

Curiosity has newly conceived, and will now suffer abortion, if a taste of
this promised juice be not suddenly presented whose nature and excellency is
encomiastick, sufficient, so transcending all other nutriment, as that just
Noah makes it the first act of his husbandry: and planted a Vineyard before
either corn or any other grain, as is affirmed by sacred testimony. The
reason if I should presume to offer, Ne Suitor ultra crepidam, I must expect
from divines, and justly, if I should adventure to explicate any text of holy
writ, without qualification; yet will I not so inthrall my fancy, or suffocate
such motions as may be advantageous to a rational man, without prying into
the Arc; as not only to take notice of this plantation to be the first act of
husbandry, but especially of his age, which was Nine hundred and fifty. His age
extended Twenty years beyond Adam, in whom the principles of Nature were most
firm and pure; And no reason can argue otherwise, but that in course of
Nature, being so many Centuries after Adam, the years of Noah necessarily must
have bin shorter by many score then were his Grandsires years, had he not
tasted Nectar from that plant from which Adam was excluded, I mean an
inferior species of that tree of life: For had it been equal in power,
whereas he lived after his plantation Three hundred and fifty years (a good
cordial to an old man) he had been now alive, and so should have been for
ever. Moreover, in Six hundred years he could not but conclude, and determine
most natural questions by experience, and thereby sufficiently taught out of
universals how to draw his particular conclusions, or otherwise by resolving
them into their natural principles, make a sensible discovery of Natures
secrets. And out of this fullness of knowledge and experience, does he plant
his Vineyard; So that by inference the excellency of this subject does appear
transcendent; Now let us really consider the nature and quality of it, with its
difference and use, both in respect of aliment and medicament and application
to every individual, of what age or temper soever.

And to the end we may act as much as we speak, Let us look upon the quality
of Wine philosophically, and at the first view we shall discover a twofold
heat in it, as it flows from a living body (viz.) an animal and elementary
heat, for though wine cannot be said to be animatum, such as gives a soul or
life, yet it may carry with it and to it self, an impresse central orimplanted
heat from a soul, as may be demonstrated plainly in other things: for the
seed of animals as well as of plants, have not a soul in act, according to the
doctrine of Aristotle: Yet it does take from a soul such a generative power
like unto the soul, which Aristotle says is nothing else but a vital heat,
which he has distinguished from igneous and elementary. So as in the
generation of a living creature the first moving is animal, or the plant from
which the seed issues, but the seed is the instrument, which by a power
received from the plant (that is to say) by a vital heat; begets another
being like it self. Since therefore there is in semine, a vital heat,
distinct from elementary, why may we not say the same of wine, which in like
manner issues from an animate body? Then wine has a double heat, or one
conflate or moved out of two: and that which is great and intense does not
consist of an indivisible, but in some certain latitude, and it is now greater
or less according to the variety of Species, as also from the diversity of
places; for in more hot places where the Sun effects a stronger heat, there
grow hotter Wines, and this heat in them is not external, but rather natural
and implanted in the wine: For from the heat of the place it comes to pass
that the vital and elementary heat, which constituteth the natural heat of
the wine, does become greater and more intense: So as we cannot deny in wine
that double moisture: and Galen is of the same opinion, when as he
distinguishes the substance vinosa from the substance aquosa, for vinosa
qualitas, has that humidity which does unite the parts, and the watrish
substance, only that which is contracted from aliment: For so long as the Grape
was conjoined to the Vine, there did flow thereunto a watrish humor by which
it was nourished, and after the Grape is separated from the Vine, still does
retain that waterish humor, which as yet was not converted, nor assimulated
into the substance of wine, neither can have any further conversion, because
the wine is now no more animatum, or able to produce it into act. But this is
that humidity in wine which is spent and wasted in boiling or otherwise, and
the other heat remains only which is innate, and fixed to the substance of
wine; and hence it is that the boiling of wine makes it more sweet, the other
humidity being thus spent, it returns to its true natural moisture; And this
I hope will be a sufficient satisfaction for the nature of wine in general,
from whence its familiarity with humane nature will appear.

Now we proceed to the specificall difference of wine, and wine, and these
differences consist chiefly in name, for although some differ among us in name,
yet there is no specificall difference; but if you take them naturally there is
in such a specificall difference, which adds to the name, as color tastes
and smell; The nature of them all corroborative, nutritive, mundificative,
apperitive, and these are not only testified by the ancient learned Physicians,
but also proved out of their own existence or prime animation, which hereafter
shall be demonstrated.

To return therefore to the difference in name or names they are so various
and endless, as that will relish more of curiosity then utility, to render,
many of them being more phantastically imposed, out of the exuberate
singularity in Merchants of all nations. But so many as Philosophers,
Physicians, or Poets have taken notice of, I shall briefly set down, and so
pass to the colors.

In the first place let us take notice of the general name Vinum, and so
called a vi, from the strength of it, as Varro would have it, but I rather
render it vinum quasi divinum, and so a species of the tree of life in
Paradise. The Ancients they had many sorts of wine differing in name, as
Fortinum newly expressed from the grape, Protopum, such as fell from the Vine
before the grapes were trodden; others which take their names from the regions
in which they grow: as Chium, Lesbium, Falernum, Caecubum, Surrentinum,
Calenum, Signinum, Tarraconense, Spoletinum, Ceretanum, Fundanum, Malvaticum;
amongst the French many others: as vinum Belonense, Divionense,
Monlispedonense, Remense, Burdegalense, Aurelianense, Andegavense, and these
agree better with sound bodies in preserving their temper then with infirm
constitutions. There are weak wines in France which agree better with
feverish dispositions, then with cold phlegmatic tempers: as Parisiense,
Limonicense, Forense, Allobrogense, with many other. But now you know their
names, and partly to what temper they are proper let us take a taste, and
principally strike these four vessels, (viz.) sweet, acute, austere, and
mild, observing also four colors in them, (viz.) white, sanguineous, yellow,
and black, the first three commonly used and known to us by the names of
White, Claret, and Sack, and these also admit of their differences: for there
are several sorts of Sack and Claret, so also are there of white wines, some
sweet, some austere, some thick, others lympid and clear, and all these
nourish much, but especially the sweet wine, with this caution, that the liver,
spleen, and reins, be void of obstruction; For the sweetest Wines, (though
they nourish most) yet because they obtain a body generally more crasse:
therefore they are said to obstruct very much. Now having Philosophically
showed their nature and difference specifically, it remains that I offer them
medicinally to public view.

The qualities generally received amongst Physicians are to nourish, Et super
omnia alimenta^, if you will accept the testimony of Galen; It does also
evacuate, corroborate, correct putrefaction, open obstructions, exhilarate the
spirits: and what more is wanting or needful for the preservation or
restoration of life and health then these, except we should prefer
circumstance before substance, nor can there be any thing more securely
practiced, then that which is so familiar to nature, and universal principles
of mixed bodies, or humane tempers: or so undoubtedly known to us in our
Region, in any of these respects incomparable either with vegetall or mineral.
For though we be very curious in our scrutation, we shall find either a
difference irreconciliable in their figure or quality, and for the last, if it
be argued home in most drugges, it will put us, or rather force us to our
hidden quality, and if we speak of remote drugges which are transported from
other Regions, then I dare be bold to say we know them not at all, or not in
such a degree of perfection as we ought: considering the frequent use of them.
However the use of them cannot but be doubtful; for if we know them, either
we cannot have them, or else such is their alteration and change in
transportation, as must force us to fault the Ancients for their high
commendation of them, we finding either no such virtues as they affirm of
them, or none so effectual as they avouch.

To this purpose Christophorus Barri a Jesuit in his relation to the Pope, of
Cochin-china, professes that the rhubarb which he brought with him from
thence, was so changed in transportation from what it was, as that he did not
know it to be the same thing either by the virtue or color of it. And
Symphorianus a learned Physician, has adventured to challenge most of our
pharmacall compositions upon this very ground, and does affirm the chief
ingredients to be altogether unknown or found in the shops of European
Apothecaries: For better satisfaction take this expression in his own words;
Sed quod res quasdam vel non afferri, vel non sine macula, vel in totum
ignorari puto: ea sunt balsamus, Cardamomum, Myrrha, Nardus indica, Cassia,
Scordium, Cinnamomum, radix Pentaphylli, Calamus odoratus, Xylobalsamum; Now if
no man hitherto has answered his challenge, which for my own part I suppose
unanswerable. Then let us view our Pharmacopea, and judge what use can be made
of our greatest compositions. How uncertain, how unsafe the practice of them
which in a plain expression is but pugnare contra hostem clausis oculis. I
could start other doubts about many other things much in use amongst us, as
Unicornes horn, and Bezoard-stone, or such like; but my intention is not to
enter into controversy; yet desire either to be better informed, or else to
inform others, for which cause I now fall upon this subject, so well known to
all Nations, that there is such a thing as Wine, and that this or that, is
without question such a kind of wine, and familiarly used in this or that
place; And if I prove not the aforesaid qualities to be in it, I neither look
to satisfy my self nor the reader. Therefore that which was last in my
intention shall now be first in execution; And though I make not an Index of
Authors, yet now my arguments shall be altogether a Testimony not doubting in
our subsequent discourse to clear the point more artificially.

The first then is, That wine nourishes above all other aliment; they that
have read Galen, know these are his words translated. Indeed some nourish more,
some less, according to their specificall quality, as Vina aquea perexiguum
alimentum corpori praebent, quae vero crassa sunt and color rubea plus
alimenti habent quam reliqua vina, Gal.

Secondly, that it does corroborate, Vinum confortat spiritum, and ad spiritum
convertitur, and fortificat virtutem, Avicenna.

Thirdly, that it does evacuate, Vivacrassa dulciaque quod alvum deijciant
nemini fere ignotum est, sicut mustum, quod tametsi aegre concoquatur
crassumque succum, and inflationes faciat, alvum tamen movet, Gal.

Fourthly, that it does open obstructions, Vinum dulce vehementer aperit
oppilationes pulmonis, Avicenna.

Fifthly, that it does exhilarate the spirits, take sacred Scripture; so that
hitherto I have cleared, and plainly discovered these qualities in wine
medically, and confirmed all by ancient classick authority. Yet if further
satisfaction be expected, then look upon the qualities of Wine in gross, as
they are obviously laid down by most or all the chiefest Ancients. White wine
may be adhibited in all acute and hot distempers, ut voluit Hippo. Sweet wine
in cold diseases, because it heateth the body more, yet cum calefactione
temperata, Gal. No White wine is sweet, and that which is pure and subtle
moves Urine very much, leaves no impression in the head, because it does not
manifestly heat, it does sensibly refrigerate, and is commanded to be
administered in febre continua, Gal. Wine in general taken moderately, does
purge choler by Urine, exhilarate the mind, and refresh the senses; Wine also
that is dilute may safely be given in Fevers, and White wine does manifestly
refrigerate, and cleanse the lungs, sweet Wines also may be taken in acute
passions, as Plurisies and infla^mations of lungs to provoke expectoration,
when the matter is digested according to Oribasius, Haliabbas, Constantius
Monachus. Wine also that is white, subtle, and thin, is not turbulent to the
stomach, but of easy digestion, soon penetrateth the veins, provokes urine,
and is profitable in Fevers, because it does not make hot the body, or disturb
the mind, nor offend either brain or nerves. But if it be mixed then it
quenches thirst better, if you will credit Isaac the son of Solomon, an
Arabian King.

Lastly, White wine is said to be insipid, dilute, coagulate with cold, because
in such are more parts of water then of wine; yet under favor in respect of
its universal parts, there can be no such coagulation, as is affirmed by
Johannes Portugalensis, once a Pope of Rome. These are the general opinions of
the Ancients; But reason still urges to prove further the possibility of these
seeming contraries in one and the same nature, as to open and shut, or shut and
open, to corroborate and weaken, or to weaken and strengthen, and that these
contrary acts should appear together at the same time, in the same subject to
whom it is applied; As that wine (as you have heard) should generally evacuate
excrements of the body, or particularly purge bilious matter by urine, and yet
the same specificall wine shall corroborate the whole and every part it works
upon at the same time: But when I consider or contemplate the super-excellency
of this plant in a natural perfection and mixture transcending all other
vegetals, as does plainly appear by the purity of its nature in it self, and
familiarity with all animals; then it does not seem so unreasonable, to grant
it in its temper a complicate mixture, or comprehensive nature, and to
comprehend the quality of other Plants inferior to it self; and in its own
perfection to obtain a degree, though not so high as in the more proper
subject. And thus is man the Epitome of the whole world. How ever we know
these aforesaid qualities to be in wine, and may be with as little
contradiction as in Guiacum which does by constringing evacuate, and Rhubarb
which does bind by purging. But still I spy more possibility then that, which
is only extracted out of a Simile: and this is aliquid Catholicum, or an
incorruptible spirit in Wine more powerful then in any other such thing. And
this moves freely contracting or dilating its self in its sphere, add
distance weaker or stronger according to the power of the forenamed agent, and
disposition of the Sphere wherein it moves. It may also be said to move thus
from its material principles, as by virtue of its fluent and fixed heat, the
one oleaginous continuating, binding and uniting the parts together, the other
fluent attenuating the humors, and loosening the belly or the body
universally. And thus it is possible to effect these contrary actions out of
its own natural mixture. And since it can do thus, there is a great deal of
reason why it should be thus practiced, for there is no other vegetal or
mineral so safe, harmless and familiar in it self to humane constitutions as
being naturally more pure, and better concocted then any other juice, either of
milk, eggs, corn, fruits, or the like: all of them more subject to
putrefaction, and more onerous to nature in concoction, by reason of their
crudity, the most of them breeding little blood, or vicious blood, or no blood
at all; But wine, especially Claret or red, is sanguified before it be taken:
Nay, the Ancients seem to persuade me (when they call it the old man's milk,
that it has received a concoction more then blood, as it is cited in Iecore.
For milk is blood dealbated or thrice concocted. This is the physic which
does not dull, but set a true edge upon nature, after operation leaves no
venomous contact. Sure I am this was ancient Physic, else what meant Avicenna,
Rhasis, and Averroes, to move the body twice every month with the same, as it
is familiar to Nature, so they used it as familiarly; As for my own experience,
though I have not lived yet so long, as to love excess, yet have I seen such
powerful effects, both on my self and others, as if I could render no other
reason, they were enough to persuade me of its excellency, seeing extenuate
withered bodies, by it caused to be fair, fresh, plumpe, and fat, old and
infirm to be young and sound, when as water or small-beere-drinkers, look
like Apes rather then men.

My eye now is converted to the vulgar, and I see their hearts dance systole
and diastole, disorderly without observation of true time, the heart being too
much dilated with this report of preservation from death, sickness, and pain.
For natural death, or extreme old age, suffers dissolution without any
pain, and all these to be affected by so familiar a medicament as Wine, this
surely verifieth the Proverb, Every man now must be a fool or a Physician.
But be not deceived, the application of this medicament, to every temper, age,
distemper, with its circumstances of Sex and Clime, will exercise the best
Philosopher rightly to dispose and order, and if disorderly applied, or
ignorantly advised, the principles of Nature must suffer decay, and in stead of
being extended shall be sweetly shortened, how sweet then must extension be!
Empericks here stand like Tantalus with apples at their mouth, but cannot be
the better for them; They see this subject but can never reach it, their Logic
from a particular to an universal is of no force here; nor in this course can
any man have experience, but he that knows what he does in every one of these
respects following, which are not rightly to be apprehended by any Emperick
quatenus an Emperick. Yet before I fall upon the foresaid respects, give me
leave since I see Plato to salute him: amicus Plato, magis amica veritas. The
prohibition he brings concerns Kings, Magistrates, Soldiers, Women and
servants, absolutely forbidding Wine at any time, place, or to any of these
persons, and confineth them altogether to water; So that whether he meant none
but the Commonwealth of Scholars, should enjoy this happiness makes no
matter, for assuredly he chiefly intended sobriety; Yet reason is not
satisfied, nor is his politic rule or law so agreeable to reason, as to be
received in any Republique (except Platonicall.) First, because it binds those
from the use of Wine which are most capable of it, in respect of judgment and
reason, which Princes and Judges have above other people, and therefore know
how to use it rightly: and being continually in services of trouble, care, and
pain, exhausting their spirits and courage, stand in need of such a
refreshment as shall exhilarate the mind, and maintain the principles of
nature. What panick fears does Wine prevent in the Soldier subtilising their
drooping spirits, which before were quenched with puddle water, and in time of
famine how does this cherish and defend their bodies against distempers, which
by other stinking unsavory meat and drink might be generated. As for
servants, this is meat for their masters, but Physic for them upon just
occasion. And so I pass to the tempers of bodies in general, and the Wines
generally agreeing with those tempers, and then more directly to this or that
individual.

Temper it self being the reason of mixture, or the harmony and consent of the
prime qualities in elements, and by the exuperancy of each simple quality;
these four simple tempers are created; as hot when the heat surpasses the
cold, and yet of siccity and moisture remains an equality, and so of the
rest, as cold, and dry, and moist. Besides, there are four conjugate tempers
which proceed from the exuperancy of the two first qualities, as hot and moist,
hot and dry, cold and moist, cold and dry, which are the four compound
tempers; their fixation consisting in that oleaginous humor which we call
innatum calidum: and this innate so praestantious, so necessary, as without it
mixed bodies cannot subsist; it is also fomented, and cherished by influent
heat, contracted in the heart, veins and arteries, as their proper channels
consisting of spiritual blood, lying hid in the heart as the middle of the
body, which by sympathy does defend and maintain innate heat, and does
absolve and perfect the temperament, with all the functions of the body, even
as the Sun like a blazing Lamp inlighteneth the world, so does the heart
ejaculate the influent spirit, into the universal body, besprinkling every
part, conserving life, and excitating to particular functions, so as in truth
such as is this fluent spirit, such is the innate or sixth spirit in power, and
accordingly all the functions in a corporal Republique administered, which by
sense and reason are plainly comprehended, so that the excellency of this
fluent heat is not only admirable, but also of absolute necessity. And if
such a cause may be admitted, as we call causa sine qua non, then this may be
so accepted; for without this mutual commerce of fluent and innate heat, all
bodily actions are stayed and quiet. These being then the prime existence and
subsistence of humane nature, and powerful agents both in conformation and
nutrition, their Sphere of motion may be more or less adaptated by external
means, either homogeneall, or heterogeneall. For tempers then in general,
there is no such aliment, no such medicament as Wine. For the smallest wine, is
a truer pabulum to the fluent spirit then eggs, or milk sucked from any
creature, they all laying some burden upon Nature to concoct, and in
concoction there must be some expense both of fluent and radical heat, and by
so much is man's life shortened. But Wine is so pure in its own nature, that it
receives a sudden mutation, and in this very alteration adds light and heat
to the forenamed principles; and it is as oil to those natural lamps,
therefore to be preferred in my opinion.

Fernelius seems to favor my reason, where he says, that diseases that are
cold, admit of a safer remedy or cure then hot distempers, because contraria
contrarijs curantur, and thus regularly applying to the cold affect; we foment
and maintain natural heat. Contrarily in taking away praeternaturall heat
in the other, natural heat does either suffer, or is extinguished: but both
in cold and hot affects; Wine rightly applied, and upon true judication, is the
excellent and inoffensive remedy. That it is a remedy, and such a remedy I
shall thus endeavor to prove.

If it were by the ancient Physicians given as a wholesome and safe remedy in
Fevers, then is it a remedy in hot diseases, but so it has been applied by
the Ancients, as is before showed. Again, if it has been also by the same
authority affirmed and adhibited in cold affects; Then it is a proved remedy in
both. And if we take along with us the specificall difference of Wine, then we
shall soon observe this remedy to be regular according to the Rule of
contrariety. For Wine as it is naturally apperient, it opens obstruction; and
oppilation is the next cause of putrefaction, and putrefaction of Fevers, so
that opening being contrary to oppilation; Wine being opening is a true
contrary remedy per se in obstruction, and per accidens in the putrid Fevers.

Now let me descend to particular affects of each kind, hot and cold, and in
either of these prove Wine to be a specificall remedy, agreed upon by counsels
as well as the foresaid Fathers, beginning with a Jew that labored with
melancholy, his temper hot and dry, from a vicious praedominion over the blood,
his body lean, color black, ill disposed to sleep, prompt to all actions,
prone to anger, of an excellent wit and discourse, but at this time mute, and
has been so for Six days, his temper thus agreed upon with his distemper in
a counsel of Doctors, they come now to six upon two ways of cure, the one
being of humectation, the other opening obstruction, and in respect of both,
Wine is concluded a proper remedy.

Another great consultation was had about one of the Chanons of Rome laboring
with a Fever, whether or no Wine might be prescribed. About this point was
much controversy, and at last concluded and adhibited the remedy; For in all
this consult I read of no other medicament.

In the next place I present a young Gentlewoman epilepticall, or laboring
with the falling sickness, her temper hot and moist, and so concluded in
counsel; for they found her body fat and fleshie: In this case they determined
Wine to be most convenient for the attenuation of humors, and to be
administered as a specificall remedy; This also was agreed upon in a burning
Fever for a young Spaniard: in a great distillation pro Episcopo Lucensi: in
various affects and distempers: pro Aloysio Fos Careno, in vertigine,
proceeding from a cold and moist distemper of the brain: pro Cive Lucensi
against all affects of the kidneys and bladder, pro Magnifico Contareno, with
many others which were easy to produce, were it not prolix.

Enough being spoken to prove Wine in all tempers to be proper aliment, and in
all distempers as proper medicament, concluded by Fathers, and Councels in
medicine: thus far have I urged Wine in its own simple nature, not but that
I take notice of medicate Wines, and their excellencies in distempers above
simple wine; So I pass to every age and sex, and show how it is to be used
as aliment, and at what times.

Humane bodies are not only obnoxious daily to affects of air, diet, exercise,
passions of the mind, etc. but also from our implanted and internal heat,
which by little and little does dry up and demolish our original humidity,
which arises out of it self, and does so depopulate and waste it, as that it
does bring upon it many mutations, which are conscribed with certain periods
and conversions of ages. For every Animal newly sprung ex semine and sanguine,
as it were compounded of its prime humidity, is most humid, in whom all parts
as well bones and cartilages, as flesh, are soft, tender, and fluxible, which by
progression in age does stiffen, dry, wither, and consume. In like manner are
the mutations and vicissitudes, of temperaments, faculties, humors, distempers
and manners. Therefore age is but a course and space, in which the constitution
of the body by it self is perspicuously altered and changed.

Six notable differences of ages with their temperaments are to be observed.
The first is Child-age, which from the birth is extended to the foureteenth or
fifteenth year, and this hot and moist, and is more hot then ripe and juvenall
age, by reason of fixed, not fluent heat; for by how much nearer it is to its
original, by so much the more does it participate of innate heat. Contrarily
by how much it does recede from its first Principles, by so much is this innate
heat exhausted. And this first age, one of the Ancients divides into four
orders (viz.) Infancy, Dentity, and another between this and ripe age, and
then puberity it self, which also comes in fitly and opportunely to be
discoursed, because it is the second age in the order of Nature. This age of
puberity begins at the Fifteenth year, and is extended to the Eighteenth,
and is less moist and more hot. The third age is adolescency, begins at the
Eighteenth year, and is extended to Twenty five, and of a middle temper. The
fourth age is juvenile or flourishing young age, which begins at the Five and
twentieth year, and extends to Thirty five, and in comparison with the next
foregoing age, is of a temper hot and dry. The fifth age is virile or manly, and
the constant media, between flourishing young age and old age; Yet does it not
so participate of either, as that it is intemperate or infected thereby: it
begins at Thirty five, and is extended-to Forty nine. The sixth and last is
Old age, which with the exhaustion of natural heat, becomes cold and dry in
temper, but excrementitiously moist, by reason of languishing heat. This last
age also as the first does admit of division into these three parts. The first
is fresh old age, beginning at Fifty, and extends to Sixty, and all this
time may do the Republique good service, and execute offices as other men. The
second age is a media or middle old age, beginning at Sixty, and extending to
Seventie, and in this Classis, by reason of natural imbecility, they cannot
deserve of the Commonwealth. The last is decrepid age, and this concludes our
life, and being in this life, it begins at Seventie, and is extended
ordinarily to Eighty; And further, according to the purity of natural
Principles. These are the periods and differences exactly of man's age; The
first ingresse hot and moist, the last egresse cold and dry, the middle
temperate, sight and touch being sensible witnesses of this truth.

Holy Job testifies with me, that man springs up like a flower, and
continues not long in one state. Thus having circled out man's life a puncto ad
punctum, it will appear very probable, that man's life may by art be preserved
free from any disease, arising out of the mixture of natural principles, from
the infant age to decrepid old age, except the Principles be cast impure, from
whence proceeds weaker tempers, and many distempers which we call hereditary
diseases. And these also by art, and the artificial use and application of
Wine, may be much altered, and life beyond all expectation prolonged. For the
nature of Wine is so agreeable, and familiar with the natural principles, of
man, as if by the Physician it be directly applied, it shall so strengthen the
weakest temper, as shall make it subsist against a forcible distemper conveyed
in materia spermatica.

The best opportunity of performing or acting this duty is ab incunabulis, to
take the child from the mothers breast, and from temper to temper to proceed,
otherwise the temper universally may be spoiled before, or so injured by
unskilful application of medicaments, as may cause to fail in the
understanding. Yet much time may be gained in any such case, and that which is
counted the shame of Physicians, and puts them so often to their wits ends
(viz.) a Consumption hereditary or accidental, and universal of the whole
body, is no way to be cured better than by the right use of this plant. All
Physicians in this case have hitherto flone to milk of Asses, and the like;
But what is milk, comparatively with this juice, which indeed is fit for
Princes to receive, and Physicians duly to study upon, that they may learnedly
and rightly apply it? For as Kings are the life and soul of the Republique and
State, so for this cause, great care and judgment ought to be urged for their
safety, and the extension of their lives to extreme age healthfully; which in
many has been shortened by Outlandish devices, and kickchawes. But if the
learnedest Physicians shall thoroughly contemplate this subject, they shall
soon see where the extension of Kings lives is involved; Experto creed
Roberto. I speak not phantastically, or from any palate-pleasure. For my own
sickly temper durst not within these few years, so much as taste Wine, til
time and study enabled my judgment better, and now I take it daily, and (by
the concurring benediction of the Almighty) and not thin and extenuate, as
formerly I have been, but sound and strong as any of my years that has had
so many violent sicknesses. I could also speak of strange effects I have
wrought in others, but lest I should be challenged for ostentation I will
forbear, it being also a thing somewhat unjust, to publish persons and their
imperfections to the world, which were privately committed to my care. Nor is
testimony in this case needful, since I have proved the probability of
effecting these or such like, by reason, and argued the nature and mixture of
this subject philosophically, and upon this ground I defire rather to be
credited, then upon any other. And so I will return from my digression, and
take up my subject again, and see if I can fit it now to all ages.

The Infant age is the first and most difficult (as some think) to reconcile,
because Galen says, vinum Infantibus sit nocivum, by reason of their temper,
which is hot and moist; And so they understand Galen to speak of the quality,
but he was not so weak a Philosopher or Logician, as not to understand that
mixed bodies are maintained, preserved, and nourished by their Simile. Nor did
he ever argue against ijs nutrimur quibus constamus, which is to be
understood of mixed qualities rightly applied, that such are most apt and
disposed in their own nature to assimilate with their like, as is this mixture
in Wine to our material Principles of nature; So that Galen cannot be
understood to speak of the quality, but rather the quantity exceeding just
proportion, with the manner of application, as if by the excessive quantity,
you will add so much oil to the Lamp as shall extinguish it, or at such
times when it shall disturb it, by moving of some other heterogeneall, with
time of it self, with the help or secret and insensible motion of Nature will
consume. But had the mixture in it self been hurtful, there would appear
but little reason in Hippocrates, which dyeteth children which are hereditarily
subject to the stone, either of the bladder or reins, with white Wine rather
then with milk. Now he was not ignorant of diseases hereditarie, that they
are conveyed to the children in the Principles of Nature: and that Wine in it
self was most agreeable to maintain their constitutions, without any
alteration of it to move affectedly; my self also have advised it, and not
only in the same case, but also in Consumptions, and many other affects with
singular success: And (in truth) if Wine hurt any temper, the discretion of
the Agent is to be questioned, not well observing or knowing the true
specificall differences each way.

By these expressions I hope, those that understand believe also, that the
first is set at liberty to make use of Wine; now I must present a health to
the next, which we called Pubertie, this temper is more hot, and less moist
then the former. So that by way of contemperation of the heat, and humectation
of the moist, the same Wine is still useful and most proper. But when, and how
long, and how much, and how fitted is only known to the Physician, and he
guided by his judications.

Adolescency, which is the media, or of a middle temper, neither hot nor cold,
may not fear either White, Claret, or Rhenish, in their order, observing the
seasons; with the inclination of celestial orbs, and the measure.

Iuventus, being more hot and dry, must also apply himself to these forenamed
Wines, somewhat more dilute, which is easily effected by water.

Virile age holds out a cup of more rich Claret from 35 to 49. and goes out
with a draught of the smallest Sack. Which Senectus makes stronger by addition
of Aligants, and the richest Sacks and Muscadine, and continues them unto the
last period of life.

Thus have I now applied it generally to every age, and briefly cleared my
proposition. As for the Sex, male or female; between these I shall make no
difference of temper. Nor do I give ear to some, that make foul stir de
Lana Caprina, or to prove diverse temperaments of Sexes, and that the
procreation of women is more in the left then in the right side; Ergo, they
must be more cold, and more weak; But whatsoever they fancy this is only to
be observed, without any further dispute; That temperaments are not conflate,
out of heat more obtuse, or vehement, but depend on the perfusion and consent
of the four Elements. Therefore having distinctly discoursed of temperaments,
I have also included Sexes; As for the manner of using this subject. Thus it is
as follows.

Hitherto I have taught the nature and use of Wine, both Philosophically, and
medically, and how familiar a nutriment it is to man, and still say it must be
so, both in respect of its substance and form, else I understand not Aristotle
his alimentum simile and dissimile; For although all aliment of what substance
soever must receive form of heat before it be converted into blood, by which
it does nourish both fluent and fixed heat in us. Yet such nor so apt is any
substance for form to sanguifie or nourish as Wine; and if it be possible, it
will augment innate heat and moisture; For it is oil not water that augments
the flame, a proportion observed, else it puts it out: so that it is the true
Nectar, by the use whereof Principles of life are augmented, natural humors
multiplied, spirits refreshed, strength restored, care expelled, and bodies in
youthfulness conserved. To conclude, it is all in all to a natural body. For
although in general, aliment is said to be liquid, airie, and solid, yet it is
humidity that nourishes. For medicament also I have proved it proper; The
Arabian Phisicians are of opinion, that to take this liquor once every month,
in such a quantity as shall be approved by the learned Phisicians is wholesome
Physic, it does much recreate the Animal faculties, reconcile sleep, provoke
urine, and sweat, dissolve superfluities, and they affirm it to cure the
Quartane with other diseases, circumstances conducing to the profitable use of
it after this manner, which circumstances I obscure, because I am desirous to
entertain time with substance, only Custom is to be mentioned as somewhat
substantial, for it over-ruleth the rest; and the time generally most fit to
receive Wine is with meat, and then such Wine as best fitteth the temper of
the Individual; But those that mean to use this subject rightly must not be
without their Physician, or out of their view, for let their temper or
distemper be what it will, so it be not some fatal stroke, or wound; by the
wisdom of the Physician and his skill, they may sinsibly perceive the
prolongation of their life, and by this means, which is so pleasant to
universal Nature. The Chemist his best Rhetoric is exercised about the
pleasantness of his extract, smalnesse of quantity. But here I present a
taste for pleasure, beyond all mineralls forsafetie, it is incomparable either
with them or Vegetals. Excess in this may be more easily repaired; nor is the
offense in nature of so great moment. Now because there will be some
difficulty in getting true natural Wine without sophistication, therefore I
should think it fit (were it so pleasing to Authority whereunto I humbly
submit) that as it has been heretofore with us, and is still in other
Countries, Apothecaries might have liberty to sell it, and so by the direction
of the Physician, to make many medicate Wines, fitted and in readiness upon
all occasions. But that I may draw to a conclusion, I will briefly lay down
(or rather take up) two maine objections, one moved by Galen, the other from
the sacred Scripture, apprehended erroniously: both indeed at the first view or
blast will seem to shake both my foundation and edifice also.

Galen after all his ratiocination, is raised out of his Urne, and presents to
me in his Commentary upon the Aphorisms these words; Wine debilitateth as
Venus: and Frambesarius makes bold with his doctrine, and delivers it for a
truth, and in these words, Vinum Venusque nocent eodem modo. The objection I
confess is instar omnium, and very material, whether he be taken to speak
of the use or excess of Wine. In the first sense it does oppose all that I
have formerly taught and proved, in the last a fit opposition to Avicenna,
Rhasis, and Averrohes, they advising wine once a month, usque ad obrietatem.
Now if Galen be not understood to speak of excess, then (as I have said
before) neither Wine nor Venery, can hurt, debilitate, and weaken the body, for
both rightly used are profitable, the one to preserve the individual, the other
to propagate the species, and venus as well as vinum, both exhilarate the
mind, cheer the spirits, refrigerate the body, and cause sleep. So that at
the first view, Galen does seem to speak of excess only, or principally. But
that I may reconcile him with the Arabian Physicians my part is now to
explicate, and render him in his own proper sense and meaning. This exception
is not so much, or principally against the quantity, as the quality and
misapplication, both in respect of time and temper. As when the quality of wine
exceeds in strength the temper of the body, to which it is given, and at a
time unseasonable, as upon a fasting stomach, and then to exercise the act of
Venery, intemperatly upon it: and in this sense is Galen to be conceived
chiefly. But I apprehend Plato and Ambrosius in another sense, merely
distasting the nimium ebriety, and intoxication in a voluptuous way: and (to
speak truth) after such manner abused, it is poison both to mind and body,
inflameth the blood, debilitateth the nerves, vexes the head, and to be short
is worse then any poison. For this cause Moses not only calls it Venenum, but
the poison of Dragons which admits of no cure. Therefore Wine in this manner
taken, and according to this sense is more detestable, for the strongest poison
of Animalls or minerals can but vulnerate the flesh, but wine is powerful to
wound the soul; Yet such is my candid censure of those Arabian Princes in
Medicine, that they never used it after this manner themselves, or advised it
in a voluptuous way to others (I mean to ebriety) but as a medicament rightly
and properly judicated; Thus they made use of wine rather then any other
medicament, because of its familiarity with the Principles of humane Nature.
Well knowing that ebriety, (as it is simply into xication) may be effected by
other medicaments as well as wine, and if not wine, then we are enforced to use
the other for soporificks, and the like. So that by this time I hope the doubt
is clear, the ancient Physicians reconciled, and my self moving toward the
next objection grounded upon Scripture.

There are a sect in the world, and in this Region, that stiffely defend the
fatality of man's life; and that no man can be preserved, prolonged, or
restored. That diseases of every kind are, or else to be inflicted, by an
inexpugnable necessity determined of God, and immutably fixed; And these
Ignaroes have base and mean thoughts of those which defend the contrary,
supposing it to be a superfluous curiosity to avoid contagion, to seek
remedies for diseases, or to arm themselves against their enemies, because God
foreseeth death of this kind or the like; And the Almighty foreseeing death of
this nature, and at this time, and to this or that individual; Ergo, it is not
to be avoided, though the Lord shall say every man's perdition is of himself.
Dangerous and impious must this opinion needs be, for if it be granted, what
needs the Church or any private person, put up any prayer to the Almighty, for
the restoration of life and health, and preservation out of danger? and to
what end or purpose was the gift of healing dispensed to the Phisician, if
death and dissolution of every kind be predestined, so as by no means it
can be shunned or prevented? Nay, to what end should we pray for our daily
bread or health, etc? That we may therefore expurge this pernicious and
intolerable mistake concerning the divine providence of God, some things about
his celestial administration of universalls are more highly to be taken into
consideration, and repeated: by which the dignity and eximious utilitie of
medicine may be fully showed. That therefore the vicissitudes of humane actions
and things happen not by chance or fortune, but by the ordination of the
Almighty, ought to be embraced by all Christian pious people, and that God is
the omnipotent and eternal builder of the Universe, and framed it of nothing,
as is proved by divine testimony. This building being thus powerfully framed,
is also by the same efficacy conserved, who has also constituted to every
particular created thing by its self, a beginning and an end of subsisting and
moving, and does take notice not only of principal, but also of subsequent
causes of things, as if the Lord did govern, moderate, dispose and order them,
according to his free will, and yet all this government is void of fatal
violence, and most commonly comes to pass mediatly, and by deputed causes,
which the vulgar call second causes; which the divine Majesty does use as the
instruments of his will, while he does so manage all things which he has
created, as also himself may suffer them to exercise their proper motions; for
the will of man by divine ordination is the beginning of humane actions, freely
choosing what seems best to its self, especially in externalls. And
according to Aristotle, the nature of motion is the cause of this or that thing
in which it is primarily and per se. As for example, in the Sun, perpetual
rotation, in weights of their inclination to Center. Yea, the causes so answer
the effects, as if the effects be necessary, the causes are also necessary,
and of contingents, the causes are also contingents; nor does the presence of
God, which is certain and cannot be deceived take away the contingency of
natural events. But the future effect is disposed, as it were by a divine
providence, necessarily or contingently. Nor is it so that the Creator is
bound to the necessity, but moderateth all things freely according to his
free will and pleasure. As did plainly appear, when he caused the Sun to
stand still a whole day. And when he caused the Sea to divide it self and
stand like firm walls about the Israelites; As also in the case of Daniel. The
three children in the fiery furnace. And Duffus Milcolumbus King of Scots, who
being cruelly murdered, Anno Dom. 961. neither Sun or Moon was seen for
the space of six months after. And although he can thus dispose of causes,
and life and death absolutely at his own pleasure, yet it behooves us rightly
to take that constitution of term of life not absolutely for a fatal
determination; but for a divine ordination of servient causes, by their
natural power of sustaining or corrupting life. For since life (as the
Philosopher speaks) is nothing but a duration of heat conjunct with
moisture, and duration of vital heat, and extinction of the same, are
natural effects, depending in like manner upon natural causes; which without
doubt for the various internal disposition of natural heat and moisture, as
also external causes, not only the quality, but also the quantity of life it
self may be varied. For it does attain the internal condition of lively
Principles, so long as the heat and moisture are so united in Animals, as one
is not destroyed by the other, and so long they live, but either of these
separated each from other perish. And in whomsoever innate is more vegetious
and strong, and radical moisture more pure in substance, copious in quantity,
and also temperate, in them life is more long. Thence it comes to pass, that
our ancient Fathers by reason of purity in the internal causes of life, have
exceeded the age of nine hundred years; Succeeding ages departing from that
purity of Principles, by little and little are come down to shorter ages; And
in these our ages, the Countess of Desmond, and Thomas Parre, are
extraordinary examples. For ordinary old age is Threescore and ten, if more
it must be by the extraordinary power and purity of the radical Principles;
For radical heat is the principal Agent of generation, in the liquid
substance of seed and blood in the first conception, soon after renders it
more dry, and exhibits the rudiments of every member, and by drying still more,
does publish the exact species; Then it does augment after it is come into the
world, and brings it to perfection. Hence by the continuate efficiency of the
sameheate, all the parts being exiccated above measure are less able to
administrate their offices, whence follows a necessity of decay, and
extinction at last of natural heat, and this is a natural death, according
to Galen. Which by decrepid old age, by siccity and defect of nourishment,
without sense of pain according to nature is extinct. And is unnatural and
violent, when by any other internal or external cause or injury, it is put
out before decrepid age; For so with care and skill it may be prolonged. For
as I have plainly argued, and yet not swarving from true natural Philosophy,
by this right it does appear possible, to maintain the Unity of heat and
moisture till they spend themselves in their own natural motion, and is to
cut off their being by unskilful courses either in diet or medicine.

And if a Simile will be acceptable, I suppose Hippocrates to be very happy
in his, when he compares the life of man to a candle in a Lantern, or set
up in some other place, where neither wind or rain, or other tempest can seize
upon it; In such a place the candle will be longer burning out, then when it
is exposed to common injuries of wind and weather, by which it is either
suddenly blown out, before the oil or tallow be spent, or else blazeth out
in a shorter time. And these injuries are to the bodies of men plagues, wounds,
and all manner of diseases, compelling nature violently, to yield its natural
being; which otherwise might and would be further extended.

I confess according to the truth of that, Contra vim mortis, non est
medicamen in hortis; That natural death cannot be avoided, because the heart
cannot be made moister, when as by age it is exiccated; Yet I do not think
it wise or religious, in a negligent way to betray our lives to death before
the time, as some do in a fantastical way, others in a desperate, but all
like fools go to the slaughter alike, when as they run upon such dangers,
inconsulto medico vel amico.

By this time I hope the fatality of man's life will not be questioned much,
nor the possibility of extending it to extreme old age; and by no means so
familiar and safe as Wine. Now if I should proceed further to every
circumstance conducible to the practical part, it would be a work of long
time, which I cannot well spare, and of exact judgment, wherein I could be
content to receive directions from others more able and learned then my self.

That which I have done is rationally to satisfy the world in the thing it
self, which has been in allages questioned, both in respect of man's life,
that it is not to be extended; As also in respect of Wines, that they are not
so proper to extend it. Now if you look back upon the Principles of man's
life, and the Principles of wine, none will, I hope, condemn my Philosophy,
though some may differ in opinion, and many such there will be, which in such
infinity as well of judgments as of faces, cannot be helped nor avoided.
Therefore it is not in me to satisfy every fancy, nor do I desire to be
understood of the Vulgar; But rather that wisdom should be justified of her
Children, and to such are these my endeavors offered a sacrifice, after the
manner of those devout Children in Plutarch, which by reason of sudden
inundation of waters were disappointed of their yearly oblation, which they
used to offer up to Jupiter, yet rather then they would be wanting therein,
they religiously concluded in stead of a Ram to offer a Limon, which Jupiter
accepted in that case of necessity.

So my self having lately waded through Fountains, Moors, standing Pooles,
Rivers, Wells, and the Sea, it is impossible my brain should be free of
Inundation, and consequently my Wine pure without mixture of water and much
weakness; Yet if my devotion may be well pleasing to Jupiter, let it be
blessed to the world. And whereas I have (like Hercules his dog) but only
besmeared my lips, with this Crimson juice, other Herculian brains may vent
it in a plentiful manner, by which every sense shall be refreshed, every
capacity filled, and every understanding truly delighted.

FINIS.
PVlchrum tuum, vir clarissime, ac doctum de vine tractatum non oscitanter
perlegi, ac tibi remitto. Ab isto subjecto Noacho agnomen obtigisse existimo;
Quum isto fuerit gentilium Ianus bifrons nullus dubito. Nota illi fuere, and
quae ante diluvium gesta, and quae aliquot annorum centurijs post illud
accidere. Ille a liberaliore vini potu pudenda detexit; tu ab ingenio vini
arcana in publicum bonum revelas. Si quis sitqui ex assidua Authorum lectione
qui tibi viam praeruere, existimet se quae ad hanc materiam pertinent abunde
percepisse nae ego illum existimo late falli. Inveniet in tuo opusculo non
pauca hact^nus non observata, quibus instructus possit, and quae in rem suam
sunt pervidere, and aliorum sanitati consulere. Quamobrem fra^^o ^^^lign^ (...)
voris dente perge (...) iui gloriam aternitati consecrare.

Scribebam Londini 7 Calend. Mart. anni. abexhibito incarne Messia supra
millesimum sexcentesimum trigesimi sexti. Tui si quis alius studiosus,
Alexander Reidus.

Imprimatur.

Tho. Wykes R.P. Episc. Land. Cap. domest.


