The English Myrror.

A REGARD Wherein al estates may behold the Conquests of Envy:

Containing ruin of commonweals, murder of Princes, cause of heresies, and
in all ages, spoil of divine and humane blessings, unto which is adjoined,
Envy conquered by virtues.

Publishing the peaceable victories obtained by the Queens most excellent
Majesty, against this mortal enemy of public peace and prosperity, and
lastly A Fortris against Envy,

Builded upon the counsels of sacred Scripture, Laws of sage Philosophers, and
policies of well governed commonweals: wherein every estate may see the
dignities, the true office and cause of disgrace of his vocation.

A work safely, and necessary to be read of every good subject.

By George Whetstones Gent.

Malgre.

Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON.

Printed by I. Windet for G. Seton, and are to be sold at his shop under
Aldersgate 1586.

(...) which are the fountains of goodness, from whence princes and heroycal
states may receive perfect wisdom, and the whole world besid^ moral
instruction: to conclude, your Majesty (as Gods ^ener) being settled in Salomons
throne, crowned with the conquest of Envy, the queller of Alexander, Caesar,
and most of the worthies: plentifully distributing divine and earthly
blessings, upon afflicted kingdoms, against whom all traitorous practices are
of the nature of the horse called Seian, whose masters had evermore miserable
ends. Most gracious Lady, admyring these great considerations, I fearfully
have armed this profitable book, with the sheilde of your Royal protection,
from whom the glory and goodness thereof is derived. The censures of grave men
which are the substance of this work, stand in place of counsels for your good
subjects, and unto me as loyal as the truest, the bare labor is only dew. In
which trembling presumption, I protest before God and your Majesty, that my
heart nor book medleth with matter of your happy government, to which no
earthly policy may be added, neither is heavenly wisdom absent: And as far
is it from my thought, in name figure, or circumstance, to misnote any capital
Maiestrate, whose honorable travels deserve much reverence, and no less
regard: It then follows, most regarded Queen, that the reach of my duty,
which climeth between fire and frost, (the premises allowed) simply laboreth
to publish these regards, that common faults may be amended in imitation of
your precious virtues, the lights of the world, and life of Englands happiness.

God grant my pains a profitable success, to which good god I zealously
pray, that long may your majesty live, that still may your enemies fall, and
those that lovingly fear you, no doubt shall ever find you a good gracious
Lady.

Your Majesty's loyal and humble subject, therein happy. George Whetstones.

To the most Honorable the Nobility of this flourishing Realm of England,
accomplishment of a^e desires.
MOst Honorable, the long continuance of her Majesty's most happy government,
fully witnesses the saying of moral Diogenes, Virtue only conquereth Envy,
for if force or fortune were antidotes against her infections, the ancient
monarks had overcome her venom, and (contrary to other poisons) her breath had
not shroonke up their large Empires, into the length and breadth of their
Tombs. Basil in his sermon of Envy, says, that this passion bends her
forces against the glory of God, the peace of Princes, and obedience of
subjects, feeds upon lamentable chances, and pineth to behold the
prosperity of virtue. Basil to confirm his censure, had the subversion of
large Empires, ruin of flourishing commonweals, and (in former ages) the
spoil of divine and humane blessings, whose wonderful conquests I have set
forth for three considerations: the first, to show the mighty providence of
Almighty God, in defending this little Realm from sundry the assaults of so
furious an enemy: the second, to enlarge, or rather eternize the glory of
many her Majesty's peaceable victories against this bloody Envy: the third,
to counsel her good subjects by weighty examples, to arm their happiness
with virtue, the only mean to withstand the puissance of Envy. They may
hardly plead ignorance, having the commandments of sacred scripture, the
laws of sage Philosophers, and policies of good common wealths men, to
instruct every of them in the offices and duties of their vocation, Right
Honorable, this is in effect the reach of my travel, which I hope will
entertain the discreet Reader with many other particular benefits. Unto you
most noble Lords, I reverently direct this first part, which (some ways)
medleth with the sword, and the rest

I present according to the quality of the subiete: which considered by the
moral substance, may (with your favor I say it) be a Myrror of government
for all good subjects. The further censure thereof, I humbly submit to your
Lorships leysurable reading: and for your health, honor, and prosperity, as
the beauty and strength (next unto God and her Majesty) of this happy
government, my daily prayers shall not be forgotten.

At whose right Honorable Lordships commandments I humbly remain. George
Whetstones.

R. B. to the Reader of this English Myrror.
TO praise a thing, that no man can dispraise,
Approves zeal, yet smally does alure,
The Iuy bush, is but a needless gase,
Before the door, where as the wine is pure.
The Authors name alone commends this book,
The Muses so, have always blessed his Pen:
And who so shall with judgment thereon look,
Shall find Regards for every sort of men.
Let Malice swell, and Envy show her might,
His Fame shall live, in spite of every spyght.
FINIS.
GEntle Reader, whereas by absence of M. Whetstones, some small faults remain
(perhaps) uncorrected: if thou light of any such, I beseech thee with thy Pen
to amend them, and especially such as are contained in the which are general
faults through the impression. Errata,


Errata.
Page 3. line 5. for fastneth, read fasten. page 4. li. 28. for nourishes,
read nourish, pa. 25. li. 27. line of Beniamen, read line of Judah. p. 152. li.
13. up hary, read Ap-hary or Vap Harry. pa. 237. li. 19. Gleobulus, read
Cleobulus. p. 247. li. 14. from study, read from manners. pa. 248. li. 5. the
neighborhood, read the neighbor. p, 249. li. 11. Maiestrates, read Maiestrates
of cities.

THE ENGLISH MIRROVR.
A Regard wherein all estates may behold the Conquestes of Envy etc.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Original of Envy, and how far in evil this fury passes all
other passions of the mind.

THere is no defect of mind nor infirmity of body, but has his original of
nature, or color from reason, and by the benefit of the one or the other,
receaueth cure: preposterous Envy only except, who degenerateth from kind, and
masketh without vizard of excuse Touching the passions of the mind, pride is
abominable before God, ambition perilous for a Common weal, and flattery
the great deceiuer of men: yet are none of these evils without a cunning
cloak, although void of just excuse.

The proud man says unto himself, I am formed after the image of God, I am
Lord of his creatures, as well on the earth The defenses of pride.
as in the sea, and (beyond the power of nature) beautified with a divine
knowledge, I pry into the qualities of the heavens, and prognosticate what
they promise or threaten on earthly creatures, and therefore have good cause to
advance my thoughts and to think well of my self.

The ambitious has this veil or shadow: I see (quoth. hc) that The defenses of
ambition.
virtue her self attyred with poverty, is ouerblowne with light regard, her
servants, slaves to varlets in credit, so that he is an enemy to his own
prosperity, that in bare estate, presents any good part, for that he is
sure to encounter the malice of the ignorant, who fearing their own fortunes,
with envy suppress his perfections: and the good (although they embrace
virtuous endeavors) at the first sight judge by the outward habit, as the noble
Titus did by his good friend Gissipus, till necessity discovered who he was.
And therefore says the ambitious, I hold authority the readiest ladder to
advancement.

The flatterer thinks, that to reprove men's faults, is a The defense of
flattery.
mean to fire the faulty man's heart with malice, and thereby should increase
his friends evil, and endanger his own welfare, where the wisest are not so
wise, but that they open both their ears to hear their own praises, and
therefore (says he) blame he that list, I will breath in no man's face, other
then good words: not only these, but all other infections of the mind, have
such like sophistical reasons, to give color to their errors: neither are
they so past cure, but that there is a hope of reformation.

Now concerning the infirmities of the body, the pestilence Infirmities of the
body.
is most dangerous, the plurisie most sudden, and the leprosy most odious:
notwithstanding, if delay have not wrought over much defect in nature, physic
has a medicine for every of these maladies.

But this hiddeous Monster envy lies open to all reproach, and as a moth in
cloth, or canker rust in iron, dies Envy without cure.
with the destruction of his follower, who burst out of the entrayles Original
of Envy.
of the old serpent, to so we hatred between God and man: for the envy that
the Devil bare, at the Almighty Majesty of God, raised a desire in Adam and
Eve, to be as their Creator in knowledge, and so brought sin upon the face Genesis
3. Envy the first cause of sin.
of the earth, and through sin swadled all their posterity in the heavy
displeasure of God, with this bitter curse was she hatched, and with the sack
of Commonweals and blood of innocents, she has ever since been fostered.

A man governed by other detestable evils, be it murder, Envy worse the^
murder etc.
theft, perjury and so forth: if he be not soon cut off with the sword of
Justice, yet is he continually chastened with the scourge of his conscience:
but law and justice net easily fasteneth on the envious, for he hydeth his
conspiracies, until he be strengthened with a multitude, whose fury breaks
forth The ^tes of Envy.
in the flame of fair cities, and is quenched with the blood of many
thousands, and therefore envy may well be compared to brandes raked up in
ashes, which are uncovered, to set mighty blocks a fire: In the conscience of
the envious, remorse has no place, for that his thoughts are continually
busied with devilish imaginations as well as his forces are bent to the ruin
of his neighbors.

A man without much blushing, will confess himself a covetous, Def^ces of
(...).
voluptuous or cowardly person: for that the needeful foresight of the great
charge of children, the daily hard fortunes which happen, and the costly cure
of sickness, whereunto all men are subject, are colors for coueteusnesse.

Again, the blame that is laid upon a nigarde, the contempt Defenses of
volptuousnes.
wherein men have mecanicall lives, she hasty death that follows care, are
reasons to make men be pleasant and merry with their own.

The peril of life, the grief of wounds, and the danger of law, are
sufficient excuses for a coward. The defenses of covvardlines.


But if he be envious, he dare not recyte so much as the name of envy, the
reason is, this passion is so soul and infamous, None will confess himself
to be envious.
as it stincketh in the opinion of him that is infected therewith and good
cause why, for that the others grow as langors and malladies of nature, and
envy proceeds of a malicious and froward consent of our own will, without
any ground or reason: save such as would make the worst infidel blush to
defend, and the weakest Christian abhor to hear, his inticementes are so
far from grace, humanity and natural pity.

All other passions of the mind may grow and spring from such hard
temptations, as they which yield unto their Necessity cause of many
trespasses.
affections, do give cause both of pity and lament: as necessity may make
men steal, tyranny in Princes, may so we sedition among subjects, hardness
and cruelty in parents, may cause disobedience in children, and so of others,
which although the offenses ought to be chastened, yet their causes may with
charity be bemoned: But this feinde envy is only tempted with the bounty of
God, for as our savior says, the eye of the envious is for no other cause
evil, but in that it beholds Mat. 20.
that God is good, which considered, the envious is to be condemned, much more
then the impatient, yea when affection leads him to murmr and rage against
God: for the impatient, There may be cause of impatiencie, but no color for
envy
may be so sharply pressed with Gods heavy judgment, as (charged above the
sufferaunce of nature) reason shall be forced to give place unto fury, and
when the heart is at this liberty, the tongue will not let to disgorge
blasphemies, sufficient (if it were possible) to fire the heavens, but if the
envious vnbowelleth his grief, when he comes to dispoyle his Blessings which
grieve the envious. August. contra Donat. lib. 4. cap. 8.
heart, he can allege or pretend no other cause of sorrow, but that God is too
good, too merciful, and too liberal toward his creatures. In giving to some
great authority, to others abundance of riches, to this man store of
friends, to that man enlargement of honors, etc. On the contrary part, if he
rejoice, it is in beholding of most sad and lamentable chances, as in Causes
which rejoice the en^ous.
discord among friends, jealousy between man and wife, their children
disobedient, their servants thieves, or in such like havoc, of their
neighbors prosperity: and as among beasts, some nourishes themselves with
evil odours, some with poison, and some with filthy carrion: even so the
envious is fatned with the curse, misery, and death of his brethren. Basile in
his sermon of envy, compares the envious properly Ba^. Sermon de ^dia.
unto flies, which leave the sound parts of our body, and liteth upon a scab
or sore, the juice or filth whereof gives the^ a sweet and pleasant taste:
even so virtuous and good men, afflicted with exile, imprisonment, loss of
goods, or such like ordinary calamities, give comfort and rejoicing unto the
envious. Seneca rightly compares envy unto a Panther, who so rages Envy
like^ to a Panther.
at the presence of a man, for the majesty he presents, as presently he
imployeth all his forces, to dismember his beautiful The nature of a Panther.
limbs, and not only is agrieued with the lively countenance of man, but
wheresoever he beholds his painted image, he is not in quiet until he has
defaced his face: even so the envious are not satisfied in giving untimely
deaths unto good men, but to bury the remembrance of their virtues, Envy
continues after death.
(if it possible were) commit inhumane outrages, upon their ingraued bones,
and condemn their learned and necessary books unto the fire: so that it is
apparaunt that there is no possibility, how any other evil; should match
envy in evil, for that their extremest revenge stretches but unto death,
when the malice of envy searches the grave: which considered, the envious are
more hurtful then the Crocadile, who although she hungerly prays upon a
living man, yet if she find his dead carkase, she lamenteth over it, and with
her warm tears washes his face, yea so extreme devilish are the qualities
of the envious, as Socrates likeneth envy unto a Viper, who so soon as they
have engendered the female, Envy compared to a ^per. The unnatural nature o^
a viper.
murdereth the male, because she will not live as his inferior: again, the
young ones eat themselves forth of their dammes intrayles, because they will
not be bound unto the obedience of nature. And questionless Socrates in the
quality of this venomous beast, rightly figureth the condition of the envious,
who to compass the desire of his defiled heart, treads under foot care of
his countries welfare, duetifull obedience unto his parents, and natural
affection toward his kinffolke and friends: yea which is most against kind,
the envious often The en^ (...) to (...). A ^ble of E^pe.
times commits wilful outrage upon himself, to behold a greater upon his
enemy: according to the saying of morrall Esope, The envious desired of
Jupiter to be spoiled of one of his eyes, that the covetous man might lose
both. To which purpose, many examples in my following discourses, shall be
shown, whereas if any other passion entiseth a man unto evil, it flattereth
him with the hope of a profitable end. Moreover, though a man malice deadly,
yet there may be satisfaction, or means of atonement: But where there is
(...) is never reconciled.
envy, there is no hope of reconciliation: whereupon is set down for
infallible experiments, that there was never love, but envy between Cain and
Abell, Isacke and Ismael, Loath and Abraham, Jacob and Esau, Joseph and his
brethren, the Kings of Judah and Israel, and the Apostles, the Turks and the
Persians, the Romans and the ancient Spartians, the French men and English
men, and so consequently between neighbor countries, between whom there
can be no perfect Neighbor countries envy others glory.
amity, not for that the one is unable to repair ye wrongs done unto the
other: but for that the one without envy cannot endure to behold the glory of
the other. For which cause Timon of Athens was called dogged, because he
grinned at Timon of Athens.
the felicity of man: yea if we well considered their effects, the actions of
the envious may well be termed deuilishe, in that they repine* at the glory
of God, and bend all their forces to suppres virtue and her followers, which in
these following discourses, shall be more largely shown.

CHAP. 2.
The original of Paricide, and other inhumane murders by Envy.

MURDER the monster of inhumanitie, Murder the bird of envy.
was hatched by this accursed Envy, through whose motions the reprobate Genesis
4. Abell slain by C^.
Caine slew his just brother Abell, only because that Abels oblations were
better regarded of God then his own. Envy caused Romulus to commit Envy
cause of pa^de and in hummane marthers. Remas slain by Romulus. Machiuel dis.
Lib. 1.
the like outrage upon nature, in slaying his brother Remus, because he
participated with him in rule and soueraignetie, which inhumane fact, Machiuel
does thus excuse, It was needful (says he) that it should be so, for that
other wise the Roman Empire might have ended in the beginning, being at one
instant governed by two kings of several disposition and direction. But
allow the reason to be good, the good which fell unto the Common wealth,
cannot wash away the stayne of Romulus bloody offense, otherwise then the
freedom that the Romans gained over their tyrannous Kings, cleared proud
Tarquinius of the rape committed on chaste Lucretia, for if any good (as
oftentimes) does come of a naughty cause, God is to be praised for his
providence, and the Author is to be chastened for his evil intent. And
questionless Romulus entente was so foul, as exceeded ye cruelty of ye
ravening Wolf which nourished him, and therefore worthy to live in this
reproach.

Unkind thy Damme, thee suckerlesse did leave,
against kind a Wolf thee fostered with her teate, Romulus and Rem^s were
fostered by a^ wo^fe.

Whose kind was thee with bloody jaws to tear,
thou most unkind to sit in Sovereign seat.
Unkindly slewst Remus thy brother dear.
So outrageous was the envy between Polineces and Eteocles, Polinec^ and
Et^ocles broth^.
as old Oedipus their father scratched forth both his eyes because he could not
endure to behold the murders and other deadly mischiefs, inflicted upon the
poor Thebanes, in sustaining their unnatural quarrels, and (as some histories
make mention) when they had sheathed their swords in each others intralles,
the envy of their life appeared after death, whose heresies being joined
together, the flame of the funeral fire violently sundered the^, with ye
selfsame venomous malice, which is naturally impressed between these
vnpolitike creatures, the Eagle and the Dragon, the Cock and the Lion, the
wild Bore and the Eliphant, and diverse other brute creatures, who so disagree
The mortal venime of envy. A necessary example.
in nature, as being dead, by no means their ^louds will mingle together: an
example of weight, to teach men to beware of their envious enemies, in whose
hearts disdain and malice are so mortally enbleamed, as neither gifts,
prayer, nor good usage are of power to work a true attoneme^t. This monster
envy imboldned wicked Nero to violate the bendes of nature, Envy caused Ne^o
to ^ay ^s mother.
by the murdering of his mother, to see the place of his cursed conception, as
in his best excuse is alleged. But the true cause was this, he hastened her
death, for that her life by the charge of nature, bound him to a duetifull
reverence, for his thoughts reigned over all men, though his life deserved to
be loved of no man.

With this viperous child may be coupled the ungracious Commodus, son of the
good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, Commodus enuyed the remembrance of his fathers
virtues.
who encountering fourteen or fifteen gentlemen Romans, upon a bridge over
Tiber, demanded of the gentlemen whereupon they so sadly devised: the gentlemen
simply answered, that they talked of the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, whose
life was beautified with such divine virtues, as his death has charged Rome
with an endless sorrow. Whereupon as a murderer of his fathers renown, he
commanded his guard to throw them all into the river of Tiber, alleging
that they could not praise his father, without the blaming of him. Wherein
though Commodus did evil, he spoke truth, for the commendation of virtue, is
evermore a reproach to vice: and Vice is reproched by the commendation of virtue.
without doubt, as the good Emperor Aurelius enlarged the monumentes of his
predecessors, in example to those that should succeed him: so the ungracious
Commodus exceeded all his ancestors in evil, and left no possibility for his
heirs to be worse: of whom is reported that his notorious crimes exceeded the
days of his age: which I ouerpasse, as examples necessary for other purposes,
and unto this impious part I will join this following cruelty.

Upon a day one told this naughty Emperor, that his cosen Mamertius
Antomenes resembled him in comeliness of An other inhumane murder caused by
envy in Commodus.
body, and magnanimity of mind: upon which report Commodus pronounced death
both upon the reporter and his innocent cosen, holding it for reason, that it
appertained to no man, to vaunt, (less) to resemble him: and (in my opinion)
if Antomenes resembled him in deuilish qualities, death was too easy a scourge
for so lewd a life. Mulla Abdula father of Moley Mahumet, commonly called the
black king, in whose cause the mortal battle, between the king of
Portugal, and Amoley Muluco king of Fees was fought the 5. of August 1578. as
in the alteration of the latter commonweals by envy, shall be more largely
shown, upon an envious suggestion that his brethren by the priuity in nature
and blood, looked A horrible murder by envy.
to live in greater liberty then subjects, by the assistaunce of a noble man
of the country called Alcatho Alley, caused the throats of a eleven of his
brethren to be cut in one morning. Now to conclude these particular tyrannies
of envy, unto H^ule, Grafton, and other English H^oriographers
which millions of notorious examples may be enserted: the monstrous murders of
king Richard the third a tyrant of our nation is worthy note, in whose wretched
end, yet worthy his wickedness, the happiness of England began again to
flourish, and enjoyed her ancient renown. This tyrant at such time as he was
Duke of Gloucester, with an envious eye, beheld King Henry the 7. overcame this
tirant and calmed the afflictions of England. Prince Edward slain by Richardes
hands.
the soueranity of king Edward the 4. his brother, and yet enforced by
necessity obeyed him. For anointed kings with weak policies are not
deprived, but unable to hold his hand from their throats, who for their
dignities took the upper hand of him, against the laws of honor with his
impious hands he stabbed Prince Edward to the heart, being taken prisoner at
the battle of Tewksbury.

Next like an Alehouse ruffen, with his dagger he slew the K. Henry the 6.
slain by Richardes hands.
unfortunate good king Henry the sixth in the tower of London. Then heaping
murder upon murder, he caused George, Duke of Clarence his natural Brother to
be drowned in a Duke of Clarence drowned
Butte of Malmesey. And last though not the least, to roll up a number of
noble subjects ends, with the death of king Edward the fifth, and Richard Duke
of York the kings brother King Edward the 5. and his brother slain.
and his nephews, whom he caused to be murdered in the Tower, and buried
without honor, to infame the name of king Edward the fourth and his posterity,
he pronounced his mother like a filthy harpye, to be a strumpet, and that the
said king Edward was a Bastard, and him self only legitimate, (as I think)
son of the devil, for it seems wonderful that so inhumane a creature,
should take life of humane seed.

CHAP. 3.
Envy original of war, and capital cause of the destruction of the first
Monarchies.

MAny years after the beginning, every king qui etly enjoyed the countries in
his own possession until Ninus king of the Asserians, envying the soueranity of
his neighbor kings, put him self ^st. lib. 1.
in arms unlawfully to enlarge his own dominions, by deposing other from
their kingdoms. Thus byenuy from the bottom of hell came war, and by war
confusion of divine and human blessings, the advancement of thousands of
devilish Envy the original of war.
iniquities. For whereas laws give place to arms, the honor of God is
wounded, his word is misprised; Jesus Christ is blasphemed, and persecuted, his
Gospel is rejected, and his Sacraments are profaned: fire is put to the house
of the lord, Wolves are thruste into his steepefolde, and wild Bores among The
miseries of war.
his vines, truth and equity is perverted, charity is cold, innocents and the
just are oppressed, youth be ill instructed, public orders are broken,
discipline and rules of good life are abolished, ignorance is raised,
knowledge is abased, proud, ambitious, and men of least estimation do
govern, the learned, wise, and virtuous are disofficed, as idiots, and men of
no merit, countries be unpeopled, fair Cities are burned, peaceable citizens
are murdered, their wives and daughters are ravished, their grounds lie
untilled, goods compassed by the travels of a man's whole life, in one hour do
become the spoil of a riotous soldier. And to conclude (though short of a
number of other curses, which follow war) vice mounted in her chariot of
triumph, arroga^tly treads pore virtue under foot, and thereby they that should
cry out of this outrage against God and man, are dumb, and the reformers of
these enormities deaf, these vengeances by war the envious eye, and ambitious
heart of Ninus, bred in the world which died not with the destruction of
Th'asserian monarchy. Notwithstanding envy the erecter was the destroyer
thereof. For Arbactus (leiftenant of the Meades) enuiyng the soueranity of
Sardanapalus, a man more effeminate then a woman, by the assistaunce of other
The end of the Assiri^n monarchy by envy. Just. lib. 1.
lords gave battle unto ye king. Sardanapalus discomforted ^led into his
pallas, and there enuiyng ye fortune of Arbactus, more to reaue him of the
glory of his triumph, then moved by sorrow of his own defeat, Sardanapalus set
fire of his Pallas his wealth, and him self, and so by the prodigal spoil of
his life, recovered the reputation of a man: for manhood is most truly The
tuchstone of manhood.
tried, by constancy in the trembling passage of death. The like envious part
was committed by Ariathes king of Capidocia, The city of Capidoc^a burned
through envy.
who being overcome in battle by Perdicas one of Alexanders successors, fled
into the City and enuiyng Perdicas good fortune more then he lamented his own
mischance, caused the city to be set on fire, and encouraged his soldiers and
citizens to slay their wives and children, holding it less evil to die by the
violence of friends, then to live a servile life under ye controlment of their
enemies. And by this means in truth he reaued Perdicas of the spoil of his
victory, but did both unto him self and country, an injury against nature and
reason: against nature in committing wilful murder upon him self and
posterity: against Time is able to repair the ruins of fortune.
reason, in that time was able to repair his ruins of fortune. But to keep an
order in discoursing the actions of envy, by the victory which Arbactus had
over Sardanapalus the empire of The Asserian empire translated into the Meades.
Th'asserians was translated into the Meades, which corse most conquerors and
adopted Princes ever since have taken to crown their native country with
imperial title, and to leave the places conquered, or by other means gained,
to the tyranny of leifetenants. Well this monster envy which mortifieth ye
natural Miserable are the countries governed by lie^tenants.
affection of a father, and robs dutiful obedience from ye son, made the
one of these the cause, ye other the overthrow of this second empire. For
Astiages the last king of the Meades, receiving answer of the Oracle, yt his
daughters son should govern his empire, as it were to despite the Gods,
that had fore destined this honor unto his daughters son, upon an envious
thought, first married her to a mean man of Persia, for that following the
course of nature: the father being base, the son should not have a generous
mind. But not so satisfied, he be thought him of a common speech, that the
father may bequeath the son his liuinges, but not his virtues, neither is he
sure to ingraft in him his vices. And therefore (as Astiages imagined) to make
sure work, he commanded his familiar servant Harpagus, so soon as his
daughter was delivered An impious cruelty.
to murder the child. But note by this example, how vainelye the greatest
Princes strive, that strive to frustrate the determination of God. Harpagus
departed with a resolution Man purposes and God dispo^h.
to do the kings commandment, and ready to strike the stroke, the child
regarded him with such an affable countenance, as his heart was not able to
strengthen his hand to commit so impious a murder, and therefore he left the
vengeance of the kings will to be executed by savage beasts, as an office
unseeming a civil creature. Thus God by his wonderful providence, to rebate
Harpagus sword, armed this infants face with the virtues of the two noble^
Romans, Marius and Crassus, M^rius and Cr^us.
who by the assurednes of their countenaunces, made the executioners weapons to
fall from their hands, so that they forsaking their determination, the other
over lived that hard destiny. And in advantage, contrary to kind he made a
she Wolf to nourish the child, with an affection as great, as that Ci^us
suckled by a she wolf.
where with the Lions entertained Daniell. And last, Cyrus having knowledge of
his Grandfathers cruel intent, he subjected him to his merry, and possessed him
self in his empire, who being a Persian borne changed the Empire of the Meades
The empire of the Meades changed into Persian. Just. lib. 1.
into the empire of the Persians. During the continuance of which government,
many envious parts were exercised among the^ selves, which being the less I
conclude in the great overthrow of their monarchy, which happened in the time
of Alexander the great, who so envied the glory of the Persians, as when their
king Darius offered him an honorable accord with his daughter in marriage,
Alexander would grant unto The empire ^nslated into Macidonia.
no peace unless Darius would give him soueranity and take him self the
second place. Upon which refusal the armies joined, Darius was defeated and
the Empire translated into Macidonia. By which fortunate battle Alexanders
power The envy of Alexander.
was great and his envy greater. For he held no country sufficiently
conquered that the people were not ransomed with the mercy of his swoorde. But
yet this envy which gave him in his life time heat, hastened his death. And he
that tamed the pride of mighty kings, was poisoned to death, by the envy
Alexander poisoned thorough Envy.
of Antipater his familiar subject. Who as some aucthors affirm envying his
absolute power, or rather his severe justice, for that in heat he put Alexander
of Lyncest and other of Antipaters kinse-men and friends to death. And which
wrought the greatest impression of hatred, for that his own Thessalus a tr^i
terous Physician
noble enterprises achieued in Grease were over blown with light regard. For
some of these causes, although all sufficed not to excuse so great an impiety,
Antipater bribed the Physician Theslatus, to poison Alexander, who in the
traitorous execution of his unlawful promise, has left a warning to all A
necessary note for Pr^ces.
Princes of two notable mischiefs: the first, to beware how in not rewarding,
or regarding good services, they kill the loving affection of their subjects,
for although, all the trauelles of a subject, in the service of his king, be
but duty, and the least reward of a king is liberality: Yet is a Prince (were
he unjust) Kings for there own sa^ ti^s, are bound, to favor their subjects.
bound to the one for his safetye, as well as the subject is thraull to the
other of duty: For where the subject only obeys through fear, the Prince
cannot reign, but in fear, and when men are in bondage, they will spare no
advantage of liberty which is the cause that few tyrauntes make peaceable
ends. Upon which ordinary fortune, when the tyrant Hippias, told a
Philosopher of Athens, that if he lived one Hippias a tyrant of Athe^.
year to an end, he would make the intrailes of dogs, the sepultures of an
number of his fellows. Whereupon the Philosopher boldly prophesied, that it
would not be so, for hell could not spare Hyppias so long. The second regard,
that a Prince, who always has mighty enemies, intertaine for Where the fear
of God stays not, the love of money makes passa^ for any mischief.
his Physician a man that fears God. For if only for reward, he minister
medicine, it may be feared, that for a greater gain he will give poison. To
which purpose, a Gentleman of Vennis, one a time supping with a Physician in
Padua, marueiled that the Physicians, who in short space, find a remedy for
the most violent new disease that reigns, can not cure as well as give ease
to the Gowt an ancient malady. Which doubt, the Doctor thus pleasauntly
resolved. O Sir (quoth he) the Gowte is the proper disease of the rich, and
we live not by the poor, it may suffice that they find ease. But to
prescribe a cure, to beggar any facultye, were great follye. Well though the
Doctor spoke merrilye, it often times falls out, that the rich man's wealth,
is most enemy unto his health. And the Counsels of K. ^dinando.
better to aucthorise this question, Ferdinando the good king of Aragon, among
many of his weightye precepts, said it is greatly requisite, that a Prince
make choice of an honest Physician. For (quoth he) the strength of a Princes
guard, can not defend a Physicians treason. And certainlye, the negligent,
covetous, or traitorous Physician is the most dangerous murderer of the
world, some one of which faults, are so conuersaunt with most Physicians, as
experience teaches: that exercise cures the most part of poor men's
surfettes: when Physic kills (by small distemperatures) as often times the
rich: And therefore it is necessary for all men to follow the counsel of this
old and approved Proverb, Honor (and use) the Physician, for necessities
sake: Which imports extreme danger, and not every trifling distemperature,
which nature, exercise and orderly diet will cure.

But again to Alexander, who after he had received this mortal portion, the
venime thereof tormented him so much above his patience, yt to be eased he often
times assayed to murder him self. Notwithstanding in his death bed lying
in this extreametie, his friends requiring to know who should be his heir, he
stoutly aunsweared the worthiest. So great was the courage of his heart, as he
privileged not his son Hercules, his Brother Arideus, nor the infant, in his
Wife Roxanes womb, before a stranger of better desert. But although this
bequeste proceeded from the magnanimity of Alexanders mind: yet the
incertayne succession in the Empire, The misery that follovved the incertainty
of Alexanders succession.
could not but as it did, work the ruin thereof. For whereas this liberty was
given, the one enuyed, that another should pryse his virtues at a higher rate
then his. Hercules claymed as heyer, Arideus as Brother, and one that could
best manadge the affairs of the Empire, Perdicas challenged it by military
testament, for that the king when he was speechless gave him a ring from his
own finger, as a token said he, that he bequethed him the Empire, as the
most worthiest. And to strengthen either of them in their claim, there wanted
not a Roman Brutus to draw his swoorde, A Florentine Pazzi to try liberty,
or an English Duke of Buckingham with five hundred horse to demand what was
to be done in this new world: for discontented (or rather dissentious) persons
(how soever the power of a settled Prince, keep them under) upon a change,
will discover their seditious ^artes: as fire hid in ashes, by the sprinkeling
of Gunpowder bewrays the heat. To quell which cunning dangerous people
though Machyuell prescribe a policy, unseeming a Christian Prince, who is to
refer hidden trespasses to the vengeance of God, and not to punish with
death an intent, without an attempt of evil: For untimely death, only
appertains either to Gods secreat vengeance, to open and lawful conviction
of justice, or in lawful ways to the swoorde of the soldier, for what
human blood is otherwise shed, is tyranny in a Prince, and punishable in a
private person: yet Princes to bridle such close enemies, of public peace:
may safelye without reproach of tyranny, follow the counsel of a Geneowe
merchant, who was sometimes familiarly favored of Tamberlayne ye Great,
surnamed flagellum dei, who worthy the name of vengeance, at what time as he
after two assaults A cruel part of Tamberla^ne.
was peaceably possessed of a fair city, the citizens with their chief
Magistrates, wives and Children clothed all in white having Olive branches in
their hands, as assuraunces of peace: upon their knees humbly beseeching him
of grace: Notwithstanding, commanded his soldiers to kill them all like
dogs. This Genowa moved with pity to see this outrage, besought
Tamberlaine, to spare his cruelty for such, as A good counsel rejected.
he conquered by force. And (quoth he) if ye fear, that these dogs will
another day bite, strike out their teeth. Their countenances if need be, will
help to scare Wolves, meaning that he should spoil them of their armor, and
if occasion served, he might make them fight, as king Astiages did his
cowardly soldiers, either with enemies in their faces, or friends at their
backs. Which good counsel though Tamberlaine in his fury regarded not: Yet
other Princes that have their passions more temperate, may thereby learn how
to keep under their own suspected subjects without dispeopling of their
realms, to animate foreign enemies. Upon which consideration William the
Conqueror when he entered this realm, straightly commanded that no outrage
should be done upon the common people, for (quoth he) though they obey me, I
must reign by them. Well neither Hercules, Arideus nor Perdicas wanted will,
or friends, to persevere in their claim, and sure they had gone together by
the ears for his realm, before Alexander had had his funeral rites, if the
tumult in the beginning had not been pacified, and an order for the government
of the Empire, been appointed by the grauer Captains. But as water courses
stopped, will find out new passages, so envy how so ever she be quallified, will
break forth into mischief. The true events whereof appears in the division
of king Alexanders captains, who as they were many in number, so were there in
his Empire, so many several provinces, as rewarded every Captain, with a
regal leiuetenantship. The names of either for the glory of the Empire and
renown of so many famous captains: but chiefly by the destruction both of the
one and other: to show the bitter end of civil dissension, which lightly
has beginning of envy: I have thought good to set down at large, the
particular whereof ensues. The hugenes of Alexanders monarchy.


Arideus was chosen king, Antipater was made Regent of

CHAP. 5.
How the envy of Rufin, and stilicon the one the Governor of the East, and the
other of the West made a passage for the barbarous Goths and Vandals to sack
the famous city of Rome, which could never since recover the twenty part of her
ancient beauty.

THE most famous Empire of Rome, who received many spoils and in fine utter
ruin by this monster Envy, meriteth a larger report, then my purpose affordes.
But to draw the Reader to a great contempt of this foul passion, as well as to
show the ancient glory and present ignomy of the Romans: I certify, by the
accord of all histories, that there was never Empire, so large as the Empire
of Rome, The greatness of the Roman empire.
nor at this day (considering her ancient greatness) none that is not utterly
destroyed, that has fewer privileges: for in times past the Roman Empire,
was attyred (well near) with the habit of all Europe, Africa, and a great
part of Asia, as France, Spain, England, Germany, with all the provinces of
Italye, the Islandes called Mediterranees, al Grease, Thracia, Macidonia,
Pollonia, Demmarke, and as I have said ye greater part of Africa, as
Manritania, Numidia, Carthage, Libie, with many other realms and provinces,
Egypt, and all her confines, in Asia, Arabia, Siria, Indie, Mesopotamia, also
her segniories reached unto the renowned Rivers of Tiger, and Euphrates, and in
the time of the Emperor Traian, her bonds stretched even unto the East
Indies, unto whom was subdued, the provinces of Armenia, and Albanie, with all
Asia minor, and many other Regions, too tedious particularly to rehearse: whose
length and breadth at this day is drawn (by the Pusilanimitie of certain
emperors: or rather by the envy and pride of the Pope of Rome, whose pageants
begin to appear) into a small part of Germany, and Italy. So that Rome some
times commaundres of the whole world is now steightly regarded: and if any of
devotion do come to visit her she intertaineth them with this sorrow. Quanta
roma fuit, ipsa ruina docet.


And well she may vaunt of her ancient monumentes. But to describe her
present estate, there is small beautye, in her buildinges, and less virtue in
her people: and she that was called the fountain of the world, for her
flowing virtues, may now be justly named the sincke of the world, for her
filthy corrupt vices. Well let her ruins show her further reproach, which were
so lamentable, as might melt her worst enemies unto pittye, many shrewde
spoils she received, by the envy of her own people, especially by the civil
contentions of Scilla, Marius, Carbo, Cinna, Pompeius, and Caesar, Brutus and
Cassius, Octauius and Anthonius, in sustaining of whose unnatural quarrel, by
Romans, there were more Romans slain, then by strangers in conquering the
kingdoms of the whole world. With which grievous wounds though she were
much weakened, yet by the wisdoms of her Temporal Magistrates she was
again cured: and long might have lived if like unto green Iuie that from the
Root of a great Oak by soft embracementes ouergroweth the top of the Tree, the
ypocrisie of the Bishop of Rome, had not so compassed, or rather overcome her
Emperors with an ignorant devotion, that to make the Cleargye mighty, they
yielded to make them selves weak: yet to report a truth, she received, her
bane in the time of the Emperors Honoreus and Arcadius. By the envy of Ruffin
and Stilicon, two temporal magistrates, but with all to approve what I have
already said, the Pusalanimitie of the emperors, before that day, gave
encouragement, for the conquered Regions to revolt, and more styrred up, the
barbarous Goths, to invade Italy, in so much as the Emperor Theodotius,
beholding the perrill of the Empire, and the rather for that his young sons
were not capable to govern, as he thought, to provide a remedy for the
mischief, he left these two great captains (whom he had approved to be wise,
and valiant, and with all had bound them with many greater aduancementes) to be
the protectors of his children and Empire, and to the government of Ruffin,
appointed the East parts, and to Stilicon Italy and the West, But behold the
nature of ambition, the The nature of ambition.
impe of this miscreat envy, neither the bountye, with which the deceased
Emperor, had tied them that was great, the trust which he had committed unto
them which was greater, nor the duty which they ought unto the young emperors
their sovereigns, which was greatest, could stay their insatiable desire to
rule, by the breaches of all these duties, so that regarding the emperors,
with envious eyes, they obeyed them with ruling hearts. Ruffin hungring after
the Empire for him self, and Stilicon in the behalf of his son. But as
there is an old tale, of a shrewd wife, that meant to poison her husband, and to
be sure as she thought, she put two strong poisons into One poison remedy for
an other.
the portion, but contrary to her expectation, the one poison so strove with
the other, as the man was preserved from death. So envy to make a ready
confusion of this famous Empire, even in the heart of her glory made her to
foster two mortal enemies of her property, but so long as they both lived,
neither could obtain his purposes, their policies were so mutuallye employed
the one to suppress the other.

Ruffin too hasty of his purpose, moved strangers to make Ruff^ p^ (...)
death.
war upon the Romans, and being chosen Captain, assaied to make him self
Emperor: for which enterprise he was put to death by Honorius. Stilicon waited
a better opportunity, and to avoid suspicion married his daughter to Archadius:
but being always mindful of his purpose, secreatly solicited, Pollisie of
S^licon.
the Goths, Vandals, and other barbarous nations to war upon the Empire:
thinking for his sufficiency to be chosen captain: by reason of ye tender
years of the emperors: whose purpose took place: the Goths entered Italy with
a strong army: and Stilicon being chosen captain: obtained many weak victories
against the Goths, of purpose to continue the wars: Alaric king of the
Goths: being a man of good judgment: found out the dalliaunce of Stilicon,
and seeing small hope of success: certified the Emperor Honorius of Stilicons
drift: and desired him to accord to a peace: protesting that he sought but
some Stilicons drift discovered.
small country for him and his people to dwell in: the Emperor upon diverse
other suspicions believed the information of Alaric: and assented unto his
conditions of peace, and assigned a part of Gawle, for him and his people.
Nevertheless he desembled this knowledge with Stilicon: who by the departure
of the Goths unto their assigned habitation, fearing the end of his
authority, secreatlye practiced, with one Sawle a Jew, a captain of his army:
under pretense of a private quarrel: to set upon the Goths: upon an Easter
day, which the Goths (being Christians) celebrated. Which practice Sawle
executed, and made a great slaughter of the Goths: but the Stilicons treason
punished.
Goths being gathered together: revenged this outrage with the death of
Sawle, and the most of his partakers: Alaric imboldened here with, set upon
the forces of Stilicon, who dissembling a fear, feigned to fly, and sent to
Honorius for more aid. The Emperor fearing the secreat drift of Stilicon:
more then the open force of Alaric: sent a strong power to the camp: by such
persons as slew both Stilicon and his son. Honorius by this means thought
that he had both discharged him self of Stilicons treachery, and by his death
supposed that Alaricks fury would be appeased: but it fell forth, that it had
been better for the strength of the empire that Honorius had spared Stilicon
till a further time: for being unfurnished of a right valiant and worthy
Captain, Alaric pursued the advantage that was offered, and blamed Honorius
as guilty of the matter, and with all expedition set forwards toward Rome,
and without resistaunce in his passage wasted every place with fire and
swoorde, and finally besiedged Rome on every side. Many have written the
assault and taking of Rome by Alaric: but yet so briefly or darkly: that they
have given small light to the Reader: Peter Messire says that he has found
it written in the Annals of Constantinople: that as Alaric marched toward
Rome: there went before him a Monk of an unknown place: who (notwithstanding
that Alaric was a blouddy tyrant, yet being a Christian) upon audience
desired him, for the love of God to moderate his ire: and to remember that he
him self being a Christian, was in duty bound to forbear the sheading of
Christian blood: much more the destruction of Rome which had no way offended:
to whom Alaric thus aunsweared: know thou, thou man of God, that of my proper
desire I go not against Rome: yea further more know thou, that I am thus daily
importuned by an unknown persuasion: advance thy self against Rome, destroy
it, and make it desolate: whereupon the religious man sore amassed durst not
reply: and so king Alaric followed his enterprise: so that it seems this
adversity of Rome, was a special scourge of God: Paul Osorius further says
that as God sent Lot forth of Sodom: even so he delivered Pope Innocent the
first, from this heavy destruction of Rome: but if in that suggestion he had
not been partial, he would have compared the iniquitye of Rome, to Sodom
and Gomorrha: and so by consequence the Cardinals and rest of the Clergy, as
spotted as Labans sheep. The truth was the Pope was gone to Rauenna, to do
his duty to the Emperor, and as it seems shortly after dyed: for Platinus
says that this adversity of Rome was in the time of Pope zozim. This cruel
siege by Alaric lasted two years: during which time the famine of Rome was no
less then that of Jerusalem, in so much as they were driven to eat one an
other, and the mother was constrained to eat her one child: variable are the
opinions touching the winning of Rome. Procopius says, that Alaric finding his
forces too weak, was driven to this policy: he conspired with three hundred
Roman prisoners, whom he set at liberty, who being received into Rome,
suddenly slew the warders of one of the gates, and so let Alaric and his army
in, some said by the commandment and industrye of a great Lady this gate was
open unto the Goths: which proceeded of pittye that she took, of the
miserable estate of the poor people: whom she thought that the enemy could
not afflict so much as the inhabitauntes of Rome: but how so ever it was Alaric
commanded upon pain of death that no man should hurt any person that fled
to the Churches for safety, which was observed: the rest of this City with an
innumerable sort of people were consumed with fire and sword.

The Emperor Honorius lay all this while at Rauenna, with out taking care for
the relief of distressed Rome. In derision of whom the Goths led a young
man up and Rome sacked by Alaric.
down a whole day attyred like the Emperor, and the next day likewise led
him clothed like a slave. This was the first time, that Rome since her
prosperity, fell into the hands and power of strangers: but after this sack
by the Goths, the greatness both of the city and Empire decreased, yea many
times was destroyed and subjected. The success whereof briefly to touch, I
hold it necessary, that the Reader may understand, the frailty of
kingdoms, and worldly powers.

About forty years after the Goths had thus sacked Rome, and outraged Italy,
the Vandals under the conduct of their king Rome taken by the vandals.
Genserick, entered Italy, and without any resista^ce took Rome, the greater
part of the inhabitaunts being before fled: who for the space of four days
spoiled, and in many places fired the City. Twentye and seven years after
the conquest by the Vandals, Odoacrus king of Euryles and Toringnes, came Rome
taken by Euriles and Toringnes.
before Rome with a great power: whom the Citizens not able to resist,
received louinglye and in peace: who naming him self king of Rome reigned
foreteene years: afterward Theodoric king of the Goths, being in friendship
with the Roman Emperor, to recover Rome: incountred Odoacrus Rome taken
again by the Goths.
with a great power: and not only chased Odoacrus from Rome, but also forth
of Italy. Theodoric upon this victory made him self king, and reigned
thirtye years in peace. After whose decease, his son Artalaric with his wife
Amalasonte reigned about ten years. Afterward the Emperor Justinian
coming to the Empire, the Goths returned again into Italy: with their most
cruel king Tottil: under the Emperor Justinian the two most valiant and
hardy Captains Bellisarius, and Nassettus governed in Italy: who in many
most cruel battles foiled Tottill besiedging of Rome. In fine by the
treason of one of the inhabitauntes, Tottill gat the City: and although at his
first entrance Rome taken again by the Goths.
by the intercession of Pelasgus then Bishop of Rome Tottill moderated his
furye, yet in fine upon an unpleasing aunsweare from the Emperor Justinian: he
furiouslye destroyed the greatest part of the City, and left not the third
part of the wall standing: but to be brief after Tottill had an other time
taken Rome: by the valiantness of the most worthy Captain Narsettus: both
Tottill and the whole power of the Goths were chased out of all Italy: within
a while after the Longebards came into Italy: who making them selves Lords of
Gawle Cilsapine: of whom it has ever since been called Lombardie: who about
three years after the chasing of Tottill: under the conduct of king Clowis
besiedged Rome, to the great damage of the neighbor Towns, but Rome out
held both that besiedging, and also an other most dangerous siege by Atanlfus
likewise king of the Longebards: by whose furye Rome had been leuiled with the
ground: if that Pepin king of France had not succored her distress.

Further in process of time: in the time of the Emperor Lewis the Mores and
Sarizins Disciples of Mahomet: besieged Anno 830. Rome vvonne by the Sarizins.
and entered Rome, who profaning the Church of Saint Peter, and burning a
great part of the City with many rich spoils returned unto their ships.

But the most great ruin of Rome was in the time of Pope Gregorye the
seventh, and Henrye Emperor of Almaigne, between whom there was mortal
wars, in whose quarrelles there was at one time two contrary armies in Rome,
burning and wasting the City. But in fine the Normans, in the behalf of the
Pope were victors: But their conqueste made Rome almost desolate, that where
there are now Uineyardes, Gardens, and large waste places, she was before
beautified, with goodly Churches, and other sumptuous buyldinges. And for last
example, even of late time, the Emperors army, under the leading of the most
Rome won by the Duke of Burbon.
worthy Prince Charles Duke of Burbon, Rome was taken, and although the Duke
upon the enteraunce was slain, yet his soldiers as victors spoiled a great
part of the City. These often and sharp punishments, has Rome suffered as
a wonder, and warning to the whole world: and which is much to be regarded,
there is almost the people of no Nation, which she here to fore had
subjected: but at one time or other were at the sacking and spoiling of her
beauty. For the further and necessary enlarging of this historye, I have
adjoined this Chapter of the envious humors of the Popes of Rome.

CHAP. 6.
How the Popes of Rome enuiyng the soueranityes, which the Emperors had in the
election, and confirmation, of them and their successors, by sundry shifts
wrought them selves forth of this obedience, and by the advantages of time
grew to usurp authority, to approve and confirm, the election of the
Emperors them selves: with a supreme power, to depose, and establishe
anointed Kings, from and in their kingdoms. A Chapter for the variety of
the matter worthy the regard.

LArge and unreprovable, are the testimonies, which witness, that the bishops
of Rome, under many tirannous emperors, truly professed, and sincerely
preached the Gospel of our savior Jesus Christ, and to confirm the
Evangelical doctrine, patiently and constantly embraced many sharp
persecutionsand martyrdomes.: but O the venime of riches, she no sooner entered
into the Church, then she poisoned her pastors and ministers, with envy,
pride, ambition, heresy, idolatry, and all abominations: the riches,
liberties, and great possessions, with which Constantine the great endowed the
Bishops of Rome (although they eternize his name with the tytles of a good,
zealous, devout and christian Emperor) yet were they the causes which have
bread these soul effects, or iniquities in the greater number of the Popes of
Rome. True it is, that before the Emperors were christians, the Bishops were
chosen by the christian Priests in Rome, neither did any seek that office by
other means then virtue: But after the Emperors became Christians, as a
witness that the sovereign Bishop of Rome was the subject of the Emperor,
the election of the Pope appertained to the clergy, joined with the voice and
consent of the people, which done, they were driven to send to Constantinople,
to be confirmed by the Emperor: this was the first order of the election of
the Popes, after Constantinus the great: which approves a souerainitie which
the Emperous had over them, but by little and little to wind themselves out of
this subjection, they first made suit to be confirmed by the Emperous deputies
Policies of the Popes to w^nd out of obed^
in Rome, after wards Pope Pelagius the second administered this office without
the confirmation of the Emperor, but being afraid of the displeasure of
Maurice the Emperor of Constantinople, for this usurpation, he sent an
ambassador to ex cuse his act, giving for reason, ye besteging of Rome by the
Lombards joined with ye let of passage, by means of the outrage of floudes and
waters, which drowned diverse places, about the time of his election: the excuse
was accepted, howbeit the authority of the Emperor concerning the
confirmation of the Popes, in many following elections continued. The Pope
finding no wished success in his saucie attemptes, sought to bewitch as the
Crocadile, who by the tears of her eyes, disperseth the venime of her heart,
so he with hypocritical show of holiness, purchased such reverence of mighty
kings, as in tract

time, Mahomet King of the Turks, and great grandfather of the great Soliman,
besieged the same with such a power, as Constantinus was unable to resist, and
so both himself, and subjects became feelers of Mahomets vengeance, and the
stately Constantinople his Imperial seat, and as sundry authors witness, the
contention between the Popes of Rome and the patriarchs of Constantinople for
supremacy, was the passage of the Turks attempt, and the greatest hope he had
of good success: and truly his advantage was great: for after a cruel fight
between mastie dogs, if a Bear appear, although they will all join to
weary him, yet t^eir former bickering will greatly weaken their forces: even
so in civil contentions, although both parts will join, to withstand a
common enemy: yet their strength will be much abated, and their enemies
courages more increased. But whether this, or lack of magnanimity in their
Emperors were the cause, all Christendom rueth the loss of so famous a
City, from whom all nations received a benefit, and by this Conquest, her
riches is a scourge to all nations, which in times past for the renown of her
beauty and riches, was of Strabon called illustris, of Pliny and Justin named
noble: long was she (...) and same of Constantinople.
the chief seat of the Empire, in her were many general Councilles
celebrated, and an infinite number of heresies discyphered, destroyed and
rooted out. This City is seated in Europe, in a most fertile place of Thracia,
upon the particion of the sea, between Asia and Europe, at the entry of the
sea Euxinus, called the great sea, and therefore Ovid terms her the port of
two seas, her beauty, fertility and riches were such as Philip father of
Alexander the great, besieged her with a mighty power, to be possessed of her,
but after long assault in vain, an inhabiter of the city called Lion, came
before the King, and spoke to him in this manner, Show me Philip, what injury
have thou received of Bisance, that thou besiegest her with such anger? I am
provoked with no injury, (answered Philip) but for yt she seems to be more
fair then any city in Thracia, I am inamored of her, and am therefore come to
conquer her amorous kings (replied Lion) which will be beloved, if their
lovers endeavor to overcome them with sweet music and courtesy, and not with
sharp war and cruelty, with this floute Philip was glad to raise his siege,
without damage to the Bysanceans: but leave we Constantinople, and the Empire
of Grecia in the possession of the Turk, the capitol enemy of Christ and
Christians to declare the disposement of the Roman Empire, as great a
persecutour of either.

In the year 1002. Othon being Emperor, and the kinseman of Pope Gregory the
fifth, an Almaine borne, the said Pope made a Law to privilege the Almaines,
with the election of the Emperor, to which he got the consent of Othon, which
was, that from thenceforth three of the clergy, and four of the laity,
should be the electours of the Prince which they called Caesar, and king of the
Romans: to wit, the Archbishop of Magonce, of Treues and of Colloine: the
Marquis of The Pri^ ele^tours.
Brandebourg, the Count Pallatine de Rhene, the Duke of Saxony, and the King
of Bohemia, and their successoures in these dignities, and after their
election, with the confirmation and approuement by the Pope, the Prince elected
should be called Emperor Augustus, see here a wonderful change, the
Emperors of Rome, which for many hundred years had the authority, to approve
and confirm the Popes of Rome, are now become subjects to the approuement and
confirmation of their subjects, the Pope and his successors: well, with this
change agrees the presagement of saint Jerome, who says that the Roman
Empire, which holds all nations in subjection, shall be abased, and then
shall Antichrist arise, the fountain of all iniquity. That the Pope of Rome
is Antechriste, regard what is said of this monster in the 7. and 13. of the
Apocal. He shall make war with the saints, and Apoc. 1^
shall overcome them, Item power is given him over all kinreds, tongues and
nations, and all that dwell upon the earth worshipped him: that the Pope of
Rome warreth with the saints, overcomes them, and becomes drunk with
their blood: his persecution of the true professors of the Gospel, through
out Europe, is a memorable witness: of which point the reader of the Registers
of the reverend divine, master John Fox, entitled Acts and monuments of the
Church, may be liberally satisfied, that he has had power of al kindred tongue
and nations, the subjection of Emperors and Kings, witness the worship and
the reverence done unto him, may not be hid, in that he will impudently and
arrogantly challenge unto himself, what only belongs to God, for it is thus
registered in the Cannons, yt he has power to save or to damn: Can. si Papa de
st^et. 42.
how that by wagons full laden, he can send souls to hell, can condemn to
purgatory, and at pleasure fetch men forth again, where the holy scriptures
in sundry places assures us that only God forgiueth sins. That he is that
stru^et attyred in purple, scarlet, etc. mounted upon the beast with seven
heads etc. spoke of in the 17. and 18. of the Apocal. the Angel expounds,
that these seven heads signify seven mountains Apocal. 17. 18.
or hills, and what author remembers any famous City to be builded upon
seven mountains, or hills, many say that Rome was so builded, but none that
witness of any other The names of the mountains where Rome was builded.
city: the names of which mountains were thus registered, more then a 1600
years since, the mount Palatin, the mount Capilotin, the mount Auentin, the
mount Esquilin, the mount Viminal, and the mount Quirinal: in remembrance
whereof, there was in ancient time, a feast day in Rome, called
Septimontinalia, Virgil in his Georgickes, speaking of Rome, and (...) 2. circ^
(...). Apocal. 17.
her beauty, says, that within her walls she inuironeth 7. hills every
particular nation in Europe reuealeth her, by this large witness: their Princes
have been drunken with the blood of many godly martirs, and have insatiably
drunken of the Popes poisoned cup of abomination. To be brief, the most
infirmed eyes may see, yt the Pope is that Antichrist the Apostle speaks
These. 2. 2.
of, that he shall sit in the Temple of God, and be honored as God: the Pope
not only takes that place, but will thus be called, Domine Deus noster Papa. O
Lord our God the Pope they may perceive in him a fulfilling of ye prophet
Daniel, that he should place himself above all things in the world, that he
Dan. 11.
should distribute lands and kingdoms, to such as should take him for a God,
and worship him. Leaving to write further of this monsters other damnable
sins, which being past number, shall purchase him torments without end. I will
in his envious tyrannies toward such Princes as were not the servants of his
will, reveal this prophecy, and continue my purpose: Morrall Esope recites a
fable of a snake, which being nie frozen to death, was by a good husbandman
pitied, and brought unto the A ^able moral^zed by the Pope.
fire, but when the fire had given strength to this viper, he forthwith stung
the husbandmans children: even so this Apostata, or reuolter from Christ, did
with all the venime he could, afflict and weaken the Imperial dignity, whose
rulers gave him first earthly promotion, and from time to time sustained him in
all his troubles. Behold how Pope Benedictus the third enuyed the soueraintie
of Emperors and anointed Kings, who condemned for heretics one Okan and Dant,
two persons blinded with all his idolatries and superstitions, save that they
maintained that Emperors held their Empires of God, and not of the Pope: this
Pope might more properly have been adopted Maledictus then Benedictus, as one
wiped out of the book of life, which it seems he little read, and less
regarded: for if he had studied the sacred Bible, the perfect mirror both of
heavenly grace and morrall government, it is like he might have light upon
these passages of holy scripture, By me kings reign, and Pro. 8.
Counsailours discern justice, by me kings rule, and rulers Wis. 6.
judge the earth: hearken then you kings, etc. for power is given you of the
Lord. David thus says, The Lord teaches Psall. 144.
the kings hands to manage arms, and his fingers to war: etc. the Lord
establishes Kings, has power over kingdoms and disposes them at his
pleasure, and to whom he please. Dan. 2. 4. 5.
The great King Artaxerxes acknowledges yt the most great Ierem. 25. 27.
and good God gave him and his forefathers their kingdom. And briefly to
conclude, the excellency of imperial and regal dignity, there is no
superior power, but of God: well, Romans 13.
though the least of these unreprovable authorities, suffice to condemn these
tyrannous Popes to hell, no wonder yt they all stopped not his accursed mouth,
that pronounced the unjust sentence against these two innocent persons, for he
(the Pope I mean) who strives to match the Majesty of God, enuyeth the
records of his power, and fears not what is writ of his vengeance, much
less can endure that Emperors, Kings and such potentates, should be Gods
Lieutenantes on earth: his pride bewrays the one, and his envy daily
discovers the other. The Chronicles of every christian common wealth are
testimonies, that since Princes became the subjects of this proud Pope, their
kingdoms were never free from curses, excommunications, nor Kings clear from
depriuement of kingdoms, their subjects free from privy seditions, nor their
countries vnoutraged with open rebellions, if his word governed not the
sword, and his will stood not in stead of law. so that it is a question,
whether his hypocrisy have wrought more mischief in the West, or the Turks
open tyrannies in Pride and cruelties of the Pope.
the East. Upon some envious suggestions, Gregory the ninth and Innocentius the
fourth, Pope of Rome, did depose ye Emperor Frederick the second,
excommunicated and banished his faithful and obedient subjects, and absolved
the rest of their oath: and furthermore granted great indulgences, and pardon
to such as would rebelliously rise to confound him: yea, after he had with an
hundred and twenty thousand marks redeemed himself from this
excommunication, he was (notwithstanding that) once again banished and
accursed. The perfect histories of France witness, that Pope Vrbane the
fourth, about the year of our Lord 1264. violently did depose Conradus of his
kingdom of Scicilia, being his right inheritance, and gave the same to Charles
Earl of Angion, and brother to Lodouicke the French king, to frustrate which
gift, Pope Nicholas the third, about the year 1268. caused Peter king of
Arragon, to come out of Italy, to deprive the said Charles, and to possess
him thereof, he wrought a practice, that in one night all the French, both
men, women and children within the Island of Scicilia, were murdered by the
inhabitants thereof. In remembrance of which cruelty, to this day, there is a
word called the Scicilian euensong. Pope Boniface the eight, enuiyng the
majesty of the Emperor Adelphus de nassan, predecessor of the Prince of
Orange, for challenging to be the Popes superior, stirred up, Albert, the
first Duke of Austriche of that name, and race, to take arms against the
Emperor, for the imperial seat, and assisted him Look in the Cron. of
Germany.
with the secreat council and strength of Gerrard Archbishop of Maience, in
which battle the Emperor was slain, and Albert succeeded in the Empire. In
so much as puffed up with pride, for the lucky success of his ungodly
practices, this ungracious Pope in his Iubile, caused two swoordes in triumph
to be carried before him, making the bearer of the one to cry, O Christ, see
there, the Vicar on earth. And the other: Apol. of the prince of Orange.
O Peter, see there thy successor. In so much as the French king called Philip
le Bell hating his pride, refused to acknowledge him for his superior. For
which contempt he pronounced the recited Albert king both of Rome, and France,
whereupon the said Phillip, secreatly in the night under the conduct of Sarra
Colomna, sent out 400. horse men and took the Pope, at Anagnia, and from
thence led him prisoner to Rome. To whom the king in this scoffing manner
wrote Sciat fatuitas vestra, etc. and after his beastlye death, which shortly
followed his arrival at Rome, he was long remembered with this reproach,
Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt leo, morritur vt Canis. Epitaph of Boniface the
Pope
See what large coats, Pope Gregorye the 7. cut of other men's cloth, because
he could not make the Emperor Henry the fourth, the vassaile of his will, he
first excommunicated the said Emperor: and cursed all his adherentes, and
after gave Ralphe Duke of Swaben his kingdom with an imperial crown, bended
with this trim verse. Petra dedit petro, petrus diadema Radulpho.
A diadem the rock gave Peter and his race,
And Ralph received a royal crown, from Peter's holy grace.


But although the Pope were prodigal in his gift, yet his holiness nor power
could shield the unfortunate Ralphe from the vengeance due unto traitors, who
shortly after was pitifully slain, who having his hands first cut off,
lamentablye exclaimed before the bishops, that through the Popes and their
prouocations, he and his confederates were accursed, for rebelling against his
own lord, and supreme head. Not long after this succeeded pope Paschalis the
second, who excommunicated the emperor a fresh, and commanded Robert Earl of
Flaunders, The Popes war ^ant or letter written in the 2. book of counsels
^o. 810
to destroy with fire and sword the territories of Lueck and Camericke,
because the inhabitaunts remained loyal, to their sovereign lord the emperor,
yea he gave the imperial crown with all the jewels of ye empire, to Henry ye 5.
son unto the said emperor Henry ye 4. and herein prevailed so much, as he
moved his son to persecute his lord, with such horrible and unnatural malice:
as after he had miserably sterued him, in the prison at Rob. barnes cronicle.
Eusebius and Nanc.
Lueck: he would not receive the Lukeners to grace, nor the pope discharge them
of excommunication, until they had vntombed the buried carcas of the emperor,
and had cast the same into the open field, as the carrion of a dog. This
envious act of Pope Alexander the 3. is no less notorious, who after many
excommunications, and curses, arrogantly treading upon the neck of the emperor
Frederick Barborossa, upon the top of the stayres of the great church of S.
Mark in Vennis, before all the people, did vsurp and pronounce this saying in
this Psalm, Super aspicem, and basilicum equitabis, and conculcabis leonem and
draconem. Psalm. 19.
That is to say, thou shall ride upon the lion and the Adder: the young lion,
and the dragon thou shall tread under thy foet. Pope Clement the 4. for penance
enjoined Franciscus Dandalus, to creep a long the Popes palace, upon his
hands and knees, with a collar about his neck like a dog. Pope Alexander the 6.
gave unto Ferdinando king of Castile, motu proprio, all the new Indians which
lie upon the Ocean seas, west ward from Spain: Lopes de go^or. in his hist. of
and.
for which gift Artabaliba king of Peru (though he cursed fortune, for his
defeat in battle by the Spaniards) said, that he esteemed not the pope, that
would give a way to an other that which was none of his own. Leo the 10.
offered Frauncis the French king the whole empire of Constantinople: but the
king giving him hearty thanks, refused his gift, unless he would put himin
possession thereof as he, yt wisely fore dreaded, the fortune of the Dukes of
Germany, who to conquer the kingdom of Boemia, upon this weak title, Pope
Paul the 2. by sentence deposed George the right and lawful king, and gave it
unto the said Dukes with this condition, yt they should go, and at their own
proper charges, take it perforce: in which attempt who lostaboue 100000. men, a
horse back and a foot, and yet did prevail very little. These and many other
outrages, the envy which this proud bishop bare toward the majesty, and royal
estates of those emperors and kings, which refused to give him sovereign
place, with most extremity tirannised upon the^ selves subjects and realms:
and small is the wonder how he came to this intelligences of foreign princes
proceedinges, yea to the vnbowelling of the secrets of their hearts, when the
chief of their privy counsels, the A dangerous policy of the pope.
head rulers of their parliaments, the principal ambassadors for matters of
common weal, by the cunning of this Soul queller, and ungracious college:
were Cardinals, Archb. bishops and other of the clergy, who having to do in
the affairs of the commonweals of princes, so handled the matter, as they
kept every Christian king for the most part busied either with enemies at home
or abroad: ye they thereby should have little leisure, to look into the smoth
hypocrisy of this wicked pope, and his shameless brood of shauelings. And which
is more: after yt his subtilties had set the^ together by the ears, he so
handled the matter, ye it was reputed unto him a matter of fatherly love and
singular holiness to make them friends again: not unlike to a knauish
physician, yt superficially poisoned a number of people, to get unto him self
a name and credit by the curing of them again: in the government of princes,
there could be nothing irreuocably done if he said not Amen. And by your leave
what other fruits might grow of the ambitious humors of his proud prelates?
what wonder is it, if they envied, that Dukes, Marqueses, Earls, Barrons, and
all temporal magistrates, should take their places above them? The servant is
privileged by the honor of his Master, these temporal estates, are the
servants of their princes, and the emperors them selves, are the Popes
inferiors ergo the Popes sworn servants are more worthy then the Emperors
subjects: a good argument for sooth where the mayor is false, the minor
foolish, and the conclusion the scourge of commonweals. Well according to
the Proverb, as the old Cock croweth the young Cock follows, that the Pope
will have Emperors, and Kings, his inferiors, Anno 1070.
in advantage of that which is reported, Pope Gregory the seventh suffered the
Emperor Henry the fourth in the dead of winter, to stand three days bare
headed, and bare foot, at the gates of Gamisen, while he passed the time in
daliaunce with the Duchess Matildes, and would not vouchsafe to look upon
him, until the Duchess of a more generous disposition, made intercession for
the receiving of the Emperor yea to show them servants, rather then
inferior companions, when the Pope is determined to ride a horse back, the
Emperor Cerimoniae Eccles. Romans lib. tit. (...).
or king present must hold his styrrop, when the Pope will be carried in a
chair, the Emperor or king present, is bound to bow down his neck, to take
up the chair upon his shoulders: The emperor or king present, at diner must
give the Pope water, and wait till the first course be served. To this
servitude the Pope brought mighty Princes, and to bondages more the^
sufferable, his prelates inthralled right noble Peers, yea too tedious would
be the particulars of this vipers and his venomous broodes proceedings, and in
their tyrannies would instruct the tormenters of hell in vengeance with whom Sic
volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas.
So I will, so I command
For law, let my pleasure stand.


What feend may be more graceless, then this hipocrite, or people so
miserable, as those subjected to his power, when the law of God is no bridle to
hold him from tyranny: nor the law of man a shield for the others safetye: who
besides the daily example of his works, by the warranties of his Bull which
follows, shows a will to violate either.

Non obstantibus constitutionibus, and ordinationibus apostolicis, A
presumptuons commandment
caeterisque contrariis quibuscunque: In English thus, notwithstanding all
constitutions, ordinances apostolical, nor any other thing what so ever here
unto contrary: mary sir it is no marvel although he take upon him to be a
God, a Creator, a disposer in heaven, earth and hell, as many substantial
Doctors would prove him, that will undertake to ouerrule the ordinances of
God, and institutions of men. A king which is the most sovereign title, that
ever God gave unto A good ^ing bound unto the law.
man, is bound unto the law, unless he be a tyrant, that is obeyed for fear,
yet ruling, lives never out of fear. With this preposterous corse of the Pope,
agrees the pleasant answer of a good Abbot, who being demanded, Papa cuius
partis orationis? A pleasant aunsvvere.
said that papa was participii partis, quia partem capit a clear, partem a
seculari, partem ab vtroque, cum totius orbis doloris significatione, sine
modis and temporibus. That is to say, this word Pope is a Participle, for he
receives of the spiritualitie, he receives of the temporalitie, and parts
stakes on both sides, without measure or end, to the great anguishe and sorrow
of all the world, may truly be said: somewhat I have discoursed, and much more
other nations have felt, neither yet has little England, which some hold not
part of the world, been exempt from his ravening crosses, no better then
curses, but through his mean has been partaker of other countries
calamities. King Inas made the whole land tributary to the Pope, and further
upon suggestion, that Thomas Becket archbishop of Caunterbury was slain, by
the kings consent, the Anno 740. This tax was peter pence.
whole land was a great while in subjection, and at the disposition of the
Pope. It is a wonder but that God would have it so: that no worthy Prince did
unmask the painted village Anno 1181.
of this glorious Pope, in so long continuance of his error: yea the
continuance of his kingdom, is a great matter of his glory, and a color that
yet deceauesh many: but Saint Paul sufficiently aunsweareth the matter saying
that God should send such an efficacy in error, that men should give
credit unto falsehood not only for a day: but for a long continuance of
time: but as there was a beginning of all that is bisiblye seen: so there
shall be an end of the greatest glory that our eyes may behold. And although
the ten kings figured by the beast with ten horns, in ye seventeen of the
Apocalips, which Apoc. 17.
shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and that shall
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: is meant in that passage as a prophecy
of the destruction of the Empire of Rome, yet granting the same: you shall
easily find out Antichrist by the whore that sat upon the seven hills before
described. I have in the Chapter before touched the most of the ten kings
which Saint John speaks of, which destroyed and spoiled Rome. But for that I
have not set them successively done in the other chapter, but only remembered
those, that entered Rome by force, I hold it not amiss in this place briefly
to remember them. Radaigasus the first king of ye Goths which entered Italy
with two hundred thousand Goths, can not be reckoned for one of them, for
that without doing any great damage he was overcome, taken prisoner, and
strangled by Stilicon captain of the Emperor Honorius army.

1 Alarick was then the first king of the Goths, and stranger that entered and
spoiled Rome.

2 Adolphus was the second: who if the intercession of his wife Placida,
Honorius sister, had not appeased his furye: had utterly subverted Rome.

3 Generick king of the Vandals was the third that spoiled Rome.

4 Odoacer as some say a Saxon, was the fourth king, that punished Rome: and
first of all named him self king of Italy.

5 Theodarich king of the Goths was the fifth: who and his heirs occupied the
empire 50. years.

6 Athalarick, Theodarich son was the sixth.

7 Theodat successor of Athalarick, also king of the Goths was the seventh.

8 Vitiges, was the 8. king: this Vitiges left Rome naked of all her beautiful
buildinges, and ancient privileges.

9 Tottill king of the Goths was the ninth, who destroyed Rome more then the
rest, and this wound lasted 42. months, as it is written in the Apoc. 13. for
it was three year and a Apoc. 15.
half before Bellisarius repaired Rome, after her first ruin by Tottill.

10 Telas succeeded Tottil, and was the last king of the Goths that governed
Rome, who in the beginning of his reign, was vanquished, taken prisoner, and
put to death, by Nasetes, chief of the Emperor Justinians army.

In this sort did God chasten this Empire of Rome: and albeit God has
appointed other then carnal weapons, to confound Antichrist: who being the
enemy of God, is threatened to be confounded by Gods own word: yet to join
shame with his overthrow: visible vengeance is seen to reign upon him. For
to what nation is not his deformity known? and as by piece meals he clymed
to the highest degree of worldly dignitye: even so by a lingering consumption he
is almost wasted to nothing, or in the best construction brought unto a vile
reputation: and as I have here shown his flourishing pride, and pomp, even so
occasion will hereafter minister matter, in sundry places of his ruin
disgrace, and daily defeats, whose utter confusion, God for his sons sake
speedely grant Amen.

CHAP. 7.
Of the envy of Sergius a monk of Constantinople, who being banished for
heresy fled into Arabia, unto Mahomet, by whose devilish policies,
ambitious Mahomet, forced the people to hold him for a Prophet, which damnable
sect, until this day has been nourished with the blood of many thousands.

LAmentable and most lamentable, are the blouddye cruelties, manifested in my
former discourses, but this one act of envy broched, the extremest venim of
the devil. For although in my recited examples I have published, open injuries
both against God and man, yet were they executed on those persons, whose glory
the envious beheld, or in the worst degree, to bury the remembrance of their
virtues, which they imagined would lessen their account. But this fact of
Sergius was drawn many degrees more extreme, who though he sufficiently
bewrayed the envy that he bear to his superiors authority, beeng a Monk in
Constantinople: in that he raised damnable heresies, to make him self famous,
yet the sect of Mahomet, which his accursed head first planted in Arabia, has
left an impossibility to Belzabub to scatter in the world, a more blasphemy
against God, and injury toward men, whose opinions buried millions of souls
in hell, whose bodies were to form, many hundred years after his departure
unto the Devil. The actions of whom, and original of Mahomets sect ensues.

Sundry are the opinions, of what parentage, and country this false Prophet
Mahomet was. Platinus says that he sprung from noble line. But Pomponius
Letus, a most diligent author, in the abridgement of the Roman history,
affirms that he was of a race, base, vile, and obscure, which Vn^nty of
M^omets lineage.
may the rather be credited, for that a man so evil, in whom was nothing
worthy of memory: but malice and iniquity, may hardly be the issue of noble
blood. Some say he was a Persian, some other an Arabian, and both opinions not
without reason, for that at that time, the Persians governed Arabia. Touching
his father, were he noble, or villayne, sure it is that he was a Gentill, and
neither Jew nor Christian: by his mothers side, the better opinion is, that he
descended from Abraham, by the ligne of his son Ismaell, whom he had by his
Chamber maid Agar, and so as a Jew, observed the law of the Jews. This
Mahomet had a quick spirit, and easily learned, what so ever he was taught,
who in his youth was sold, as a slave, unto a rich merchant named Adimonople,
who regarding the towardnes of the young man, intertayned him as his son, and
in no point as his slave: who so well managed his masters affairs, that in
short time he returned Adimonople great riches, and by reason of his great
traffic, both with Christians and Jews, he was well exercised in either of
their laws: during this time, Mahomets master dyed without issue, and left
Ladigua his wife very rich, who having before proved the sufficiency of
Mahomet, took him to husband, and so of a bondsman, raised him unto the degree
of a rich Lord.

In the Prime of Mahomets advancement, the forenamed Sergius arrived in Arabia,
who to be revenged of the Clergy that banished him Constantinople, or more
properly to show his malice, to despite God because he suffered him to prosper
no better in his herestes, in every place he tormented the poor Christians,
with whose outward habit he was but lately attyred: in the end he lighted in
acquaintance with Mahomet, whom Sergius found in ability and power great, in
wit quick and subtle, in mind proud and ambitious, of disposition froward
and envious, a great practiser of magic and nigromancie, and to be short,
that he was ignorant in no vice, neither was there any lewd attempt that he
feared to enterprise: who taking his best opportunity, counseled Mahomet to
take upon him the name of a Prophet, and to give him The wicked counsel of the
monek Se^.
the greater credit, by magic and other diuelis^ practices, he illuded the
people with some false miracles, in so much as his wife and most familiar
friends began to admire Mahomet, and to reverence him as a holy Prophet.

But were it the vengeance of God sent to abase his pride, or the malice of
the devil by this plague to color his impious enterprise, Mahomet was many
times stricken with the falling evil, whose strange passions much amazed both
his wife and household servants, which Mahomet thus excused, that the Angel
of God oftentimes talked with him, and unable as a man to sustain his divine
presence, he entered into this agony and alteration of spirit, and that by
this visitation, he forelearned what was the almighty will and pleasure of
God, whose express charge he followed.

By these subtle illusions and protestations, he not only seduced his familliar
friends and allies, but by his cunning and their false rumors he was admired
and reputed through the greater part of Arabia, as the Prophet of God: Mahomet
growing to be thus popular, and after the death of his wife, sole possessed of
a great mass of wealth, by the encouragement of Sergius, he published abroad
that he was sent from God into the world, to give laws unto the people: and
for that he was by his industry learned in all laws, in the beginning till he
had well rooted his damnable sect, to reaue himself of many dangerous enemies,
in part he accorded with the Jews, in part with the Christians, and moreover
in many things he Mahomet an Ath^ist
agreed with the heretics which reigned in his time: he denied the Trinity
with the Sabellicans, with the Macedonians he denied that the holy Ghost was
God, and approved the multitude of wives with the Nicolaites, on the other part
he confessed that our Savior and Redeemer was a holy Prophet, and that he had
the spirit of God: with the Jews he received circumcision, and to be short,
being of no religion, he entertained the professors of every religion: but
especially, his wicked law tolerated al carnal vices without controlement.
Ma^omet being by these means strong and puissant, he made his law named the
Alcoran: and for that he distrusted the goodness thereof, he generally forbad
all men, upon the pain of death, not so much as to dispute of his law. A
damnable policy.


In the beginning of these matters, he was strengthened with the multitude, and
such as were seduced with his false persuasions. Also there joined with him all
the vicious and carnal men, which in those days abounded through the world by
whose aid he assaulted the confines of Arabia, and subjected a great part
thereof. His beginning was about the year of the Lord 620. in the time of the
Emperor Eraclies, who so soon as he had news of Mahomets proceedings, (as
Platinus witnesses) he prepared a remedy, and performed the same in part,
intertaining for this service with large promises ye Scenits, a warlike people of
Arabia, so that this new sect was in a manner stifeled for a time:
notwithstanding the Emperor greatly A matter is better vnbegun, then not
effectually followed.
erred, that he followed not his purpose, until he had clean plucked up this
wicked root, which brought forth such dangerous and damnable seed, for in not
continuing his enterprise he did much hurt in beginning of the same: for
because he kept not promise with the Scenites, and paid them their accustomed
wages, they in despite thereof, joined with Mahomet, and seeing that he was in
great reputation and holden for the Prophet of God, they chose him for their
captain, Afterward he and his people assailed the Empire of the ROMANS, and
entering into Syria, they conquered the noble city of Damas, with all Egypt,
Judea, and the adjoining countries: Mahomet A pleasing persvvasion of Mahomet.
then persuaded the Sarisens, a people of Arabia, that the land of promise
belonged unto them, as the legittimate successors, of Abraham, and having thus
fortunate success in his enterprises, he made war upon the Persians, by whom
he was at the first vanquished, but in the end he had the upper hand.

To conclude, after that Mahomet had compassed great and horrible matters, he
was poisoned in the 40. year of his age, and as Sabellicus says, in the year
of our Lord 6* 2. And for that Mahomet would often say, that after his death he
should Mahomets death.
ascend up into heaven, his disciples kept him above the ground until his
body stuncke as badde as his soul, which was then closed in iron, and by his
said disciples was carried into the City of Meque in Persia, where he is
worshipped of all the people of the East, yea of the greater part of the world.

Califus succeeded Mahomet in the Empire and Hali succeeded Califus and Hali
successors of Mahomet.
Califus, these two greatly augmented the sect of Mahomet, and so from time to
time, by diverse means and successions, and Principally for our sins, and
through the cowardlines of the Emperors of the East, this pestilence continues
unto our age.

And certaynely if Gods mercy and the diligence of the Emperor CHARLES the
fifte had not stopped the passage and determination of the great Turk SOLOMON,
Italy and all the West hadbene in danger of this infection. God be praised
for his providence, and when it stands with his good will, all good people
do desire that there may be such unity among Christian Princes, as joining
their forces together, they may be able to confound the tyranny of this
enemy of many thousand millions of men's salvation: by whose pusalanimitie,
envy and discord: of a vile and abject person, he is grown to be a Prince,
renowned and feared through the whole world, the great Turk I mean, who
although he be sprung up long since Mahomet, yet his damnable sect never dyed,
and at this day by the Turks proceedings is wonderfully dispersed. Which
almighty God for his son Jesus Christ his sake speedily extinguish.

CHAP. 8.
Of the Envy of Simon the Magician, and other heretics since Christ his time.

THere was never common wealth, City nor people so well governed in unity,
but that envy made a passage for division and discord, Among the heathen
Philosophers their sects wrought much division. The Jews although they obeyed
one law, notwithstanding the heresies (for so call the Greeks the causes of
division in religion) of ye Pharisites, Samaritans, Nazarites, Herodians and
others caused much contention and debate among ye people: but at this day the
deuines only calls those heretics, that instituteth, finds or follows
any sect, contrary to christian religion, whereof Simon the Samaritan called
the Magitian He was borne in a town of Samarie called Tricon. T^rt. de here.
with his harlot Selene, were the first, that envying the credit of the
Apostles, sought by a venomous opinion, to kill the roots of christian faith
and religion, he and his supporters which were called Simonaques, offered to
sell the grace of the holy Ghost, he preached that our nature proceeded not of
God, but of a high and supernatural cause, with many monstrous and horrible
propositions, particulared by Irenius and others, which Irenius called him
father of heresies: this Simon seeing that the Apostles by laying of their
hands, gave the holy Lib. 1. cap. ^0.
Ghost to those whom they touched, sought to obtain of Saint Peter, that for
money, which he acquired with godliness and faith: but the Apostle thus
answered him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou think the gift of
God may be Act. 8.
obtained with money: thou have neither part nor fellowship in this business,
for thy heart is not right in the sight of God: Simon being thus reproved by
Saint Peter, ever after his enemy, and envying the miracles the Apostle did by
grace, he continually studied to do the like by magic, and in the end he
grew so famous, as in the time of the Emperor Nero, he was so reverenced in
Rome, as between the two bridges over Tiber, his Images were set up with this
superscription, To Simon the holy God: Simon being drunken with this admiration
of the people, arrogantly offered to contend with S. S. Justin. marty^ in his.
Apology.
Peter in doing of miracles, and practiced by his art to raise a kinseman of
Neroes from death to life: but to a bootlesse end he tried his cunning: but
saint Peter after he had called upon the name of Christ, raised him from death
to life: Simon being more deeply enraged by this miracle, purposed before the
people of Rome to fly between the mountain Capitolin and the mountain
Auentin, if Peter would follow him to the end it might be known, which of
both them was best beloved of God, and there withal comforted with his
devilish arts, Simon prepared himself to fly: then Peter holding up his
hands to heaven, desired God that he would not suffer so great a people to be
abused by his magic: after whose prayers, Simon fell in the midst of his
flight, and broke one of his legs: through grief and shame whereof, he shortly
after dyed in Afric, whether he was by his disciples carried.

But out of this monstrous root many other heresies

much dissension in the Church of God, in seeking to separate Christ from the
divine substance of God, (by the sharp punishment of God, purging his very
entrails) was driven to confess that pride and envy were the very grounds
of his damnable heresy. If I should repeat all the heresies and dissentions
that envy has sown in ye Church of God, it would rather contain a volume
then a Chapter. The diligent readers of histories shall find, that for the
most part, if envy armed christian subjects against the peace of their
country, she made some false prophet or heretic, with the veil of religion,
to be their ringleader. The envy of the Clergy is the root of al mischief,
envy erected the order of the Dominican friars, through envy of the reverence
given unto the Franciscans: the Jesuits sprang from the envy of the
Dominicans: the fall of Antichrist, has driven the Pope to publish the
proclamation of Schimeon the seditious Jew. Who so lists to Iose. de bell. Iud
be rid of the bondage of his master, or has received injury in his country,
all that be in debt or stand in fear of their creditours, those that dread
the Judges for shedding of innocent blood, and therefore haunte the mountains
and desert woods, who so is disposed to rob, steal, murder, haunt whores, to
eat and drink at other men's costs without labor of his hands, if he will
make war (says the Pope) with the true professors of the Gospel, him will
I protect from the danger of laws, pardon his offenses, and will lade him with
booties and spoils. His intertainement armeth all the Atheists, heretics and
unthrifty persons in The Popes soldiers.
Christendom with civil dissension: the defense of the Pope is their color,
but envy, ambition, necessity and breach of law are the true causes: so that
the general quarrel of Christendom is between the Papists and the
protestants: but I hope, and so all good Christians zealously pray, that God
will always give victory to ye true professors of the Gospel: and as he
hitherto has powered his visible vengeance upon heretics so he will speedily
confound this Archeretique the Pope, and his huge rabble of reprobates.

Amen.
CHAP. 9.
The mortal quarrel that envy raised of the faction between the two
brethren, Gelphus and Gibelin.

EXperience daily approves the old saying, there is no venim so mortal, as
the envy of brethren, nor war so cruel, as the enimitie of kindred: whereof
there can be no ampler testimony then this following history.

In the time of the Emperor Frederick the second, and Pope Gregory the
ninth, between whom there was great discord: there was in the town of
Pistoye, two factions, the one named the Panciatiques, and the other the
Chanciliers: it fell out that two brethren, the one named Gelphus, and the
other Gibelin, in this city held contrary opinions, the one followed the one,
and the other party followed ye other: insomuch as the favorers of these two
brethren, being men of account, began to name themselves the one Gelphes, and
the other Gibelins: so that the Gelphes chased the Gibelins forth of the town,
and for that it was a rare thing to see two brethren so contrary, every one of
the fastion acquired the favor of many of their neighbors, by which means as
a contagious pestilence, this division by little and little was spread over all
Italy: in so much as the Emperor Frederick, the capital enemy of the Pope,
being then in the city of Pisa, Anno 1340. and not knowing which faction took
his part, and which the Popes, at all adventure said and published, that he
took the name and part of the Gibelines: which done, he made cruel wars upon
the Gelphes, and by means of this declaration all Italy was divided into
these two names: through which there was in every city mortal frayes: yea, in
particular houses the son was armed against the father, and brother against
brother, and only in affecting the one party of the Gelphes, and the other of
the Gibilenes: the one striving to confound the other: the stronger always
overthrowing and leuiling the houses of the weaker with the earth: in which
envious quarrel, there was never more cruelty showen amonst infidels, then
was then among Christians, among whom no advantage was spared. Anthony
Archbishop of Florence writes, that through this faction, thirty of the most
famous houses of Florence were rased and overthrown: the like outrage was
seen throughout all Italy. The greater part followed the Emperor, and chased
the Gelphes: who again with their uttermost power resisted the^: to conclude,
the greatest part of Rome were ready to take part with the Emperor: which the
Pope seeing, he forthwith set open his relics, and made a solemn Procession,
and The Pope dr^ue^ (...).
sought all the means that might win the people, carrying before him (as the
people supposed) the keys of S. Peter and S. Paul, and in place of most
audience, made a public oration, or more properly a sermon, declaring how
great a folly it was to persecute and kill so many men, for the only favor of
these two names, which the devil had spread abroad, for the public
persecution of Italy: more, he affected his perswaston with other matters of
so great weight, as he moved the people to commiseration, and to join to
defend him against the Emperor, who was in good hope to have destroyed the
whole party of the Gelphes: this scourge for the sins of the people, lasted
a long time in Italy, by means whereof, many thousands of men were slain,
many sumptuous Palaces were destroyed, and many fair houses were burned: the
authors of this report are, Platinus in the life of Pope Gregory the Plat. de
vita G^eg 9. Sab. (...). par. 3.
ninth, Sabellicus in the third part of histories, and many others of great
knowledge.

CHAP. 10.
The envious revenge of Megolo Larcaro a Genowais, against the Emperor of
Tribisonde, a notable example for envious Courtiers.

AMong all Estates and professions of men, envy is principally entertained
among Courtiers, where every man labors to work his fellows disgrace, and
above all enuieth his prosperity, which have been the cause of many quarrels,
and often times of civil commotion, of which there cannot be a more rare and
profitable example of admonition, then this which follows.

At what time the Genowaies were Lords of certain Cities A re^rd for Co^tiers.
of the Leuant, in the year 1380, It happened that among other gentlemen of
Genoway and Florence, which trafiqued to Caffa, there was a Genowais of the
family of Larcari named Megolo Larcaro, who for his rare qualities, and
virtues, was highly favored of the Emperor above all other: who obtained
satisfaction of all his demaundes, which favor moved the chief of the Court
to great envy, anger and disdain: who sought by all means to abase him: it
fell out in the end, that Larcaro playing at Chests with a young Courtier, a
favorite also of the Emperor: who of set malice with injurious words
disgraced Larcaro, and enlarged the same in scandelizing the name and race of
the Genowaies: which constrained Megolo to give him the lie, for which lie ye
other suddenly stroke him with his fiste, and such was his assistants, as
Larcaro was deprived of present revenge, and in answer of sundry complaints
to the Emperor, he could have no reperation of credit: who seeing his honor in
this peril, protested in his heart to be revenged and dissembling his
intention, in few days after he desired license of the Emperor to depart, to
order certain affairs in Genowai, which the Emperor granted: Megolo having a
prosperous wind, shortly after arrived at Genowai, where he was well welcomed of
all his kinsemen and friends whom he solemnly feasted, and after the banquet,
from point to point he recounted the whole matter, and beseeched their aid to
revenge this outrage, which not only touched himself and them, but also all the
Genowaies. To whom they all solemnly swore, that they would not forsake him
until they had reparation of the injury, and preparing themselves to succor
him in this enterprise, in short time they provided two galleys well armed with
soldiers, mariners and skillful pilots, and so set forward to sea, with
determination to rob and rifle all the ships of those parts, and to burn the
villages and towns subject to the Emperor upon the sea side: but Megolo
purposed not to kill a man that he took, but to give them a more grievous life
then death: for every man which fell into his hands, Larcaro caused his nose
and ears to be cut, to their An ^ous re^ge.
continual reproach, and although there were many vessels armed against him,
yet none could damage him, his Foystes were so light, as knowing his
advantage, he shunned and escaped all perilles, he took many galleys, and with
the former disgrace he curtailed a number of men: one day he went on shore to
recreate himself, and to make provision for fresh water and victual, his men
going aforeraging, took the cattle, goods, and the men of a village (which
they sacked) prisoners among the captives there was an old man, that had on
his head and beard none but white hears: with whom were his two sons
captive, who seeing the mangling of his companions, and the danger of his
sons, fell humbly at the feet of Megolo, and with many tears beseeched him,
rather to put him to death, then to suffer such shame to be done to his sons
Megolo that had a generous mind, took compassion of the old man's tears,
pardoned both him and his sons, and with a great Uessell full of noses and
ears, he sent him to the Emperor, and commanded him to deliver the same to
his Prince with this message, that until he delivered his enemy into his
power, he would not leave to do him all the mischief he could: The old man glad
of his escape, did his message: The Emperor considering well of the mischief,
thought it the less evil to go in proper person to the sea side, and to lead
the young gentleman captive to Megolo, then to suffer the continual pyracies
which he committed with his galleys: the young gentleman in form aforesaid,
with a halter about his neck, was presented before Megolo, who made humble
intercession for the pardon of his life: Megolo with his foot struck him
first on the face, and said that the Genowaies were not wont to show cruelty
to women, and such effeminate persons as he, and giving his enemy an other
blow with his foot, he returned him to the shore, not without the great
rejoicing of the young gentleman's friends, who but lately bemoned him as a
dead man: the Emperor made many great offers to Megolo, all which he refused,
and answered him that he was not come thither for the covetousness of goods, but
for his owe, and the name of the Genowaies honor, and that he demanded of him
none other thing, then that in remembrance hereof, he would build A proud
request
at Trebisonde a fair shop for the merchandise of the Genowaies: about which
should be painted this history, which the Emperor accomplished, and used the
Genowaies with greater favor then before: and so Megolo returned to Genowaie,
gratified and received of every man with great honor.

CAAP. 11.
The contention that envy set between the Emperor of Constantinople, the
Lord of Bulgarie, and other Princes, was the first ground and sure foundation
of the great TVRKES Empire.

THe puissant kingdom of the Turks, at this day so much renoumed and feared,
together with the lineage and family of their Ottomans, and kings, are of late
years sprung up, as a scourge sent and suffered by God, for the sins and
iniquities of the Christians.

It is not yet 300. years since the first beginning of their kingdom, which
at this day is multiplied, to the terror of the whole world: the name of the
Turks are nevertheless ancient: but to say that they came of the ancient
Trojans, because they are called Teucres, is a manifest Original of the
Turks. Pom. Mel. Lib. de Cosmo 1. cap. 18.
error, Pliny and Pomponius Mela, in the end of his first book say, that
their original comes from the Sarmats, which are of the confines of Scythia,
near unto the sea Caspia: who in ancient times were called Turaci, and now
Turks: these Scythians or Turks, living before as sauadge men came forth of
Scythia into Asia Minor, which is (by reason of their name) to this day called
Turkey, where they robbed and conquered certain provinces: these (as barbarous
and infidel people,) received the damnable sect of Mahomet, as the first yt
was presented unto them, and which best agreed with their wicked customs: these
The Turks infected with Mahomets religion
people without gouerner or head: but being a multitude, fiercely joining
together, settled themselves in the less Asia: in fine, they chose one Soliman
of the kingdom of Cilicia for their K. whom Godfrey of Bolloine, and other
christian Princes utterly overthrew, Godfrey Bulloyne.
and so discomfited the Turks, that of long time after they had neither K. nor
captain of account. In the end Ottoman Ottoman. 1.
(a man of base lineage) got the favor of the people, and was made their K. and
by virtue and great valor somewhat enlarged their dominions, he reigned 28.
years, and dyed An. 1308. whose K. continues to this day, in the ligne of the
heir males. Orkan Succession of the Ottomans. Or^an. 2.
succeeded his father Ottoman, a man as valiant and more industrous then his
father: he was a great inuenter of military engines, magnanimous and liberal:
who after he had reigned 22. years, dyed of a hurt which he received at the
assault of a city, he had by the K. of Cilicias daughter a Christian, who^ he
married, a son named Amurat, that suceeeded him: a man far unlike ^at. 3.
his father in virtues of the mind or strength of body, and yet very ambitious
and desirous to enlarge his Empire, to compass which, envy presented him a
fair occasion: at that time the E. of Constantinople was at controversy with
certain Princes The envy of the Emperor and nobles, first sure foundation of
the Turks Empire.
his subjects, which favored the L. of Bulgarie, who charged the E. so hard,
as he was driven to demand succor of this Amurat K. of the Turks, who sent
him 15000. chosen men, by the aid of whom, the E. vanquished his enemies, which
done, he kept the greater part of the Turks in his own dominions. Amurat
understanding the disposition of the country, under the color to aid the E.
against his enemies, came into the dominions of the E. with 60000 footmen, and
a great number of horsemen: and in despite of the E. made himself L. of the
cities of Calipoli and Andronople, he overcame Mark ye grandmaster of
Bulgarie, and Lazarus the despos of Seruia, with a great number of Christians,
and Malgre the E. possessed himself of the gretest part of Thracia and Greece:
in the end a slave of Lazarus slew him when he had lived 23. years, which was
An. 1373. Amurat left 2. sons, Soliman and Bajazet, Bajazet slew his brother
Bajazet, who slew his elder brother So^.
Soliman, and made himself King: in the beginning of his reign, he prepared
great wars against the Christians, to revenge the death of his father: and with
a great army, he incou^tred in battle with Mark L. of Bulgaria, and with the
greatest part of the nobility of Bulgaria and Seruia, whom he slew Victory
against the Christians.
and utterly defeated. 3. years after this victory, he returned a new upon
the Christians in Hungary, but chiefly in Albania and Valaschia and from
thence sent many Christians slaves into Turkey, and being possessed of the
greatest part of Greece, to wit, of the ancient countries of Athens, Boetia
and Arcania, he laid siege unto the great City of Constantinople, which drove
the Emperor in proper person to desire aid of the Consta^ (...) be^ (...).
western Princes: in which behalf K. Charles the 7. succored him with 2000.
lances: among whom there were two french gentlemen of great expectation, who
joined with Sigismond K. of Hungary and afterward Emperor, who for the same
purpose raised a great army: with whom also joined the grandmaster of the
Rhodes, the Despos of Seruia, and a great number of other christian Princes:
whereupon Bajazet leaving his siege at Constantinople sodeinly with 300000 men
set upon the Christians, who were about a 100000. men, between whom there was
a most bloody battle: in fine the Christians overcome.
Christians were overthrown, and the greater part slain: the King of Hungary
and the grandmaster of Rhodes hardely escaped by flight, and the Frenchmen were
near all slain or taken: this battle was Anno 1395. upon Michaelmas even.
After which victory Bajazet returned again to his former siege of
Constantinople, and had surely won the same, if the news of Tamberlaines
entry into his country, and that he had already gained many towns, cities
and provinces, constrained him to trusse up his baggage, and with his full
power to go find his enemy in Asia: now two of the mightiest princes of the
world, encountered each other in battle, where Bajazet was overcome and
taken, who endured the most vile Misery and overthrow of Bajazet.
and hard prisonment that ever was heard of: for Tamberlain still carried him
with his army in an iron cage, and always when he mounted upon his horse, he
set his foot upon his shoulders: moreover, at meals he tied him under his
boorde, and like a dog fed him with fragments: in this sort ended this
Prince his life, who had been the most aduentrous, the most renowned and the
most feared Prince of his time. The sons of Bajazet which escaped the battle
where their father was overthrown, in their flight taken upon the seas by
certain galleis of the Christians, and certainly at that instant a fair
occasion was offered the Christians, to have kept under for ever their capital
enemy the Turk, but their sins forbad so precious a blessing. The one of
Baiazets sons named Calapin Calapin.
was delivered, who seeing the incapacities and contention of Tamberlaines
sons, and taking with all other advantages that time offered, proclaimed
himself Lord of his fathers Empire, and by strong hand kept Greece and
Thracia. The Emperor Sigismond, both to keep Calapin under, and to be avenged
of the overthrow which his father gave him, offered him battalle, in which
Sigismond was overthrown, and narrowly Christians overthrown. Mahomet. 6.
escaped by flight: Calapin reigned 6. years, and dyed, leaving behind him
two sons, the eldest named Orcan, and the other Mahomet: Orcan was slain by
his Uncle, who thought thereby to have had his kingdom: but Mahomet behaved
himself so well, as he slew the murderer of his brother and recovered the
Empire: he made cruel wars upon the Christians overcome.
Christians in Valachie, and reconquered the lands and provinces, which
Tamberlaine won from his grandfather in Turkey and Asia, in which conquest he
spent 14. years, and dyed in the year 1420. Amurat his son succeeded
Mahomet, whom fortune so favored, as by maine force in despite of the
Emperor of Constantinople, who offered to resist him, he broke upon the
Christians: and won certain Towns, in Seruia, he conquered the country of
Epire, at this day named Roman, he made many courses into Hungry and Albania,
he besieged Belgrade upon Danuby, but left it again with great loss of men.
Ladislas king of Polonia, and Turks overthrown.
Hungarye encountered, and overthrew one of his Captains, and slew a huge
number of the Turks, Amurat (upon news that the king of Carimaine, made
wars in Asia) was nevertheless driven to be at peace with Ladislas, who
(while Amurat was occupied about resistaunce in Turkey) by the persuasion of
the Emperor brake the league, who jointly with the aid of Pope Eugenius, the
Venetians, and Phillip Duke of Burbon promised so to stop the passage of the
Sea, between Europe and Asia, as Amurat should not land his men to succor
his lands: upon which opportunity Ladislas might peaceably conquer the same:
who put in execution their counselles: but Amurat made a short return, and in
despite of the christians, passed the straight: and offered battle to
Ladislas, where the victory was so doubtful, as Amurat was upon the point to
fly, but being stayed, by one of his Bassas, he obtained Bassa a (...) Lord of
(...) Christians ourthrovvne.
the victory and slew Vdislas upon Saint Martins day An. 1440. after this
victory he greatly damaged Hungary, he entered upon the Mores, where sometimes
stood the ancient Cities of Lacedimonia and Corinth, he broke the wall upon
the entry of Province, containing six miles, between the sea Ionigne and the
sea Egea, all which he conquered save certain marish places, he was the first
which erected the band of the Ianissaires, Original of the Ianissaires.
which are reuerted Christians: and now the greatest strength of Turkey: he
reigned 31. years and dyed An. 1450. his son Mahomet succeeded him in the
Empire: this Mahomet Mahomet 8.
excelled in all good quallities, save that he was too cruel.

In the beginning of his reign, desirous to do some exploite, aunswerable to
the greatness of his heart, he besieged Constantinople conquered.
Constantinople, with all other places subject to this Empire. This done he
besieged Belgrade, from whence he was driven with dishonor, besides the loss
of many men, and much artillery, by that valiant Hungarian captain John
Vainode, after this Io. Vaiuode. Turks defeated
he sent one of his Bassas to destroy the Mores, who rebelled in favor of the
Venetians: also to destroy the Isles of Negropont, Mitelene, and Lemnus. After
he entered into ye province of Bossina where he took and beheaded ye king,
having these victories against Christians overcome.
the christians, he passed into Asia, against Vsancusan, the mighty king of
Persia: with whom he fought 2. battles, in the first he was ouerthrown, and
in the 2. had the victory, after this expedition, he made war upon the emperor
of Tribisonde, who^ he vanquished and slew, and so determined the siegniorie
of the Christians Determination of the siegniorie of the christians in the East.
in those parties. He sent a great army into Italy, passed into Carintia and
Istria, even unto ye territories of the Venetians, disco^forted the christians,
and slew of the nobility of Italy. He sent a great army unto ye Isle of Rhodes,
where he was resisted: he then sent a great army into the kingdom of Naples,
by one of his Bassas named Aconiat, who took ye city of Ottranta, which was
governed more then a year, by the Turks to the scandale and damage of al
Italy: he so feared the states of Italy, as Sixtus then being pope, determined
to retire into France ye old refuge France the ancient refuge of the pope.
of the Roman church, as one out of hope to defend Rome. In fine in his
journey against the Soudan of Aegipt, having in his army by land 300000. men,
and by sea 200. galleys and 300. armed ships, he died by the way: in the year
1480. by whose bloddy wars there were destroyed more then 300000. men: upon
whose death the city of Ottranta was reco^quered: which was no small comfort to
al Italy: Mahomet left behind him 2. sons, the one named Bajazet, the other
zizim, who contended for the empire by reason yt their eldest brother was dead:
zizim was aided by the Soudan, and certain Bassaes: the other Bassaes and the
Ianissares favored Bajazet, with all his son named Corcut was created Grand
seigniour of Constantinople, by whose renou^sing he attained the empire, and
with speed hasted into Turkey, and Bajazet. 9.
chased his brother into Italy where he died: Bajazet being sole governor, made
hot wars upon the Soudan, against whom he was wroth for aiding of his brother,
but the Soudan obtaining victory constrained him unto peace. Bajazet made then
hot wars upon the christians: he won the city of Duras in Albania, and Valona,
upon the frontiers of Pouilla: in ye end he so scourged the Christians
overthrown.
Hungarians, as they were driven to crave ye aid of Jews duke of Millaine, and
Jews king of France, who (but chiefly the Duke of Sessa, a Spanish captain) so
delaied Baiazets fury, as he accor ded to peace, being old and tired with wars.
In histime, in Persia began the empire of Sophy: who is to this day a bridle to
the Beginning of the Sophy his empire.
Turk, and a hindrer of damage to the christians: which empire began by one
Ismael, ye named him self a Prophet, and published an Alcoran contrary to
Mahomets, by which means he assembled many people, by whose aid he overthrew
certain Bassas of Bajazet, and made him self lord of Pertia and other
provinces: whose kingdom, from time to time has been augmented. But returning
to our purpose, Bajazet had 3. sons, the eldest named Acomat, the 2. Corcut
(who as is shown renou^ced the empire) and the 3. Selim, who although he was
the youngest yet was he ye most valiant. This Selim seeing the age and
decrepednes of his father, sought how to make him self emperor: the better to
co^pas which, he married the daughter of the great Tartarian. His 2. brethren
perceiving his intent, aimed likewise at the Empire Acomat because he was
eldest, and Corcut, because he first put ye empire into his fathers hands: and
now because of his inabilitie to govern, he alleged yt of right he should
return it unto him again. The old man was greatly perplexed with these
matters, especially with the disobedience of his sons: this division of the
brethren, was the death of many of their adherents but Selim the youngest had
ever ye better hand, who under the color to crave pardon of his father, and to
defend him against his eldest brother Acomat, so won the favor of the
Ianissaires and the other men of war, as by their help he took the empire from
his Father: and banished him from Constantinople, and afterward poisoned him
An. 1512. This traitor and Paracide Selim caused him self to be crowned with
great solemnity: which don he highly Selim 10. Paracide.
rewarded ye Ianissaires, and men of war, which strengthened him. Soon after he
went into Turkey against his brethren, where he slew the Children of his
brethren which were fled before his coming: and with all so pursued his
brother Corcut, as Inhumaine mur^.
(falling into his hands) he killed him: Acornat the eldest by the help of
the Sophy, and the Soudan, gathered a great power, whom Selim ouerthrewe, and
took prisoner, and afterward caused him to be strangled.

This wicked Paracide having thus slain all those of his ^loud: was rid of the
ielous fear of his Empire: and disdayning the Soudan and the Sophy, he
confirmed the league, with the Venetians, and made peace with Ladislas king of
Hungary, and so with a great power he went toward the Sophy: who nothing
dismayed, abid the battle, which was sharp on both sides, but in the end
the Sophy was vanquished hurt, and driven to fly, greatly to the increase of
the Turks honor This battle was the 24. of August. 1514
and reputation: the year following, the Turk make war upon a great prince,
which governed upon the mountain Taurus, whom he slew, and got possession of
all his dominions: this done Selim prepared his forces against the Soudan, and
approaching the coasts of Surie with his army, he caused a brute to be spead
abroad, that he would wage war against the Sophy. But the Soudan suspecting
his policy, prepared a great power, under the color to suppress the
rebellion of a The Soudan overcome.
great Lord in Surie. In fine these two puissaunt Princes affronted each
other, near unto the City of Damas in Surrie, and after many skyrmiges on
either side, their powers joined the 24. of August 1516. the same two years
after the overthrow of the Sophy.

This battle was sustained a long time valiauntly of either party, in the
end the Turks had the victory, and the Soudan was found dead, having never a
wound other then by treading of the horses, being of the age of 76. years
after his victory he seized upon all Surie, the Palestine and Judea, those
which escaped the former battle, chose for their Soudan, ye governor of
Alexandria named Tamonuey: between whom and Selim was fought the cruellest
battle yt ever was heard of: notwithstanding ouercharged with ye multitude of
the Turks Tamonuey was vanquished, and in the end betrayed into ye hands of the
Turk, who caused him to be slain: after the death of Tamonuey, the Turk soon
took possession of the ancient, and puissant kingdom of Egypt, where (as
also in Surie) he left a good order for the government, and afterward in great
triumph he returned unto Constantinople, where he died of an impostume: An
1520. in ye 8. year of his reign, and 46 of his age: this tirant was of so
great a courage, as he was never known to be afraid Soliman. 1^.
of any thing. Soliman his only son succeeded Selim, who was crowned
Emperor. Soliman having subdued Gazellus that usurped the segniorie of
Tripoli, and other domestic rebels, Soliman his v^tories.
the year following in proper person, he made wars upon the Christians, and
besieged Belgrade the port and strength of Hungary: which with vain success,
had been attempted by many of his predecessors. But Jews then king, being
very young, and governed by the Princes of his country: by negligent defense,
suffered the City to be taken by the Turks: Soliman retired from this exployte,
in proper person (contrary to the minds of his Bassas) laid siege unto
Rhodes, with an innumerable power of men and artillery, both by land and sea:
during this siege, the notable feats of arms of either parties, can not be
sufficiently praised. But at the 6. months end, the Grand master of Rhodes
named Phillip de Villiers a French man, was driven to yield the City unto
Soliman: who returned to Constantinople, proud of so great an enterprise.
Three years after, which was An. 1526. he entered Hungary with a maruailous
army: with whom king Jews (ill advised) The Hung^ans slain.
encountered with a small power between Buda and Belgrade, where the said
Jews was vanquished, and found drowned in a ditch: after which the Turk
took Buda and other bordering towns: and as a conqueror returned..

After this Soliman came with a huge army of six hundred thousand men into
Hungary, and Astria, with a desire and determination to conquer all
Christendom: to withstand whose enterprise: Charles the 5. presented him
self in proper person, with less then half the number of the Turks: through
fear of whom the Turk forsook his purpose with the loss of many of his
people: as he did An. 1537. when both by land and Sea he came into Italy: and
had taken certain places in the kingdom of Naples. Sultan Selim succeeded
Soliman in the Empire. During his reign, the Venetians lost Selim 12.
the famous City Famagosta, and a great part of the Isle of Cipres. In which
conquest of Famagosta, there were slain, and taken prisoners, a great number
of Christian noble men and captains: amongst the rest the tiraunt Mustafa
Bassa, by the train of favorable usage, intrapped the noble Bragadino, go
uernour of Famagosta, and contrary to his own faith, the law of honor, and
humanitye: he first caused his ears to be cut off, and then to be cruellye
stretched forth upon the ground, to whom the tiraunt thus blasphemouslye
spoke, where is now thy Christ that he helps thee not, to which the patient
Gentle Mustafa Bassa cosen to the the^ which honge on the left side of Christ.
man made no answer. After this the noble Bragadino, after many vile and
spiteful disgraces, was in the market place tacked to the pillory, and fleaed
a live, whose skin being stuffed with straw, was hanged upon a bowsprite of a
foyste, A^urath 13. murdered 5. of his brethren.
and so carried along the port Towns of Siria. Amurathe that now reigns
succeeded his father Selim, by murder of five of his younger brethren: of him
self he is afraid of the noise of armor, and therefore committed the charge
of his wars to his Bassas, he is politic and in the East wonderfully feared,
the Sophy occupies him with hard wars, and yet the king of Spain from whom
he has won the kingdom of Tunis, nor yet the Venetians, whose seignorie he
almost possesses, dare not but be in league with him, when he waits but
opportunity, to spoil not only them but all Christendom. I would to God his
advantage were less, and the swoordes that are now in Christian men's hands
ready to gore one an others intrailes, were mutually bent against this tiraunt
the sworn enemy of Christ, and blasphemer of his blessed word.

CHAP. 12.
The wonderful conquest of Tamberlaine, reconquered and his large kingdom
overthrown by the envy and discord of his two sons.

Among the illustrous Captains Romans, and Grecians, none of all their
martial acts, deserve to be proclaimed with more renown, then the conquest and
millitarie disciplines of Tamberlaine: but such was the injury of his fortune
as no worthy writers undertook his historye at large: although Baptista
Fulgosius in his collection Campinus florintin, in his history of the Turks:
make some mention Camp. f^o. de his. tu^.
thereof: about the year of the Lord 1390. Tamberlaine being a poor
labourer, or in the best degree a mean soldier, descended from the Partians:
notwithstanding the pouertye of Original of Tamberlaine.
his parents: even from his infancy he had a reaching and an imaginatiue mind,
the strength and comeliness of his body, answered the hautines of his heart.
This Tamberlaine as Fulgosius reports, keeping beasts among other youths of
his condition his companions in a meriment chose him for their king: whereupon
Tamberlaine (having a ruling desire) after an oath of obedience, commanded
every man to sell his cattaile: and to contemn their mean estate, and to
follow him as their captain: Tamberlaines first attempts.
and in small time, he assembled 500. heardmen, and laborers, whose first act
was to rob the merchants that passed that way: he parted the spoil continually
among his companions, and intertayned them with such faithfulness and love, as
the rumor thereof daily increased his strength: the king of Partia
understanding these matters, sent one of his captains with a thousand horse to
take him: but Tamberlaine so be haued him self, as he won this captain to be
his companion and assistant with all his strength who thus joined, did things of
greater importance then before: these matters in question, envy had ^owen
discord between the king of Persia and his brother. Tamberlaine joined with ye
kings Envy (...) of Tamber^es kingdom.
brother: and so valiantly behaved him self, yt he overthrew the king and
seated his brother in the kingdom: the new king created Tamberlaine, chief
captain of his army: who under color to enlarge his kingdom, raised many
people, and found the means to make them revolt from their obedience, and so
deposed ye new king, whom he lately aided to the kingdom: and ^en made him
self king of Persia: redeeming (by this industry and dexterity Tamberlaine
king of Persia.
in arms) his country from the servitude of the Sarizens and kings of
Persia. Tamberlayne having a puissaunt army: in Tamberlaines conquest.
process of time, conquered Siria, Armenia, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Scitia,
Asia, Albania, and other provinces, with many goodly and invincible Cities: it
is pity his policies and battayles be not largely written, which in these
conquestes could not but be famous: but of his military discipline thus much
Tamberlaines military discipline.
writers commend, in his army was never found mutine: he was wise, liberal,
and rewarded every soldier with his desert: there is no remembrance of a
greater army then his: his government and order was such, that his camp seemed
a goodly City, wherein every necessary office was found, merchants without
fear of robbing, or spoiling repaired thither, with all manner of necessary
provision for his army: the reason was he suffered no theft unpunished, and as
lovingly honored, praised, and paid the virtuous and valiant soldier, which
favor joined with justice, made him both feared and loved: he led a greater
army then king Darius, or Xerxes: for writers affirm, that he had four
hundred thousand horsemen, and 6. Creat^es of Tamberlaines army.
hundred thousand foot men, the which he led to conquer the less Asia.
Bajazet the great Turk (of whose worthiness, and wonderful prowes is
sufficiently spoken in the former chapter) advertised of Tamberlaynes
proceedinges: was driven to leave his siege to Constantinople: and with all
expedition, to enlarge his power to the uttermost: to encounter with
Tamberlayne, by estimation he had as many horse men as Tamberlayne, and a
great number of foot men: these two puissant captains in whom wanted neither
valor, pollicye, nor any Battle betvveene Ba^t and Tamber l^ine.
advantage of war, with equal courages, mutuallye consented to abide the
fortune of battle: and so incountring on the confines of Armenia: at the
dawning of the day with all their power they began the fiercest battle
that in any age was foughten, which by the huge number of people, and the
experience of their captains may be lawfully supposed: the slaughter continued
of both parties, and the victory doubtful all the whole days. In fine the
Turks of whom two hundred thousand were slain: vanquished by the multitude
of their enemies turned their backs: which Bajazet perceiving: to encourage
his army, with an vnappauled spirit resisted the furye Courage of B^iazet.
of his enemies. But such was Gods will, for lack of rescue, by the ouercharge
of foes, he was taken prisoner, and pre sented to Tamberlaine, who closed this
great Emperor in an Iron cage, and as a dog fed him only with the fragments
that fell from his table (as in the former chapter is shown) a notable
Baiazet^ over throvv an^ misery.
example of the incertaintye of worldly fortunes: Bajazet, that in the morning
was the mightiest Emperor on the earth, at night, and the residue of his life,
was driven to feed among A notable example.
the dogs, and which might most grieve him, he was thus abased, by one that in
the beginning was but a poor shepherd. Tamberlaine thus possessed of Asia
minor, which was before in the possession of the Turk, he speeded into Egypt,
and by the way raised all Siria, Phenice, and the Palestine, he took many
famous Cities, and among others Smirna, Antioch, Tripoli, Sebastian and Damas:
In Egypt he encountered with the Soudan, and the king of Arabia, and overthrew
them: he was ever best at ease when he found a stout resistance in his enemy:
that his policy and prowess might be the better known: as appeared at the
city of Damas, which after he had taken, the principle and most valiant men
retired unto a tower, which was thought impregnable, afterward they offered
him composition, but he refused unless they would fight, or yield unto his
mercy: and with diligence beyond expectation, he raised a tower leuel with
theirs: from whence he battred them in such sort as they were unable to resist:
it is said, that in his batteries Tamberlaines order at assaults
and assaults, he used the first day to raise a white tent, which gave
knowledge that if that day the Citizens yielded: they should have both their
goods, lives, and liberty: the second day he raised a red tent, which
signified, that if they did that day yield, he would save all, but the masters
and chief of every house: the third day he raised a black tent, which
signified that the gates of compassion were closed, and all that were that day,
and afterward subjected, were slain without respect of man woman or child:
it is written that Tamberlaine besieged a strong city, which with stood the 1.
and 2. days assault, the 3. day the people fed with a vain hope of mercy, set
open the gates, and with their wives and children clothed all in white, having
Olive branches in their hands, they humbly beseeched grace, but Tamberlaine in
place of compassion caused his squadrons of horsemen to tread them under their
feet, and not to leave a A great cruelty.
mothers child a live, and afterward he leuiled the city with the ground. At
that time there was a merchant of Genowa, somewhat favored of Tamberlaine:
pitying the cruelty; boldly demanded why he showed such cruelty to those, that
yielded and beseeched pardon, who^ Tamberlaine (with a countenance fiered with
fury) answered: thou supposest that I am a man, but thou art deceived, for I am
no other then the ire of God, and the destruction of the world: and therefore
see thou come no more in my sight, least I chaste^ thy over proud boldness. The
merchant made speed away, and was never afterward seen in the camp. And in
truth Tamberlain although he was endued with many excellencies and virtues: yet
it seemed by his cruelty, ye God raised Envy end of Tamberlain^s kingdom.
him to chasten the kings and proud people of the earth. In the end this great
personage, without disgrace of fortune, after sundry great victories, by the
course of nature died, and left behind him two sons, every way far unlike their
father: between who^ envy sowed such dissension, that through their
incapacities to govern the conquests of their Father, the children of Bajazet,
whom they kept prisoners, stole into Asia, and so won the people to
disobedience, as they recovered the goods and possessions that their father
lost. The like did other kings and princes, who^ Tamberlaine had spoiled, in so
much as in small time this Empire was so abased, yt many days ago, there was
no remembrance left, either of him or his lineage: save yt Baptista Ignatius a
great Baptis. Ignatius.
searcher of antiquities says, that ye successors of Tamberlaines sons:
possessed the provinces conquered by him about the river of Euphrates, until
the time of king Vsancasan, and according to the opinion of some writers, of
the heirs of this Vsancasan, was chosen the first Sophy, who to this day (to
the benefit of all christendo^) maintains mortal wars against the great
Turk. But it seems that their empire was clean ended: for (as it is set down
in the chapter of the great Turk) one named Ismaell a false Prophet, gathered
a multitude of the co^mom people together, of whom (by continual favor of time
and fortune) the Sophy is grown, of power to encounter the great Turk. And
herein although the lightness and inconstancy of the common people be heretofore
noted: yet occasion here and in sundry places, ministers matter to blame their
envious and froward dispositions: there was never invention so fantastic, nor
captain so wicked, yt they refused to follow: they erected the tirannous
empires of the Sophy, the great Turk, and Tamberlaine, and over threw the
famous and prudent governments of Athens, Lacedemonia, Rome, etc. The Swizers
envying the authority of their nobility and gentlemen: by general consent slew
them al, and ever since have been governed, by that base government, called
Democratia, where mecanical people have the only segniorie: a gouerme^t, which
resembles a monster with many heads, yet they all have neither will nor
capacity to cherish virtue, learning, and worthy enterprises, the beauties and
strength of a good common wealth. Nevertheless Joshua simler of zurich in his
Ios. Simler d^ r^epub. Swi^
book of the Swizers common wealth, both for their military discipline in
war, and sound administration of justice in peace, compares the government of
their Cantons, unto the common wealth of the Venetians: time and necessity has
much reformed the same from their original, and yet how be it he greatly
praises their justice, yet his own report thus much testifies of their
weakness, that to martial and govern their wars, they have been oftentimes
driven to obey and follow the direction of foreign captains, which lamenes in
a common wealth can never be but an open blemish, and a secret danger. For a
perfect common wealth resembles a well proportioned man, whereof the military
defense, resembles his hands, which being maimed or cut off, bring misery to
the whole body.

CHAP. 13.
The calamity, and servile bondage of Portugal, under the government of
Phillip king of Castile, etc. by the aduenturous battle, and death of
Sebastian, king of Portugal, the 5. of August 1578. and especially by the
envious malice of Henry which succeeded, in suppressing the lawful title of
Don Anthonio the now reputed king.

THe renown of the kingdom of Portugal: both for the commodities of the
natural country: as for the wonderful riches of the east and west Indies:
with diverse cities and towns in Africa, subjected and annexed to the crown:
equalled of lateyeeres the fame of most christian governments: and certainly
at this day, the calamity and bondage of the people, by the conquest and
violent rule of the king of Spain, requires the compassion and relief of all
true Christian princes: the grounds and causes of whose miseries follow. By
succession of time, and lawful decent: Sebastian was crowned king of Portugal:
whose virtues and outward gifts promised great honor unto his kingdom: but the
inconstancy of worldly dignity is liuelye figured, in his much lamented death:
king Sebastian being about ye age of 24. years: upon the earnest labor and
suite of Mulei Mahumet, king (as he pretended) of Fez and Marocoes, who by
Mulei Maluco his brother was driven forth of the kingdom: condescended with a
puissant army, to pass into Africa, to restore this Mulei Mahumet to his
kingdom: the enterprise agreed with the magnanimity and greatness of young king
Sebastians mind: besides to relieve and restore this expulsed king: among
indifferent judges was a matter of great honor and virtue: so that resolutely
to execute his promise king Sebastian departed with his army from Lisbone in
June 1578. and arrived at a port in Castile called el puerto de Sancta Maria,
where he tried the breach of the king of Spain his uncles promise: which was
the aid of 50. Galleys, and 4000. armed soldiers: nevertheless the said king
Sebastian like (as he was) a magnanimous prince, having a 1000. sail of ships
in a readiness pursued his voyage, and landed his army in Africa to the number
of 15000. fighting men, and on the 5. of August in the same year in a plain
field called Alcazar, there was a most fierce battle fought, between him and
the enemy: wherein the young king Sebastian, and Mulei Mahumet whose part he
took, were both over come and slain in the field. Neither did Mulei Maluco
the king their enemy escape: for with sickness and wearines he died during the
battle: a battle very unfortunate, wherein neither party gained, and most
rare and worthy of remembrance, that three kings were slain in the same, and
above 600. of the chiefest nobility, and Gentlemen of Portugal. After the
death of king Sebastian: Henry a Cardinal and a very old man, the Henry king
of Portugal a Cardinal.
fifth issue male of king Emanuell, was presented unto the crown, Don Anthonio
being then prisoner in Africa: and his right unknown: by reason that he was
thought not legitimate. Within a few days after, by Gods providence Don
Anthonio, was both delivered forth of prison: and by probable witness ses, was
assured of his legitimation: the knowledge whereof so moved the old and
foreworne king Henry his uncle: as poisoned with envy and malice: he not only
banished him the court, but stopped the course of justice, in the pursuit of
Don Anthonioes lawful claim: and not finding his malicious humor satisfied:
because Don Anthonio had procured the Popes inhibition, to disable the said
king Henrye to attempt any thing prejudicial to his right: he therefore took
an other course to disgorge his rancour, which was under pretense, that Don
Anthonio disobeyed his commandment, in coming with in six miles of the
court, he commanded him upon pain of A senere judgment of king Henry.
death within fifteen days, to depart out of his realm. How injuriously this
old king, that by course of nature could not live long, dealt with his
natural country and kinsman, the calamities of the one and oppression of the
other largely testify. This old and withered king Henry: if envy and disdain,
had not both mortified reason and natural affection, upon the certain
knowledge of Don Anthonioes right to the kingdom: had great cause to thank
God, and comfort his affections: that when the glory of Portugal lay a dying
for want of linall succession of the heir male, that so worthy a personage,
as Don Anthonio: in whom there wanted no commendable virtue, a natural
Portugal, and of the blood royal, was by divine providence, reserved to
reign and receive the glory of the kingdom: I have read of many aged princes,
and yet more able to govern then this king Henry, (the estate of whose kingdom
so hastily required not a sufficient and able king as Portugal) that have
voluntarily resigned their government, to young and sufficient men: but I have
seldom heard of any, that even at their entrance into their grave, have
furthered the claim of a stranger, before the right of their natural kinsman
and country man. But whether malice or fear, or both were the causes, king
Henry banished Don Anthonio, and suspended his right, and shortly after died,
before any order taken for the strength and succession of the kingdom: after
whose decease, The king of Spain his own judge.
(who in most of all his claims, makes force his judge) would not tarry the
determination of the estates, but with fire and sword made his passage to the
crown. The estates of Portugal, the Clergy, nobility, and comminaltie, now
too late looked about them, and forth with elected, and made Don Anthonio
their king: they anointed and swore him with all kingly D^ Anthonio ^de king
by the 3. estates.
ceremonies, but they provided not a strength to settle him in his kingdom,
which (if king Henry's rancour had not banished him) his wisdom would have
foreseen: they persuaded the king of Spain to retire his army, until that
justice had determined K of Spaines greedy desire of rule.
his claim. A weak persuasion where the victory was so sweet a kingdom: and
the king of Spain a party, whose desire coueteth universal rule. And (as
Euripides says) to gain a kingdom, the breach of laws are half
privileged, but so, or no, he stood in awe of no judge. The munition and
Gunpouder, K. Anthonio put to ^light.
by the corruption of the Governors of Portugal (Sede vacant) was conuaied
into Castile, so that he made an easy conquest of a rich kingdom: king
Anthonio, by Gods providence miraculously has sundry times escaped his
cruelty, although the kingdom daily feel his tyranny. Out of their calamities
of Portugal, I special observe this counsel of Gods justice, to admonith
semblable traitors to their country. John Masquerannas, Francis de Sa, and
Diego lopes de Sosa, three A good example for traitors
of the Governors of the realm, who by bribes, and fair promises of promotion
by the king of Spain, sold the munition and in effect their country. Al which
three upon the election of Don Anthonio fled into Spain, where they all with
grief that they had sold their country, and melancoly that the king kept not
his promises with them, soon after died. Iristan vazde vegna without any
necessity yielded the strong Castile of S. John by Lisbone, to the duke of
Alua, upon the promise of a great pension during his life, who presently upon
the delivery, without other reward, then the just reward of traitors, upon a
slender quarrel was banished into Aphryca, to serve ten years against the
Mores: and truly therein the king did both justly and honorably, for he that
will be false to his country will be true to no man, neither deserves he to
have any promise kept with him: yea (as Phalaris made Perillus to be first
executed with his own torture and tirannicall devise) it is sound counsel, to
receive such traitors service, and to hang them for their labors, or at the
least to banishe them for ever. For such heads are apt to damage more then
they profit, whose minds seldom leave groaning until they clymbe to the
Gallows.

CHAP. 14.
The true report, of the change of the government of Florence in the year
1478. and the outrages and murders, which followed the envy which the
Archbishop of Pisa, they of the howses of Saluiati and Pazzi, bear toward
the family of Medices, for the authority which they administered in the common
wealth.

SAint Paul declaring the offices of a bishop among many other duties, says
Tim. 2. cap. 3.
that a bishop ought to be no fighter him self, yea to abhor fightinges, and
dissentions in others, intending with all, that fighters and the sustayners of
fraies, and unnatural murders were ye sworn enemies of charity, and public
prosperity, upon whom bishops are bound to pronounce the curse and vengeance
of God, least the Gospel which they should preach, being it self true love,
peace, and charity, rebuke in them selves, the sin they might blame in
others. But small is the wonder though Frauncis Saluiati archbishop of Pisa,
contraried this doctrine: being the true Disciple of the Pope: and S. Paul the
faithful Apostle of our savior Jesus Christ, ^.
between whom there is no union neither in life nor doctrine. For our savior
Christ attyred with humility, preached the unmeasurable power of God, and
peace unto men, and the Pope clothed with the riches of the world, proudly
aduaunceth his own traditions above the glory of the almighty, and labors
to so we sedition in the bowels of mighty Princes. This ungracious Archbishop,
as an earnest follower of the Popes errors, or rather wilful sins,
beholding with an envious eye, the estimation and authority of Julian and
Laurence de Medices brethren, and of the people of Florence, high ly favored:
with a malicious heart, desired the ruin of their glory, and to give success
to his naughty wish, he conspired with the families of Pazzi, and his own of
the Saluiati, two of the most ancient and famous houses of Florence, to give
untimely deaths, to Segnior Julian, and Laurence de Medices.

Small persuasion needed to encourage Segnior John, and Frauncis de Pazzi, and
others of the family of Saluiati to follow this enterprice: so highly they
envied the rule of the Medices, whose honor begun in the virtues of Cosmus de
Medices their Grandfather, when they them selves of small regard, were
descended of the most ancient and noble houses of Florence: forgetting that
virtue, not time made a gentleman, and gave him reputation, and that more
honorable was the first, then the last gent of a man's house: In so much as
Cicero borne of base parentage, by the warraunt of this cognizaunce,: Virtue
the cog nizance of a gentleman.
Ego meis maioribus virtute praeluxi: abashed not to sit cheek by ioule with
the most ancient Roman in Rome: but in vain I prescribe the privileges of
virtue to restrain envy, knowing that envy is the mortal enemy of virtue,
who can not endure the commendation, much less the prosperity of the
virtuous. Let King Saul be joint example with these Florentine conspiratours:
who rejoiced not so much to see his Capital enemy Goliahs head upon David's
sword, as he sorrowed to hear the people to crown him with this commendation,
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand: and through envy
of this renown sought to murder David, who was the safegarde of him and his
people. This like reverence given by the Florentine people unto the brethren of
Medices, moved the recyted Pazzi and Saluiati and other their confederats, to
seek the means to murder these two Medices.

The favor of the multitude toward Segnior Julian, and his brother, was a
great let unto their enemies: besides Policy of the Medices.
their own wisdoms many times frustrated their enterprises: for the two
brethren foredreading a sudden mischief, were never seen to walk together
in the town, knowing for certainetie, that no man would enterprise to offend
the one while the other remained in safety.

The Archbishop of Pisa and his confederates seeing their purposes by this
means of the Medices daily prevented, practiced to get the two brethren into
the great Church upon a feastiuall day, and about the elevation time they
agreed to murder them, persuading themselves that the privilege of the place,
would make the Medices careless of their own safety: and unprepared to
offend their enemies, and in truth, if the success of their attempt had
answered their advantage of time, their expectation had not been deceived.
And therefore A necessary counsel to be followed.
the example necessary to forewarne all estates, that are envied by mighty
enemies, to be best armed where least danger appears. For to stay the
reuenges of Envy, no place is a Sanctuary, no innocence a plea, nor prayer of
power. And what greater likelihood is it, that the Church may be a Sanctuary
for the living, more than the grave for the dead, let the robbing of Bucers,
Paulus Phrigius, and other godly men's sepultures, confirm my advise with
truth, and the burning of their half consumed bones, condemn the Papists of
tyranny. In all modern troubles, some of which rablement of helhounds are
chief authors. Well this plot pleased the Archbishop, and the rest of the
conspirators Francis de Pazzi, and Barnard Baudin undertook to kill Segnior
Julian de Medicis, and the death of Segnior Lawrence, was committed to the
execution of Anthony de Volterro, and Anthony Preaste. And the better to
strengthen this treason, the Archbishop of Pisa found the means to draw a young
Cardinal, nephew of the Pope Sextus, from his study at Bologna, to pass the
time at Florence, to the end that his train should be the guard of his
mischief, without making the Cardinal privy to his intention.

This determination set down, the execution was appointed to be upon a sunday,
being the third of May 1478. upon which day, the Cardinal went to hear
Mass, and with him Seignior Lawrence de Medicis alone without his brother. The
Conspirators seeing Seignior Julian absent, Francis de Pazzi, and Barnard
Baudin which had sworn his death, under the shadow of courtesy went unto his
house, and wrought the means that they got him unto the (...) Judas kiss.
Church, and placed themselves with best advantage to do their feate, upon the
point to dispatch their purpose, Barnard Baudin stabbed Seignior Julian to the
heart with his poynado, Francis de Pazzi hasting to make him sure, hurt
himself in the body with his own dagger, notwithstanding, Segnior Julian
died in the place, and with him Frauncis Nori, with Iu^ian de Medic^ ^ne.
the stroke of Barnard Baudin, for setting hand to his sword, to defend
Seignior Julian. Anthony de Volterro, and Steven Preaste, assailed Seignior
Lawrence de Medicis, but with so small dexterity, as with the good defense
that he used, he escaped, only with a small hurt in the mouth. The
Conspirators sought to save themselves, and Segnior Lawrence, with certain of
his friends, retired into the Sacristie of the Church. Barnard Baudin who had
slain Segnior Julian, supposing that his companions had failed to slay
Seignior Lawrence, hasted to dispatch him, but found him strongly enclosed in
the Sacristie. This assault was so sudden, as the executioners were not
perfectly discovered. The outcrie of the people was such, as it seemed the
Church fell to the earth. The Cardinal had leisure little enough for his
safety to recover the high Altar. All the Town were in an vproare upon the
brute. Some said, the two breethren de Medicis were slain: others said no,
and so put themselves in Arms. They of the house of Pazzi, and Saluiati, cried
liberty. The Segnewrie with great diligence retired into the Palace, where
the Conphalonnier being arrived, they Assembly of the Segnew^.
strengthened themselves with armed men. The Counsaylours of the City, and the
favorers of the Medicis went to seek Segniour Lawrence, and guarded him unto
his house, where he found more than eight thousand armed men. The Archbishop of
Pisa following his purpose, accompanied with the Saluiati, and others of their
line, went into the Palace with hope to work the seigniorie, unto his
faction, and to this end, he placed the one half of his people at the Gates
of the Palace, and with the other half mounted up the Palace, and gave the
Seigniorie to understand, that he had certain matters to propound for the
benefyte of the common wealth, whereupon, being admitted audience, with a few
of his people, he entered, and suddenly the Palace door was made fast, in
such wise, as he was sure from the reskewe and succor of his soldiers. The
Archbishop with a hie voice prepounded many things so disorderly, as the
Seigniorie found out his naughty and malicious invention: the Conphalonier
attached James Saluiati and James the son of Monsiur Poggio Fury of the
multitude.
de Pazzi: and so great was the tumulte, as they and those which accompanied
them, were slain in the fray: so that there were more then thirty dead bodies
thrown forth of the Palace windows.

Within a while after, the Common people, who favored those of the Medices, in
great troops came toward the Palace, where all the Archbishop of Pisas
people were taken, and without respect of persons were in the place put to the
sword: touching the Archbishop himself, he was hanged as a fearful The
archbishop hanged.
example to others.

James de Pazzi and the rest of the conspiratours rode up and down the City,
crying, Liberty, liberty: but perceiving that none multiplied the cry, and
that all in a manner in their countenaunces discovered an affection toward
Seignior Lawrence de medicis, sought to save himself and his people, except
Barnard Baudin, who lay sore sick in his bed of a wound which he gave
himself. The City in arms, in the behalf of Seignior Lawrence de medicis:
who as one very sorry for the lamentable death of Segnior Julian his brother,
made great pursuit after those of this conspiracy: insomuch that an number
which were but suspected of this trespass, passed the course of their
fellows. The young Cardinal nephew of the Pope was long detained prisoner, in
the end through his innocence was delivered. Barnard Baudin was naked lead
unto the Palace, and in this Equipage was hanged by the Barnard Baudin hanged.
Archbishop. Anthony de Volterro and Steven Preast which would have slain
Segnior Lawrence, were themselves slain in the fury of the people, which
cried in every corner of the city, Medici, medici, slaying and sacking all
their houses, that were adversaries to those of Medicis: to be brief, it were
too much to set down in writing, the cruelties and inhumane murders committed
in this fury.

James de Pazzi was taken as he was flying, and conuayed to Florence, where he
was hanged, and after torn in pieces, and unchristianly buried: all his goods
and reuennues were ceased and confiscated unto the Segniorie: after the
malefactors were thus punished, the body of Segnior Julian was with great
pomp interred. Behold the issue of this conspiracy, of the Pazzies, in less
then three hours, the Lord Julian de Medici was slain, the Archbishop of Pisa
was hanged, with many of the conspiratours, together with the sack and
overthrow of their houses.

Pope Sixtus and Ferdinando King of Arigon, so stomacked this act of Florence,
as they sent a great army against the Florentines, who with the aid of their
friends, maintained long and cruel wars, to the small aduanntage both of
the King and the Pope: foul fall envy the beginner of this fraye: the
conspiratours that thought by this outrage to have acquired honor and
promotion, lost their lives, set their country in an vproare, and made their
enemies more strong, for the Lord Lawrence de medici was chosen to be sole
governor of Florence, and by the wisdom of his offspring, the said
government is become the hereditorie dignity of the Medici, which before was
Oligarchie, where a few of the mightiest bare the swaye: so that the
posterity of the Saluiati and Pazzi the ancient gentlemen of Florence, have
not only by the envy The ground of the Florentine dukedom.
of their ancestors lost their places of authority, but are the subjects and
abiects in favor of the medici, who by all possible means will keep them
under.

CHAP. 15.
A brief report of the calamities, of France Flaunders and Scotland, hatched
by envy and ambition, under the quarrel of Religion, relieved by the
compassion of Queen Elizabeth, and prosperity of England.

THe diligent Readers and searchers of histories, shall find in the Cronicles
of all Gouernmentes, since the coming of Christ, and that the knowledge of the
true God was published and received among the Gentiles: that the envious and
ambitious or more properly rebellious people of all nations, have made for the
most part religion the color of their unlawful quarrels: neither until this
general war between the Papists and Protestants, there was almost in any
government any civil insurrection, but that some Monk, Friar, false Prophet,
or heretic was a ring leader: and at this day all Christendom is so divided
about the maintenance of the Pope, and the defense of the Gospel, that if hell
gates were set open, and all the Devils had liberty to wear visible armor:
they should be entertained to fight under the standard of some religion, under
the protection and banner of the Pope, al theiues, murderers, traitors,
envious, ambitious, and discontented persons arm them selves against their
Prince, and peace of their country.

The lamentable estate of France, Flaunders, and Scotland, our bordering
neighbors, in all which countries, there has been no settled peace this
twenty years and odd, color all their calamities, with this quarrel of
religion, when the true causes proceeded from ambition, envy, and private
coffeehouse. The true reports of the troubles of France testify, that
long before the Catholic wars (as the Papists term it) in France, where
of the Popes side, the Duke of Gwyse, and Envy of the Gwyses first cause of
the troubles of France.
their friends have been the chiefest Captains, the said family of the
Gwyses, mortally hated the Constable of France, and the Admiral Chatillion.
The causes were, that the Constable, and Admiral, were high both in authority
and favor, while Frauncis the first, and Henrye his son reigned in France,
who having care of the honor and prosperity of France, were (as the Gwyses
thought) some lets of their ambitious clyming, but especially for that the
Admiral, satisfied not the expectation of the Earl of Aumale, about the
furtheraunce of a marriage for the Marquis du Maine, with the Dalphines
Curtesan, the Senescales Daughter.

Their envy and malice brake forth into open fury, when Frauncis the second
came to the crown, who being both very young, and with also married to the
Queen of Scots their Niece, they governed both the king, and affairs of the
realm as they listed: who now by all means possible, not only sought the
disgrace of the Constable and the Admiral, and their favorers: but also their
lives: and the trouble of all France. The Cardinal of Lorraine complained of
the disobedience, and many misde meanours of those of the religion, and made
the Admiral, and the chief Peers of France, to be touched with favoring of
them.

To be brief, the Cardinal and the Duke of Gwyse then being, never ceased
their practices until the Papists and protestauntes were in arms, and that
civil war had set all France in an uproar: which from the beginning of her
trouble, has never entertained assured peace until this day, when there was
no open hostilitye, there was nevertheless daily news of inhumaine massacres
murders, and policies of barbarous cruelties executed by the Papists, and
there professed Captains.

The division of Scotland first grew from the said Gwyses, who sent the Bishop
of Amians and other confederates into Division of Scotland.
Scotland, who to compass their purpose, practiced the deaths of the nobility
of the religion: but God that judges the counselles of men, frustrated their
wicked purposes, and has hitherto given the upper hand to those of the
religion: albeit since the first landing of the Frenchmen in Scotland, in
Frauncis the secondes time, the Papists have sundry times attempted war
against the Lords of the religion: and by wicked practices have compassed the
death of a great many, with all which proceedinges the Cronicles will largely
acquaint the Reader.

And certainly, if outward actions of barbarous cruelty may condemn the
blasphemy of the Pope, his ministers in France, Flaunders and Scotland have
already sent the same unto hell and have elected him to be the Archtyrant of
the earth. For where was there a more savage cruelty ever committed, then the
massacre of Paris, where by the train of amity, and the ^cre of Parts.
celebration of a marriage, between the King of Navarre, and the Kings
sister: which in outward appearaunce, promised much peace and honor to the
long afflicted realm: the peers of blood, and nobility of the religion, to
honor that wished accord, repaired unto the Court, where the good Admiral
was slain, and by that stratageme or rather device of the Devil, many a
thousand innocent and fearelesse Protestants in Paris and other cities of
France, were cruelly murdered, which monstrous massacre (although many other
treacherous murders, in France reproach the Papists, with the extremest name
of cruelty) is remembered with the blame and exclamation of the cruellest
Pagans in the world.

This traitorous and butcherly warfare waspractised with Murder of the king of
Scots.
the murder of the King and many noble men of Scotland.

The pretense of the tyrannical government of ye Spaniards Tyranny of the
Spaniards in the ^ovve country.
in the low Countries, and contrary to the ancient lawesof and privileges ^he
said Countries, at their first entrance, their killing and destroying of the
principal nobility, and persons most worthy of government, was colored
with the maintenance of the Romish religion, but what excuse by religion have
they for the destroying and dishonorable murdering of many Roman
Catholics, among whom the right noble County of Egmond was that ways
especially affected: even forsooth some such reason as the thief had, who said
he robbed none but Papists, when he spared not any that had a cross in his
pursse, which cross he took to be the mark of a Papist: so the Spaniardes
took these noble men for Protestants, because A staff is soon found to
strike a dog.
they were of honorable dsspositions, maintainers of their countries
liberties, and lovers of virtue, which are not the ordinary marks of Papists:
the riches of these countries by common estimation aunsweared the vallew of the
king of Spaines Indias, and from this root proceeds all their ruins. The
proud Spaniardes envied the greatness of these Lords, and the prosperity of
the people, and to feed their own wastefull humors, they hungered after
absolute dominion and possession of their riches. In all matters of obedience,
that appertayned unto the king, they served his majesty with all
faithfulness, so that the Spaniard could picked no quarrel of disloyalty.
They were driven to square about the Pope: though these people obeyed the king,
they charged them with Catholic disobedience, upon this cause (as they
allege) more then these twenty years, the insolent Spaniardes, with swoorde,
famine, and many other cruel manners of death, have afflicted, and destroyed
the natural people of those countries: and have ransacked, and spoiled, the
most of their fair and rich cities. And yet these proud Spaniardes upon a true
account, have neither gained honor nor profit by the ruins of these most rich
countries.

While the godly Prince of Orange lived, the Spaniardes had many foyles, and
few honorable victories, the compassing The prince of Orange diuelishly
murth^red.
of whose death: with the worthy destruction, of their own mur thering
instruments, testify the tiranous spirits both of the Pope, and the king of
Spain: that neither obey the laws of God, honor nor humainitie, by working by
any means the deaths of their enemies. After the good Prince of Orange was
traiterouslye slain (the order whereof is universally known and condemned)
the afflicted people of these countries, by their increasing calamities, soon
missed the benefit of his grave counsels. But God be praised for the life and
happiness of her sacred majesty, even good Queen Elizabeth, who with a
merciful eye, and a Princely hand, has both beheld and given large sucker to
their afflictions: to the afflictions of these appressed people of the low
countries: to them I say with royal defense, and public succor: and to the
persecuted Christians of all nations, as their calamities required: her sacred
majesty (even her only zeal, and virtue) has preserved Scotland from
foreign outrage, and civil destruction: the young king of Scots (whom God
bless with divine and heroical virtues) confesses her majesty to be his
mother: by whom next under God he lives, and reigns, she has given him a
kingdom, in redeeming of it forth of the tyranny of strangers, and
disobedience of awelesse subjects. Her mediation has much pacified the furies
of France, and her clemencye has refreshed the wounds of Portugal, her
mercy is the Physician of foreign afflictions, and her holiness the sure
ground of Englandes peace and prosperity. England at this day, and from the
first hour of her majesty's blessed reign, the wonder of nations. England I
say, of absolute governments, only in peace, only in prosperity, only free
from feeling the vengeance of envy, and many enemies: be thou thankful for this
divine protection. England, Admonition to England and English men.
or rather English men be you counceled by the overthrows of the fore recited
monarchies, kingdoms and commonweals. I have presented you with these
conquestes of envy: that you may be fore warned of your worst enemy: even this
monster envy: which ever more contendeth against peace and prosperity: you are
plentifully blessed, with both the blessings, and universally besieged with
envy. It is miraculous, that you have escaped the mischief of all her
stratageames and dangerous war. The Athenians were ignorant of no policy, to
withstand their enemy yet could find no defense against envy, but to tame and
keep under their prosperitye, Policy of the Athenians to ^dle envy.
they yearly banished their noble men, not such as had offended the law, but
those which the common people would have banished, their wisdoms made the
common weal to florishe: but neither their wisdoms nor force could banishe
envy out of the hearts of the people, they feared this passion more then
Alexanders power, and good cause why, for her venime poisoned Alexander, her
policy murdered Caesar and quelled most of the worthies. We need not search
foreign examples, to teach us the power of envy, she destroyed the house of
Brut: at whose government we begin our English cronicles, for Ferrex and his
brother Porrex striving for sole soueranitie, sought each others confusion,
Porrex slew Ferrex, and their mother murdered Porrex in his bed, in whose
deaths the lineage of Brute was ended. Envy was the cause of the chaunges of
government by the Saxons, Danes, Britans, and lastely the envy between Harold,
and his brother, after the death of king Edward the confessor, was the mean
that crowned William the conqueror, with the Diadem of England. The mischief
which envy sowed in king Richard the secondes days, brought forth continual
murders, civil wars, and deadly quarrelles during the reigns of six kings
that succeeded him. To be short this passion (since the conquest) has been the
only hurtful enemy of England. Yea as I have shown the conqueror, of
conquerors, and subuerter of former monarchies, whose conquest I have set
forth, much to the glory of her majesty's peaceable victories, who armed with
grace only with a Laurel bow, in many dangerous conflicts, has overcome her
mortal enemy envy, whose wonderful conquestes I have in my second book
orderly registered: that her majesty's loving subjects may comfort them selves
with this assurance, that God is her strength, and the defense of her people:
and that her wicked abiectes seeing their daily confusion, may be intised by
her exceeding mercy to love, and reverence her majesty, or by continuance of
their overthrows, may be brought to fear and dread Gods vengeance: and so
giving honor and praise to his holy name, I end this first book of my English
mirror, containing the conquest of Envy.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ENGLISH Mirror, entitled Envy, conquered by Virtue:

Publishing the blessings of peace: the scourge of traitors: and glory of
Queen Elizabeth's peaceable victories: accompanied with many other comfortable
regardes for good subjects.

A Sonnet of triumph to England.
England rejoice, the foes of thy welfare,
The foes, that made the former monarkes bow,
Wrath, war, discord, and envy fettered are,
Elizabeth, even with a laurel bow
Has vanquished them, that foiled Caesar's band
Upon thy ports, to fear thy foreign foe,
Destruction stands, with blouddy sword in hand,
Within thy Coast, in towns and Country go,
Plenty, and peace, armde with a hasell wande,
Thy subjects true, on milk and honey feed,
Thy abiectes false, consume like flames of reed.
Malgre.

To the right reverend Lords, the Bishops, and other the de^ines of England,
accomplishment of all holy desires.
MOst reverend Lords and deuines, having composed this English mirror, of
selected counsels in sacred scripture and grave censures of moral governors,
applied to a general instruction: where in the good, may see the large
rewards of virtue, and the bad the severe scourges of wickedness. The book
(with a fearful boldness) I have armed with the shield of her Majesty's royal
protection, who is the lively example of David's righteousness, Salomons
wisdom, Augustus clemency, and what virtue so ever is else contained in a
religious government: at whose feet (rather by divine miracle, then worldly
policye) envy, and her worst enemies fall: so that (in effect) her excellency
is a figure of the whole work: and the work, the judgments of religion,
honor, and justice. Religion containing the godly counsels of the Clergy,
honor the fortitude of the Nobility, and Justice the wisdom of temporal
magistrates, the three chief members of this blessed government, whereof her
Majesty is the head and glory. The first part containing the conquest of
Envy (next under her Majesty: who contains the whole) I have directed to the
right honorable nobility, to whom appertains the sword: the second part,
containing Enuies overthrow by virtue: or more properly her Majesty's peaceable
victories, I reverently present to your reverend Lordships, as co^quests
gained by grace: The last part containing, a fortress, against Envy:
instructing every estate with sacred and moral counsels, in the offices, and
disgraces of their professions, I humbly present unto the temporal
magistrates, upon whose wisdoms all good governments are builded. The part
which I submit unto your grave censors, I hope, will be well accepted,
containing so holy matters, as peace, godly government, divine providence, etc.
Peace is your visible attire, the beauty of Gods Church, and of temporal
blessings, the most precious. Saint Paul among the offices of a Bishop,
forbids him fighting: yea persuades him to abhor it in others: and by
circumstaunce or lawful imagination, counsels him to protect and defend
peace. I need not privilege my boldness, in numbering the manifold benefits
thereof, you (Reueren de deuines) daily preach them, and by grace and your
godly labors, England possesses them. God continue his peace (which passes
all understanding) among us. To which good God, I zealously pray, for the
prosperity of his church, the welfare of your Lordships, and all other true
preachers of his word, with what title so ever they be adopted.

At whose commandment I reverently remain, George Whetstone.

Induction to the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, the good Orator Demosthenes, pleading the injuries of a
poor Widdowe before the Athenian Judges, was of the said Judges so lightly
regarded, as he left his purpose, and told them that A policy of Demosthenes
to get audience.
he had a strange tale of the shadow of an Ass to deliver: the Judges ears
were by and by quickened, and with great earnestness desired Demosthenes to
tell on his tale. Demosthenes by this policy having got full audience, openly
rebuked the folly and injustice of the Judges, who had their ears better
prepared to hear the tale of the shadow of an Ass, then the oppression of a
poor VViddowe, and so through very shame, obtained judgment in the Widows
behalf: and certainly, a Variety delightful to the reader.
pleasing entrance, and unexpected variety many times, causes tedious tales
to be fully hard, and long Books to be thoroughly read, which otherwise, how
good so ever they be, the one might be smallie regarded, and the other less
perused. But friendly Reader, I salute thee not with this following Epistle of
the Athenian Senate, with this bare respect, that thou might with
expectation of nouels be drawn to read out the blessings of our English
peace, and the divine and heroycall virtues of our most good Queen ELIZABETH,
when with the fulness of thy own benefits thou have large cause hourly to
contemplate of the one, and the admiration of the whole world to allure thee to
gaze on the other, but rather writing of so divine a subject as Peace, I
thought no commendation (the holy Scriptures reserved) so excellent, as the
judgment of the Athenian Senate, who set light of the very gain of war, in
regard of peace, and by semblable judgment arose this prove be, that unlawful
peace, was to be preferred before lawful war. For one other especial
regard, I commend this grave letter unto thy censure, which was, the high
account that the Athenian Senates made of the renowned Philosopher, and good
commonwealthes man Euxin, that with like reverence thou may honor, love, and
obeie our capital Magistrates, and common wealths men, placed by God and her
Majesty in Authority, as the pillars and strength of this happy Government:
for thy further instruction, I refer thee to the letter it self, which, with
the cause thereof follows.

Between the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians arose a most cruel war about a
contention for certain towns seated upon the river of Milin, the day of
battle was assigned, and bloodelie fought on either part, but in the end, the
Lacedaemonians were defeated and overcome by the Athenians. The vanquished
demanded truce of the victorers, and the more easily to obtain this grace,
they sent as Ambassador the renowned Philosopher Euxin, who before the Senate
set forth the commendations of peace, with such eloquence, and withal
approved his message with such gravity, learned, and sound reasons, as he
not only obtained a truce from the Athenians, but overcome with the power of
Euxins Oration, they gratified the Lacedaemonians with the gift of the confynes
which they had but lately conquered, and of long challenged as their own
right: and by Euxin as assurance of love and amity, returned this leter.

The Senate and people of Athens, greeteth the Lacedaemonians with a hearty
desire of health, and peace.

WE call the Gods to witness, that through the passed battle we have
sustained more grief to see you so bloodely vanquished, then we have received
pleasure to behold our selves conquerours, upon judgment that in the end the
effects of war are such, that to the vanquished the dammadge is certain, and
to the vanquisher the profit doubtful, we would have been right glad that
you had overcome us with Euxins words, before we had vanquished you with our
swords. What pleasure would it have been to either, if the chance had
unfortunately fallen upon us both, sithe^ce the rule is infallible, that all
that which the Gods have ordained, may not be forestood by man's wisdom,
judgment, or power, even this, you should have lost much by this war, and we
should have gained no good by your loss.

You demand of us a truce for three months, to this end, that during this
space there may be treatise of an accord between us: we answer you, that the
Senate of Athens have not accustomed to make a truce, afterward to begin war
again, but have an ancient law either freely to accept of cruel war, or
freely to accord to a perpetual peace, we endeavor in the time of peace to
attire our Accademies with wise men, to strengthen us with their counsel in
the time of war, and by the^ are now advised to grant no truce upon suspicious
conditions, and it seems to us that their counsel is good, for a dissembling
peace is much more dangerous then open war.

The Philosopher Euxin your Ambassador has so eloque^ly spoken in this Senate,
as it should be an unreasonable thing to deny him what he dema^deth: also a
more honest grant seals a peace required with words, then demanded with the
lance. Now we say, and give you to understand, that our Senate accords unto
you Lacedaemonians with a right good will, a loyal peace, delivering you withal
from the suspicion of war. And to this end we do it, that the world may know
that the Athenians are so strong hearted against the ouerproud, and so great
lovers of wise men, as they know how to chasten the foolish Captains, and
suffer themselves to be commanded of the wise Philosophers. You know that all
our contention is sprung for the possession of the towns seated upon the
borders of the flood Milin. By this letter we certify you, and by the immortal
Gods swear unto you, that we renounce and render unto you all the right that
we have or pretend to have in the said confines, with charge that on the
contrary part you bestow on us Euxin your Ambassador, for the happy^ Athenians
esteem more of a philosopher in their Academy, then of a whole province for
their common wealth. And you Lacedaemonians repute it not an act of lightness to
have exchanged the Empire and segniory of many, for the liberty to command one
only man: for this Philosopher shall teach us to live well, where the
possession of that Country may give occasion to die evil. And sithence of
such ancient enemies we declare our selves such perfect friends, we will not
only deliver you of this war and send you peace, but in advantage we will give
you council to co^serue the same: for the medicin which preserves health, is
of far more excellency then that which chaseth away sickness, and now regard the
remedy. Whereas you greatly desire that your young men should be exercised in
arms, so be you dilligent that your infants be in time instructed in good
letters, for as the one with blooddy lances raise^ war, so the other with
sweet words obtain peace. Think not Lacedaemonians that we persuade you this
without cause, for in neglecting the council of the wise, and in suffering
idleness to grow among the people, the same engenders seditions and civil
wars, and so death to the one and other.

We would not that you should repute us lovers of much talk: for our ancient
father Socrates ordained, that the first lesson A law of Socrates.
that the tutor read to his disciple in the Academie, should be, that he
should not in two years after dare to dispute: for it is impossible, that any
should be prudent in speech, that is not patient to hold his tongue. Let it
then please you that Euxin remain with us, and imagine you, that if we hope
for profit in his presence, you may be assured, that of the counsels which he
gives us, you shall receive no damage: for it is a very ancient law in
Athens, that the Senate may make no enterprise of war, unless the
Philosophers first examine whether it be just. No more unto you, but that we
pray the immortal Gods, yours and ours, that they will provoke both you and
us, and that it will please them for ever to preserve us in this peace, for
that only is everlasting, which is confirmed by the will of the Gods.

MIRROVR. Lib 2.
CHAP. 1.
Of the blessings of Peace, the scourge of civil war, and renown of
peacemakers.

PEace of the moral virtues, is the sovereign Queen,
Peace the christiline mirror is, wherein is science seen.
Peace is the fountain (next Gods word) from whence does goodness flow,
Peace is the holy ground, whereon, all earthly blessings grow.
Peace is the trompe (...) tongue of law, peace sets justice up,
Peace measures right to every man, yet with a several cup:
For peace does chastise wicked men, and cherishes the good,
Peace executes the pains of law, but suckes no guiltles blood.
Peace open sets the city gates, that plenty enter may,
Peace leads and guides the traveler in safety all the day.
Peace brings the Merchants wandering ship into the wished port,
Peace safety seals upon the doors where strangers do resort.
Peace hangs armor by the wall, that men may ply the plowe,
Peace does sustain the poor man's need, that lives by sweat of brow.
Peace brings victual to the town, for such as have money,
Peace where she reigns makes the land, to flow with milk and honey.
Peace lends, releeues, and freely gives, and keeps enough in store,
Peace heaps these riches on the good, and many blessings more.
Peace sheelds the wise from soldiers force, and virgins vndeflowrd,
Peace lets the flock to feed at large, and saues them vndeuowrd.
The City of the mighty God, sacked through his peoples crime
Of blessed peace was Salem called, until king Iebus time.
God would not have his Temple built, but in the time of peace,
Christ was not borne until that war, throughout the world did cease.
Christ his Apostles thus does bless, with you be peace and love,
Christ thus the wicked Jews does curse, peace shall from you remove.
Christ is the author of all peace, the sacred word does say, (day.
Christ will have peace throughout the world, against the judgment
Much more may be said, although no man can say enough in the commendation of
peace, save such as have felt the worst vengeance of war, for as Cicero
says, the goodness of a thing is known by the depriuement thereof. If our
neighbors harms may make us heedfull, or our own prosperity make us
thankful to God, true to her Majesty, and obedient to her grave Ministers of
public benefit, we may behold our country as a beautiful Tower, on every
side environed with a consuming fire, and yet miraculously preserved from the
least vengeance thereof. But experience teaches, that examples of misery
moves many times co^miseration in the beholders, but seldom impresseth any
deep sorrow in their hearts. The Romans many years saw the bloody vengeances
of war, inflicted upon sundry kingdoms, yea many times sorrowed to see their
own conquests. When Pompeyus was Pity without charity.
murdered, his enemy Caesar shed tears upon his head, and Alexander gave the
mighty Darius a royal funeral. Which compassion may be more properly termed
a motion of pity, than any work of charity, for they still followed the
fortune of war, without consideration of the precious blessings of peace. But
when the stout Romans, (whose covetousness of rule the whole world could not
glut) by civil and most pernicious factions in the triumuirate of Caesar,
Crassus, and Pompeius, Civil vvarres of the Romans.
and afterward in the triumuirate of Octauius, Anthonius, and Lepidus, felt in
their own bowels the scalding fury of war, when they saw the fathers throat a
sheath for the sons sword, when the mother beheld the rauishment of her
daughter, and the sister mingled tears with her brothers blood, when the
Senate house was no Sanctuary for Caesar, nor Pater patriae a protection for
Cicero, when the fountains were turned from the Cities, and the channels flowed
with the best burgesses blood, when the fair buildings were fired by the
household servant, and the rascally masters of the richest merchants goods,
when Justice was painted without a mouth, and oppression with a hundred hands,
when law gave place to lances, and Orators to the braying of horses, when
uncivil soldiers judged Senators, and the nobility were suppliants unto the
unconstant multitude, when religion was mispraised, youth ill instructed, gray
hears vnreuerenced, discipline unused, a famine with virtue, and nothing
public, but disorder, when the vineyards lay unordered, and unprofitable
briers ouerran the fruitful fields, when the plow was laid in fire, and fire
hurled into the husband man's barn: I say, when these proud Romans beheld in
their own cities these hauocks of divine and humane blessings, they were in
times past never so forward soldiers in following of war, as they were now
humble suitors for peace: they never attributed so much honor to Caesar for
conquering of kingdoms, as they gave reverence to Octauian, for determining of
ye civil broiles. Honor given to peacemakers. Octauian.
In perpetual remembrance of Octauian, they added to his name Augustus, and
decreed, that all the following Emperors should be called Augusti, and after
death, both Augustus, and the good Emperors succeeding, in most solemn manner,
they deifyed, and placed among the number of their Gods. The great Cane of
Cathaya, is so called, in honor and remembrance of their first Emperor
Chanius, who (being aged, the meanest Chanius.
and poorest of the seven linadges which governed, or rather tirannized the
provinces of this Empire as the history says) by the reuealement of a white
Knight, took knowledge that the will of God was that he should be Emperor and
peacemaker of and among the seven linadges: upon which comfort, and the
faithful obedience of the people, he obtained this blessed conquest. The
mighty Emperor of Aethiopia is called Preter John, and in their language
beldugian, which signifies Preter John.
joy and power, only in remembrance of one of his ancestors, who
notwithstanding he was the sovereign of seventy Kings, yet he established
peace through his whole Empire. These glorious monuments remain of
peacemakers, and are like to live until the world end, when the violence of
death, the inconstancy of fortune, and injury of time have enterred the
haughtiest conquerors, returned back their conquests, and of their huge
colonies have left no sign at all. But so settled are ye virtues of
peacemakers, and so precious are the blessings of A special honor.
peace, as these heathen, that had no other guide than natural reason, annexed
their good Princes names unto the honor of the crown, as men that hoped, the
name would make the virtue her editorie, or at ye least instruct succeeding
Princes, of the worthiness of their ancestors. And questionless men are
greatly encouraged to weldoing when good demerites are fully rewarded, and good
men's lives are faithfully registered. For albeit ye soul of man traueileth
without a guyd to bring forth that which is good, yet in as much as the
corruption of flesh is nearer our sensible motions, the divine works of the
soul are darkened, as is the brightness of the Sun by the Moon, the most
inferior Planet, being opposite between the same and the earth, and therefore
to help our infirmity next unto the sacred scriptures, the histories of time
are the most visible The benefit of histories.
lights to show us the way to happiness: where the names of good men live, which
takes away a great part of our fear to dye. And truly if for the worthiness
of some one king of that name, the Aegiptian kings were called Pharaoes, the
Bethinian Ptholomies, the Albian Siluies, the Roman emperors Augustes, the
Ethiopian Preter John, and the Cataian the great Caan, by far larger warrant,
the English kings ought to be called Henry's. For of 8. Kings named Henry
since the All the kings named Henry of England were worthy kings.
conquest, cronicles condemn no one of the^ to be irreligious, notably wicked,
or tirannous oppressors of their subi^s, but as images and patterns of kinglye
magnanimity, of w^nderfull prowess, of peaceable government, and of many
other divine and heroical virtues, every of them has left a rare monument of
a noble gracious and good Prince, as if by heavenly providence, an especial
blessing had been joined unto the name of Henry. But albeit the heathen
ceremonially thus named their Princes, as the Cardinal of Rome do new
christen their Popes, yet true Christians esteem of this adoption, as of the
image of Jesus engraued in a wodden cross, which is as full of holiness as a
painted fire of heat, and both a like. The fairest tree that bears no fruit
is fit for the fire, and the best named Christian, without the exercise of
christianity is meet for hell. So that I allege the examples of these worthy
persons as instructions for their posteritye, and attribute no greater honor
unto them, then that they were the ministers of Gods goodness and mercy, of
peace and prosperity, to their subjects which are the greatest titles that any
monarch can possess. And more then was due to Alexander, Caesar, Ta^berlaine
and others: who contrariwise were the rods of Gods ire, and quellers of many
millions of innocents. Cronicles expose their virtues at large: and who so
ever shall join regard with his reading in the governments of these eight
Henry's, shall find many worthy obseruaunces, which degression this place will
not bear, the summary of whose virtues containing a larger volume then is
determined for this subject, so much as concerns this purpose I am bound to
report, of the two latter noble Henry's, the one being the root, the other the
tree, which brought forth the fruits of Gods glory, of the greatest peace,
plentye, and prosperity, that ever Nation, people, or subjects enjoyed, even
the grave Henrye the seventh Grandfather, and the victorious Henry the eight,
father of our gracious sovereign Lady, the most good Queen Elizabeth: Upon
whose virtues heaven and earth fixes regard. A princess I say, regarded of
God with the eyes of favor, regarded of the world with the ears of envy, and
regarded of good and happy subjects with the hearts of true obedience. A Queen,
and more the visible image of God, as well in respect of the happiness and
divine gifts which her majesty possesses, but principally for that mercy is
chief of her virtues, which envy and her majesty's worst enemies are bound to
witness, in whose royal person the perfection of all good Princes are
contained. For what may be justly said of all their righteousness, wisdom,
and clemency, are but words of her works, and written examples of her
majesty's liuelye virtues, the which, the godly in their comfort, the wicked
through self destruction, and envy by continual defeates, have ingraued in
the Capitals of the whole world, the triumph of whose peaceable victories, to
Gods glory, and universal wonder follows.

CHAP. 2.
An introduction to the peaceable victories of the Queens most excellent
majesty, against envy and all her enemies.

THe nobility, and commons of England impatient of the misgouernment of K. An.
do^. 1400.
Richard the second, deposed by maine force, the said Richard, and possessed
Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Herteford, with Imperial dignity, a prince endued
with many great virtues. And Henry the 4.
albeit he entered unlawfully, he governed his subjects like a gracious and
prudent Prince. But this good which followed an evil attempt acquitted not the
realm from the vengeance which God inflicteth upon disloyal subjects. The
father which takes the rod to chasten his son, if the son takes
correction patiently, in hope of amendment burns the rod. But if the son
stubbornly A (...) for ^es.
and violently catches at the rod, the father dubleth his wrath and trebeleth
the sons punishment: even so God which appoints tirauntes to be the
scourges of his ire, conceived against wicked and unthankful people, if in
patient suffering, they acknowledge his wrath to be iustlye imposed upon their
sins, he deals with the tirant as the good father does with the rod. But if
they spurn at his vengeance, and offer to revenge the tyranny of their
princes, he causes tirauntes to rise like Hydraes heads, which shall torment
them, as in the bitterness of their affliction, they shall be driven to pray for
their worst prince, as the old Roman did for the prosperity of wicked Nero.
This Nero was a most cruel emperor, he set Rome his imperial city on fire for
seven days together, and commanded that the people should neither save their
goods nor quench the fire. He slew his own mother, and put to death the
husbands of Octauia and Sabina, and took them for wives, but shortly after
sent them the way of their former husbands: And to show that he passed all
other in envy, hearing one to pronounce a Greek verse which contains this
desire. After my death I wish,
Heaven and earth to perish.


And I quoth he rather wish the same while I live, he so much envied that so
glorious a work should remain after his death. Envy of N^o.
Upon a time Nero passing by, a poor old man heartily prayed for the life and
prosperitye of Nero: Nero which knew by the accusation of his own evil, that
no man had cause to wish him good, demanded the reason why he contraried all
men's desires in wishing his welfare, that would nothing but mischief to the
Romans. The old man boldly answered, Tiberius thy predecessor was a cruel
Emperor and him the people slew. After him succeeded Caius Caligula, a more
cruel and barbarous Emperor, and him likewise did the people sley, and now
thou most inhumaine and savage Nero raignest, and for thy life and prosperity I
pray, least if thou be likewise slain, the devil him self come and reign
over us. Thus heaped God his vengeance upon the stiff-necked Romans, which
would not bow unto his yoke the more they resisted his chastisement, the more
sharply he scourged their disobedience. The senators of Rome thought the
imperial authority a seueere bondage, and therefore by their mutual assents
Julius Caesar their first emperor was slain in the Senate house. But when they
saw Brutus and Cassius that first set hand to the swoorde, to die likewise
by the sword, when they afterward saw the bloody euentes that sprung of the
contention, between the Triumuirate of Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus, they
most joyfully received imperial servitude, and afterward how wicked so ever
their Emperors were, the grauer Senators tolerated their government, or
voluntarily banished them selves: so that they for the most part were destroyed
by Gods justice in the common peoples outrage. God by a seueere commandment
threatens, that he will visit the sins of the parents upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation, of those that in their spiritual
worship, adore any other God, or the likeness of any other creature in heaven
or earth. The same God annoynteth kings (as the visible images of him) with
the semblable majesty: concerning temporal worship, he calls them Gods, and
S. Paul says, he that resists the ordinance of the king resists the
ordinance of God. He then that strives to depose Romans 13.
his natural king, and to exalt a stranger, commits earthly idolatry, in
likewise as the worshippers of false Gods commit spiritual. And therefore
Princes in all gouernmentes, heathen and christian, the one by revelation, the
other by imitation of holy scriptures have public laws, to lay the trespasses
of traitors upon their children, the lands and goods of traitors are
forfaited, and the reputation of their posterity is corrupted. The emperor
Vespatian, commending the virtues of Josephus unto his son Titus, wills him
to trust him as one no ways corrupted, saying further upon occasion, that the
son of a traitor ought not to live. To lay violent hands upon the Iosep. bell.
Jude.
Lords anointed is a damnable thing. Saul unjustly persecuted David: but
David having Saules life many times in his power, refused to offer him any
violence, saying, the Lord keep me from laying my hands of the Lords
anointed. Which Reg 1. 26.
proves though subjects may fly from the tyranny of Princes, they war
without warrant that rebel against their worst kings. Were there neither
authority divine nor profane, to reprove rebellion, yet in their best
quarrel, destruction which is the end of traitors, shows their beginning to
be naught. God many times suffers both good and bad Princes to fall into the
hands of their subjects, but woe be unto those subjects by whom either
perish. We need no other torment to relish our present peace and prosperity,
then the remonstration of the civil wars, bloodshed and many grievous
calamities, which for the space of 85. years, yea during the reigns of 6.
kings afflicted this small kingdom. After the violent depriuement of king
Richard the second, from his crown and dignity: but in the end the Lord
having compassion of our manifold miseries, seeing our private dissension,
ready to grow to public destruction, even when his wrath seemed to be most
hot, even then the beams of his mercy suddenly comforted us, by the
destruction of our arch tyrant Richard the third, who caused and committed
more wicked saluadge murders, then fifteen of the most tirannous kings of
England. But humbly confessing Gods providence, with this old age Nullum
violentum perpetuum. This tiraunt that was giltye of the death of king Henry
the 6. Prince Edward his son, and his own natural brother George Duke of
Clarence, and afterward within the space of three years of his usurped
reigns, caused his nephews king Edward the 5. and Richard Duke of York his
brother to be murdered in the Tower, not caring for his alleageaunce toward
the one, nor fearing to break the sanctuary for ye other, who repudiated his
own mother, and offered to marry his brothers daughter as is a fore said.
After these and many other murders without the proceeding of law, this manifest
monster (the end of Englandes civil misery) was slain at Boshworth field, by
that prudent Prince king Henry the 7. by Gods planting the root of Englandes
happiness, and naked like a hog was carried upon a bare horse back to
Lecester, and there buried, who meriteth neither the monument of King nor Man.

CHAP. 3.
A sommarie of the virtues of the prudent prince King Henry the seventh.

THE fairest buylding has a foundation, and the fruitfullest tree his root,
and 1485
albeit the beuty of either be in the outward attire, yet the strength of both
consists in the inward substance. And certainly in all discriptions the
cause ought to be as well set down, as the effect, that Anatomy is perfect,
that discovers all the inward, as well as the outward workmanship of man.
Virtue I grant conuayeth honor simply from a man's own good actions, yet the
same is much enlarged, if from desent, to desent honor be issued from the
monumentes of his ancestors virtues. And sure the glory of a man is much
injured or eclipsed, that is blasoned but by his own Antiquitye a great beauty
of virtue.
proper regardes, when the same may be truly illustred, by such ancient
graces.

But touching my purpose, some will suggest, that as it is a needless labor
to seek a Diamonde with a torche which glimmereth in the dark so as
bootelesse is the curiosity, to derive her majesty's glory further then from
her own sacred virtues, when her wicked enemies renown her perfections, and
wilfully pursue their own destruction: through presumption that her
excellencye is composed all of grace, and mercy, I am bound reuerentlye to
acknowledge, that her majesty's perfection, is the true discovery of
imperfection, and in this regard absolute (that envy and the worste sworn
enemies of God assault her prosperity) yet if any thing may be added, to
extol her name, this meriteth regard, that the fruits of universal comfort,
which her divine and heroical graces plentifully distributeth, grow from the
root of Englandes happiness, which no privy conspiracy could vnplant even king
Henry the seventh. And of that green tree, which the stinging Locustes could
by no means wither king Henry the eight. And doubtless who so shall zelously
contemplate, how that the providence of God even in our greatest destructions
always sustained us, may easily persuade him self, that God would have his
glory to s^ine over the world (next his word) from the lights of this little
Island, separated as some write from the world, or at the least joined to the
outermost end thereof. How easy a pray had we been for the ambitious desire
of some bordering king, during the blouddye contention between the two
illustrous houses York and Lancaster, for imperial dignitye, but God would
not our subuertion. The history of Richard the thirds tyranny is a most
lamentable cronicle, yet the same considered A necessary ^onsideration.
by Gods providence, assures us by that sharp remembrance, a remembrance of
his merciful goodness, in delivering us from a continual calamity, in she
wing us through the unlawful proceedings of the tirant, a lawful means to
accord these two puissant houses. But before this great blessing his
incomprehensible wisdom, so sharply scourged this realm: as all her estates
suppressed their private desires, and heartily prayed and labored for this
happy unity, who mercifullye regarding our patient bondage, crowned king Henry
the 7. with title of both houses, by taking to wife Lady Elizabeth eldest
daughter to king Edward the 4. And albeit the end of our civil destruction, in
the beginning of his prudent reign, be sufficient alone to crown king Henry
the 7. name with everlasting fame, yet to govern us right, God endued this
noble Prince with virtues answerable to so great a blessing as a general peace.
And certainly if Alexander surnamed Seuerus be reckoned among King Henry the 7.
compared to Alexander Seuerus.
the number of the most wise emperors: King Henry the 7. meriteth semblable
title, as the true imitatour of Alexanders government. King Henry the 7.
entered upon a kingdom no less disordered with continual tumults, then did
Alexander with the unmeasurable voluptuousnes of Helyogabalus, the necessitye
of time made him a severe executioner of his laws, and testifies the same to
be derived from perfect justice, he punished offenses without respect of
persons. Honor was no plea for the mighty, he judged the trespasses of Lawyers,
with his own knowledge of the law, he only pardoned ignorant offenses, and
graciously relieved his poor subjects oppressions, he was thought somewhat
too seueere in punishment. But such murmuringes were no lawful complaints, to
a fore that is deep festered with corruption sharp corsiues are to be
applied: Even so in a disordered common wealth seueere laws are to be
ministered. He was a just, virtuous, valiant, and learned Prince, a true
distributour of peace, plentye, and prosperitye to his subjects, who (in his
life time) had had a most liberal portion of happiness, if in his days the
Gospel of JESUS had, had a free passage. But leave we Gods will therein, who
would not have his outward temple builded in David's time, but in his son
Salomons, and yet was David a righteous man, after the Lord (in whose hand the
hearts of princes are) had established a settled peace in this long disquiet
realm, in the 24. year of his reign, he peaceably called this noble king
Henry unto his heavenly kingdom, and as a visible sign that he blessed the
ioyninge of these two kingly houses in one, he gave unto this noble king by
Queen Elizabeth his wife sundry goodly children, of which as the undoubted
heir of the kingdom, by both titles, was crowned the victorious king Henry
the eight.

CHAP. 4.
A sommarie of the royal virtues of king Henry the eight.

THe most victorious king Henry the 8. son of king Henry the 7. began his
1509
triumphaunt reign the 22. of April 1509. whose invincible courage was feared
and admired through al Europe. He was a most bountefull Prince toward well
descruing subjects, the magnanimity of his countenance kept them in a loving
obedience. In the 5. year of his reign (a fore presagement, that he should
clymbe above the Pope of Rome) The Emperor Maximilian (the Popes lawful
sovereign) and all the nobility of Holland, Braband, and Flaunders received
wages under king Henry's banner, whose puissaunce 1513
discomforted and abashed the whole power of France. This royal king besides
that he was Alexander in field, he was a Philosopher in the Uniuersity. And in
his great learning blessed his subjects with the fruits of this old
Proverb, happy are those people, whose king is a Philosopher. And doubtless
where the Prince is learned, the people are peaceably governed.

Science which contains all duties, with variety of examples so liberally
instructs the lovers and followers of her lore. In the thirteenth year of
his reign, the King wrote 1521
with his own hand a book against Martin Luther, for which the Pope named him
Defender of the faith, but little forefeared he, that God would make him the
capital offender of the Romish superstition. Saul breathing out threatenings
and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, received a Acts Cap. 9.
special charge from the high Priests, for the persecution of all sort of
Christians at Damasco, but God, whose wisdom judges the determinations of
men, wrought a wonderful change in Saul, for of a persecutor, he made him a
faithful Apostle, and chief strengthener of the Gentiles. Even so gratious^ie
dealed God with this most noble King: whereas the Pope imagined, to have (by
this title) made him the sustainer of his Idolatry, God by his holy spirit
moved him to use the same to the first capital disgrace of Antichrist the
Pope. But as the good Father Latimer certified his Majesty, the title Defender
of the faith, simply considered, was Acts and Monuments.
more then was due to any earthly prince, when his holy word delivered by his
Ministers, both fostered and defended the same. But in as much as it was Gods
good will that under this kings and his offsprings authority the same should
have the most visible protection, it may be lawfully thought, that it was his
will that the Pope should so entitle him, as foreseeing by his wisdom that
this prince in his seed should overthrow the Popes usurped authority, the most
public enemy of the true ancient and Apostolic faith. Many interpret this
prophecy of Esdras, ecce leo concitatus de sylua rugiens, etc. lo, a Es^. 4.
cap. ^2.
Lion hastily running out of the wood roaring, who with a ma^s voice reproved
the saucie and misproud Eagle, to figure this noble prince Henry the 8. The
ravening Eagle that had the victory over the four beasts which God would have
had rained in the world that troubled the meek, etc. is likewise interpreted
to be Antichrist the Bishop of Rome. The Arms of Rome which is the Eagle, and
the actions of the Pope, well approves their interpretation. Now who is more
like to be this Lion that came roaring out of the wood, and showed the ravening
Eagles villainies to all the princes of the earth, then King Henry the eight who
evermore stoutly defied the Pope, who evermore plainly painted his murders,
deceits, and abominations then King Henry the 8. nay? who first catched him by
the throat but King Henry the 8. When all christian princes stood in awe of his
curse, he banished all his authority out of England: when the meanest Bishops
in other realms would check their Kings in his cause, he caused the whole
Clergy by his learned Council to be judged in a praemunire for mainteining ye
power legantine of Cardinal Wolsey, who being called by process into the
Kings bench, were 1530
glad by submission to pray and pay a hundred thousand pounds for remission.
When other princes feared to murmur against the Pope secretly, King Henry in
the name of himself and Vide Chro. of England.
his Nobles, wrote a book against the counsel appointed by the Pope at
Mantua, signifying to the whole world, that the Pope had no more authority
then an other Bishop, and how that the appointment of Counsels only appertained
to the Emperor, and other Princes of Christendom. What Lion was ever so bold
with the Eagle of Rome, as this Lion of England? What Lion is so like to come
roaring out of the wood, as the Lion of England? The Lion of Vennice comes out
of ye water. The Lion of England is proper passant: bows and arrows which are
his strength comes out of the wood. I would the Popes english favorers would
wey this prophelie, with the pride, envy, and outrage both of divine and humane
blessings settled in the heart, and seen in the actions of this Emperious Pope,
and then by allegory they would peradventure repute him to be this ambitious
Eagle, signified by the arms of his sea, and capitol city Rome. And on the
contrary part, if with the like regard they would behold the wonderful
disgraces that this noble king by himself and princely children has and daily
gives this envious Pope, they should have large cause to believe that our
Lion, signified by the arms of England, with his man's voice, should set this
misproud Eagles head aw^y, should vanish his wings, weaken his kingdom, and in
fine, set his whole body of fire. If they had any sense, they might feel that
our Lion in the name of the Lord thus says, hence thou misproud Eagle, appear
thou no more, neither thy horrible wings, thy mischeuous heads, thy ravening
claws, nor thy hollow body co^pact of vanities. The cause straight follows,
that thou once gone, the earth may be refreshed, that thy kingdom once fallen,
men may return to freedom, etc. I dema^d what reckning they ca^ make of ye
egles 12. wings yt ouerspread ye earth by Gods appointment, since our Lion
first shoke him up, or as ye text says, since the wind, K. Henry's thu^dring
voice spread abrod his wickedness. See if England be not shronk from him,
Scotland denies him, Hol and Brabant and Flanders delieth him: Germany paints
him as a mo^ster, Denmark is parted from him, France is divided, Polland is
indifferent: if Spain and Italy be constant, they be well paid for their
friendship. The Eagle the Pope that sometimes was capitalis dominus, as well as
summus pontifex welneere of all Italy, is clean shut out of ye kingdom of
Naples, the Dukedom of Florence, Ferrara, Mantua, Millaine, Parma, Vennis, the
state of Genua, etc. so that to come to his segniorie of Bologna, he is driven
to the lower way by Rac^onati, Maddona de Loreto, Ancona, and by exchange with
the Duke of Vrbin patcheth a passage, so that in respect of her ancient limits,
this proud Eagle is welni^h brought into ye case of Platoes cock, with never a
feather on her back: the end of this Eagle shall be confusion the text so
says, the lion shall rebuke her unrighteousness, and rent her asunder, and shall
deliver ye rest of the people of trouble, and make the^ ioifull. The Lion of
England, even King Henry the 8. and his posterity, has made a fair
reuealement of this prophecy, the godly expect yt the Eagle shall vanish to
nothing with ye thundering blasts that the English Lion has and shall storm
upon her, she fears the same, and therefore bends all her secret forces to
disquiet the Lion. S. Augustine long ago, seeing certain english boys to be
sold as slaves in Rome, thus prophesied, been vocantur angeli, quia nitent vt
angeli in quo regno euangelium dei florebit, they are properly called
Englishmen, because they shine as Angels, in which kingdom the Gospel of
Christ shall floorish. The learned Doctor Erasmus writing a paraphrase of the
four Evangelists, dedicated the first to the Emperor, the second to the
french King, the third to the noble King Henry, and the fourth to the Emperors
brother, the Pope was wiped out of his travel, as one not destined to have the
protection of this precious jewel. To King Henry the eight he dedicated his
paraphrase of S. Luke, and in his Epistle wrote that he had sent him Luke the
Physician: and by circumstances reputed his Majesty through his godly and
religious proceedings, to be the spiritual Physician, that by the working of
the holy Ghost purged the souls of many from the gross errors of Antichrist.
I lean not so much to these modern prophises, although there be a common
Proverb, Vox populi, vox dei, the Scriptures gives light sufficient, that
from these parts the Gospel of our Savior should be visibly revived. In the
fourth Chapter of Cantica Canticorum be these words: Up thou north wind, and
blow upon my Garden, that the smell thereof may be carried Cant. Cantico. cap. 4.
on every side, yea, then my beloved may come into his Garden, and eat of the
sweet fruit that grow therein. This wind is up at the Almighties call, his
commission is well blasted abroad. This noble King Henry (as it is
interpreted) this Lion, this wind, ordained and sent of God, first shook the
wicked tyrant of Rome, first blewe the blast that has almost blown his
authority out of all Christendom. The Pope in his quarrel almost armed all
Christian princes against this Lion, but they feared or failed to do him hurt.
In the Popes quarrel many seditions were sown in England, in fearing the
communaltie that the King would beggar them with impositions. The Northern men
openly rebelled, and the whole realm was in arms, ready bent against their
proper intrailes, but God frustrated the deuisers counsels, and preserved us
from the wilful murder of our selves. When the kings power and the rebels
were ready to meet, he parted the armies with a sudden swelling of the
water, while after a parle, the Rebels were willing to acknowledge their
faults, and with the kings gracious pardon, departed to their own houses: a
wonderful providence of God, that would not have the rebels perish in their
ignorance, nor the good subjects murdered in so unnatural a battle. The
ungracious Cardinal Poole stirred a great power in France, but the french were
more afraid to venture, then was king Henry in his aged days that they would
enter into England. His mind was inuinsible, and even of God all his
proceedings were blessed, their happy success testified no less, who in the
37. year of his triumphant reign, ended his life in peace, whose death made
England unhappy, in that the most toward and godly prince Edward the sixth his
only son and heir of the Crown was of so tender age.

CHAP. 5.
A sommarie of the most excellent gifts of King Edward the sixth.

THe godly and most toward young Prince King Edward the sixth, being but of the
age of nine 1546
years, began his reign the 31. of January 1546. This prince in his tender
age was endued with such towardness, wisdom, learning, and all goodly gifts,
as Europe seldom or never fostered the like. By reason of his tender years,
the Duke of Somerset his uncle was made Protector both of the King and his
Realm: who, for the discretnesse of his speech, the wisdom of his behavior,
and virtue that accompanied all his actions, was worthily reputed to be better
able to govern at ten, then many princes at thirty years of age. There
wanted no gift of nature, learning, or education, that might renown a good
King, but that mightily grew in his young years, as the undoubted heir not
only of the crown, but of all the virtues of his most noble father. He
advanced the Gospel, to which by Gods holy spirit his godly father gave free
passage in England, whose devout zeal witnessed, that this heavenly blessing
was no less planted by his Grace, by his godly councels and wisdom. By his
especial request and letters the Citizens of London erected three needful
Hospitals, viz. for the sick and aged they erected S. Thomas Hospital in
Southwarke: for the fatherless child and infant they erected Christ's
Hospital: and for the sturdy vagabond they erected Bridewell: by his godly
means this charitable work was sown. His wonderful victory against the
Scots may not be forgotten, where was slain 13000. Scots, and A vvonderfull
victory in Scotland. Muskelborrough feeld.
but 60. Englishmen. And truly, if his subjects would have been imitators of
his piety, charity, temperance, and other christian duties, their envy,
ambition, cruelty, and other grievous sins, had not so highly moved Gods
wrath, as that his vengeance would not suffer us in any perfect years to enjoy
this right gracious King Edward, sample of all goodness, and by his death for a
time reaued us of the fruition of the Gospel the food of our souls, and in
place of both, to further punish our unthankfulness, he sent us a prince that
held a hard hand over us, that not only stopped the passage of the Gospel, but
persecuted the godly professors thereof, even Queen Mary good King Edwards
sister, part of whose actions follows.

CHAP. 6.
An abstract out of the proceedings of Queen Mary.

LADY Mary, the eldest daughter of king Henry the eight, began her reign 1553
over the realm of England the sixth of July. 1553. Touching her natural
disposition, she was virtuously and well given: but by reason that her
bringing up was under Papists, and her youth thoroughly instructed in the
superstitions of Papistrie, anon after that she was settled in her kingdom, by
suffering the bloody Bishops to misuse her Imperial sword, she in their
proceedings outragiouslie tyrannised the true professors of the Gospel, which
(God, her noble father, and good brother, his instruments, be therefore
praised) had taken a sound hold in the heart of England, whose cruelty and
contrariety in Religion may no ways slander her godly father, and his
offspring. We see the Rose tree that brings forth the sweet Rose, likewise
brings forth sharp prickels: but to come more nearer the matter, the
kyrnell of the best apple will grow to be a crabbe, unless some good fruit
be grafted on the stock, and look what the Sience is, such will be the
tree: look what is ^owen in youth, is ever seen in age: the following example
teaches a good policy, to have an eye unto Schoolemaisters, and the
education of Papists A godly po^.
children. The seed of Idolatry, superstition, and send Ceremonies, were
sown in the heart of Lady Mary being a child, which grew to the disworship
of God, and the destruction of the godly, Lady Mary being a Queen. But God
no doubt suffered this prickle to grow of this green Rosier, and this
irreligion to be grafted of this religious stock, to chasten the sins of
England, who having a righteous Prince, peace, and plenty both of spiritual
and temporal blessings, neither saluted the giver of this goodness with
hearty thanks, nor sought the continuance thereof, with a dutiful regard of
the Kings Majesty, but (in some of her members) having an eye fixed upon the
Kings tender years, and not an heart settled upon his firm virtues, she began
to work matters hateful to GOD, offensive to the Prince, and most hurtful to
her self, and therefore God (...) England of the most mild, vertueus,
godly, and well disposed Prince King EDWARD the sixth, and in wrath sent us
even such a Prince as the Prophet speaks of, that (...) C^p. (...).
should oppress us with most grievous bondage, that should by taxes and great
impositions take from us the fruits 1. Sam. Cap. (...).
of the feeld, vineyards, and olive trees, and should give them to his lords
and servants. Even Queen Mary that imposed many great sums of money upon
us, to enrich strange Lords, that by committing the weighty affairs of the
public weal to Bishops, almost wilfully lost Callis, an ancient ornament
belonging to England, which City, the notorious Atheist Gardener vaunted that
he would keep with a white wand: an unlikely matter that his courage served
him to defend Callis against the power of a puissant King with a white wand:
that armed troops to guard the vnresisting Martyrs to burning: but which
stained her government with everlasting cruelty, she by her ministers in five
years tyrannouslie burned five times more innocent and quiet Protestants, then
good Queen Elizabeth in 27. years reign by her laws has executed notorious
Papists that committed treason: when my soul durst swear, that there be
double the number of the poor Protestants that then constantly professed the
holy Gospel, that now in their hearts wish her Majesty's depriuement both of
life and crown, and yet live. This The protestants never rebelled in England.
persecution made many to flee the Realm for their consciences sake, but they
sought not liberty by rebellion, they confessed this bondage and persecution
to proceed from the Lords heavy displeasure, and humbly awaighted his favor
for their deliverance. No one has more cause to exclaim of this hard
government, then our gracious Queen Elizabeth. She was not entertained like
the daughter of a mighty King, and heir apparent of a rich kingdom: Good
Lady, she was emprisoned, her attendance small, her liberty nothing. When her
innocence disprooued public accusations, the Clergy sought her life by
secret tyranny: sought it do I say? yea, they had wrought it, had not God
beyond man's expectation wonderfully delivered her Majesty: her assured friends
despaired of her worldly welfare: her Majesty that beheld the bloody knife a
sharpning, misdoubted not her deliverance. Her friends trembled, because there
was no measure in the Papists The Papists cruelty without measure.
cruelty: her Majesty looked cheerfully, because she knew the Devil had no
might, but such as God suffered. In the holy Bible (the loving embracements
whereof was her Majesty's persecution) her excellency had learned these
precious comforts, and in them reposed. The Lord says, Who so honoreth me,
him will I make honorable. In another Comfortable examples for the godly in
time of persecution.
place David says, Who so dwells under the shadow of the almighty, him God
covers with his wings, and keeps safe under his feathers. I know (says he)
the Lord helps his anointed, and even from heaven hears them. Some trust
in chariots, some in horses, but we in calling upon the Lord. God can and often
times does pine man and beast even in the midst of plenty. God where he
sets too his hand, works wonders, and sturdie strength stands in no
stead. God thus speaks to David, and yet by a spiritual interpretation makes
like promise to all kings and princes that heartily seek his glory. Because
thou have set thy love upon me, I will see thee rid from all thy troubles. I
will defend thee: why so? it follows, Thou have known my name, thou seek
my glory: and therefore whenever thou call upon my name, I will hear
thee: yea, I am with thee in all thy calamities, and will deliver thee from
them, I will set thee higher in honor, send thee long life, and show thee thy
salvation. Her Majesty builded upon these comforts, her soul desired and
hoped to be an instrument of his wonderful glory, examples of Scripture told
her, that those whom God had appointed to any special service, even those he
guided through mortal dangers: he preserved Joseph from the murdering envy of
his brethren to save old Jacob his father, his malicious brethren, and al
Israel from the sharp death of famine. Against the tyranous decree of Pharao,
which was, that the Midwiues should kill all the male children of the Hebrews,
his providence saved Moses from drowning, and made him his instrument to lead
the children of Israel out of the bondage of Pharao, unto the land of promise.
God (in the deapth of the sea) fetched Jonas the Prophet forth of the Whales
belly, to save Niniuey from destruction. God delivered Peter forth of the
prison and tirannie of Herod and the Jews, that he might open the gates of
faith, and preach the way of salvation even unto his enemies. God sundry ways
miraculouslie delivered Paul from the vengeance of death, to preach the
Gospel of salvation unto the Gentiles: at Philippos in Macedonia he caused him
and Sylas to be delivered forth of prison. In Lycaonia the Jews and the people
stoned him, and drew him forth of the City as a dead man, and God raised and
revived him again. God again redeemed him out of the hands of the Jews, when
as forty of them swore they would neither eat nor drink, until they had
slain Paul, yea, God in his extremity stood by him, and comforted him,
saying: Be of good cheer Paul, for as thou have testified of me at Jerusalem,
so must thou bear witness also at Rome. God had appointed him and the rest
weighty charges, the execution whereof the malice of men might not withstand,
examples of great comfort to the godly, and terror to the wicked. The godly may
learn by them that his mercy succoureth them in the sharpest adversity, and
the wicked may be assured that his justice will confound their policies in the
chiefest hope of success. Her Majesty (to whom I every way may apply ye former
examples) beset with death as dangerous as Daniel in the Lions den (as after in
her own thanksgiving may be seen) comforted her self in the strength of God,
which always defended her, which good God having compassion both of her patient
suffering, and the general affliction of his Church, mercifully burned the rod
of correction, by calling away Queen Mary, and setting of gracious Elizabeth
in the imperial chair of England, France, and Ireland, for which exceeding
mercy, his holy name be praised,

Amen.
CHAP. 7.
Of the peaceable entrance of Queen Elizabeth our gracious sovereign, unto the
crown and diadem of England, and other obseruances of Gods especial favor
and mercy.

IT is commonly seen, that upon the death of princes, envy, ambition and
dissentio^ show their humors, and that secret coffeehouse breaks forth we
public disturba^ce. And although in England hereditary succession be a great
bridle unto these passions, yet upon such changes they many times have found
the means to show themselves, as after the deaths both of king Edward the 4.
and king Edward the 6. and upon the death of Queen Mary, the difference in
religion was a likely cause to sow discord among the people. But almighty God
that had as it were by especial miracle preserved our gracious Queen Elizabeth
the visible image of himself from the spoil and malice of dangerous enemies
aforthand provided, that her sacred Majesty should receive her crown in
peace, should govern her people in peace, and my hope does assure me where she
now peaceably reigns, her majesty shall long live and die in peace: who the
17. day of November, 1558. the very day of Queen Mary her sisters death, with
the sound of a trumpet, both at Westminster and in the City of London was
proclaimed by the name of Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
defender of ye says, etc, The news whereof raised a sudden joy among ye
people, so hearty, as their loving affection was presently seen by public
feasting, banqueting, and benefiers in the open streets. The 23. of January
following, her Majesty from the Tower passed through the City of London toward
her Coronation, but before her Chariot set forward, her Majesty lifted her eyes
up unto heaven, and acknowledged Gods mercy in this thankes-geuing.

O Lord almighty and everlasting God, I give thee most hearty thanks Her
Majesty's thanksgiving.
that thou have been so merciful unto me as to spare me to behold this ioifull
day: and I knowledge that thou have dealt as wonderfully with me as thou did
with thy true and faithful servant Daniel the prophet, whom thou deliueredst
out the den from the cruelty of the gredy raging lions, eue^ so was I
overwhelmed, and only by thee delivered. To thee therefore be only thanks honor
and praise for ever Amen.

Her majesty by this thanksgiving published her sure confidence in God, the
effects the tyranny of her enemies, and the conclusion a special comfort to
the godly.

The Citizens of London to show they rzeale in welcome of her Majesty, attyred
the City with many stately shows, the most whereof they derived from her
proper virtues, who was the lively substance of all their painted bewties. The
first pageant showed ye long desired unity (which God, and her majesty be
thanked) is knit between us and the holy Gospel of our Savior Christ. The
second set forth the seat of gouerna^ce which her majesty's lively virtues
bewtified more then their gorgious devises. The third (which they applied unto
her majesty) depainted the 8. beatitudes mentioned in the 5. of S. Matthew, and
truly, if any earthly creature deserved Her Majesty visibly blessed with the
eight beatitudes in the 5. of Matthew.
them, they are worthily heaped upon her majesty. God has blessed her humble
spirit both with a spiritual and temporal kingdom. God has dried up ye
tears of her persecution with spiritual and temporal comfort. God has blessed
her meekenes with large possessions on earth. God has blessed her scarcetie
for righteousness sake with abundance. God has blessed her mercy with the
fulness of his mercy. God has blessed her chaste and undefiled heart with the
sight of himself, in ye true knowledge of his holy word, God has blessed her
travel for peace (as his proper child) with the visible image of himself. God
has blessed her periceution for righteousness sake, in assuring her soul of
the inheritance of his heavenly kingdom. God has blessed her (to revenge the
reuiling and persecution of the Papists) with the disgrace and overthrow of the
Pope. The fourth declared the ruinous state of this realm, which (as they
prophesied) is by her majesty restored to the dignity of a flourishing common
weal. Yea, in her miraculous proceedings an old by prophecy is effected,
which was, A maiden Queen should do wonders in England. The fifth compared the
expectation which her heroycall virtues promised, with the politic government
of the worthy Debora. Her majesty was in Cheap side presented with the holy
Bible in English, which she reverently kissed, and thankefully received, as her
spiritual comfort, her temporal cross, and godly counselor. The Mayor of
London presented her majesty a thousand marks in a pursse, with humble petition
that she would continue their good lady: she gave answer, yt if need required
she would willingly spend her blood in their defense, which magnanimious
saying, all her after actions have declared. Although this most royal
entertainment, showed the dutiful love of her faithful subjects (which zeal
God has requited with many blessings) yet Gods wisdom (that comprehends
all knowledge) foresawe that her Majesty's clemency compared with Julius
Caesar, that would not hear the accusation of his enemies: with Augustus, who
gave life to Cinna that sought his life: with King Frances the first of France,
who pardoned the commotion of the Rochellers: adjoining thereunto, that he
chiefly rejoiced that his severity caused no man to wear a moorning gown:
clemency well bestowed that both enlarged the renown and safety of these
princes: for Pompeys friends were thereby won to Caesar, Cinna became most
faithful to Augustus, and the Rochellers afterward loyally obeyed King
Frances: but God (I say) who knew the greatness of her Majesty's compassion,
would rather breed presumption then duty in her dangerous enemies: therefore
to rid her A providence of God, in taking away of seditious pa^ls
royal person, realm and good subjects (whom he determined to bless) from
continual conspiracies, his mercy joined with justice, alittle before and
after the death of Queen Mary, caused death likewise to attach the bloody
Atheist Steven Gardener Bishop of Winchester, the seditious Cardinal Poole,
and others, whose heads were always occupied with authority or dissension.
Yea, about this time, that the fall of Antichrist might be visibly seen, by
the taking away of such Christian princes, as were his settled supporters: when
(as Lodo. (...). Comment. lib. (...)
Lodowicke Guiccerdine reports) there was not any where either brute of
pestilence, or extraordinary disease, there died within the space of one year
the Emperor Charles the fifth, the Queen of Hungary, Queen Mary of England,
two Kings of Denmark, Bona Sforza Queen of Polonia, Henry the third king of
France, Ierolme Priuli Duke of Vennice, Hercules da este Duke of Ferrara, and
Paul the fourth, Pope of Rome, a change very universal, wherein Gods
providence is not to be ouerpassed with a light consideration, whose will
undoubtedly was, by the change of these princes (the most of them) drunken with
Popery, to make a ready passage through Europe for ye gospel of our savior
Jesus Christ, which upon this change began to flourish in most of the recited
gouernements. And albeit ye fall of Antichrist in many places of the scripture
be lively presaged, upon the authority whereof there is sure and sound
building, when the prophesies and dreams of a number are but rotten
foundations, yet I hope I may without just reprehension say, that God many
times acquainteth the minds of some good men with an imaginatiue knowledge of
things to come, which many years after falls out according to their
presagement: and for example belonging to our matter, the reformation of the
Church under her Majesty's reign, before her noble fathers death, was set
down in this following prophecy: Post H sequetur E, post E quod mirum M,
M coronabitur, and breue confundetur
Post M sequetur E vel A
Et tunc conuertetur ecclesia.
In English. E shall follow H, next E (with wonder) M,
M shall be crowned, and soon confounded
Next unto M, E or A shall reign,
Then shall the Church converted be again.


Noble King Henry the eight first unmasked this proud Pope, King Edward the
fixed, the parragon of young princes helped to uncase him, Queen Mary favored,
but lived not to strengthen him, and now our sovereign Elizabeth has given
him a mortal disgrace: his painted Church abides not the tuch, Gods Church is
universally reverenced. The multitude are more delighted to read a few godly
sentences written upon the Church wall, then to see his rarest rotten relics
laid up in a golden chest. Against her Majesty he principally warreth, as the
chosen instrument of almighty God, to abase his imperious mind, to ye wonder
of the world, and comfort of all good Christians.

CHAP. 8.
Of the peaceable and honorable victory that her Majesty had against the
french forces in Scotland, which were raised with a determination for the
invasion of England the second year of her Majesty's reign.

AFTER the death of Henry King of France, his son Frances the second
succeeded in the kingdom of France, a prince of the age of sixteen years,
who being married unto Mary Queen of Scots, and niece to the Duke of Guise,
suffered the affairs of the estate to be governed by the ambitious policy of
the Duke, and family of the Guises, who having wished success in their
practices (in Queen Maryes days) about the winning of Callice, hoped and
hungered after the spoil and conquest of England. And the better to color
their purpose, they entitled the King of France in the right of the Queen his
wife to the Crown of England, and knowing the difference between the Queens
Majesty of England and the Pope in matters of religion, they easily obtained
of Paulus the fourth Lod. Guic. (...) Com. (...)
a disablement of the Queens Majesty, and an approouement of the Queen of
Scots right, but King Frances had been well advised if he had not accepted
this gift, until the Pope had set him in possession of the kingdom, which
would have troubled both him and his whole College of Cardinals. This
deprivation by the Pope the Guises practiced to move the Papists of England to
their part taking, and arming their purpose by degrees, to work a fear in her
Majesty's loyal subjects, they wrote a book of the weakness and
insufficiency of feminine government, and by their own reasons, wounded the
strength of their own title, which they derived from the Queen of Scots. This
scandale of feminine gouernemente, was soundly answered by an unnamed
author, in an english printed book at Strasbrowgh entitled, A safe harbor for
good subjects. And truly, although the sovereign place of rule, the chief
credit of knowledge in Arts and Mecanicall crafts, together with all other
gifts of grace, nature, and education be given unto man, yet there have been
women, that in all manner of arts, qualities, and virtues, which have equalled
the perfitest of men. Innumerable are the testimonies of women's profound
learning, pure chastity, rare constancy, patient martyrdom, and a number
most valiant, whereof Chawcer recites nine Woorthies aunswerable to the nine
Woorthies of men. And touching regal government (from whence this question is
derived) the Jews record the sage gouernemente of Queen Alexandra with more
renown, then they did the tyranny of her husband Alexander with reproach,
whose body they were determined to have given unto the dogs, as also to have
murdered his two sons, to have rooted out Alexanders name, if that her
wisdom had not redeemed out either. Theodosia the Empress of Constantinople
with admired prudence ruled the whole Empire during her life. The government
of Senobia was no less renowned, Dydo, the Amazones, and many other were
absolute Queens. Semiramis enlarged the bounds of her Empire, and Queen
Tomyris slew Cyrus and his whole hoaste, etc. But if the envy of men would
suppress and murder the worthiness of women, yet the divine virtues of our
sovereign Queen Elizabeth, does and will always keep alive their divine
memory. Of whom Guiccerdine in his Commentaries, although all his Lib. 3.
writing defends the pope, and reproves Religion, thus reports. The good
Queen Mary being dead without issue, Elizabeth her sister was proclaimed
Queen, etc. a Princess of great learning, and over and above the Laten and
her mother tongue, she is possessed of the French and Italian language, which
she eloquently speaks: a young Lady of a hye spirit, wise, and endewed with
rare and noble qualities. He might have added the Greek, Spanish, and some
other ordinary tongues, with many extraordinary virtues, which may as hardly
be sampled by any other living Creature, as the Sun by the fairest of the
Planets. The worthiness, and strength of whose Government, even from the
beginning, confuted the scandule of this lybell, which was grounded upon noe
general Law, of God or man. There have been private Laws in some particular
Governments, to take away, and to disable the absolute government of women,
when the general Law possessed them with Imperial authority. As in Rome the
Law Voconia so called, because Voconius, Tribune of the people pronounced the
same. In France the The law Voconia in Rome.
law Salique, which they fetch from king Pharamond, which binds the present
government of France, no otherwise ^avv (...) in France.
then the ancient statutes of the Danes, Britans, or Saxons do at this day
the Government of England. This unnatural Law had a barbarous beginning, for
the reporters lib. sec de A^ ve^d. 10 2^
thereof confess, that anno. 420. the Franconians having abandoned their
Country, inhabited along the Rhine, and especially about Treues. The manners
of these people being barbarous, they lived uncivilly without Law. Which
considered by Pharamonde their first King, the son of their Duke Marcomir.
He chose four of the principal men of the Sicambrians, whom he authorized by
their wisdoms to give a Law unto the people. The names of these four were:
Vsucast, Losocust, Salgast, and Visogust. These four made the Law Salique, by
which Law Imperial government (say they) is taken away from the daughters and
heirs of the Kings of France. This dead Law, and many other to as little
purpose were revived, to bury the true, and lawful title of King Edward the
3. to the kingdom of France, in the right of Queen Isabell his mother, the
daughter and heir of King Phylip le bell. But King Edward nor his successors
would not loose their right upon such canterbury suggestions. And some of them
subjected the Frenchmen to English obedience. And to this day the Arms and
Imperial title of France, are joined to the honor of England. To what
purpose does the law Mental in Portugal forbid feminine The law Mental in
Scotland.
government. King Philip deriueth his title from Marie the daughter of John,
the third of that name king of Portugal, and by that title is possessed of the
kingdom. It is God that disposes kingdoms, and the works of busy heads,
that unlawfully seek to withstand the law of nature in succession.

To be brief, this inuectiue, proved but a scarecrow: it was indiscreatly
written, and negligently regarded. King Francis, or more truly the family of
the Gwyses, ancored their hope upon the Popes sentence: and in all the kings
patents, and other instruments, caused to be entitled Frances, of France,
Scotland, England, and Ireland king: and in his shield, quartered the Arms of
England, and to conquer the kingdom (Come era apparente) as Guiccerdine
reports: diverse french forces were daily conuayed into Scotland, who Lib. 3.
took, and by force kept the strong towns and fortrises there. The
inhabitants oppressed thus with strangers, were for their own safeguard driven
to sew unto the Queens majesty of England, for aid to expel the french, who
sought the spoil and subuertion of Scotland. The malicious purpose of the
Guyses, joined with commyseration of the dangerous affiction of Scotland (the
Queen whereof was married, and governed in France: and so barred to use the
liberty of her Crown) bound the Queens Majesty, by the virtue of honor,
policy, and charity, to sucker them with expedition. To accomplish which
matter, her Majesty sent a sufficient 1560.
power toward Scotland by the Duke of Norfolk as general, who remained at
Barwicke, and the Lord Greay of Wilton being Liuetenaunt, entered into Scotland,
and with her royal power joined with the Scots, against the french: who were
soon weary of the English-mens coming: But almighty God, had set down a
more mild order, to honor her Majesty, with the vanquishment of her enemies,
then by dynt of sword, to accomplish which, her highness sent Sir William
Cycill knight, at that time her Majesty's principal Secreatorie, and now Lord
Treasorer of England, (for the full knowledge, of whose exceeding worthynesse,
I return the good reader to the Athenians commendation of the Philosopher
Euxin) and with him accompanied the learned and grave Gentleman Master Doctor
Wotton to treat with the french, who with their wisdoms so vanquished the
french, as to the quietness and safety both of England and Scotland they
forced them to depart with this following dishonor, as Guicherdine reports:
who if he be pertiall it is in favor of the french. First that the King and
Queen Articles of accord between England and France, taken out of
Guicherdines Coment. Lib. 3.
of France and Scotland, should leave the Arms and title of the King of
England and Irelande: and that within six months at the furthest, they
should cancel and renew all their writings and instruments, (if there were
any so made) with the former Arms and Titles. Further that the Realm of
Scotland, should be governed by the Counsel of twelve persons of the Nobility
of the said kingdom, whereof seven should be nominated by the Scottish
Queen, and sieve by the three estates of the Parliament.

That the injuries, and trespasses committed on either part during the
commotion should be forgotten: and for the better assurance should be confirmed
by the said Parliament.

That the Garrisons of french soldiers, should return into France, saving
only in two fortes sixty a piece, subject to the Justice, and pay of the
Parliament of Scotland.

That every man, should be rest^red to his office in the said Realm: and
that no french man, should have any more office, benefit, or administration
what so ever in Scotland.

That the french should not at any time convey Munition of war, or
soldiers into Scotland, without consent of the said Parliament, with sundry
other straight obseruaunces on the behalf of the french: which Guicherdine
concludes, Con grandissimo vantaggio and honor, della regina Inglese, with
the greatest advantage and honor of the Queen of England: a victory no
doubt of great glory and honor. Whereby her Majesty not only delivered her
own Country from the danger of invasion, but also freeed Scotland from the
bondage of foreign Government: and thus her enemies hungring after an
unlawful spoil, lost the disposement of an assured benefit, which fortune
befall to all those that miswish her.

Amen.
CHAP. 9.
Of her Majesty's peaceable victory against the rebels in the North, joined
with her quiet vanquishing of sundry other conspiracies, to the universal
benefit of England.

PIus Quartus, who succeeded Paulus 4. in the Popedom, finding an abaseme^t of
the glory, with which his predecessors 1561
were honored: and fearing with all, that the example of England, Scotland,
Denmark and Germany, would draw other Nations, from the obedience of the
Romish erroneous Church, to the profession and receiving of the Gospel of our
savior Jesus Christ: the life of the soul, and destruction of this accursed
Antichrist: labored with the consent of many Princes, to revive the Counsel
(or more properly the conspiracy) of Trent. A conspiracy I may justly say,
the policy whereof was, to keep under the glorious merit of our savior
Jesus, and to advance to the highest degree of reverence, the painted
Idolatry of the Pope. And appointing for his Legates, 5. Cardinals, who with a
great number of Bishops and other doctors of their Church, the eight day after
Easter, 1561. began this unholy Counsel. And truly as in the intent of
their assembly, was seen this saying of the Psalmist: The kings of the earth
stand up, and the rulers take consell together against the Lord, and his
anointed: Psalm. (...).
So likewise in their vain and idle success: this continuance of the Psalm
is further seen: He that dwells in heaven, shall laugh them to scorn, the
Lord shall have them in derision: and where the Pope by his proud authority
thought to have strayghtned the passage of the Gospel, as it is set down in
the same Psalm: God gave unto his son the heathen for his inheritance, and
the outmost parts of the earth for his possession. Yea he gave visible
authority, and reverence unto his Gospel, either by public obedience, or
private profession, universally through the world. The counsel of the same
Psalm might have persuaded the Pope and his confederates To have served the
Lord in fear: but they would not kiss (but kick against) the son, and so
they perished from the right way. The Pope although his pomp were bruised with
an iron rod, and his kingdom broken like a potters vessel: Yet his pride and
fury abated not: and (by Gods providence) knowing his capital disgrace
proceeded first from England, he practiced by his worst malice, the
destruction, and overthrow of her prosperity as follows. Pius the 4. having
no great good success, of his counsel of Trent, Pius Quintus, who succeeded,
took a more sharp course against her Majesty and happy government his
principal enemy, in whose overthrow, (as he supposed) consisted the new
raising up of his kingdom, and in truth her prosperity, is the visible
comfort of his universal enemies. He first began with her Majesty: His roaring
Bull showed his malice, but his short horns had small power to hurt her,
which Bull is declared in these word: Pius Quintus the greatest Bishop, of the
fullness Vide, in the book of the execut. of Justice in Engl.
of the Apostolical power, declares Elizabeth to be bereaved or deprived of
her pretended right of her kingdom, and also of all, and whatsoever dominion,
dignity, and preuileadge and also the Nobles, subjects and people of the said
kingdom, and all others which had sworn to her any manner of ways, to be
absolved for ever from such oath, and from all debt and duty of feealtie.
Doctor Morton with a commission, or embassage from the said Pope Pius to the
like effect, stirred the rebellion in the North. 1569. He blasted his
commission, and had soon moved Thomas Persy, Earl of Northumberland, Charles
Neuel Earl of Westmerland, and other Gentlemen of account in the North, unto
rebellion. They began their power, by raising of men in the Queens name, and
with all, left a warning to lessen the strength and authority of strong
papists to get favor of the people, whereof a great part favored the old
Romish religion, they had a Crose, and a Banner of the five wounds, borne
before them by Richard Norton: They tore the English bible, the Communion
book, and such like at Dyrham, and having gotten a strength of 4000. footmen,
and 1600. horsemen, which number they could not exceed: they in rebellious
manner withstood all her majesty's proceedings. But behold good reader how
peaceably these northern rebels were vanquished, who are naturally men of
fierce courages, and how like a bubble the Popes bull vanished, which in times
past, feared mighty Emperors and Kings. Before the Noble Earl of Warwick, was
come with the Queens power, the stout earl of Suffex the Queens Majesty's
Liuetenant general in the The Northern rebels vanquished.
North (whose virtues appeared in my book, of his life and death) armed
himself with so many of the Queens friends as he could get near unto that
service, and with all speed made toward the rebels. The knowledge of his
coming, and the brute of the Earl of Warwicks approach with a far greater
power, so amassed the rebels, as the two Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerlande, with some of their principal Gentlemen, suddenly and secreatly
in the night left their associates, and fled unto Herlan in Scotland, and
thus without any resistance, the Northern rebels were discomforted,
overthrown, and the greatest number of them taken, and many of the principal
were executed, and the rest were saved by the Queens exceeding mercy: A
victory that promised great happiness and glory to her Majesty, in which the
blood of the offenders was only shed, and a general rebellion, was (as
seems) in the beginning suppressed: for the said Earls were borne in hand,
by Doctor Morton, that all the Catholics would assist them with strength,
as appears in Doctor Saunders visible Church Monarchy, particulared in a
treatise, Entitled, The execution of Justice, etc. And certainly although the
heads of this rebellion escaped the present vengaunce of Justice, yet neither
of them escaped the worthy punishments dew unto traitors. The Earl of
Northumberland two years after 1571
was peaceably delivered into the possession of her Majesty's Justice: and
being by act of Parliament before attainted of treason, was beheaded at York.
The lingering myserie of the Earl of Westmerland, in Spain, the low Countries
and other places of his wilful vanishment, unto a Noble mind, could not but
be more grievous then death: his greatest intertainment being scarce able to
sustain the allowance of a man, and a page: and which was more grievous, he
was driven to bear with the arrogant disgraces of every rascally Spaniard:
and to say the truth, not only the Earl, but all other the English
fugitives, labor out such a long and a miserable life, (in respect of their
callings, if they had lived in the obedience of good subjects) as they rather
deserve to be pitied then enuyed of their worst enemies. This peaceable
overthrow in the North, touched the Pope to the quick, and least that delay
should cut him to the heart, he by his threatening Bull published open wars
against her Majesty: In May following the rebellion in the North, this
terrible Bull was hanged upon the Bishop of Londons gate, but the horns
which should have gored her Majesty's good subjects, grew to a pair of
gallows, to hang his instrument Felton in the place: Felton hanged up the
Popes Bull secreatly, and as a rank traitor, was himself hanged, headed, and
quartered openly: the Popes holiness 1570
could not make him walk invisible, neither yet could his pardon protect him
at his trial: this ill success had the Pope in his English attemps, and from
the first hour of her Majesty's reign, the wished events followed the
proceedings of her majesty, both against the Pope, and other her enemies
whatsoever. If her Majesty's and prudent Counsels searching wisdom:
discovered not traiterous conspiraces, while they were a breeding: yet God ever
more gave grace to some of the confederates, to discover the mischief in a
seasonable time. The vengeance of Envy was now broched, and the venime thereof
swelled many busy heads, even unto their own confusion. The same year a
dangerous conspiracy in Norfolk by Throgmorton, Applearde, Brook, Kete,
Redman, and others was practiced against strangers. But Kete discovered the
matter, before the mischief was ripe. By which reuealement, an insurrection
was peaceably defeated, and for example, of diverse of the conspirators that
were condemned, only, Throgmorton, Broke and Redman, were hanged, drawn, and
quartered. The bloody conspiracy of Madder and Barlowe, was shortly after
discovered, and they as traitors were executed. All which preuentions of
danger, and public disturbance, may neither be attributed, to chance nor
worldly wisdom. But above the rest the peaceable vanquishing of the Duke of
Norfolk, is a bye note of Gods wonderful providence, and favor showen to her
Maiestis, and blessed Realm: his conviction, showed his attempt to be most
perrilous, both to her Majesty, and many of her loving subjects. And for to
perform the same, he was the most popular subject that lived in England many
a day: he was settled in the favor of most of the chief pears, and
generally, he was honored of the Commons: which universal love proceeds not
always from true virtue: But contrariwise sometimes from dissembling
humility, the highest ladder of ambition. With a sly and hypocritical
spirit, ungracious Catiline, and aspiring Caesar, bewitched the people of
Rome. And although the wisdom of Cicero delivered Rome from the danger of
Catiline (for which he was recompensed with the crown Ciuique) yet nether the
grave Counselles of Cato, nor all the cloquence of Cicero, prevailed against
the popular favor of Caesar. Caesar with the favor of the multitude, judged
the Senate, and in the end crowned himself with Imperial Majesty: but yet
with such myseries to the Romans, as the Poet Lucan who partly touched them,
was amassed fully to recite them: if God had not myraculously laid all this
vengeance upon the Dukes, the capital offenders head, many a true English man
might have shaken the Romans by the hand with this salutation: In misery it
is good to have a companion. The Duke had a guilty conscience, a mistrustfull
spirit, and ungracious counsel, to withstand the censure of her majesty's
Laws: but God among his wandering thoughts, directed him a happy course for
England, although necessity, after many merciful delays, quieted the
troubles of England with the cutting off of his head.

CHAP. 10.
Of the wonderful providence of Almighty God, in the preservation of her
Majesty, from poisoning, and destruction, by Magic, and such like devilish
practices, as also from being violently murdered: a Chapter necessary the
regard, showing Gods merciful protection of her Majesty, and some of her chief
Counsel, the worthy confusion of the conspirators, the odiousnes of murder,
and the godly justice of England.

INnumerable are the examples: that the malice of envy is neither vanquished
with the wonders of God, nor confusion of her ministers, but still warreth
against the providence of God, and safety of her own members. The turning of
the rivers of Egypt into blood, Exodus 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 14. The plagues of
Egypt, and destruction of Pharao.
the covering of the land with frogs, the biting of lice, the stinging of
noisome flies, the morraine of cattle, the blaines and botches that punished
man and beast, the hail that destroyed the cattle, grass, and corn of the
fields: the Grasshoppers that eat the fruits and green leaves of the tree:
the darkness that ouershadowed the land, and the death of the first borne of
Egypt could not vanquish and mollify Pharaos malicious heart, but fighting
against God, he wilfully ran upon the destruction of himself and his whole
host in the red sea. The Jews when they saw that their open clamors prevailed
not against Paul, that their secret vow that they would neither eat nor
drink before they Acts 23. 24.
had slain him was frustrate, they yet wrought against Gods providence, and
practiced with the Ruler Festus, to have him brought from Cesarea unto
Jerusalem, and by the way meant to have slain him, but God put otherwise in
Festus head, and the Jews pursued their malice in vain. I might allege many
other examples, but none I think more profitable, then the continuance of the
malice of the Popes and his confederates envy (with their daily confusions)
against the life of her sacred Majesty, and prosperity of her happy realm.
It is shown how her Majesty had a most honorable and peaceable victory
against Pope Paulus the fourths judgment: the dangerous pretense of the French
against the roaring Bull of Pius Quintus that made her Northern subjects to
rebel, and how the Northern Rebels (who naturally are fearce) fled before her
royal power as amazed sheep. The Pope and his confederates seeing that open
hostility prevailed no whit, they therefore vnbowelled their rankor, and
practiced with the Devil to shorten the life of our most gracious sovereign
Elizabeth: The Queens death practiced by Negromancy.
they looked into the wonders of Magic, the execrable villainies done by
Negromancie, and saw, by success of the like practices an appearance of their
devilish purpose. Dangerous instruments were found out to practice with the
Devil, as Prestall, Phaer, and another unnamed English fugitive, who (as the
Archtraitor Doctor Story their chief Doctor Stories confession.
comforter confessed) said, he could, and would bring the Queens highness
to death, if he were well plied by negromancie: the Devil was set a work, the
month, the day, and the hour were set down when the Queen of England should
be in hazard of her life: there were right Machiuillians, Atheists, and Devils
set a work: men that would attempt any mischief for promotion, or (as the
confession goes) if they might not be used as underlings. These fellows
looked into the ancient strength of the Devil, how (before the coming of
Christ) he made such fellows to be generally admired as Gods: they thought to
have done wonders, but they were not wise enough to look into the abasement of
their art before the coming of our Savior Christ. God by his Prophets
revealed many matters unto the Jews, and the Devil (by Gods sufferance) by
Magitians did the like unto the Gentiles, but when our Savior came, the
admiration of either was diminished, and in a manner extinguished: he was the
light, the life and glory of the whole world, woonders and miracles attended
only upon his word and commandment. Saint Hierome says, that when the
Uirgin Mary and her son passed through Egypt, their Idols fell from the
altares, and the Oracles which the Devil caused to be made, never after gave
answer. Plutarke in his treatise of the defectes of the Plut. de defe^. orat.
Oracles, shows many examples of the very complaint of the Devils, that
their power was diminished by the birth of our Savior Christ. It appears
that the strength of Magic was much weakened in the Apostles time, when Simon
the great Magitian sought to buy at Saint Peter's hands the gift to do
miracles. And it seems that the Pope and his ministers have small confidence
in the aid of God, when they are driven to the succor of the Devil, well,
the Devil with them, and God be always with her Majesty, and they no doubt,
as Satan trembles at the name of the highest, so shall his ministers be
confounded at the feet of her Majesty. God suffers the Devil to do much
mischief, but limits his power. Simon Magus to disgrace Saint Peter
practiced, but could not revive the kinse-man of Nero, no more can all the
Negromancers Look the chapter of her^ fol. 61.
of the world by Magic kill any one person that GOD will have preserved. The
godly may safely say with David, I will not be afraid of ten thousand of
people that have set themselves against me round about, Psalm. 4. 18.
it follows in another place, for thou O Lord make me dwell in safety: the
devil is bound, and the hand of the Lord is upon the magitioner: Paul stroke
Elimas Bariehu the arrogant sorcerer blind: the devil answered the vacabond
Acts 13.
Jews, and the seven sons of S^eua one of the chief priests, which did
adjure him by Jesus whom Paul preached, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but
who are ye? forsooth they were unbelieving Jews, whom the spirit would not
obeie: yea, he caused the man whom he tormented to run upon them, and to
overcome them, so that they fled out of the house naked and wounded, it is the
best reward that the devil bestows upon them that deal with him. He many
times fails Genes. 41. Exodus 8. 9. Esaias. 47. Daniel 2.
to perform the desire of his disciples, but he never fails to bring them to
confusion: yea, in the tune of the Prophets, when his strength was greatest,
his ministers were always confounded in matters, wherein the glory of God was
to be seen, as appears in the passadges marked in the margent. For further
example let it suffice, that Gods mercy preserved her majesty, and his
justice put the chief practisers of this magic, in the possession of her
vengeance. Doctor Story was miraculously brought out of Flanders, and as he
notoriously deserved, by common justice was adjudged and executed as a
Traitor. Yea, he confessed at his execution, that it was God that dimmed the
eyes of his understanding: yea, Doctor Stories confession at his execution.
it was surely God that wrought his delivery into the hands of her Majesty's
laws. Prestall and Phaier were both after wards prisoners at her Majesty's
mercy: her exceeding Prestall and Phaier delivered forth of the kings bench
without trial. Phaer executed for coining.
mercy measured grace unto them both, that vngratiouslie sought her
destruction, they both had life and liberty, Phaier was afterward executed
for coining, his head was too busy to stand upon his shoulders: Prestall
upon special considerations, long after was called to the answer of his old
treasons, he had no defense but to fly to Prestall condemned for ^reason, but
not executed.
her Majesty's mercy, with protestation, that upon that safeconduit he came
into England, a presumption that highly honoreth her Majesty, that those
subjects which offended They ^ors presume of her ^iesties mer^.
in the highest degree of treason, durst upon her Majesty's bare promise venture
upon the danger of her laws, when at this day among most princes the saying:
Who knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to reign, is holden for a
principle in government. But sure the counsel is much against the honor of a
prince, whose promise ought to have the strength of a law, unless in such rare
cases as where the subject offends beyond all merit of commiseration: but to
eternize her Majesty's gratiousnesse, be it known, the law long sithence has
adjudged Prestall death, and yet he lives by the sole virtue of her princely
word, and certainly the godly justice of England deserves universal
admiration and reverence, where the worst and most dangerous traitors are only
confounded by solemn conviction of law, and by favor thereof a number escape
that policy would have cut short. Our ears are daily occupied with the news
of secret poisoning and unlawful murdering of noble personages in most
gouernements without attainder, trial, or any other ordinary course of
justice, but God who is therewith pleased, be therefore praised, since the
first day of her highness blessed government, neither her Majesty nor her
justice is yet stained with any such politic or rather devilish destroying of
any one of many her enemies: but yet to slander ye peaceable proceedings of her
Majesty and godly maiestrates, the notorious fugitives in Rome, Reames, and
other foreign parts, make show of wary looking unto themselves, as if their
lives were daily assailed, when their consciences, and her Majesty's
gratiousnes assures them that they fear without cause, albeit they give cause
of narrow vengeance, if the order of her government observed the councels of
their bloody practices, she might find brauoes a number in France, and
especially in Italy that for a hangmans fee would do execution of her rankest
traitor abroad: among whom, murder is so common, as the least injury is in a
manner death by custom, the easy escape out of one jurisdiction into another,
makes them thus bold where the fear of God is no bridle I report this upon
the knowledge of my own obseruances, while I lived in those parts, it is
generally known that there are hirelings that make no more conscience to
murder a man, then to kill a bird: but the actions of wicked men are no
examples of imitation, but admonitions of terror to the godly, for that lightly
vengeance follows such works. At my being in Italy, there was a heardman
Murder punished.
executed about Tyuoly, that had murdered more than fourscore persons, and
the notable outlaw Catenea, who had slain threescore and ten persons, was
led prisoner unto Rome. God may defer, but he seldom leaves murder without
visible vengeance. Above all sins nature abhors murder. When the heathen
men at Milete saw the viper to hang upon Paul's finger, even from the hatred of
nature they murmured and said: No doubt this man is a murderer, whom (though
he have escaped the sea) yet vengeance suffers Acts 28.
not to live. Nature taught the infidels to believe that vengeance follows
murder. Erasmus says, that in murder the consenter is as gilty as the actor.
Pylate against the sentence of his own conscience, having pronounced death
upon our Savior Christ, thought to have washed away the fact, with the
washing of his hands, and this protestation: I am innocent of the blood of this
just man ye shall see, but Pylates conscience made him gilty of Christ's death,
whom Matthew. 27.
the wrath of God still followed. After this wicked judgment he did nothing
but injustice, and being thereof accused, as also for profaning the temple,
and robbing the common treasure in Rome he was by ye Emperor Caligula banished
unto Lions, the place as some said of his birth: through grief of which
disgrace, by the justice of God he desperately flew himself that he might die by
ye most wicked person alive. Many other things are written of Pylats end by
Joseph in his antiquities, Eusebius, Ioachin, Vadian, and others, which for
breuity I omit. The instruction stretches even unto the seat of justice,
which makes the criminal Magistrate to be gilty of murder, if for R. cap. 12.
love, fear, or gain he unjustly pronounce death upon any innocent person.
Yea, murder cries for vengeance against anointed kings. Because David's heart
murdered Vrias, God laid the revenge of Vrias blood, many ways upon David, and
although he put the sin from David's person, yet ye child begotten upon Vrias
wife in adultry died for it: there sell 3. years dearth together in the days of
David, and David enquired the cause, and the Lord answered: It is for Saul,
and the house of blood, Reg. 2. Cap. 21.
because he slew the Gibonites. It further appears yt murder is so odious in
the sight of God, that he will not have the very blood of murderers shed, but
either by his vengeance, or public justice, when he says, Whosoever slaieth
Kaine, it Genesis 4.
shall be avenged seven fold, yea, God set a mark upon Caine yt it might be
known yt he had reserved ye punishment of Caines fault unto his own justice.
Uengeance belongs to the Lord, and a positive justice is set down unto men.
Her Majesty knows yt she received her kingdom of God, and by his holy
commandments she governs the same: she seeks not ye life of traitors but
where her own laws are in force. If any of the^ slip over beyond the seas as
vagra^ts and vagabo^ds upon ye earth, she pursues the^ no further, but
refers their trespasses to Gods justice, who continually powers confusion
upon the^, and yet according to ye Psalmist they still draw their sword to sley
such as are of a right co^uersatio^, but ye Lord laugheth the^ to scorn,
Psalm. 37.
and causes their swords to go through their own hearts. Madder Madder and
Barlow.
and Barlow would not be counseled by other men's harms, they practiced
murder, the murder of no small personages, but even of such as by their
wisdoms (next under God and her Majesty) save ye lives of many thousands of
good English subjects, but God be praised, they co^spired their own
destruction, they were rotten we the gallows before their mischief was rife.
What a desperate instrument had the Pope of late (by his Jesuits allureme^t)
piked out of harebraine Someruile to murder ye Somernile.
Queens majesty: a gentleman (though far unworthy the name) always void of
gouerme^t, and in the end so far past grace, as he desperately hanged himself.
He went resolutely about his mischief, but he was one of them whom God shot
at with a swift arrow that wounded him, his own tongue made Psalm. 64.
him to fall, and all that heard of him laughed him to scorn: his own tongue
first bewraied him, his harebraine unschiefe was without worldly judgment, and
his graceles end without spiritual remembrance, her Majesty was thus rid of a
rotten member, but not of the Popes malice, nor of all her subjects treason.
Parry came in his place, a right Orleance Doctor: of which sort of Doctors is
risen this french proverb Paies Doctor Parry.
^argent, and pass docteur Asne, Pay your money, and proceed doctor Ass. But
this right Atheist Parry, although he were not learned, yet he having no grace,
had but too much wit by his ingenious reaches. Many years he carried a port
above his calling: he disdained his fathers name up Hary who lived by keeping
of an alehouse, and changed the same unto Parry, but the vices of his youth,
insolency, pride, riot, and a mischeuous spirit accompanied him to the
gallows. From this base reckoning by fortune in marriadge he attained the
wealth, and grew to the credit of a Gentleman, but as the saying is, Goods
easily gotten, are many times idly spent. To be short, he wanted no slight
to acquire favor, nor had any honesty to keep a friend. But albeit his
shifts supplied many wants, his riot in the end outspended both his fortune and
credit: and being pursued for debt at the suit of Hugh Hare Gentleman, he
committed a wilful and violent outrage upon the said Hugh Hare, for which the
law condemned him of Burglarie, and her Majesty's only clemency gave him
life, a favor that would have bound the cruellest Turk to be thankful and
careful of her Majesty's safety, but he being an Atheist, showed himself
every way worsse then a Turk, who reuerenceth some form of Religion. His
guilty conscience took away all hope of advancement, unless he rose by some
notable mischief, his ungracious spirit still worked upon this Machiuell like
counsel. If thou will be any thing, do some thing worthy of fetters. He had
put this in practice, but his desire followed not, the devil then put him in
mind that it must be matter worthy the gallows, and all manner of reproach,
that must do him good, even to kill the Queens majesty: who not long before
had given him life, when the laws of her realm had adjudged him death. His
own confession shows, that want and mistrust of preferment first put this
damnable practice in his head. The most infirmed eyes may see by his own
demonstration, that he made no conscience to do it: yea that all his
ceremonies, in obtaining the allowance, absolution, and plenarie indulgence of
the Pope, was but only to acquire credit, and more liberal advancement for
his odious service, he was diswaded from the matter by many Papists, but he
sought not their opinions, to any such purpose: he saw no other mean of
advancement: it was for living and promotion that he sought, and without that
(as he confessed) life was Parties letter to the Lord ^sorer.
not fit for him, for all his painted protestation of the holy obseruaunce,
both of his vows and promises, if he had not comforted himself more with
these words in the Cardinals letter of the Popes assurance, That his holiness
will further make himself debtour, to acknowledge your deseruings in the best
manner that he can: then in these words, he grants unto you his blessing,
plenarie indulgence, and remission of all your sins: He would have made more
reckoning of ten pound, then ten such warrants: he showed what he was neither
whot, nor cold, unfaithful to her Majesty, and untrue to the Pope: He broke
his promise with the Pope, and violated his vows in heaven, with contrary
oaths upon earth. He swore to the supremacy in the beginning of the
Parliament: and after he had solemnly received the Sacrament to kill her
Majesty, he swore he never meant to do it: but as there was no zeal in the
first, so there is less credit to be given to the last: being contrary to a
number of the assurances of the execution of his wicked purposes, as appears
in a book of the whole order and trial of his horrible treasons. To conclude
the whole course of his life shows, that the devil could not have picked
forth a more dangerous instrument for the Popes purpose, and by his execution
as a Marti^.
Traitor, Gods providence is wonderfully glorified, the Popes inhumanitie, is
proclaimed: and if examples may work amendment, a number of false hearted
subjects, by the myraculous preservation of her Majesty may be brought to a
loving obedience etc.

CHAP. 11.
The most fortunate, and peaceable victory, which her Majesty had against the
Spanish, and Italian forces, together with the miserable confusion of James
Fitz-moris, the Earl of Desmond, and Sir John his brother, and other the Popes
confederates in Ireland: with other considerations of Gods providence in the
defense of her majesty, and Dominions.

Fearful are yt sayings of the Psalmist in many passages: where he
Prophisieth the destruction and confusion of the wicked. They says he, shall be
like the chafe which the wind scatereth Psalm. 1. 7.
from the face of the earth: They shall 37.
fall into the destruction they made for other, They shall be cut down like 52.
the grass, and be withered like the green herb. The bosting 112.
of the tyrant shall be abased, and the desire of the ungodly shall perish. And in
many other places, he heapeth vengance upon the wicked, and pronounces
confusion of their Counsels. Again he promises millions of blessings unto the
godly, and safe deliverance out of their enemies hands. England has
plentifully tasted of all this goodness: and with the Psalmist may justly say.
The Lord will be a defense for the Psalm 9.
oppressed: even a refuge in dew time of trouble. It is alredie reported, what
sundry seasonable victories Noble Queen Elizabeth (where the vengance of war
scarce fastined of any one person save her enemies) has had from the first
hour of her blessed reign, until anno. 1580. which year 1580.
the Pope had provided a Challice, to drink her majesty's precious blood: the
king of Spain expected her Crown, and the Duke of Guise to be domine factotum
in Scotland. Regard the strength of their policy, and easiness of their
confusion, and you shall plainly see, that the wisdom of the world is
folishnesse before God: The king of Spain had provided a mighty power (under
pretense of some exploit in Aphrica) for the invasion of England: Don John
should have married and have done Don John dyed 1580.
wonders with that army, with which I purpose not to meddle, but (God be
praised) Don-Iohn was fair buried. The year was not too far spent, for the
king of Spaines purpose: who had lost al his cost, if that the old king of
Portugal had not that Portugal invaded by the king of Spain.
year dyed, with which power he invaded that kingdom. The Duke of Guise should
have occupied Scotland, with martial exercise: but the troubles in Piccardy
and Dalphine so weakened his strength, as his purpose was more then half maimed,
somewhat was attempted in Scotland, but not to the expected purpose. The Pope he
undertook the matter of Ireland, and as he thought had laid a sure foundation:
he picked out a dangerous instrument for his purpose, even James Fitz-morice,
a natural Irish: a man wise, valiant, learned, and of great experience in
martial affairs: he was a great traveler, and I may safely say, to stir up
troubles, which powered destruction, upon his own head. This James Fitz-moris
was sent before to make a passage for the Popes power, anno. 1579. he arrived
1579
in Ireland, and soon intised the Earl of Desmond, and Sir John his brother
to be traitors: but as wise and as stout as this traitor James Fitz-moris was,
he was yet peaceably confounded even in the entrance of his mischieues: for he
purposing to burn the country of the Borkes, a noble young Gentleman in James
Fitzmoris slain.
the defense of his fathers country, slew him before he saw any success of his
conspired treasons. The Popes malice might have bin quailed by ye presagement
of evil success: having his ankor and principal Captain Fitz-moris thus
peaceably vanquished, but he incensed more with the displeasure of his death,
then restrained with the cogitations of Gods providence, armed his power,
against Ireland, and comforted his soldiers, that they should find in that
Country many more friends, then enemies: his Cappitaine Fitzmoris, had
seduced some of the principals, and his legate Doctor Saunders had bewitched
the multitude upon a hope, which hitherto has deceived him: the Pope under his
banner sent out of Italy d^ers Capitaines and bands of soldiers of his own,
furnished with treasure, munition, victuals, ensigns, banners, 1580
and all other things requisite for the war into the Realm of Ireland, where
the same forces with other auxillier companies out of Spain landed, and
fortified themselves very strongly upon the sea side: and erecting the Popes
banner, proclaimed open war against her Majesty. I am bound by the duty of a
true subject, to set down the joy and cheerful behauiours of the English
fugitives in Rome, upon the news of the Popes forces safe landing in Ireland,
to the end that those, which will believe a truth, may know that the coming
of these disguised Jesuits, was absolutely, to practice to bring the realm
into a war, external, and cyuill, hoping by an alteration of government, to
bring in a change of Religion and not simply, as they smothly pretend, to save
their Country men's souls, without any motion of disobedience to her Majesty
their lawful Queen. In the beginning of November 1580. I returned from Naples
to Rome, at which time the news was freach in Rome, of the Italians and
Spaniards ariual in Ireland, who promised a wonderful hope of a great victory
against her Majesty, and truly the news was not so quick in the Romans
tongues, as the joy was The rejoicing of the English fugitives, upon news of
the Spaniards ar^uall all etc.
fresh in the English men's faces, they could not suppress the reuealement of
their traitorous hearts: their common speech was, The time drew on, that the
continuance of the heretics prosperity (for so they termed the Protestants)
would make their overthrow more grievous: they so assured themselves of the
change of her Majesty's government, as in a manner every man painted out his
own office: The matter was so sure in their own imaginations, as some few,
that pretended a sorrow for Englands myserie, wished that the only vengeance
might light upon her Majesty, and some of her Maiestrates, but they further
said, that God would not have it so: his justice could not but send a general
subuertion, to revenge the injury done unto so many holy Catholics, which for
their Consciences were driven forth of their country: with these and such like
words they published the wishes of their hearts: no one, (one only except)
that in word or gesture, seemed to be sorry, that strangers should have
dominion in their native Country: wherein they showed to have dispositions
more vilanous, than the seditious Jews, when Jerusalem Joseph. de b^ Iud.
was beseiged by Titus: who although they continually killed one another with
cyuill frayes: yet to withstand the assault of the Romans, they would in
their egerest scyrmiges part themselves, and unite their forces to withstand
the foreign enemy: Nature teaches savage mastiues, who (how cruelly so ever
they fight together) at the sight of a Bear they will part themselves, and
fall upon their natural enemy: but these be worse then Mastiues, and without
they amend, God send them the destiny of Dogs. And now to the matter of the
former news, they ceased not to importune ye Pope to sucker his force in
Ireland, with new supplies, to which end Cardinal Forze with present
Commission, all along the lower way, by Raconati, Loretto, Ancona, and so to
Bologna, in the Popes proper dominions, mustered and pressed soldiers 3000.
Caliuers were in a readiness, to be shipped at Lygorne: but this preparation was
not so speedy, but before al things were set forward, Rome received news,
that the most worthy Captain, the Lord Gray, her Majesty's deputy then in
Ireland, had vanquished, and put all the Italian Italians etc. p^t to the sword.
and Spanish soldiers to the sword, a few of the principal Captains except:
they could not vaunt that they dyed with the deaths of any of their enemies,
and certainly if the forward Gentleman Master John Cheek, had not received his
death more of voluntary, then needful boldness, it had been in reckoning, as
well as reputation, a right maiden victory. This overthrow dismayed the Pope,
and brake the hearts of the English fugitives, whereupon the second supply
was stayed, and the soldiers were dismissed. I was in Rome, when Rome was
occupied with other news, ye first made not the Englishmen so Iocund, as the
second made them pensive: they honge down their heads, and had not (as the
proverb goes) a word to speak: what mine own eyes beheld, I boldly set
down to their shame. Thus the dangerous intention of the king of Spain, the
Pope, and the Duke of Guise, her Majesty's foreign enemies, which tended to
the invasion of England, Ireland, and Scotland, 1580. to the glory of God and
great honor of her Majesty was peaceably defeated: and since this Chapter
chiefly concerns the action of Ireland, to diswade others from rebellion, I
think it necessary to show the easy confusion of the Irish Traitors, that
took the Popes part: James Fitzmoris death is alredie shown. Not long after
this sound overthrow of the Popes forces in Ireland, which was Malum omen to
all his confederates, The Earl of Desmond, after that he had secreatlie The
Earl of Desmond.
wandered a season without sucker like a miserable beggar, was in his Caben
taken by one of the Irishrie, and in an Irish sort after his accustomed savage
manner, his head was cut from his shoulders: an end due to such an Archrebell.
Doctor Saunders, the Popes Irish legate, in the like extremity, Doctor Sanders
wandering in the mountains in Ireland without sucker, dyed in a frenzy. The
fourth man of singular note, was Sir John of Desmond, brother to the Earl, a
very bloody faithless traitor, and a notable murderer of his familyar Sir
John of Desmond.
friends, who also wandering to seek some pray, like a Woolfe in the woods, was
taken and beheaded, after his own usage, being as he thought sufficiently
armed, with the Popes bulls, and certain Agnus dei, and a notable ring about
his neck, sent from the Popes finger (as it was said) but he saw these saved
not his life. The Pope may well persuade, that there are much virtue and
strength in holy presents, but his miserable instruments feel, that their
only strength is in bringing of themselves to confusion. This year 1580. John
Stow Crownacleth, that the 17. day of June, in ye parish of Blamsdon A monster
in Yorke^hire.
in Yorke-shire, after a great tempest of lightning and thunder, a woman of the
age of 80. years named Ales Perin was delivered of a strange and hidious
monster, whose head was like unto a sallet or head piece: the face like unto a
man's face, except the mouth, which was like unto the mouth of a Mouse: the fore
part of the body was like unto a man having eight feet, and not one like unto
another, and a tail of half a yard long: which monster (says he) brought
into the world, no other news but an admiration of the divine works of God:
but certainly Almighty God who (since the coming of his son, in whose
sacred Gospel, whatsoever is necessary for man's salvation is contained) has
left familiarly to talk with men, as in the time of the Prophets: yet he
sends prodigious signs to acquaint the world with some offensive matter to
his divine Majesty, which his vengeance not long after, for the most part
punishes: and in my opinion (leaving the known truth to God, and every man's
censure to himself) this monster is a right figure of the Popes estate, who
being the Whore of Babylon, in her old age, and wane of her glory, has
brought forth a visible monster: The head which resembles a helmet, shows
his malicious desire to uphold his kingdom by Paul's sword, since that he
finds no strength in Peter's Keys. His mouth that was wont to fear all
Christendom with threateninges and cursing, by the symilitude of a Mouses,
shows that for all his malice he has no more might then a Mouse. His eight
Legs, not one like another s^eweth (as I before have showen) that his
kingdom is now in the case, that Mahomets was in the beginning: sustained by
the Atheist, Traitors, Murderers, and discontented persons of all Nations: The
tail which is natural to a beast shows that his Murders, and barborous
impieties, declare him to be a visible beast and monster: and that he thus
appeared in the North, is a fair warning, unto those people how they be
seduced by his painted, and hypocritical devises: for from those parts, he
expects great sucker, which God defend him from: and open the eyes of all
her Majesty's subjects understanding that they may deserne the truth from
falsehood, and then next the devil, they shall understand him to be the
father of all lies, whom shame and confusion follows, as also those that are
associates in his unrighteousness.

CHAP. 12.
The dangerous and seditious practices, of Edmond Campion, and other English
Jesuits (by Gods providence) frustrated: their worthy confusion, and their
apparent slanders of her Majesty, and godly government reproved.

AMong a number whose judgments reach no farther then their eyes and opinion
is settled, that Campion, and his fellow Jesuits, by reason of their peaceable
profession, were executed with too seueere Justice: and charged with treason,
impossible for them to compass: as civil rebellion, and foreign invasion:
it is set down in a book published by authority, which effectually
maintains the Justice of England, Of the execution of Justice etc
that Persons and Campion, had faculties granted by Pope Gregory the 13. the
14. of April 1580. That the Bull of Pius quintus should always bind Queen
Elizabeth and the heretics, but the Catholics it should by no means bind.
Who so shall herein consideratly way the policy of the Pope, and the diligence
of his traitorous instruments, may plainly see a great likelihood of
rebellion, and a wonderful danger by Gods providence prevented. To draw men
from obedience toward her Majesty, they had this large warrant from the Pope,
which figuratively imported a blessing to those that would strengthen their
rebellion: and with this Pope holy color, if you join the hypocritical,
subtle and alluring feaches of these Jesuits, you shall easily perceive that
they came rightly armed for rebellion: and in their scholars habit, procured
more danger to her Majesty's person than could an armed Army, with twenty
thousand Lances. The multitude as Sophocles says, is a monster with many
heads and every head greedily follows alteration of Government. Disposicion
of the multitude.
If they be in prosperity, they grow insolent, if in poverty they murmr: a
religion that pleases their eye, is far more welcome than that which
instructs their soul: they bear a natural envy unto their superiors, and
easily believe, all the slanders that are raised of their Prince and
principal Maiestrates. To deceive the ignorant, with a painted holiness, some
of these seditious Jesuits took Geneua in their way, and arrogantly offered
to dispute with the Reverend Beza, with such proud offers, as promised that the
holy ghost should do some miracle by their holiness. But to acquaint the
world with their hypocritical iugling, I certify that there is a godly
privilege in Geneua, that strangers during three days, may have liberty to
propose controversies of religion, grounded upon a godly zeal, that those
that doubted in any matters of faith, might be religiously instructed, and so
peaceably depart: these bragging Jesuits, protected themselves with this
privilege, and before the date was out, they vanished like bubbles, to which
their Bulls and waightiest relics may be compared. At their arrival in
England, to purchase intertainment, they blasted abroad that Difference
between the Apostles and the Jesuits.
they were come to win souls: but not as S. Paul did, when he travailed to
convert the Gentiles, for he in his Apostolic habit at noone days, in the
open Cities, preached the Gospel of our savior Jesus Christ, and the open way
of salvation: But Campion and his fellows disguised like Russians, in secreat
corners taught the traditions of the Pope, and the wide passage to damnation
But see what followed: Gods providence Act. 14. 16, 23.
raised Paul after that he was stoned in Lycaonia; the same delivered him forth
of prison at Philippos, and out of the murdering hands of the Jews, who had
vowed his death: on the contrary part his justice discovered these night
Ravens, and lawful conviction, quartered Campion and some of his obstinate
companions at the gallows for Treason, with their Bulls, defamatorie livels,
and other malicious suggestions, they labored to settle an opinion in her
Majesty's subjects, that her excellency was a tyrant, a Machiuillian, and
every way as evil as themselves, who were little better than the devil. They
scandaled her godly government, and with odious names reviled her grave
Maiestrates. All which they proved) as the vicar of Croyden, did Aue Maria to
be a prayer) with never a word of scripture: for if they had been counseled
by S. Paul, they would not have reviled their rulers, yea if they had offered
them unjust violence: as appears when Ananias the hy priest caused him to be
smitten on the mouth. Paul upon this vyolent temptation but answered: God shall
Acts. 23.
smite thee, thou painted wall: and after wards knowing Ananias was the hye
Priest, he by and by corrected his own error, and said, I wist not brethren
that he was the hie Priest: For it is written, thou shall not curse the ruler
of the people. These seditious Traitors, did not only curse and slander,
Exodus 22.
but move men violently to murder their anointed sovereign, Queen Elizabeth
(whose life, as the life of England God long continue.) The traitor Someruile
confessed, that he was moved to kill her Majesty, by the inticements Look in
the book called the Execution of Justice. etc.
of certain of his kinsmen, and Allies, and also by sundry seditious vile
books lately published against her Majesty: how wrongfully they charge her
majesty with tyranny, their own murdering attemps, and her vnappauled spirit
makes manifest. Iobe says that fearefulnes shall afright the blood Job. 18.
thirsty on every side. The lives of tyrants are full of hatred, and their
persons are subject to many perrils, Horror and fear, are always in their
ears: and although they live in peace, yet are they in continual dread of
death. How pleasant (I beseech you) was the life of Aristippus, whom the bare
walls did fear: Nay how wretched was the estate of Alexander Phareus who
dreaded his own wife? and was Dionisius the Saracusains life any other than a
living death? He never durst trust his Barbor least he should cut his throat:
he carnally accompanied not his two wives Aristomida and Dorida, before he
saw them dispoyled of their garments: his bed was environed with a great
mote, into which he entered by a draw bridge. Cicero describes the fearful
estate of a Cicero ^se. lib. 5.
tyrant, in a story between the forenamed Dionisius and the Orator Damocles,
the moral whereof is contained in this Sonet.

There is no fort, that seems safe or strong
There is no food, that yeeldes a sauery taste.
The sweetest Lute, and best composed song,
The chirping byrds, that in the woods are plast,
Sound no delight, but as a man forlorn.
The silent night, does seem an ugly hell,
The softest bed, a thycket full of thorn,
Unto the heart, where tyranny does dwell.
Whose mind presents, through horror, and through dread.
A naked sword, still falling on his head.
The estates of tyrants are so miserable, that of them is properly said, That
Tyrants nourish fear. How little that passion troubles her majesty is
publicly known. The Hargabush shot by Appeltre, that sore wounded a
water-man, 1579
within six foot of her Majesty in her Bardge, sufficed to have appauled a
martial courage, the chance being so rare: at the first face, could pretend
no other than treason, a danger that tried her true Magnanimity, the matter
so little feared her invincible mind, as her highness set a part the care of
her own safety, to carry the comforting of her poor wounded Barge-man. The
Ambassador Mounsieur Shemere was in honor bound (who was there present) to
report in France, that in a mortal extremity, her Majesty, whom the fear
principally concerned, was the least amassed in the company: but it may be said
that this was a casual perrill, that was not known before examination, and
her exceeding mercy in pardoning the offender cleared al suspicion of tyranny.
Many a worthy prince to settle an awe in subjects, have suffered their Laws to
punish with death, more ignorant, (yea altogether innocent) offenses, but
certainly the least tyrant would have adjudged Apletre, for fear that destiny
had marked him to bring forth some other dangerous fruit: as the Athenians did
the boy that pycked out the eyes of birds, whom they put to death, upon a
suggestion that he would prove a tyrant. But to come more near to the shame
of these slanderous Traitors: to settle (if it were possible) a fear in her
Majesty, how diuellishly, and daungerously have they assaulted her Majesty's
life. The forenamed Someruile, kept his resolution to kill her Majesty even
unto death: and yet al they that are worthy to behold her princely and
vnappauled countenance assuredly know, that all the murdering practices of her
enemies, have impressed no fear in her Magnanimous heart (for fear is
evermore seen in the face) the reason is, there is no cruelty harbored in her
Royal breast, which passion both breeds, and nourishes fear: but
principally, when the Arche-traitor Parry told her Majesty that he had
passed his promise to kill her: she was so smally abashed, as the
constantnesse of her countenance made him to tremble. An other time when he was
fully determined to have slain her excellency with his dagger, the
assuredness of her countenance (which resembled a bright sun, shadowed with
no manner of clouds) made him to lose his resolution. The traitors own tale,
although the same were shadowed with a dissembling loyalty sufficed to have
impressed a ielious fear in her Majesty: but she made so light account of
her enemies threats, as she scorned to report Parries suspicious words unto
her grave Counsel: furthermore to clear her Majesty from the least bleamish
of Tyranny, there needs no other testimony, than the confession and records
of rank Traitors. It appears in Parries and Throgmortons voluntary
confessions, that her princely clemency stays all sharp courses against
such Papists, as live like obedient subjects, when that Law adjudged them
death, their last hope was in her exceeding mercy. Throgmorton craved mercy
with this acknowledgement, of which many have tasted, and few have been
deprived. Parry confessed, that the manifold virtues which shined in her
Countenance, evermore made him lose his resolution to kill her majesty.
Foreign writers in their books, have made questions, whether the greatness of
her Majesty's mercy, were a virtue more holy in her majesty, or dangerous
for her good subjects, because it bread presumption in those that are evil
affected. I protest before God (who I know heavily punishes wilful perjury)
that I heard a Papist in Rome, before some of his companions wish (and make
choice) to be her Majesty's prisoner in the Fleet, rather then (as he was) the
Popes pentioner in Rome: and truly her imprisonment is more large than the
Popes allowance, save unto such persons which make show of seditious spirits.
Furthermore the long reign, and manifold blessings, which almighty God
plentifully bestows of her Majesty, evidently declares that she is no
tyrant, whose Reigns are for the most part short, and their deaths violent.
Yea these Calumniers and Lybellers, with these shameless detractions slander
their own knowledge, which is, that her mercy gives life to condemned
Papists, if that (their Religion safe) they will but acknowledge
Ecclesiastical supremacy to be one to her Majesty, which the Pope and all
his power cannot pluck from her. To conclude, no one what so ever his offense
be, is put to death in case of Treason, and Felony, except the Consciences of
twelve sufficient men find him guilty: and this I may truly say, although
England be small in comparison of France or Italy, yet her mercy pardons
more, that are convicted by the Law, than the king of France, and all the
princes of Italy. It is a wonder to see the wilful stubbornness of these
ungracious Jesuits, how they strive against their own knowledge, how
shamelesly they slander the mildest course of Justice that ever civil
policy administered in any common wealth: but chiefly how impudently they
reproach her excellent Majesty with tyranny, when that her mercy is written in
all the Capitols of the world: their venim shows that they are even those,
of whom the Psalmist says. They speak lies they are as venomous as the poison
of a serpent, even like the deaf Adder that stops his ears, they with their
malicious, and untrue persuasions, bring men into the snares of destruction,
out of which they cannot deliver themselves. It is the last refuge the Pope
has to uphold his wicked kingdom, to blow into subjects ears, slanders of
tyranny, subsidies, oppressions, and other hard impositions of their Princes:
with these perswations they have kindled many commotions, and daily settle a
mortal hatred in the ignorant multitude, toward their Princes and godly
proceedings, which evermore bursteth forth with the confusion of such as they
seduce, for God which abhors Traitors seldom suffers Treason to prosper:
the diligent observance of the events whereof, is able to settle the duty and
obedience of a good subject, more than the learning and Eloquence of the
greatest Orators.

CHAP. 13.
Of the peaceable discovery of the dangerous Treasons of Frances Throgmorton
Esquire, of Henry Percie Earl of Northumberlande and others, a Chapter
declaring the Odiousness of Treason, and continual overthrow of Traitors.

Whosoever shall read the Chronacles of time (the continual life of virtue,
and endless shame of vice) they shall find that Treason is so odious to God,
as his holy hand, many times myraculously has defended the worst tyrants from
the mortal Treasons of their subjects: Comodus was a wicked Emperor, and to
kill him, his sister Lucilla had Treason of Quintianus discovered.
appointed one Quintianus: The Traitor Quintianus, wayghted at the entering of
the Amphitheatre, to kill Comodus, his dagger was ready drawn, his heart was
resolute, and his hand was ready to strike the stroke: but God appointed the
Traitors tongue, to inflict the vengeance upon himself: for before the
Emperor came under his stroke, Quintianus cried, This the Senate sends thee.
Upon which words he was taken, and Comodus nothing hurt. The day before
Sceuinus thought to have slain the Archetyrant Nero, he put an old rustie
dagger to grinding, he made his Testament, he fraunchised his bondmen, and
got rowlers in a readiness, to wrappe wounds in, by which tokens Milicheus his
servant, gathered he went about some naughty purpose, and so accused him
straight ways to the Emperor. Sceuinus straight confessed, Sceuinus
discovered.
that his intent was to have slain Nero. If God plucketh wit and prudencie
from Traitors, that purposed to kill such notable tyrants, as he made the
Traitors own words and doings, to be the confusion of themselves and
safety of the tyrauntes: It is assuredly to be thought that with the shield
of his strength, he will defend righteous Princes: and especially his chosen,
Queen Elizabeth, that above all things seeks to set forth his glory, to
advance his holy word, to abase hypocrisy, to banish Idolatry, and finally,
that all her subjects may be (as they are called) true Christians. It is
assuredly thought that he will defend her Majesty, yea it is constantly to
be believed, that he will, there is no fear of it, it is visibly seen that
he does. I might enlarge this Chapter with sundry examples, of the confution
of foreign Traitors, and preservation of their sovereign Lords: But I write
to Englishmen: for whose instruction English examples is most proper.

It is yet within the compass of our memory, that since the first hour that
the Noble King Henry the eight banished the Pope out of England, that God has
laid this curse upon Traitors, as the most part of them, even in the prime of
their conspiracies were discovered, and the principals worthily punished. What
became of the huge Commotion in Lincolne-shire, where twenty thousand rebels
October. 1536
were in Arms? at the approach of the kings power they desired pardon, brake up
their Army, and departed home. The seditious head of Cardinal Poole, within
six days after, raised a new insurrection in Yorkshire, to the number of
forty thousand rebels: they abide the coming of the kings power, with whom a
day of battle was appointed, but God (having compassion, of a number of good
subjects that were like to be slain) by his providence saved both the one,
and the other: the night before the Armies should join, he parted them with a
mighty rain, In the mean time the rebels desired pardon, it was granted,
and so the commotion seized. In February following Nicholas Musgraue, Sir
Francis Bigot, Sir Robert Constable and others, began February 3.
new Commotions in Yorkshire, which were soon appeased with their confusions:
the Insurrection of Somerset April. 1537
shire had no better success: but which most dangerously touched the kings
life, and safety of his good subjects, this ungracious Cardinal Poole, this
whirlepoole, and firebrand of desencion, seeing that king Henry with an easy
hand appeased many, and mighty insurrections at home: labored an inuation by
the power of France: but all the danger was not in the french forces, he had
drawn in the Marquis of Exeter, his brother the Lord Mountacute, and Sir
Geffray Poole, and with them his kinsman Sir Edward Neuell 1538
to be traitors: these labored no small matters, they sought even the change
and alteration of the kings godly government: they were dangerous traitors,
not so much for their power, but for that they were all so bound unto the
king, for many benefits, as common reason took away all occasion of suspicion:
to condemn whose unkindness, and monstrous ingratitude, there be many
examples of unreasonable creatures. Lysimachus had a dog which he much
esteemed, and Lysimachus dog.
the dog to show his love, when he saw his master dead, and cast into the
fire, as the manner of burial was then, he likewise leaped into the fire, and
died with his master. Plinic shows that Hiero King of the Syracusans had a
dog which Hieroes dog.
did even the same: but the Roman histories make mention of a more strange
matter: when Titus Fabinus and his family were slain, there was a dog that for
no stripes would depart from the dead carcass of his master, and when the
standers A Roman dog.
by gave him meat, he ran and laid it at the mouth of his master: in fine,
when the body was thrown into the flood of Tyber, the dog lept in after, and
as long as he could he kept his master above the water, much more might be
said to reproach ingratitude, a vice which our vulgar word (unkindness)
shows to be against kind or nature: the former examples approve as much,
but envy and ambition, the ordinary passions of Papists are so far from
grace, duty, The villainous nature of ambition and (...).
and thankfulness, as they contend with God, and violate the bonds both of
nature and friendship. The Traitor Parry in his confession, said, that his
accusor Neuill usually said, that all the advancement that her Majesty could
give him, should serve but for her scourge, if ever time ministered occasion: I
know not whether he spoke of malice or no, but experience teaches, that
these persons resemble the frozen Snake, which the pitiful husbandman
comforted by the fire, which in recompense stoong his children. The Marquis of
Exeters father was for treason committed to prison by King Henry the seventh,
King Henry the eight discharged him, and with great favor took his son into
his privy chamber, and used him always more like a companion then a servant.
The King helped the Lord Mountacute from the state of a poor Gentleman, to his
mothers land being three or four thousand marks by the year. Sir Edward
Neuill was of the Kings privy chamber, and in great favor. The Pooles were of
the Kings blood, and so bound with princely favors, as when Sir Geffrey Poole
was apprehended, the rest were not so much as suspected, but God will not have
treason lie hid, nor Traitors unpunished, though the Devil and man labor in
the behalf of either. The Devil was here set a work, but he labored in
vain against the justice and mercy of God, the giltinesse of Sir Gefferey
Pooles conscience condemned him, he now only respected the safety of the
Marquess, his breethren, and Cosen Sir Edward Neuill, his conscience was
witness against them all, he feared that torture would wrest out the truth,
and in this doubtful perplexity he resolved desperately to kill himself, and
in this passion upon opportunity, he stabbed himself upon the breast with a
knife, the Devil played his part, now see how God (as he often does) turned all
the Devils work to his glory, and Sir Gefferayes salvation, the knife was
blunt, and as God would, made the wound not mortal, yet the abundance of
blood which followed his wound, made him to fear God, to fear hell, and to
detest the murder both of his body and soul, and where as before he would
have died to save his breethren and Cosen, he now desired life for no cause so
much, as to bring them to that which they worthily deserved. Finally, he
accused them all, and by lawful trial, the Marquess, the Lord Mountacute,
and Sir Edward Neuill were January. 1538
adjudged and executed as traitors: good King Henry joined his mercy to Gods
providence, and so pardoned Sir Gefferey, whom God appointed to be the
instrument of this discovery, the like blessings were heaped upon the King,
and confusion upon his enemies, the residue of his triumpha^t reign, which
continued all the days of his most blessed son King Edward the sixth. In the
third year of his reign there were almost general commotions through
England. The Papists tempted and moved the commons to rebellion, with a
persuasion 1549
to throw down inclosier, and for themselves foysted in, to have their old
religion and Act of six Articles restored, but what followed: the rebels in
every country were vanquished, slain, and utterly discomforted. And to
continue with truth, in this report Queen Mary had (albeit she was
superstitious) the like victories against her domesticke enemies: but as it is
said, as God gave the Idolater Abias victory against Jeroboam for his great
Grandfather David's sake, so he gave the like to Queen Mary for her godly
father King Henry's sake. To come again unto the peaceable victories obtained
by the Queens Majesty, as in the former reports it is manifest, although the
Devil gave her enemies wit to begin treasons, he failed to give them strength
to effect them, yea, the Devil himself lacks strength, where God has any
thing to do, as appears especially in the prevention of the odious and
desperate treasons of Someruile and Parry. To conclude, the overthrow of her
last known enemies (which happiness I beseech God to continue many years,
and to the last moment of her Majesty's life) the wonderful discovery of the
dangerous treasons of Frances Frogmorton Esquire deserves a special
remembrance. I mean a remembrance Frogmorto^ Treason.
of thanksgiving unto almighty God, in revealing of such a covert mischief,
that threatened her Majesty with a particular danger, and her realm and people
with a general calamity, it was no ordinary conspiracy that Frogmorton
labored, but an unnatural subversion of his country by foreign invasion: he
wrought to have brought in the Pope, the King of Spain, the Duke of Guise and
all: he purposed her Majesty's death, to possess he knew not whom with the
Crown, perhaps such a one, as would all have been jealous of him, for those
by whom they are benefited, dare hardly trust a Traitor, he was discovered in
time, but yet more by Gods providence then man's policy, he was too subtle to
lay his head upon weak blocks: his secrecy was such, as he was first
desyphered by foreign intelligence: he had English confederates, but such as
weere too deep in, to discover him. When he could no longer withstand the
accusation of his own handwriting, and other probabilities, but especially
his guilty conscience, he voluntarily accused himself with many odious
Treasons, but his malicious spirit would not bow to accuse his confederates,
which could not but be some great personadges: his tongue going to execution,
accused him of a hidden secret, when he said, that he was sorry for the misery
that would light upon the people before one year, but God be praised the year
is past, another draws fast one, and many the like I hope will follow, that
her Majesty is in safety, and her Realm in peace. Mary within the same year
the Traitor Parry was hanged in Throgmortons equipage, and Henry Earl of
Northumberland (judged by the giltinesse and accusation of his own conscience)
desperately ended his life with a dagge in the Tower, with grief I set it
down, that a man of so great valor and staidness should so much forget the
fear of God and duty to her Majesty (to whom he was deeply bound) as to
practice such dangerous treason, as his own conscience persuaded him would not
abide the trial: and therefore to preserve the honor and inheritance of his
house, he made choice of a desperate death, before the trial of his peers,
the most honorable and indifferentest trial in the world: his sons have
great cause to consider of this fatherly care, that thus wilfully endangered
his own soul, to preserve the temporal honor of his house: yea, the
redeeming of it by his voluntary death, when the trespass of his life had
forfeited all, has (or ought to have) impressed such a settled zeal in his
sons evermore to uphold the same, as they and their posterity will no doubt
continually be remembered thereof, as Philip King of Macedon was, That he was a
mortal man. God grant that her Majesty's good subjects may be always worthy
of this divine providence, peace, and abundance of all good things, and that
those that are not yet sound may so profit (in amendment) by these examples, as
they may detest treason, as the assured spoil of honor, loss of life, and
(in many) the damnation of the soul, otherwise, (in seeking to pull down a
Prince whom God has chosen to reign over his people) in their confusion they
shall declare their own folly, and Gods exceeding goodness, in preserving of
those whom he loves. These notable politicians, or more properly Atheists, if
they were simply to deal with men, they might many times happily see the
wished effects of their devises: but they strive against God that strive
against their sovereign Princes, especially against such a one as God has
anointed to set forth his glory, yea, they shall prevail no more then he
that thinks to beat down strong rocks with a knock of his head, that
strives against those whom God protecteth. God defended his servant Elias
fleeing from the wrathful displeasure 3. Reg. 19.
of Iezabell, yea, he sent an Angel to comfort and to refresh him with food.
When Daniell was cast into a den of Daniel 6.
Lions, God sent an Angel to stop the Lions mouth, so that they could not hurt
him. An Angel with a drawn sword told Iosue that he was the chief of the
Lords band. Iudeth Iosue 5. Iud. 13.
had an Angel for her companion when she went to slay Holofernes. An Angel
was seen to walk and preserve Sidrah, Daniel 3.
Misach and Abednago in the burning oven. I could enlarge the Chapter with many
examples to like purpose: but to conclude, although Angels are not so visibly
seen as in the time of the Prophets, yet they minister Gods providence, and
all his blessings even now as they have done from the beginning of the world,
by whom our noble Queen Elizabeth is defended, her enemies are confounded,
and from whom her good subjects receive peace, and large fruition both of
spiritual and temporal riches. All which, God for his Sons sake always
continue, that when her Majesty has lived a long life (so long as the longest
course of nature may give leave) that then she may die in peace even in the
place where she lives and reigned many years in peace.

Amen.
CHAP. 14.
An exhortation to the English fugitives, vagrant in foreign Regions.

I Place you here English fugitives at her Majesty's feet, as abiects, whom
Gods justice for your sins will have foiled under her feet: but her
excellency, who is slow in doing of vengeance, is more ready to succor her
enemies with her hand, then to spurn them with her foot: and among many that
least deserve this favor, charity, and commiseration of your daily ruins,
moves me to wish unto you after unfeigned reconciliation, both the fruition of
this mercy, and all your Country blessings. The errors of your Religion are
manifested by many godly Divines, but the blindness of your hearts will not
suffer you to see them: and small is the marvel, though you contemn the
counsels of men, when you use the visible warnings of God to strengthen your
errors. The report of the soldiers unto the high Priests of the glory of
Christ's resurrection, sufficed to have converted the Jews, but to their
condemnation, the Devil and money sealed this slander in their hearts, that
his Disciples stole him away in the night. Gods justice stroke Mahomet with the
falling sickness, to make him know and forsake his blasphemy, but to
strengthen the peoples misbeleefe, the Devil taught him to say, that his
falling proceeded of the conference with an Angel, whose divine presence his
humane shape could not endure. Upon the principal day of the sauadge murder
in Parris, according to the figure in the Revelation, that the stinging Locusts
should not hurt the green tree, when to show that Gods word should flourish
mauger your cruelty, a withered tree bare green leaves in the Church yard,
which received many a martired carcass, you presently applied that preaching,
or prophesying example, to the second flourishing of your Romish Church, time
proves your exposition, but an idle suggestion. For although God suffered this
cruel persecution of his Church, yet he presently showed himself as a loving
father, who burns the rod when he has corrected his son, God shortly sent
an unkindly death to the chief scourge in this persecution, and with the
gallows confounded the most of ye rascally Atheists his executioners: if any
live, they bear the marks of his heavy displeasure: what honor, and to go
further, what profit have you gained by this policy of your Church? to what
purpose has the Pope painted this persecution about his great hall at Lateran?
forsooth that it may be a monument of his cruelty, and Gods mercy: of his
cruelty, who daily murthereth, and of Gods mercy, which daily increases the
number of true professors. If the hardness of your hearts had not blinded your
understanding, you could not but perceive the visible plagues which fall upon
your Pharao the Pope: you see that justice by general judgment hangs
notable murderers in chains, that they may rot and consume by peecemeales:
even so Gods justice promises semblable vengeance upon this Archmurtherer your
pope: the most infirmed eyes see the lingering consumption of his riches,
reverence, and reputation: he that sometime disposed foreign kingdoms, can
not keep his proper lands out of ye possession of his next neighbors. There is
no free state in Italy, but of late years have fleesed him, nor any Christian
Prince that is his best friend, which paieth his ancient tribute. He that
sometimes commanded the persons, goods, and roial powers of anointed kings, is
now driven to waste his substance upon Atheists, secretly to murder his
supposed enemies, whose counsels (for ye most) prove the halters, which hang
his executioners: necessity constrains him to be in league with all men, save
the professors of the Gospel: the Jews have their sinagogue, the Grecians
their proper religion even in Rome: strumpets have good law to recover the
leacherous hire of their bodies: their Ladies are his possessions, for they pay
him rent to abuse them. Atheists, traitors, murderers, thieves, and such as
the laws of all good government would consume with the gallows, are his
soldiers, stipendaries, and pentioners: and what service do they him? they
shorten their own days in laboring his wicked practices, all to a bootelesse
success: seldom, (but yet sometimes) his instruments execute his bloody
purposes: but his Machiuillians never escape the hands of vengeance: I have
shown the example of France. John Ianregui the first assayler of the godly
Prince of Orange, was presentlye slain, and sundry of his confederates were
executed, the odious Atheist which wickedly murdered this good prince, had a
severe death, but yet too mild for his execrable offense: but here in England
(from whence came the Lion that first plucked the proud Eagle of Rome by the
throat, etc.) what success has followed all his policies? since the noble
King Henry the eight showed his ravening to the princes of the earth, he has
vomited his poisoned envy and malice to the chief destruction, disgrace, and
shame of him and his partakers, his instruments of Rebellion, murder, and all
inhumaine mischiefs, had their fortune which rid the horse Seian which was
violent death: they brought bulls which gored themselves, and pardons which
turned into halters, and hatchets which hanged and quartered their masters: I
need not name Felton, Campion, Parry, and the rest: you have canonized them
for Saints, and we have Chronacled them for Traitors. Since the beginning of
her sacred Majesty's reign, whom here in England have your Popes cursses
harmed? I know his blessings have brought many Englishmen to the gallows, from
which God bless all good men, and then I mean not you, without amendment. If
you have not learned by the councels of scripture to forbear the laying of
violent hands upon the Lords anointed, yet the daily experience of your
companions falls, and their frustrate attempts, suffices to banish the very
imagination of your and our most gracious sovereigns death, which all good
Christians beseech almighty God many years to defer. You are not so wise as
the Philosophers disciples, which in the water would follow their master
but to the chin: for you follow the Pope over head and ears in two dangerous
seas, error, and rebellion. You may learn instructions of safety of Mise,
which run from houses which are ready to fall: or of lice, that will leave
the body of a dying man: all the world sees that your Popes kingdom leans
upon a few rotten props, yea, that the life of his glory is at the point of
death: why follow you then your own destruction in susteining of him, whom
vengeance will no longer suffer to flourish. Nature counsels you to have
care of your lives, and charity warns your enemies from wishing your
deaths, if you would shun the perils that vnpolitike creatures avoid, but
Pharao and his host would wilfully perish in the red sea, the like is your
stobernesse and expected destruction. Pharao was plagued, and well warned
before, and you Papists lack neither punishment to fear you, nor persuasion
to win you, and unhappy are ye that neither can profit you. Mahomet to continue
his irreligion by his Alcoran, forbad ye people to reason of it, a damnable
policy to suppress truth, which by disputation breaks out of controversies,
as fire out of Flint, by the striking of iron. The people to blind all the
world with ignorance, appointed the Latin tongue for matters of religion, which
ye multitude understood not: if one language sufficed for a general edifying,
the holy Ghost in the form of cloven and fiery toongs sat upon the Apostles
in vain, which instructed every one in their proper language, it was a
policy almost as dangerous as Mahomets, which many years masked the
hipocriticall blasphemy of the pope: when his dreams shadowed the truth, your
mists of error might well arise from ignorance: but now that truth has unmasked
his hipocrisy, your blindness can be adjudged no better, than perverse
wilfulness. His policy forbids you studiously to search the scriptures, it
is then like his will is that you should read his own monuments. And I counsel
you to read Platinus, Aeneas Siluius, the golden Legend of the acts of popes.
Plutarke reports that an Atheist governor of Cilicy, believed Plut. lib. de
orat. Plut. de mor. de verit. de reb. Christ. 17.
in God by an answer of the Devil, or oracle of Mopsus which revealed a
known secret: and it may well be these popish historiographers will let you
see paltry stuff, that the best advise will hardly persuade you to believe.
There is an old saying, Orpheus can describe hell better then Aristotle, raised
upon a fable that he fetched his wife from thence, and truly in knowledge is
assurance, and in report may be error. They are Authors that write wonders of
the Pope, and (if your judgments are not blind) matters in common sense
impossible: you may by grace stumble on such gross errors, as shall constrain
you to look upon the plain truth: but you have a commandment, that forbids
you to look into the lives of your Popes, because it can not be denied but
that they trespass daily as men, when in their doctrine can be no error,
because the holy Ghost waighteth upon their holiness, it may well be of their
holiness, and yet far enough from the Pope. Where was I pray you the holy
Ghost, when Pope Marcellus sacrificed unto the Idols of the Pagans? What office
had he when Syluester the second, when Hero. in Cat. ^ust. (...). Pet. Pemist.
in v^. Greg. 7. and (...). 2.
John the nineteenth, and Gregory the seventh were a coniuring? they were
successors of Simon Magus, and not of Simon Peter. In deed Pope Ioane the
eight erred not when she fell in labor in the midst of Procession. Among your
own Authors it is reported, that the virgin Mary told S. Brigit that most of
the Popes are in hell: a small sign then that the holy Ghost is very
conversant with them, S. Peter (from whom they derive their holy virtue)
erred, and denied Christ, and only by repentance, was again received into
grace. They exceed S. Peter in riches and pomp, but they come short of him in
holiness and doing of miracles. If the opinion of a Franciscan Friar be as
current as other Pope scripture: it is known unto you yt read ye lives of your
popes, that pope Sixtus the 4. was in ye beginning a friar of S. Frances order,
who being advanced unto the paupaltie, was oftentimes visited with the brethren
of his own habit: among whom, one of his ancient companions in his friars
weed came to see the Pope, who to set forth his pomp, showed him his rings,
and magnificent jewels, and withal said Brother, I can say now more then S.
Peter who said, I have neither gold nor silver, it is true said the friar, but
you can not say as he said to the lame and impotent arise and walk, giving him
thereby to understand that the popes of Rome labor more to be rich then holy:
but you may say (because you are forbid) that you must tell no man of the popes
faults: do then as^e did that bewraied King Mydas asses ears, tell them so
loud to the earth, that men may hear them: iwis they be more deformed then
Mydas ears, and you shall be far more praised in the revealing of them, then
profited in the concealing of them. But you will further say, that all your
doings are the documents of great learned men, whose counsels ought to work
more strongly with you then all my persuasions. That same learning in deed in
stubborn wits, when it undertakes an error, does the devil and all of hurt.
Plato says, small wits do little hurt in a common wealth, the great wits are
they that do all the mischief. S. Augustine had read much, and was very
co^uersant in the scriptures, and yet he was a great while in the heresies of
the Manichees, and still persuaded himself that scripture was of his side.
Learning does stay a man in error, rather then help him out of it, especially
if he have chued the sense of the scripture at his pleasure, or be dronken with
juice that his fantesie has corrupted. Saint Paul was learned when he
persecuted Christ's flock, and had read of nothing so much as of the
scripture, and yet you see that men could never turn his heart: God himself
was feign to put to his voice, to strike his body blind, and to enlighten
therewith his soul. In truth it is apparent that you stop your ears against
all the persuasions of man. It is Gods especial grace that must vanquish your
stubbernes, which grace is promised to all those that sincerely ask it in his
Son Jesus name: speak well of Saint Thomas, Saint Gregory, and the rest,
because they are dead, but pray not unto them, for the dead can do the living
no good. Jesus signifies salvation, and Jesus alone must be your salvation.
Pray then unto Jesus with a contrite heart, lay aside your painted hypocrisye,
and then no doubt he will lighten your understanding, and make you to use
your learning to his glory, which otherwise is like a sword in a mad man's
hand, which indangereth many, and defends not his master: believe him
that wishes you no evil, if you have a desire to do your selves good, one
moment faithfullye bestowed in this Devotion, will profit you more then seven
years reading of controversies. The short prayer of the poor Publicane was in
heaven, before the long babbling of the painted Pharisie: his doctrine is
nothing so dangerous as the Popes, he commands you to pay tribute and
obedience to Princes, and not to murder or lay violent hands of the Lords
anointed: if he set you about such business, will him to teach you more fence,
for he had need to be very skillful that shall wound him to whom God is a
buckler. It is not an enterprice to be ventured on by young scholars, least in
the striking out of their quarters their heads and all fly off. Return your
vengeance upon this ungracious pope, who is the vengeance both of your body and
soul: but now I counsel you not to strike him with carnal weapons, for the
word must be his confusion, read but the new Testament over with a holy
conscience, and you shall find many words to wound him. Marten Luther (whose
very name perplexeth the Pope) never fought with him with other weapons then
the word of God, yet in his life he so vanquished him, as being at the very
point of death, his soul beheld the triumph of his destruction, and for joy
thereof said: Pe^t is eram viuens, moriens tua mors ero papa:


Living I was thy plague, and dying will be thy death pope. He has prophesied
truly to the purpose, for all the Jesuits in Christendom can not cure the
wounds that the reverend Marten Luther has given him. Why labor you then
your own destruction to raise him whom God has abased? his life is not long,
but yours will be shorter, unless you dispatch your hearts of your odious
treasons. God so hates them, that as the Preacher says, the birds of the air
shall bewraie your voice, and with their feathers shall betray you, so that
your cunning shall be to no other end, then to lead you to the gallows. From
which, God defend you if it be his good will to give you so much grace as to
become his servants, and her Majesty's loving Subjects.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ENGLISH MIRROVR Entitled, A fortress against Envy:

Builded upon the councels of sacred Scripture, laws of sage Philosophers,
and policy, of well governed Commonweals.

Wherein every estate may see the true offices, the worthiness and (by abuse)
the disgrace of his vocation.

A work safely and necessary to be read and regarded of every good subject.
by GEORGE WHETSTONS Gentleman.

Malgre.

To the right Honorable and most grave personadges the temporal maiestrates of
England in their weighty counsels, the assistance of Gods holy spirit.
MOst honorable and grave Maiestrates, it may seem unto your wisdoms that I
flattered my wit, with a foolish singularity, and abused your favors with an
arrogant presumption, if of my own brain I should undertake (and lay before
your judgments) this weighty building, which contains the true offices, the
worthiness, and (by abuse) the disgraces of every man's vocation: which labor I
entitle A fortress against Envy. But (most reverend) as I have composed my
first book, called The Conquests of Envy, of the examples and overthrows of
the most ancient, renowned and flourishing commonweals, for Envy only makes
war with things of the greatest glory, and have continued my second book,
entitled, Envy conquered by virtue, with the admiration of her Majesty's
peaceable victories, obtained by divine providence, and her highness precious
virtues, the one incomprehensible, and the other without sample: So right
honorable, this third book (which I reverently submit unto your grave censors)
I (semblably) build upon sacred, moral, and politic counsels: the admonitions
are set down by holy Prophets, Apostles, learned Philosophers, and grave
common wealthesmen. The collection and labor to place them, as they may serve
for a general instruction, is only due unto me: and (with your honorable
favors) I think the law of the Egyptians (which I take for my platform) is a
most sure defense against Envy: for by this law of King Amazis, (which was,
that every man should put his name in a common book, and at the years end
should acquainte the Governor near his abiding, with the trade and order of
his living.) Idleness and excess (the great nourishers of Envy) were either
banished or punished, every man entertained a settled vocation, and no man
envied the pomp of another man's calling, which he knew not how to govern: and
certainly, if men would indifferently consider of all vocatio^s, they should
find there is no calling so base, but that the use thereof is profitable, and of
honest credit in a common wealth: and withal no dignity so hye, but unto the
same is annexed a number of displeasures, and thereupon it is rightly said,
That the chiefest place in the administration of justice, is to the executioner
a bondage: your wisdoms know the same better by experience, then I by
observance, so that whatsoever the book contains of grave government, I
acknowledge might better have been derived from your lively virtues, then from
other men's written counsels: but for that men can hardly praise the living
without flattery, and the dead without an honest zeal, I have made choice to
labor more for my credit then advantage: for albeit I am in a manner unknown to
most of you grave Maiestrates that live (of which in this respect I am glad,
that being unworthy of your knowledge, for any special quality, I am at no
time brought Coram vobis for any criminal trespass) yet those worthy
personages which in my time are deceased, have had the second life of their
virtues bruted by my Muse: but as my travels herein commended the dead, and
instructed the living: with the like hope, I have builded this fortress
against Envy, of the counsels of the dead, applied to instruct the living in
their proper virtues. Virtue as Diogenes says, only withstandeth Envy, yea,
virtue conquereth Envy, and virtue set apart, no policy prevails against the
stratagemes of Envy. To withstand this common foe of prosperity, I labor (by
the grauest men's directions) to acquaint every man with the virtues of his
vocation: but principally I do beseech God to bless them with his fear, the
beginning of wisdom, and confusion of Envy and all wickedness, unto whose
gracious protection I humbly commit your right honorable Lordships, and all
other godly Maiestrates whatsoever: at whose commandment I faithfully remain.

George Whetstons.

Induction to the Reader.
ALbeit, that peace is a most precious blessing of God, a large testimony of a
gracious Prince, and the perfect image of a well governed common wealth: yet
the evil, which abuse whatsoever is good (as the Spider draws honey from the
purest flower) of these good causes, beget such foul effects, as God in reward
of his blessings, is dishonored, persecuted, and blasphemed. The gracious
Prince, for his or her protection, is neither dutifully reverenced, nor truly
obeyed: and what is sown for public benefit, grows to the ruin of the
Countries prosperity. Upon the experience of the good government of Athens
and other flourishing Commonwealthes corrupted, or to speak more properly
confounded, by such vile persons, as their principal Cities fostered:
warranted the grave Socrates, being demanded what increased the wealth, of a
Commonwelth, to answer, that peace was the inricher thereof: being demanded
on the contrary part, the chief cause of poverty, in a Common wealth,
semblably answered that peace was the mean thereof. Being asked his reasons,
said, that in the time of peace Arms give place to Laws, and good Laws
administreth both plenty and prosperity, to such Countries as receive and
obey them: on the other side he alleged, that wealth the blessing of peace,
bread many vices in her own bowels, of the nature of Mothes in cloth, or
canker rust in iron, which by the consuming of their suckers destroy
themselves: and questionles the wheel of peace painted on either side with
these five spokes, Peace brings plenty, Plenty causes pride, Pride raises
envy, Envy sows sedition, and Sedition hatcheth poverty, is rather the
devise of some Philosophers settled judgment, than the toy of a Painters
variable fancy: the Embleame, so truly portrayeth the change of all happy
gouernements. But some more quick of wit, then in discretion perfect, will
suggest, that where Law has her full voice, these Cankers can never grow to
the consumption of the heart: to which question I thus answer, that Law may
have a free passage, and yet Justice scanted of her due course: for Law will
not, or cannot punish an apparent trespass without an open presentment: and
Justice would chasten the concealed fault, if she could command the Law, and
such is the cunning, of pollitike Law breakers, that where the ignorant are
hanged for stealing of a sheet, they will have the Law to strengthen them, in
the robbing of a man's inhearitance, and therefore is Law likened to a back
sword, eadged and sharp, to chasten the simple offender, and blunt when the
subtle should be corrected. Upon which reason, quoth Diogines, what
avails it to have profitable Laws, when the good reads them not, and the
evil corrupt, or care not for them: but although Diogines spoke truly as
touching the natural humors of men, for unto the good their Consciences are in
steed of Laws, and with the lewd, no bridle is a restraint from evil: Yet
grounding my reasons upon larger authorities, I grant Necessity inuentris of
all policies has found good Laws so necessary, as I hold those Realms,
Regions, Cities, and Towns which are not governed by Laws, rather to be
forrestes of wild beasts, than places habitable for men: for there where
Laws are musled, Justice goes masked, might mastereth right, Theft is reputed
honest gain, and murder lawful revenge: Treasou would enter the privy
Chamber, and to be short the wealthy, should go to wrack, and the inferior
would order, until they had disordered all good government. These open
outrages, are suppressed by the pains of Law, although the awe of
chastisement, cannot keep some rascal persons from offending in secreat.

Heraclites says, absque legibus nullo pacto possit ciuitas esse incolumis,
sed absque menibus possit, without Laws a City by no means can be in
saftie, but without walls it may. And Forteskew says, Lex est sanctio sancta
Iubens honesta, and prohibens contraria. Law is an vncorrupt holiness
commanding things that are honest, and forbidding those that are contrary.

Therefore I do reverence good Lawgiuers, and (as divine Plato says) repute
all Laws, that are made for the wealth and sauegarde of mankind, to be of
GOD, although they be devised by men. This only lacks to set forth the
glory of good Laws, and to possess the Common wealth with their true
benefits: The administrators of Laws, are nothing so careful to find out
the offender as they are ready to pronounce Sentence of the offense: agreeing
with an old tale of a Viccar of Croyden, who of a piece of his Vicreage made
an Alehouse, and there kept an harlotte: for in those days the Law of the
Church forbadde Priests to marry, and yet the awe of hell could not subdew
their lusts: this smoge Chaplain, mindful of the lesson, long before given
vnto^ the Clergy, Si non cast, tamen Caute: as he thought to take away all
suspicion of his misbehauiour, made a vehement Sermon against Lechery, and
agrauated the vengeaunces of that sin, with all the authorities, which he
could recite in the Scripture: earnestly exhorting his Parishioners, to
cleanse the town of that damnable and filthy iniquity: whereupon one of the
Churchwardens (that knew the Viccar had violated his vow) cried out Master
Viccar if you will give us example, by purging of the Church-yarde, we will
be careful to cleanse the rest of the Parish: the Viccar smelling the meaning
of the Churchwarden, pleasantly to huddle up the matter, replied that the
Churchwarden spoke without reason: for quoth he, the Church-yarde is the
appointed place to receive the most filthy Carrion of the world, and withal
wished the people not to mistake him, for he only spoke of the sin, but
meddled not with the sinner. A great part of the mean officers of Justice at
this day, do as the Viccar said.

The Penal Laws (which are many, and yet no more than are necessary: Vice
is grown to so great a strength) are solemnly pronounced in every Sise,
Session, and Leete, the offenders many, and many times present at the
repetition of their Trespasses, and yet seldom or never be presented, that
they may feel the scourge dew to their Trespasses, when the Trespasser, by his
fault is as well known to the Justice, Jury, Steward, or other officer, as to
his own conscience which offends: and how comes this bar of Justice?
forsooth by this straining of courtesy: the Judge will punish but what the
Jury finds: the Jury will find but what is presented, few will present
without inforcement: and thus good Justice, which was wont to be so quick, as
men portrayed her with a pair of wings, is now so slow, as she needs a
spur. And she that was likened unto fire, which being natural, both
cherishes and consumes, by the coldness of men's Conscienses, may now be
compared to painted fire, which neither comfort the good, nor wastes the
lewd.

But this defect is not so properly to be applied to Justice, as to the
infirmity of her administrators, who (as Gordian says) ought to be so free
from partiality, as in the service of Justice, they must forget the affection
of a Father, a husband, a kinseman, and a friend. This Gordian was a grave
Senator of Rome, who in the time of the dissolute and beastly reign of the
most vicious Emperor Heliogabalus, made suit to be discharged of the
authorities which he bore in the common wealth: not for that he grew weary of
the services which he did unto his Country, but in that he abhorred to
slander the reverence dew unto a Judge, with iniust sentenses, which the
privileges of the wicked, would enforce him unto. He would very often say,
that a good Common wealths man, applies all the parts of a well proportioned
creature, whose hands are bound behind him: his eyes are no less occupied to
pry into the doings of the lewd, then his ears attentive, to hear the
complaints of the good: his tongue is mute neither for fear, nor favor, and
by his leagues he presents a continual travel to do his country service,
his hands bound behind him, shows him as well bound unto all these offices,
as free from briberies: and doubtless the authorized Maiestrate which is thus
diligent, and no less free from corruption, shall as well be busied to chasten
the offenses which he finds himself, as to punish such as be discovered by
others. Truly there be a great number of right worthy Maiestrates in this
happy government of England, who with the eyes, ears, tongue, and legs of
Gordians common wealths man, both foresee the actions of naughty persons, and
provide to frustrate their determinations, and as the Amners of Gods blessings,
especially bestowed upon this happy Realm, since the first hour of her
sacred Majesty's most prosperous reign, have both stopped the passages of
foreign practices and civil conspiracies, and without bloodsheading, only
armed with divine and moral virtues, overcomes these enemies with their own
swords, as a concaue Mirror daunteth the assailer with his proper weapon, so
that all Nations by the impressions of their own sorrows, as well as through
knowledge of our happiness, with the spirit they admyre her Majesty and good
Maiestrates prudent government, do envy the peace, plenty, and protection
of her inferior subjects.

Now some will say, by the searching wisdoms of her Majesty and grave
senate, prosperity, in all her dominions is administered, and the enemies
thereof, of their purposes are defeated, and refer all this to a needless
purpose. There are rare monuments, to eter^ise the virtues of the Queen,
Counsel, and chief Maiestrates, and in the rest no notable vice generally to
be reproved. But with sorrow I report, and their doings approoues it: Vice
is as generally embraced of the multitude, as virtue is especially cherished of
the better sort: since the case so stands, who will not say, that that
buylding is out of order, whose spares are rotten, whose windows are broken,
and whose roof is uncovered: although the groundworke be strong, and
principal timbers sound. Surely a happy common wealth, resembles a fair
building, the foundation whereof is the Prince, the principals are the chief
Maiestrates, the sparres, the Inferior officers, the windows, the Nobility
and Gentilitie: the Tiles that covers the same, are the Citisens and
multitude: and the fair rooms within the building, are the liberties of the
Clergy, who are privileged to blame sin in all estates, but the punishment
appertains to the vengeance of God, and sword of the Prince: all which
parts firmly united together, do strengthen one another, and the corruption
of the least, by the sufferance of Time, will turn to the confusion of the
greatest, and therefore by the Law of Nature, the meanest person, in his
vocation is sworn to travel for the public benefit of his Country. It is
no excuse sufficient for him that is not authorized to chasten offenses, to
suffer offenders to live under his nose vnpresented, that the Maiestrate may
punish, nor yet no good discharge of his duty, that is authorized to leave an
offense unpunished, until information be given by others, when his own
knowledge is able to condemn the offender: every man is bound for his own
safety to discover an evil liver, and every man that has authority, is
bound both to correct the offense, and to enquire after the offender. If
every man in his calling would thus truly do the office of a good Common
wealths man: Envy and all evil, would be easily withstoode: men would
soon look into the duties of their proper vocation, for fear that others
looked into the abuses thereof.

I have with the authority of the wise and learned, set down what is
needful for every man to consider of his calling, if they will strive
against virtue, and the credit of their vocations, they are worthy of double
punishment, both for the fault, and for wilfulness, being warned of which, I
hope the godly reader will be admonished.

MIRROVR. Lib. 3.
CHAP. 1.
Of the excellency of Royal dignities, and duties of a good King, and of the
short reigns, and violent ends of Tyrants.

THE dignity Royal, is so great and holy, as kings that are protectors and
defenders of humane society, imitate the providence of God, whose office and
action is to govern al things, and therefore rightly and properly are they
called Uicars and Ministers, of that most sovereign puissant and universal
gouerner. And he himself calls them gods: figuring in that sacred name two
hie charges, the one that kings crowned with so glorious a name, should imitate
God, whose lieuetenants they are: in their religion, Justice and government:
the other that subjects knowing the honor that God gives unto kings, should
adore and worship them with all possible reverence. S. Paul says he that
resists the ordinance of the king, resists the ordinance of God. Look what
Romans 13.
dignity, and instruction is given unto the king, the Lord vouchsafes to say
that he bestows the same himself, as in these passages of Scripture. By me
kings reign: Harken then Prou. 8. Wisd. 6.
you kings for power is given you of the Lord. David thus sings, the Lord
teaches the kings hands to manage Arms, Psalm. 144.
and his fingers to war. And to the like effect are many other authorities.
Porrus king of the Indians being taken in battle, Alexander demanded of him
how he would be entertained, Porrus answered, as a king. Alexander demanded
again if he would say any thing else: Porrus said no, for all honor is
contained in this word king. This name king, was held of so great reverence
among the people of many nations, as the Indians, and the Persians worshipped
their kings as divine Idols, and held the encounter happy, if by chance they
saw their king The Ethiopians so reverenced their king, as they adjudged him
worthy of death, that did but spit in their kings presence: The Poets
celebrated Iubiter more by the name of king, than any other title. It is
wonderful with what patience the Romans and other Nations suffered the
tyranny of their vicious Emperors and barbarous kings, and if by Gods Justice
any of them were cut off, the uncivil multitude were the instruments thereof:
for the grave and wise senators were seldom guilty of their destructions. At
this day the Turks so reverence their Emperors commandments as they execute
themselves, if their Emperor pronounce the sentence. Christian kings are
nothing so severe toward their subjects, but Christian subjects are far
less obedient to their kings: well, evil will fall upon his house that
resists against the ordinance of the king, for he that resists receives
unto himself damnation: Yea albeit the king be Romans 1^.
a tyrant, so long as his commandments are not to the dishonor of God. He
that resists because the king is a tyrant It is not lawful to resist a tyrant
increases his sins, and doubleth Gods wrath, who sends Tyrants to punish
the sins of the wicked, who says, I will do vengeance on my enemies, by my
enemies, God (says Job) makes the hypocrite to reign for the sins of the
people. In O see God speaks thus. I will give thee a king in my fury: And in
Esaias, Assure is the Rod, and staff of my fury. By these and many other
testimonies it is apparent, that God sets kings in their kingdoms, by they
good or evil, and will not have them removed at their subjects pleasure. A
man that places an evil steward over his house in no case will allow, that
his servant shall put him out of office, for that such boldness would lessen
the authority of their master, who has the prerogative to place and displace
his officers: much more presumption is it if subjects displace their prince,
who has a greater power over them, than a master over his servant: for the
master in some cases shall answer the suit of his bondman, but the king in no
case de Iure shall answer a trespass done to his subject: for his prerogative
is above the law, although many good kings suffer themselves to be governed by
their good Laws. God sets them in their kingdoms, and God alone will have
the authority to remove them. Saul unjustly persecuted David, yet David having
advantage to slay him, said to Abisai distroy him not, for who can lay his
hands of the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? And he further said, The
Lord keep me from laying my hands of the Lords anointed. In ancient times
kings not only governed the common wealth, but also took charge of the
Sacrifices and Ceremonies. The Hebrews anointed their kings with the self
same Oil that they did their hie Priests: which proves that kings are
sacred, and who so ever lays violent hands upon them, cannot but be guilty
of Irriligion. We see dignity of Royal government, which depends upon
one sovereign head to be lively figured in man himself: in whom reason
governs as sovereign Queen. The world it self, where above our eyes, we
behold infinite bodies and motions, which hinders not one an others course:
below we see a Sea, that continually threateneth the earth, and yet
ouerfloweth it not. The earth being very weighty and massiue, we may perceive
to be set, or rather hanging in the air, and yet stirs not, all which would
soon be out of order, if it were not governed by the wisdom of one only
God. Even so a kingdom, which as Plato defines, is composed of a mighty
number of people, and as the proverb goes, So many men, so many judgments,
would soon have come to naught, To^ (...) tot sentent^ae
through the covetous desire to reign, and disdain to obey, if there were not
one sovereign commander of these infinite affections: which proves that
Monarchia which is the government of one, is far more sacred, excellent and
perfect Monarchia, the most worthy government.
then Aristocratia, Democratia, Oligarchia, Laocratia, or any other compound
government: for it is a harder matter to find out many, than one that is
good. The contrariety of affections, where there are many heads, can hardly
but bring forth envy, division, and to conclude continual dissension.
Considering then the worthiness of Monarchia, and the majesty of a king,
obedience is not only required of a subject, but the danger that follows,
counsels and forbids so much as to murmr against princes. There is an
ancient sentence, that kings have wide ears, and out-streached hands, which
is applied to this purpose, that princes hear what offenders do in secreat:
and can take vengance a far off, for the gain of a princes favor is so
great, as men to compass the same, give knowledge of most hidden things: The
preacher says, A byrd of the air shall bewray thy voice, and with her feathers
she shall betray thy words, which concern princes: all which is but a moral
warning, to counsel men to Eccles 10.
say nothing, or nothing but good of princes, when their knowledge searches
their subjects words, and their anger is a very death. But albeit, this
prerogative be given unto a Royal king, to do what he pleases, and the
duty of a subject, restrains him from saying what he thinks. Yet where
their murmuring proceeded more of oppression than malice, many good kings, and
some tyrants have borne with the inconsiderate words of their subjects.

King Antigonus, lying in his Tent, in the dead of the night heard a Soldier
to murmr against him, of whom Antigonus took no other revenge, but softly in
an unknown voice willed him to go further from the Kings tent, in the end
he might not hear him. The Athenian Ambassadors having audience of king
Philip of Macedone, after their Embassage delivered, king Philip asked if they
would any thing else, yea quoth one of them named Democrates (who knew that
Philip hated the Athenians) we would that thou would hang thy self by the
throat. But king Philip contrary to all expectation, mildely answered, You
shall tell the Athenians, that he that has endured these words is much more
modest than the sages of Athens, which want discretion to govern their
tongues. The tyrant Dennis asked the Philosopher Plato, what was said of him in
the Accademy of Athens. Plato boldly answered, that they were not so idle in
Athens, as to talk either of him, or his doings: Dennis knew that Pla^o
covertly blamed his vises, and therefore with great patiencie received his
grave reprehension: and truly in this clemency of pardoning, the discreet
liberty of the subjects reprehension, good princes many times see the faults
that they desire to amend in themselves, the forenamed Philip, said it was in
his power to make a man say well or evil of him: deriuing his reason from this
occasion: Nycanor speaking evil of him, Philip was moved to punish him: nay
quoth Philip, I know Nycanor is not the worst man in my realm, and so sent to
know if Nycanor wanted any thing, and understanding he was in great poverty,
in steed of chastisement, Philip gave him a rich present, and presently the
accusar brought the king word, that Nycanor spoke much good of him.
Oppression, Poverty, and such like temptations will move the tongue to blunder
forth the griefs of the heart, and questionles in such ouersights, clemency
beseems a king: and in remedying of his subjects injuries, he doubleth his
renown.

Pontanus says, that liberty and clemency makes Pont. de princ.
Princes to resemble God, whose property is to do good unto all, and
mercifully to forgive those that do amiss. By liberallitie Caesar woone
Pompeius soldiers to be his friends, and by clemency obtained such reverence
as in memory Plut. de v^. Ces.
thereof the people erected a Temple. Mamyllus asked Caesar what thing he had
done, wherein he held himself most honored, I swear unto thee Mamillus by
the immortal gods (said Caesar) that I have done nothing whereof I hold my
self so much honored and happy, as for that I have lyberallie rewarded
those, that have served me, and mercifully have forgiven such as have offended
me, words worthy of Caesar, and beseeming every Royal Prince: for in these two
virtues greatly consist their honor and safety. When Cicero saw Caesar set up
Pompeis Images, he said, Behold, Caesar sets up Pompeis Images, that his
own may stand the surer. Ciceroes wisdom foresaw, that clemency works
love in subjects, and safety in Princes: notwithstanding with this sweet and
mild usage, the majesty of a Prince requires a severe grauetie, for the
first without the last, gives subjects liberty without fear: and the last
without the first, fear without love. A reverend and assured countenance, is
the chief Grace, and not the least virtue in a prince, for of a prince me^
behold the countenance, and of a common person the apparel. The proverb is,
that in the Face of a prince, both life and death is settled, that is severe
gravity, with a mild amiablenes, to chasten and cherish as occasion serves,
which moves a loving fear, and not a fearful love in subjects. The people of
Meroe an Island upon Nylus, elect him for their Prince, Pet. mes de reb. mend.
lib. 4.
that has the best countenance: imagining that ye magnanimity of the mind is
discovered in ye majesty of the face. King Demetrius, had so honorable and
sweet a presence, as no painter durst undertake his counterfeit: for in
beholding of him, amiablenes, terror, and mild gravity, wrought such sudden
impressions, as the beholders at one instant were moved to love, reverence and
fear him. The most worthy Romain Marius, had such a reverend presence, as
being prisoner with his enemy Sylla, a french man was sent to kill him: who
entering the prison, with a drawn sword, was so amassed with Marius grave and
furious countenance, as he returned and left the prison door open: and by this
means Marius saved his life. Crassus in the like danger made the Axe to fall
from the executioners hand: with these we may very well sample our renowned
Queen Elizabeth when ye archtraitor and desperate Athiest Parry, came with a full
determination to have slain her majesty with his dagger, and had place and
opportunity as he wished (test se ipso) ye majesty of her countenance, made him
to lose his resolution. Of ye contrary part, ye deformity of cou^tena^ce, has
disgraced ye kingly qualities of a number: and for example of late years king
Ferdinando of Spain, a prince both discret and wise, yet of shape and
countenance ugly and deformed, this king upon a festiual Pet. Mes. lib. 4.
day, accompaning ye sacrament at Barcellona, at v^ares a Spanyard stroke him
such a sound blow upon the neck, with a short sword, as had it not been for
a great chain of gold, he had beheaded him. The Spaniard was taken: and to
learn if he had any confederates, he was put unto the torture: but for all the
torment they could lay upon him, he would confess no otherwise, but that
the Phisnomie and evil grace of the king, moved him mortally to hate him. But
albeit this be a rare, and too extreme an example, Yet sure a royal Prince
resembles the sun, whose bright beams comfort every creature, and being
darkened with stormy clouds, spreads heaviness upon the whole earth.
Learning is a great beauty, and a most necessary virtue in a Prince, for
learning contains the grave censures of wise men, and wisdom is the
strength, and scepter of a Prince. God bad king Solomon ask what he should
give him, and Solomon Chron. 2. 1.
only asked wisdom and knowledge, that he might worthelie Aul. Gel. lib. 15.
3.
judge the people. Plutarke and Aulus Gelius recite, that when Alexander was
borne, king Philip his father wrote in this manner unto Aristotle: I thank not
God so much for that I have a son, as for that he is borne in the time of
Aristotle etc. to whose instruction Philip committed him: and truly his worthy
actions bewrayed the wisdom of his education. This Alexander showed the love
he bare to learning when hearing that Aristotle had written certain books of
natural Philosophy: he wrote unto him in this manner. Truly Aristotle thou
deceiuest my desire in publishing of this speculatiue philosophy: which I
thought should properly have honored my self: for know thou I had rather
exceed all men in knowledge and learning, than in riches and dominions,
Antigonus king of Macedone, to be instructed in wisdom and knowledge by his
letter thus saluted the Philosopher Zenon.

The king Anty gonus wishes health to the Philosopher Zenon, I know well that
I pass thee in riches and favors of fortune: but I must confess that thou
far passest me in the true felicity, which consists in the knowledge,
discipline, and study of the lyberal sciences. Alexander before named, Plut. de
vi^. Alex.
so loved Homers Illyads, as he appointed the magnifice^t Iuel box of Darius to
keep the same. Caesar the best Captain that ever was, by his singular learning
raised a question, whether he was more honored with the lance or the pen.
Certainly they be both so necessary as without the knowledge and use of either
a royal prince is maimed. The multitude (as Sophocles says) is a beast with
many heads: and therefore to govern such a monster requires many policies:
in which the works of learned men will liberally instruct a prince, but to
acquire perfect knowledge, the principal induction is the fear of the Lord,
which (as Solomon says) is the beginning of wisdom. The prince that will
have good subjects, ought chiefly to instruct them with the example of his
own good life: for, for the most part, the manners of the people incline to
the affections of the Prince. The noble prince ought to shake the flatterer
from his ear, and to raise the oppressed that fall at his feet, for the one
lies in wait to disgrace the good, and the other by opening their wrongs
discover the bad. Hard and bitter words of a prince, is the cause of much
murmuring, and coffeehouse in the subjects, where the prince is noted to be
temperate, no man will be so hardy as to demand a wicked and vile request. O
happy art thou Marcus Cato (says Cicero) of whom no man dare demand a wicked
thing. He is worthy of a kingdom and sovereign rule, and gives hope of a
good prince, that pursues the wicked, hates the intemperate, rejects the
liars, and as the pestilence flies the counsels of voluptuous persons, for who
so effects the desires of such counselors his infancy will be shameless, his
youth effeminated, and his age infamous. The preacher says, well is thee O thou
land, whose king is come of nobles, and whose princes eat in due season, for
necessity, and not for lust king Lamuels mother, F^les. ^0.
counsaileth to give the king no wine, nor princes strong drink least in being
drunken they forget the law, and administration of justice.

When king Alexander became a drunken Epicure, in his drunkenness he slew his
dear friends, and by misgouernment hastened his own death. King Balthafar in
his general Daniel. 5.
banquet to his thousand Lords, when he was drunken with wine, commanded his
vessels of gold and silver (which his father Nabuchodonosor, had taken out of
the Temple at Jerusalem) to be brought unto him, that he, his wives and
concubines might drink in them, in contempt of the living Lord. but in the
midst of his banquet the vengance of God, with a visible hand wrote his
destruction upon the wall Dronkennes contains all vices, and the least vice is
a great blemish in a prince. Temperance in diet, bredeth sobriety in manners:
and reposed words are the glory of a Iuditial throne: The sound safety of a
king is in the cherishment of religion, and maintenance of his Laws, for the
one upon pain of damnation, keeps subjects in loyal obedience, and the
other for fear of temporal punishment brideleth the dispositions of the
wicked: it is not enough for the honor and majesty of a prince, to administer
the virtue of all these virtues to his subjects alone, but as Xenophon in his
Cyropedia writes, a prince well quallified, ought so to use his enemies, as
his enemies may become his friends. Pompey the great, having vanquished
Tygranus king of the Armenians, he established Tygranus Ant. Verd. lib. 4
again in his kingdom: saying that it was as Magnanimous a thing, to give a
king his kingdom as to take it from him: but the magnificent clemency of
Philip Maria Duke of Mylaine, toward his vanquished enemies, deserves more A
worthy example for princes.
than mortal honor. This Philip Maria, by victory in a battle upon the
Sea, took Alfonsus king of Aragon and Sicile, with two of his brethren,
Thierry king of Nauare, the Prince of Tarent, and three hundred men of great
reputation, all which he sent back freely into their own countries, and where
by the Law of Arms, he might have taken great ransomes of these Estates, such
was the honor of his mind, as he gave unto every one of them rich presents,
The senate of Rome delivered, 2700. Carthagenian prisoners without ransom, I
could resite many of the like examples, but small persuasions instruct the
wise, the virtuous desire glory rather by their own Actions, than by the
examples of other men: And above all men, a Royal Prince ought to be bewtified
both with divine and heroycall virtues: for that the names, dispositions, and
doing of the meanest princes are regestred in the Capitols of the whole world:
writers so narrowly search the doings of Princes, as the prudent Emperor
Alexander surnamed Seuerus, would oftentimes say, that he stood in more fear
of one writer, than of a hundred soldiers, for that the wound of a pen
remains after death, when the sharp stroke of a lance bereaueth a man but
of life: it is not only convenient that a Prince do exercise piety, Justice,
Temperance, and all other offices of virtue, for his honor and good renown:
but it is needful that he do the same for his own safety: for albeit there
be no penal Law to chasten a Royal king, yet Tyranny is so odious to God and
man, as we seldom read of any that reign long, and of as few that die
peaceably. A number of whose ignominious deaths, briefly to touch I hold not
impertinent, that other Princes may by the terror thereof, be feared and
warned from Tyranny.

The Tyrant Abimelech slew 70. of his brethren, and in the end, a woman from a
hie tower tombled a stone upon his Tyrants over the Jews. Abimelech. Saul.
head: the wound being mortal, he willed his Page to run him through with
his sword, that it might not be said a woman slew him.

Saul that slew the Sacrificatures, to the number of 85. as also the wives and
young children of Nobe, upon an overthrow in battle slew himself.

Athalia the mother of Ochosias, to revenge her sons death, Athalia. Reg. 4. 11.
slew all the race of the house of Judah except Ioas, who (saved by Iehosaba) was
crowned in the temple, and the wicked Athalia was slain at the entry of the
Palace. 2. Chro. 22. 23.


Achas an Idolatrer and Paricide, was delivered unto the Achas.
hands of the king of Asiria. The like vengeance was inflicted upon the Tyrant
Manasses.

The miserable vengeance that lighted upon the seed and people of Jeroboam, is
set down by the Prophet Abias, how Jeroboam.
that the dogs should eat those that died in the City, and the fowls of the
air those that died in the field, which threatenings were soon executed, for
Nadab succeeding both in the principallitie and tyranny, was slain by Baasa,
who according Nadab. Reg. 3. 15.
to the words of the Prophet, rooted out the whole race of Jeroboam.

Baasa was slain by Zamri, which Zamri left not a kinseman Baasa. Reg. 3. 16.
or known friend of Baasaes alive.

Zamri having reigned but seven days, was pursued as a Zamri. Reg. 3. 16.
murderer, who seeing the City to be taken, set fire of the royal palace,
and so burned himself.

Achab and his wicked wife Iesabell, (who caused Naboth Achab. Iesabell.
to be slain, to be possessed of his Uineyarde) according to the prophecy of
Elia, the dogs that licked up the blood of Naboth, also licked up Achabs, and
of Iesabell the dogs devoured flesh and all: and further, the vengeance of
Jeroboam reigned upon Achabs seed, his son Ocozias died of a hurt, Ocozias.
Reg. 3. 21. 22. Reg. 4. 9. 10. 11
and for that he sought succor of the Devil to be healed, Ioran his son was
slain by Iehu, who by his letters caused the princes of Israel to slay the
70. sons of Achab, which Iehu also rooted out the false prophets of Baal.

Zacharia reigned but six months, and was slain for his Zacharia.
tyranny.

Sellum who slew Zacharia reigned but one month, and Sellum.
was slain by Manahem.

Pekahia the son of Manahem was a Tyrant, and was Pekahia.
slain by Pekah.

Pekah was slain by Hoseas, and Hoseas was lead captive Pekah. Hoseas. Reg. 4.
15. 17.
by Salmanasar into Asiria, this was the confusion of the Tyrants of Israel.

The effeminate Sardanapalus by the sharp war of two Tyrants of Asiria. Just.
lib. 1^
of his princes Belochus and Arbaces, fired his palace, and in the same burned
himself and his concubines.

Senacherib by the Angel of the Lord had his army overthrown, Senacherib.
and 185000. of his host were slain, and he fleeing unto Niniuy, was in the
temple of his idols slain by his two Reg. 4. 19.
sons Adramalech, and Sarasar.

Ptholomy the thunder bolt that slew Seleuchus, and married Tyrants of Egypt.
Ptholomy the thunder bolt.
his sister Ars^a to sley her two sons, was himself in most reproachful
manner slain by Brennus and the Frenchmen.

Ptholomy Philopator, so called in mockery, because he slew his father and his
mother, lived and died in great slavery, Pthol. Philop.
while his Curtisane Agathoclea, and the baude Oenantus governed the affairs
of his kingdom.

Ptholomy Phiscon so called, because of his gluttony, for his cruelty called
the great Tyrant, who slew his brothers Pthol. Phiscon.
children, and two of his own sons, and in the College of Alexandria burned
a great number of young scholars, as he lived he died like a beast.

Ptholomy Lamirus, or the babbler, and Ptholomy Auletus, Pthol. Lami. Pthol.
Auletus.
so called for his flattery, were both cruel Tyrants, and had dishonorable
and beastly ends.

The ungrateful Ptholomy Dionisius, that stroke off the head of his Governor
Pompeius, was for practicing against Pthol. Dionis.
Caesar overthrown and drowned in Nylus.

Esaias speaking of the plagues that should reign upon Babylon, figured how
odious the Persian Tyrants were in Tyrants of Persia.
Gods sight, upon whom his vengeance continuallye lighted.

Cyrus and his whole army were slain by Queen Thomiris. Cyrus.


The cruel Cambises slew his brother Smirdis through envy that he should reign
after him, and by his sword falling Cambises.
forth of his sheath, slew himself.

The Tyrant Xerxes that slew his brother Masistes, was slain by his uncle
Artabanus. Xerxes.


Ochus slew fourscore of his brethren, and in the end was Ochus.
slain by one of his Captains named Bagoas, and his carcass thrown to the
dogs.

The Monarkie of Alexander and the Gretians, together Vide.
with the tyranny, and violent ends of his successors, is sufficiently shown
before in the Conquests of envy.

Nicocrates put to death most of the principal Citizens, Tyrants of Bithinia.
Nicocrates.
and was himself slain by Leander.

Leander succeeded Nicocrates both in rule and tyranny, Leander.
and therefore was put into a sack of leather and thrown into the Sea.

Zela, Prusias, and Pharaces, all Tyrants, were violently Zela etc.
slain.

Aristotimus the Archtyrant was so odious, as the people Aristotimus.
slew him in the temple of Jupiter, and by the judgment of the people, his
wife and two daughters ready to be married, were strangled.

Phraates King of the Parthians, who slew thirty of his brethren, and
strangled his father, had his throat cut by his Phraates.
bastard.

Eucratides King of the Bactrians, slew his father, drove Bucratides.
his Coach through his blood, and caused his carcass to be thrown unto
beasts, but by the vengeance of God in one day he lost his kingdom, his own
life, and the lives of his whole race.

Archias, Philippus, Leontidas, and Hyppias, cruel Tyrants Archias.
of Thebes, were all four slain by Pelopidas and his associates.

The Kings of Sicile were generally such Tyrants as they Tyrants of Sicilie.
are specially thus registered, The Tyrants of Sicile, of whom, horror and
cruelty continually attended, and as it appears in the question between the
Tyrant Dionisius the elder, and the Orator Damocles, the end of a Tyrant is
not only violent, but his life is wretched and miserable, so that leaving to
show the infamous ends of Caligula, Nero, Heliogabalus, and other Roman
Tyrants, as also those of our age, I will conclude this Chapter with a summarie
of Damocles history, that princes seeing the best estate of Tyrants to be
miserable, may be counseled to hate tyranny as much as they are bound to love
their honor and safety.

Damocles on a time praised the riches of Dionisius, and Cic. de tusc. lib. 5.
maintained that the sun never shined upon a more happy prince, whereupon
Dionisius to make him partaker of this felicity, made him to be set upon a
magnificent bed, caused the tables to be covered and furnished with vessels of
gold and silver, and in them most delicate viandes, and to attend upon him, he
appointed many beautiful pages, poudered with most comfortable perfumes, and
upon every side of this mignion Damocles, all manner of sweet music was
placed, but in the midst of his glory, Dionisius caused a naked sword with
the point directly upon Damocles head, to be fastened only with the hair of a
horse tail, who suddenly forgetting the felicity that he so highly praised,
humbly beseeched the Tyrant to deliver him from it, which scourge of
conscience, or rather living death never punishes the good Prince, but as the
Psalmist says, He lays him down in peace, for he knows the Lord will make
him dwell in Psalm. 4.
safety.

CHAP. 2.
Of the hye calling of the Nobility, the worthiness of their service in the
common wealth, as also the general misery that follows their disloyalty.

THere needs no other authority to approve the hye calling of the
Nobility, then the judgment of our own eyes. In matters that concern not
public disturbance, or manifest breach of the law, they are not called to so
sharp a reckoning as inferior subjects. No process at the common law (unless in
matters of the Crown) can charge the person from the degree of a Baron
upwards: the reason is, the law always intends them to be actually in the
service of their prince and country, and therefore necessary that their
persons be free from particular arrests: yet for that right may be administered
to all persons, no man is created a Baron, unless he may dispend Sir Thomas
Smith de repub. Angl.
a thousand marks by the year, which shall be liable to his debts of record
(unless in some special cases.) Virtue which laboreth to crown her disciples
with honor, has authorized the absolute Prince to raise the meanest subject to
the highest degree of subjects: neither ought the ancient Nobility to envy
the rising of an inferior subject that well deserves, when the original of
their own honor was by the like creation: for Dukes, Marquises, Earls,
Uicounts, and Barons, have their beginning by creation, through the virtue and
good service of those whom the Prince holds worthy of such honor: and for
their worthiness the same is hereditorie (at the least) in their heir males,
which honor, neither for poverty, or any trespass under the degree of felony
they can forfaite: their very names of honor declare, that they are created for
the great strength and necessary service of the common wealth. Dux a Duke
signifies a Captain, a chiefetaine, and principal doer: the Uerbe Duco has
many honorable significations, as to lead, to govern, to allure, to judge,
etc. Comes an Earl signifies in effect imitation, as Patriae laudis comites,
followers of their fathers virtue and renown. Cooper Dict. Call^pin.
Our English word Baron is taken from this word Barus, which signifies an
Elephant, or of Barro a strong man, he is created to be a man of chosen
strength and defense unto his prince and country. These personadges are girded
always with a sword, to testify that their office is to withstand the
foreign and domesticke enemy. Their service is so necessary, as regal
policy has thought it convenient to honor the eldest son with the fathers
dignity, that as the general law possesses him with his fathers lands, so
(through a desire to further advance his house) this special favor may work
in him his fathers virtues. Noble men are for the most part their princes
Lieutenants in the several counties and provinces of their Realms, and
therefore the heroycall virtues specified in the former Chapter are requisite
in a noble man: by their offices they are the leaders and the rulers of the
common people, whose natures are to run headlong Dispositions of the people.
with a snaffle, and to go never a whit with a sharp bridle: they have no
skill, and less can away with the lordly looks: gentle vsadge wins them to
love, and discret correction drives them to obeie: one hasty word or proud
countenance setleth more hatred among the multitude, then the hanging of ten
men by a temperate judgment: it is therefore requisite says the grave
Counselor Sir Anthony de Gueuarra, that the Rulers of the multitude be wise
to find their variable humors, patient to bear their uncivil behauiors,
temperate to punish their offenses, and diligent to praise their good
demerites: for if they be governed with liberty without chastisement, they
will soon grow insolent: and again, if with severity without gentleness,
their malice will be incurable. The common people are so diverse to please. As
when Demosthenes was banished by the people of Athens, in his departure he
turned toward the City, and made this exclamation: O Pallas, how is it
possible that thou bear such love unto these three beasts, the night Owl,
the Dragon, and the common people: if I had known the envy, the fear, the
false reports, and unjust accusations that they must sustain that govern the
uncivil multitude, if of two I must needs have done the one, I would sooner
have broken my neck, then have had to do in the common wealth of Athens.
Besides this wisdom in government, a special valiantness is required in a
noble man, and three encouragements he has to be resolute, the first is his
forwardness makes the whole army to follow, the second is, he is honored
with the whole glory of the victory, and the last (which is more sharp then
death) the shame of a cowardly overthrow, principally reprocheth the chief
leader: the fear of this made Caesar desperately to run upon the fierce
Neruij, and by this little care of Plutarke de vit. Caesar.
life he recovered an honorable victory, even when the Romans were at the
point to run away: I might add infinite of the like examples, but to a
needelesse purpose, for that the greatest part of the Nobility are naturallye
valiant, in so much, as Ferdinando the prudente King of Arragon would
vsuallye say, if Ambition and Envy were as free from the Nobility as
cowardlinesse, Princes should be quiet at home, and fortunate abroad. Those
two are in deed the woorst humors in the Nobility, and the mortallest
pestilence in a Common wealth. Ambition and Envy of the Nobility soon arm
the common people to Rebellion, whose civil frayes fill the grave far faster
then the hoatest plague. The Athenians had no other policy to withstand
these venomous passions, but by a Law called Ostracisme, at the choice of the
The Law of Ostracisme.
people yearly to banishe one of their principal Noble men for ten years:
by this means they thought to keep under the Ambition and Envy of the
Nobility, but the fondness of the people made this law a scourge for the
virtuous, and a ladder for the vicious, for the ungrateful people banished
Themistocles the valiant, Aristides the just, and Simon the most renowned, and
suffered the base Hiperbolus and others of the like condition to step into
their places, until they had displaced all good order.

The Athenians (as the wisest of men will sometimes err) were ouerseene in
priuiledging the common people with this waightye judgment, who love they
wot not what, and hate they wot not why. The general Law of Nations is
far more indifferente, which measures unto every man his desert. Those
whom virtue makes worthy, let them enjoy honor upon honor, and those that
be disloyal Traitors, there can be no punishmente seueare enough to be
inflicted upon them. It is thought good by general policy, that the honor
and reputation of Traitors should be corrupted in their posterity: who
render no more unto their prince to punish their treasons, then the prince
gave their Auncesters to reward their good services. The prince created their
Auncesters Earls, Barons, or as their callings are, and for their virtues
suffered the honor to descend unto their heirs: then they that will work
Treason, and forget God, the kindness of their Prince, the virtues of their
Parents, and love to their Country, it is not enough that they themselves die
the death, but the Emperor Vespasian in a letter to his son Titus says,
the son of such a Traitor ought Joseph. de bell. Iud.
not to live: God thought no temporal punishment sufficient to chasten the
rebellion of Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, he caused the earth to open her mouth
and to swallow them up and their houses, and all the men that were with Corath,
Nomb. 16.
and all their goods, and they and all that they had went down alive unto
Hell, these be the words of the text: and certainly, the vengeance of God
continually reigns upon Traitors. Chronicles make mention of millions of
Treasons that have been punished, and of a few that have had success. Almost
in every nation most of the ancient Nobility are eaten up with Treason, and
noui homines as the Romans term them occupy their places through virtue.
The learned Gentleman Master Morrisine, in his inuectiue against Treason,
says, that the Treasons of great men ought to be set forth in their colors,
because that blood is distained in Treason: he might also have added, because a
great deal of giltlesse blood is shead through their Treasons. I have in other
places sufficiently shown the falls of Traitors, and therefore to withstand
the temptation of ambition and envy, the enemies of their Countries peace and
prosperity, and utter overthrow of themselves and family, this discovery,
with prayer for the assistance of Gods spirit may suffice.

CHAP. 3.
Of the reverend calling of the Clergy, the holiness that is required in
their lives, and the lamentable miseries that proceed of disunion in Religion.

BOth among the Jews and Gentiles, and generallye through the whole world
from the beginning unto this day, the chief Priests, Bishops, and generally
the professors of Religion, were much reverenced, and in hye estimation among
the people. The office of Aaron the Priest was of such Nomb. 16. 18.
credit among the Jews, as envy, and desire to occupy the room, was the
principal cause of the Rebellion of Corath, Dathan, and Abyram: yea, Gods own
words greatly honored Aarons Priesthood, when he said, The sons of Leuy
should weight upon him and the Tabernacle. Among the Heathen Romans, the
office of the chief Bishop was of such account, as Julius Caesar when he began
to aspire, only Plu^. de vi^. C^.
labored for that dignity. And yet before the ambitious climing of the Pope,
Chronicles make no mention that they were the head rulers of any government.
Among the Jews the Prophets were privileged to reprehende the faults of the
Prince, but both the Prophets and Priests were subject unto the sword and
commandment of the Prince. King Iehoas appointed Iehoiada the Bishop and the
Priests, how they should employ the money that was brought into the house of
the Lord, and when they fulfilled not his commandment, he sharply reprehended
Reg. 4. 12.
them. Iehu put all the Priests of Baal to the sword. The Emperor Tyberius
put the Priests of the Idol Anubis Reg. 4. 10.
to the sword, because they were the instruments for the wanton Knight Mundus
to commit adultrey (by their deceit) with the chaste Roman Lady Paulina.
Yea, from Ant^rd, lib. 4. 8.
the beginning, and to be short, at this day it can not be denied but that the
reverence which is given unto the Clergy is due unto their profession, and
not unto their person, and when their pomp was at the highest, the greatest
Archbishop that offended in treason, had the trial of a common subject. Since
then the holiness of their profession priuiledgeth the Clergy to reprove
the faults of Princes, and gives them place among the chief Pieres, they are
bound, and holy Scripture commands them to glorify God with their holy
lives, that their holy words may the better edify men. Saint Paul setting
down the office of a Bishop (and in that dignity contains, the duty of
the 1. Tim. 3.
whole Clergy) says that he must be blameless, and so goes on with many
honest virtues, which are well known, and I pray God they may be as well
followed of the Clergy. Saint Peter commands them to be of so honest
conversation among the Gentiles, that where as they backbited Pet. (...). 2.
them as evil doers, they might see their good works, and praise God in the
day of visitation. A great many that would feign have an excuse for wickedness,
say, that the word of God is the life of the soul, and not the works of the
Preacher, so that if the doctrine be pure, it skilleth not if the Devil preach
the same. The word I grant remains pure, but the working will be to little
purpose if it be delivered by such a Minister, for the holy Ghost loves not to
accompany the Devil. I hope this small note shall work no offense, which is
not meant to instruct the Clergy which amply know their duties, but
reverently to show their error, that are forgetful of their duties. King
Phillip of Macedon held no skorne to be daily remembered by a Page of his
chamber, that he was a mortal man. Pope Sixtus the fourth, that vaunted how he
passed Saint Peter because he had gold, silver, and precious stones, was not
wroath with the beggarly Friar that answered him he lacked notwithstanding
much of Saint Peter's holiness: for he could not say unto the lame and
impotent arise and walk: and certainly, although the Pope were bluntly
crossed, yet he was thereby charitably counseled to labor rather to become
holy, then rich, which is a special duty in the Clergy: for by their
godliness they please God, and instruct men, when by the abuse of riches they
may dishonor the one, and be an evil example to the other. With this
admonition of the Friar, the blow that a Country peisant gave the Archbishop
of Cullen, ought to be as patiently received of the Clergy, as the hol^e tale
of the saluage Mylo was of the Senate of Rome. Upon a day as the Archbishop
traveled accompanied (according to the custom of Germany) with an armed
troop, a Country fellow encountered him with a rude laughter, which the
Archbishop noting, demanded what moved him to laugh so, the fellow
answered, to see Saint Peter prince of the Prelates, who lived and dyed
poorly, to leave such wonderful pomp and riches to his successors: the
Archbishop that was a little galled to excuse himself, said, my friends, I go
with this company, because I am a Duke, as well as a Bishop, whereupon, the
loute doubled his laughter, and boldly said, my Lord, I beseech you if the
Duke which you speak of were in Hell, where should then be the Archbishop? as
who would have said, that two professions become not one man, for sinning in
the one, he cannot be justified Fab^. Chro.
by the other. King Richard the first laughed when he had gotten a great ma^e
of money to make Hugh Pulath the Bishop of Durham Earl of Northumberland, and
chief Justice of England: See (quoth the King) what a miracle I can do, I can
make of an old Bishop a young Earl, but his miracle turned to the great
disworship of God, and mischief of the whole Realm: for the prelates by
buying temporal honors (for this King for money made many prelates Uicounts
and Barons) soon learned how to sell the peace and prosperity of the
Kingdom: this was the sound way to strengthen the Popes Empire, and the
wicked policy that kept under the Gospel, the light and life of salvation,
when ambition crept into the Church, zeal fled out of the heart of the
Clergy, but which has wrought the capitol mischief of all, the inequality
of estates between the highest and lowest of the Prelates, has brought envy
into the Church, and with envy a number of heresies and controversies.
Occasion, and millions of men's deaths and damnation, have opened the venom of
this passion sufficiently in the Chapter of heresies, and in sundry other
places in the Conquests of Envy. Disunion of the Church of all calamities is
the most grievous, because it moves a most mortal war among men, and
eternal torment unto the soul: God for his Son Jesus sake banishe this
dangerous passion forth of the Church, and give the spirit of true knowledge
unto all the Clergy, that with mutual consentes they may teach one sound
doctrine, to the glory of GOD, and universal peace and comfort of his people.

Amen.
CHAP. 4.
Of the most honorable calling of the Judicial Maiestrates, of the
waightinesse of their offices, with examples of Gods heavy justice inflicted
upon partial Judges.

IN all good gouerments, necessity has taught princes where virtue is found,
to honor it: and questionles, so weighty are the affairs of a Commonwealth,
and so holy the judgments of justice, as the nobility or innobilitie, of the
person not respected. The Magistrates or Ministers of these charges ought to be
chosen by the counsel that Iethro the Priest gave unto his son in law
Moses, which was, that he should Exodus 18.
choose among the people virtuous men, and such as fear God, true men hating
covetousness, and make them heads over the people, and let them judge the
people at all seasons, etc. The waightinesse of which charge commands a hye
honor and reverence to be given to the Magistrate, who in the place of
justice, is the image of the Prince. And in all good Gouerments, the sovereign
Magistrate has his place next unto the Prince. In Rome the Senators were
called the Fathers of the Common wealth, and as the Father is honored and
reverenced of his son, so were they of the people. The Maiestrates or
Philosophers of Greece were called Sages, whose wisdoms were so reverenced,
as nothing was done concerning war or peace but what they allowed.

The office of the Magistrate according to the Psalmist, is to defend the
poor and fatherless, and to see that such as Psalm. 8^.
be in need and necessity, may have right, and as King Lamuell sets
down, they must be advocates for the doombe, they must open their mouths to
defend the thing that is lawful and right: and according to the counsel of
Aristotle, in their judgments they must be ruled neither by love, hatred, or
gain. That these duties may be truly ministered, Cicero says, that
Sophocles counseled Offic. (...).
Pericles to make choice of Judges that had not only their hands, but their
eyes chaste and continent. It behooves that Judges do not buy their offices,
for as Alexander Seuerus says, he that buieth, must needs sell, and
therefore Lampr. de vi^ Alexand.
says he I will suffer no Merchants of Estate, for if (quoth he) I suffer the
one, I must needs endure the other, as a matter too severe to punish him that
buyeth, although he sells. In France all the offices of justice are sold,
in England they are freely given: in the one, I know the administration is
corrupt, I pray God the other be without fault. Plato was so curious in the
choice of judicial officers, as he gave counsel to give no dignity or
offices to the ambitious, or to such as coueted or sought them, but unto such
as merely refused them: and above all he forewarned to make choice of none
that naturally were barbarous, rude, or rusticke, but of people that were
civil, mild, just, and wise, the which he figuratively compared unto dogs,
which are ordained to defend the sheep, and to chase away the Wolf. In
Calcydone there was a law that needy and unworthy persons should bear no
office: but contrariwise, A worthy law in Calcydone.
such as contemned riches, and contented to be enriched with most knowledge:
and such manner of men were Curious, Fabritius, and Phocion. Alexander the Great
teaches Judges to judge uprightly, by this observance, when any man
complained, he stopped one of his ears to hear the answer of the defendant:
and truly, justice is never rightly administered, where the Judge gives his
sentence before lawful conviction. It is a place of much honor to be a
Judicial Magistrate, but the temptation of money is so sweet, as when the
world was nothing so corrupt in these days, the Poet was driven to sing:
Munera creed mihi capiunt hominesque deosque.
In English. Believe me, gifts do catch both Gods and men.


Diogenes being asked what thing an office was, said, it was a dangerous
beast, for (quoth he) it is as hard a matter for the Judges of the people to
keep their consciences sound, as barefooted for a man to walk upon sharp
stones unhurt, or to thrust his hand into the fire, without the burning
thereof. In all good gouerments there evermore have been positive laws to
bridle the injustice of Judicial Maiestrates. The false Judges that accused
Susanna were stoned to death. Alexander Seuerus caused the corrupt Maiestrate
Turinus to be smoothered with the smoke of wette stubble, during whose
execution, one cried, With fume let him dye, that fumes has sold. This
Alexander defrayed the charge of all the Judges with an honorable allowance:
that their offense might be without excuse, and their punishmente without
mercy, if they did injustice for money. The sentence that King Cambyses gave
upon a corrupt Judge, deserves eternal memory, he caused him to be flayed,
and with his skin he covered a judicial Chair, in which he placed the
Judges son to occupy the office of his Father: and to fear him from
briberie and all partiality (besides the continual sight of his fathers
skin) Cambyses gave him Johan. de proym. de sum. predi.
this sharp item: Sede sedens ista iudex inflexibilis sta.
Sit tibi lucerna: lux: lex: pellisque paterna.
A manibus reseces munus: ab aure preces.
In English. Thou Judge that sit in this seat, firmly sit therein,
And for thy light take thou the light: the law: and fathers skin.
Superfluous bribes cut from thy ruling hand,
And in thy ears let no entreaty stand.


I need not enlarge this Chapter with the positive laws of other Countries,
to hinder (as much, as policy may) the injustice of Judges, our English
government has had a special care to keep the seat of justice from the
stain of injustice.

For to prevent that authority may not outcountenance right, neither Lord nor
any other person may sit with the Judges in open Sises, upon pain of a great
forfeiture to the 20. R. 2. 3.
Queen.

To prevent that affection nor hatred may hinder justice, no 8. R. 2. 2. 33. H.
S. 24.
man may be judge of Assise in the place where he was borne or is resident,
upon the pain for every offense 100. pound.

Justice shall be sold, deferred, or denied to no man, and the Justices of any
bench or Court whatsoever shall not let to execute the common law for any
commandment that shall come unto them under the great Seal, or privy 9. H.
3. 29. 14. Ed. 3. 14.
Seal: many other penal charges are set down unto Judges to bind them to
the true administration of justice, and all to little purpose, if the Judge
have not the fear of God before his eyes: for positive laws, as the sage
Cleobulus says, are like unto cobwebs, through which the hernets break when
the little flies are meashed. The law of man may stay injustice, but the awe
of God is only of force to banish it. You Judges are Gods upon the earth,
listen then what the God of heaven says unto you: I say unto you that you are
Gods, but you shall dye like men. This was the Psalm. 82.
charge of Moses: Judge righteously between every man, (...). (...).
and his brother, and the stranger that is with him, so that you know no f^ces
in judgment, but hear the small as well as the great, and be afraid of no
man, for the judgment is the Lords. The judgment thus being the Lords, Judges
ought to be very circumspect to administer justice without respect of persons:
for his vengeance daily makes it known, that nothing is more odious unto him
then injustice, corruption, and cruelty: they are the principal causes that
God repented that he ever made man, and which moved him to destroy the whole
world with water. God by his Prophet says, that he will Genes. 6.
root out the Judge, it follows why, because he has sold Amos. (...).
the righteous for money, and the poor for shows. Daniel said unto the false
Judges that wrongfully accused and condemned Susanna, The messenger of the Lord
stands waiting with the sword to cut you in pieces. I could recite many
Daniel. 13.
fearful examples, to witness that Gods vengeance swiftly follows the Judge,
that by partial judgment either undoes the poor, or sheddeth giltles blood.
Among ye rest I have selected these special examples following, to admonish,
or rather to assure all judicial estates, that God never fails to revenge
their injuries that in the bitterness of their sorrow demand his justice. At
such time as the Templers were destroyed, a Knight of that order, a Napolitane
borne, by the Pet. mes. de cho. ^emo.
general judgment of the people, was at ye pursuit of Philip le Bell King of
France, unjustly put to death by the judgment of Pope Clement the fifth: the
poor Templar going to execution, beheld Pope Clement and Philip le bell at a
window, who in the bitterness of his sorrow suddenly cried out, Most cruel
Clement, since there is no worldly judge, before whom I may appeal to revoke
thy most cruel and unjust sentence pronounced against me, at the malicious
pursuit of Philip of France, I therefore appeal thee and Philip both, as most
wicked judges, before ye just judge Jesus Christ, within one year to answer
my blood which you most impiously shed, before whom I oppose my cause, which
shall determine it without love, gain, or dread which blinded you: the knight
was executed according to his judgment, and about the time of his demand (no
doubt, but by Gods just judgment). The Pope dyed of an extreme pain of the
stomach, and in the like manner dyed Philip of France: semblable was the end
of Ferdinando the fourth, king of Castile, who putting to death two knights,
more of displeasure than justice, when neither tears nor prayers aided their
innocence, they cited the said king to appear before the tribunal seat of
Christ, within thirty days: the last whereof king Ferdinando (attached by
death) failed not to make his answer. Baptista Fulgotius writes, that a
Captain of the Galleys of Genes, who making a course upon the seas, took a
foist of Catelong, in which there was a Captain that never offered wrong unto
the Geneuoies: notwithstanding through the hatred the Geneuoyes bare unto the
Cattelans, he commanded that the captain being taken prisoner, should be
hanged: who in shedding many tears, required that his ever well using of the
Geneuoies might repeal the iniust sentence of death pronounced upon him: but
in the end finding no grace, he repaired to divine justice, and told the
cruel Captain, that since he would proceed to execution of his bloody
judgment, he appealed him by a certain day, before god who chastises unjust
judges, to render an account of his hard judgment, at which day the Geneuoy
Captain failed not his appearance. Many other examples might be produced, but
this is of most special memory of the Archbishop of Magonce in Almaine, whose
injury was revenged on the whole City of Magonce. As the renowned Poet
Gontier in the life of the Emperor Frederick the first, and the the Bishop
Conradus in his history of diverse accidents, reports, The sum whereof
follows. In Gont. de vit. Fred. 1.
the City of Magonce in the year of our Lord, 1150. or there about, there was
an Archbishop, named Henry, a man bewtified with all manner of virtues: This
Archbishop like a good shepherd, severely corrected al public sins, and
having a great care of his flock, was very jealous of the honor of God, and of
the love of his neighbor, through envy whereof the wicked bare him a mortal
grudge, and by false accusations accused him before the Pope of disabilitie,
and many other grievous crimes. The Pope notwithstanding that he always
reputed him, a holy and a just man, nevertheless could not deny his accusors
audience. The Bishop having aduertisment of these envious suggestions, to purge
his innocence, chewsed among his friends a priest whom he had much advanced,
and especially loved, named Arnold. This Arnold being rich of spirit,
Eloquence, and money: so soon as he arrived at Rome pricked forward by the
devil, studied how to deprive his Lord of this dignity, and to seat himself
in the Archbishopricke. And to come by the same, he subborned two lewd
Cardinals with a great sum of money: afterward insteede of favorable speaking
in his Masters behalf, he spoke much against him: saying, that he was more
bound to God, and the truth, then unto men: and that in very truth the
Archbishop was guilty of the accusation laid against him, by means whereof
the Pope was moved, and abused with the report: and therefore to proceed
iudicially against the innocent Bishop: he sent the two Cardinals, confederate
with Arnold, into Almaine, who being arrived at Magonce, commanded the
Archbishop before them, and so partially heard the matter, but the one gave
sentence against him, by means whereof, he was deprived of his dignity, and
Arnold (who had sold him as Judas did our savior Christ) was placed in his
place: this judgment being pronounced, the Archbishop Henry there present
delivered these words. God knows that I am unjustly condemned: nevertheless
I have little care to appeal from your sentence, for that you shall be sooner
believed in your leasings, than I in delivering of the truth: for this cause I
receive your judgment, before the just, and eternal Judge which is Jesus
Christ, before whom I adiorne you: The Judges hearing the same, began to smile
and bad him go before and they would follow after: This sentence was given in
the year of our Lord a thousand one hundred fifty six. The Archbishop thus
deprived, sustained his injury with great patience, and lived the residue of
his life in a Monastery, to conclude God would not suffer this wickedness
unpunished, to the end that the innocence of the just might be known, one
year and a half afterward, Henry died in his Monestarie, and as it is to be
hoped, mounted into the glory he so desired. The news of his death being come
to Rome, the two Cardinals upon a day being mearie together, said that they
failed to find the Archbishop Henry: but within few days after, the one of
the two was so soundly strocken, by one of his own people, that his intrailes
issued out at his fundament, and so miserably dyed. The other grinding of his
teeth, and tearing, and eating his hands, dyed mad. Touching Arnold, for his
cruelties, and seditions which he entertained among the people, he was so much
hated, that one day being set in a Monestarie, he was slain, and after left
three days among the diches of the City, where all the people men and women,
exercised upon his body, all the cruelties that might be possibly invented.
Who so that is curious of more examples touching Gods severe punishments
inflicted upon partial judges, next unto the sacred Bible, let him search the
Acts and Monuments of the Church, collected by the reverent divine M. John
Fox, and he shall be liberally, and profitably satisfied, and so I end this
Chapter.

CHAP. 5.
Of the worthy reputation, of the Iustisers (whom we commonly call Justices) of
Peace: and of the public benefit of their service being duly administered.

THere need no other demonstration, to show the worthiness of their calling,
that are Iustisers of Peace, then the signification of their office
distribution, or administration of the right precious blessing Peace. They are
numbered among the eight beatitudes that are peacemakers: For they shall be (...).
E. 3. 16.
called the children of God. The greatest pear of England takes not scorn of
the office: yea by statute is chosen for that service, and to the intent that
necessity in such as lack living, may be no cause of injustice, it is provided
that no person, that cannot dispend xx. pound land by the year shall be a
Iustiser of Peace, unless they be certain celected men: Barrators, and men of
evil name shall not be assigned Iusticers 18. H. 6. 11.
of Peace: Trespasses committed and specified in the greatest part of the penal
laws, are committed to their examination, (...). E. 3. 16.
and determination. M. Lambeard and others have written learnedly and largely
of the administration of this office according to Law, but much (moreover) may
be said, of the administration thereof, according to Christian charity and
Justice. The diligence of the Iusticers of Peace, is of power to keep the
Judges idle in Westminster Hall, and the plow to be always occupied in the
Country: the true administration of Peace, is as well to appease ye discords
of neighbors, as to aprehend felons and evil livers. All controversies in Law,
grow either of violent oppression, stubborn malice, or manifest folly: if the
suit proceed of violent oppression, what oppressor will be so cruel as to
withstand the good mediation of these maiestrates, who for the most part are
the principal men of the sheare: if of stubborn malice, the accord that they
shall make, will be far more godly and profitable, than the agreement of the
Law: for Law (for the most part) ends controversies, and increases malice,
when a friendly agreement determines both, and if the matter be of light
reckoning, it will grow to a hauie charge in Law: which a peaceable mediation
would charitablie end. Almost there is no matter tried by law without this
censure, It is pity, it was not ended by friends: and truly in Christian
equity, this pity, is a blame in the Iustisers of Peace, that they will not
look into the discord of neighbors, which is a breach of Christian Peace:
and labor to accord them, which is a point of their duty. The Right noble
Lord, Francis late Earl of The godly example of the late Earl of Bedford.
Bedford (whose life and death, is a myrrour, of true honor, and Christian
nobility) when he lived in the western parts, in short time, so abredged the
number of Nysi prius, as the Lawers murmured against his Charity: but so
honorable was the slander, as I may with charity wish, that the example
generally through England would beggar their faculty: The Reverend Judge, the
late Lord Dyer, would usually Saying of the Lord Dyer.
say, if there came any controversies of poor men to be tried at the assizes,
that ye parties were wilful, or their neighbors without charity, because
their suits were not quietly ended. I heard a question once moved, what was the
cause that there were so many bad Lawiers? which was presently answered A
question.
because there were so few good preachers: In deed although most ministers
will generally speak against discord of nighbors in the Church, few of them do
travel to bring peace unto their houses: their godly persuasions no doubt may
profit with the honester sort, but the credit and authority of the other
Maiestrate will prevail against the most obstinate wrangler: I know in
Bedfordshire, and in some other places, A charitable exercise.
that once a week sundry of the principal maiestrates, and of the chief
deuines meet, the one to instruct the people in the rules of Christianity,
and the other to appease the controversies of neighbors: If the example were
general this general benefit would follow, the oppressor would forbear to
do injury for fear of shame: and the oppressed shoulds have ease without
expense of money. I am bound reverently to confess, that the honor and mercy
of the Chancery Law, Honor of the Chancery Law.
is a fountain of compassion and sucker, for oppressed suppliants: but the
court is so pestered with injuries, as common course keeps a man near hand
four years from iuditiall hearing: in which space as the tale goes of a
condemned man that undertook within ten years to make a Tyrants Ape to
speak, upon this hope, that before the time were expired, the Tyrant, the
Ape, or himself might happily die, so the opressor hops, by the complainants
expense, toil, and lack of friends in such a lingering suit, to bring him to
the agreement of his pleasure. Necessity makes many of these conclusions,
contrary to the law of charity and good conscience, which the diligence (and
charge in duty) of these popular Maiestrates, would administer, to the glory
of god, and general peace and commodity of men.

CHAP. 6.
Of the worthy reputation, of the godly Lawier, and the especial benefit of
his service, in the common wealth.

THE envious (that raise, mispleasing questions of the most morrall
institutions, as the Spider draws poison out of the sweetest flower) are like
enough to slander my honest intent concerning the former Chapter: with a
suggestion, that I covertly reprove Lawiers, and reproach the virtue of the Law:
but their reasons censured by the wise, will prove as vain, as their heads are
void of virtue: no man that has sense, will say, that to prescribe rules of
health, it is any discredit to Physic, or dishonor to the Physician: when
the health of man shows the reputation of either, as weak is his judgment,
that says a perswation to concord and quietness among neighbors, is either
a reproach to Law, or blame to Lawiers, when the commendation of the one, and
office of the other, is to administer public peace and prosperity. The
policy of this government, has made especial choice of Lawiers, to be
Iusticers of Peace: and for their profession they are abled for this
commission, albeit they cannot spend the yearly land contained in the
statute. Fortescue 18. H. 6. 11.
says, that human Laws are no other, than rules Fort. sol. 11.
that instruct men, to do Justice: it then follows that Lawers are the
principal instruments and amners of justice: yea so necessary is the study
and knowledge of the Law, as a man can hardly discharge his duty to God,
his Prince, and country, that is ignorant in the Laws of the Realm: The
Romans when they had banished their Tyrannous kings, and had erected their
Aristocratia or Decemuirate government, Tit. (...) lib (...).
they trusted to the strength of their Laws, the which fair written in ten
tables, they caused to be set up in the market place, to the intent that
ignorance might be no plea for any man that trespassed against the weal
public. In all good gouernements there is a common Maxim, Non excus^t
ignorantia iuris. The ignorance of the Law excuses not: And in this blessed
government, that every man might know his duty, the greatest part of the
penal laws ought to be plainly opened unto the multitude, by the Iusticers
or Justices of Peace at their quarter Sessions, and the like is the charge of
Stewards in their Leates, that the people may know the Laws which they are
bound to obey, so that it were an inexcusable folly, to reproach the Law which
according to the judgment of Fortescue is an vncorrupt holiness, and a
dangerous madness to envy generally Fol. 8.
against Lawiers, who are honored with right reverend dignities in the common
wealth: and yet with favor let the Truth be spoken, from things of the
greatest virtue, the worst vices are grown.

Religion is the holiest of holy things, and yet Heresy of sins the most
damnable, proceeds of the wresting of holy scriptures. Even so Law, which in
truth contains the very judgments of Justice, unto covetous, and naughty
persons, opens an hundred gappes, to rob and undo their poor neighbors:
and truly upon the temptation of their opressions, a man (saving the honor of
the good) may say by lawyers as Cicero did by Poets, when he allowed the
sentence of Plato: and yet Cicero honored good Poets, as appears by his
Oration for the Poet Archias, in which he persuaded the Citizens Cic. pro
Archia Poeta.
to receive him, as one that would greatly honor and benifite the City. The
like reputation and reverence, I (and all good men ought to) give to godly
lawiers: how be it my censure is, that next unto the heriticke, the wicked
Lawier is the most dangerous person.

CHAP. 7.
Of the honest reputation of the Yemonry, or husbandmen, the commodity of
their service, their aptness to rebellion, with a direction for their
quietness, and commodity.

WHO so shall consideratiuely look into the necessary service of the Yemen
and husbandmen of England, he may with the grave Cato rightly call them
Aratores, and optimos ciues in republica. Tyllers of the ground, and best
Citizens in a common wealth: and as their travel and continual labor
profits, or more properly feeds the whole Realm: so their inconstant and
seditious humors, are apt upon every light temptation to work the disturbance
of the whole Realm, and therefore the policy of our government, within the
compass of every four or five mile, in most shires has appointed some one of
the better sort of the Gentlemen to be a Iusticer of peace among them, who (as
is before shown) is bound to have an eye unto their behauiours, and an ear
ready to hear and appease their murmurings: and truly if any good counsel
may take place among the stubborn multitude, besides the admonition of sacred
Scripture, which in mani^ places commands obedience, and forbids
rebellion: the assuredness of their myserie, undoing and utter confution,
forbids them to run from the motion of sedition, as swift (if it were
possible) as the fearful Hare does from the hungry Grayhounde, for their
danger is far more apparent, the Hare many times saves her self, by the
recovery of some wood, but the poor and popular rebel lies open to all
destruction. Noble men, Gentlemen, and the better sort, if they see themselves
in perrill (as they are never safe that rebel) they have swift horse, secreat
friends, and many couerts to shroud them: but the shiftlesse country men have
no sucker but the princes mercy, which they neither deserve, nor yet have
friends to acquire the same: if there were not innumerable examples to prove
that they headlong run upon their destruction, and swiftly fly from their
safety and profit: it were a thing almost impossible, that the meanest sort
of men would be drawn into rebellion. I have in many places of my book shown
sundry examples of their inconstancy, and therefore here will only set
down what Chauser writes of their dispositions under.

Osterne people, unjust, and untrue,
Ay indiscreet, and changing as a fane,
Delyting ever in rumors that be new:
For like the Moon you ever wax and wane,
Your reason halteth, your judgment is lame
Your dome is false, your constance evil preueth.
A full great fool is he that on you leueth.
But questionless this mutabilitie, and anke-ward disposition of the
multitude, would be much reformed if the Maiestrates, and godly mynisters would
sufficiently remember them, of their duties toward God, their Prince, and
country. It is great pity that such profitable members in a common wealth
should run into danger of disloyalty, for lack of good instruction: yea it
is great pity (unless in time of war) that they should be carried far
from their labor: a poor country man that uses a Law^ers chamber, is in as
great a danger as a Lamb that haunteth a Foxes den: for how righteous so ever
his cause be, yet the poor suitor is sure to sing before his matter be ended.
Law measures right, with toil, expense, and grief.
There are many stoppes before a matter come to judgment and many nyce
quillets to overthrow a good matter, so that if the country man will direct
his controversy by this following compass, he shall find more profit in
the same, than in the counsel of the best Seriaunt, and first of all I wish
him to way the working of gifts, by this sequel.

A poor man once, a Judge besought, to judge aright his cause,
And with a glass of Oil salutes, this iudger of the laws.
My friend quoth he, thy cause is good, he glad away did trudge,
A non his wealthy foe did come, before this partial judge.
A Hog well fed, the churl presents, and craves a strain of law,
The hog receiud, the poor man's right, was judged not worth a straw.
Therewith he cri'de O partial judge, thy dome has me undone*
When Oil I gave my cause was good, but now to ruin run.
Poor man quoth he I thee forgot, and see thy cause of foil,
A Hog came since into my house, and brake thy glass of Oil.
Learn friends by this this read of me, small helps a righteous cause,
When gifts do catch, both Gods and men, and friendship ends laws.
This example is no other than a Morrall fore-warning unto the inferior sort,
to forbear controversy with men mightier than themselves, least after much
expense of money they make but a badde end, of a good cause, we are counseled
in holy Scripture not to go to Law, with men mightier then our selves, least
we be more discomforted, with an vnsentence, than with an injurious oppression.

Law is the supporter of all well governed Commonweals, necessary for all
men, but not behoueful, for the poor to follow: in great men's controversies, a
needful instrument, in poor men's wrongs, a remedy too violent.

Judges and other mynisters of the Law, in the due administration of their
callings, deserve great honor, reverence, and reputation: for that Perjury,
Oppression, and all manner of deceit goes before them, that their eyes may
behold their actions of whose forfatures they are judges: and in their
footesteps, Virtue, Truth, and good Conscience, ready with the following
multitude familiarly to converse: but sin which with the first fall of Adam
rose has made gain so sweet, and corruption so bold, as now before a great
number of them, vpright-dealing in vain continually kneeleth for
intertainement, and in their liueries all manner of deceit squareth among the
multitude.

Good and profitable Laws, were so wrested in Glebulus time, a great
Philosopher and one of the seven sages, as he said Laws were like unto
Copwe^bes, through which great Harnets broke, when the little flies were
menshed.

Pythagoras compares Law unto a back sword, which smote the greater powers
with the blunt, and the meaner sort with the eadge. By the wresting of Law, and
other partial workings, we have in England these by sayings, Might mastereth
right: The Law is ended as a man Sir Thom. S^ (...) de repub. anglo^
is friended: A good purse, is better than a just cause etc.

The wise Cato made this answer to one, that would have the pleading place
in Rome to be covered with Canuas, like unto the Theators, for that the heat
of the sun was very hurtefull for the pleaders and their Clyantes heads.
Nay (quoath Cato) for my part, I rather wish, that all the ways to the place
of pleading were cast over with Galthropes, that the feet of such as love so
well pleading, should feel so much pains of those pricks in going thither,
as their heads do of the sun in tarrying there: He meant they were but
idle, whot heads, busy bodies, and troublesome men in a Common wealth that
did so nourish pleading: Good laborers and quiet men, could be content to
end their matters at home, by judgment of their neighbors and kinsefolke
without spending so their money upon procurers and advocates, whom we call
Attorneys, Counselors, Sergeants, and generally men of Law. Those he
accounts profitable Citizens, who attend their honest labor and business
at home, and not stand waiting and gaping upon their Rolls, and Process in
the Law: as for the other by his judgment it was no matter what mischief
they suffered. This the grave learned man Sir Thomas Smith, writes in his
book De republica Anglorum: and further says, That these busy heads, and
inuentours of trouble, are men even permitted of God like Flies, Lyse, and
other vermin, to disquiet them, who would employ themselves upon better
business, and more necessary for the common wealth. These men are hated and
feared of their neighbors, loved and aided of them which gain by Process, and
wax fat by the expense of others: In the blame of these make-bates (as our
English phrase is) far is it from my intent, as in sundry places I protest
to scandilize the most necessary use of Law, or to reproach the good Lawiers.
For if necessity inuentris of all Arts, Polycies, and Mecanicall crafts,
gives honor to the Physician of our corporal bodies, no doubt she
commands a more larger regard, and reverence to be given to the Physician
of the politic body, who is the Lawier. Notwithstanding as the Medicine is of
more avail that preserves health, than that which cures sickness: Even so
the mean that keeps neighbors in love, peace, and Charity, is more
profitable than the authority that accords controversies, is necessary. For
as after the healing of a wound, there remains a scarre: even so after the
agreement of Law, there abides malice, which lying hid like fire under
ashes, kindles fresh malice, and never intertaineth faithful amity: It is
then greatly to be pitied, that these simple men for the matter of five
shillings should be vexed, arested, brought up to Westminster Hall, and half
undone at the suite of troblesome persons, of the spoils of these good men, a
great number, of the swarms of Attourneyes, and petifoggers live. The gracious
policy A gracious policy abused.
of this Realm, for the ease of these poor men; has appointed in every
county Courts, and gives liberty to Lords of Manners, to hold Plea of
actions under forty shillings debt, but the corruption of those Courts are
such, and the coming of these persons so pleasing, as almost every sunday,
Latitates, pry about Country Churches for poor men: whereof many owe not the
price of the Process, and before the suit be ended, it oftentimes falls out,
that the plaintiff, and defendant are both losers, and that these dangerous
make-bates live upon their goods, and painful labors. This mischief
would be much eased, if charity reigned among neighbors, or a godly care
among the ministers of the Church, in travailing to appease the discords of
their parissioners, but especially as I here before have said: If the better
sort of Gentlemen, and Iusticers of Peace, would take pains in this godly
exercise: whose persuasions no doubt might easily overcome the most stubborn,
and conuaie both benefit and quietness to either party, and no doubt if the
popular sort will be counseled for their profit and quietness, they shall
find these Maiestrates ready to redress their injuries so far as Law and
charitable perswation will help them.

CHAP. 8.
Of the disposition and destruction of Atheists machiuillians and Timepleasers,
with sundry examples to the same purpose.

THe Prophet shows, the fool in heart, does say there is no God,
In truth Gods justice proves them fools that little fear his Rod.
But God except, who sees his thoughts and spewes him from his mouth.
This fool the Atheist does beguile, old age as well as youth.
He Protew-like does shape himself, according to the time.
He (wretch) is neither whot nor cold, but cleaves like to slime.
To the affections of the great, if fortune change their state,
He sets his foot upon their throtes, of whom he fauned late.
He knows that gods, which rule on earth, have humors like to men
Not grossly, closely in his words, sweet flattery he does blen.
He reads, and does regard these faults, Love, hate, and private gain
Through partial domes, even Justice seat, with poor men's tears does stain.
He knows lords letters bear a swinge, sic volo keeps in awe.
And Munera speaks not for the poor, that makes and marreth law.
He knows as Diamonds set in brass, have but a slender grace,
So virtue in a poor attire, sits in the meanest place.
And therefore, clothed all in pride, above he takes his seat.
And has his tongue prepared to please the humors of the great.
Where fortune smiles, he ever faunes, and strongest parts does take,
Where fortune frowns, father, brother, and friend he does forsake.
The scripture says, this cursed wretch, is neither whot, nor cold,
His conscience feels no remorce, in murdering young or old.
The stranger and the farthest borne, he follows to be great,
And helps, to cut his neighbors throat, his neighbors goods to get.
The widows tears, and Orphants spoil, he grieves not to behold,
But only seeks to please himself, and has no God but gold.
Religion yet to serve his turn, his cloak he still does make:
When as his Zeal is like a fane, that every wind does shake.
This wretch, the prophet holds a fool: and so he does him call:
Whose building grounded all on wit, upon his shoulders fall.
Examples of the miserable ends of Atheistes etc.

As I have said, the (Atheists I mean) are armed with all worldly policies
of wit, to strengthen their purposes, and are the instruments in the practices
of great Princes, these be they that followed Abimilech when he murdered
threescore Judges 9.
and eight of his brethren: these be the firebrandes of the Pope and the two
edged sword of Tyrauntes. If they be instruments of any goodness, their
travel is not of zeal, if they be used in any mischief they outrage
without pity: people far more accursed then Pagans, for they hold a kind of
religion, and by the working of nature deal charitablie with their neighbors.

But the reprobate Atheists contemn all religion, fear no God, and although
they feign to please all men, yet they truly love not their own kindred: for
be it to depose their Sovereign, to spoil their Country, and to murder
their dearest friends, if they see likelihood in their Treasons, they give
consent, if hope of advancement, they first set hand to their sword. But you
monsters of humanity, that are drunken with the strength of your own wits,
and are bewitched with the hopeful success of your policies, esteem it for
sound counsel that I give you to understand, that the eternal God, whom you
neither fear, love, nor do acknowledge, sees all your wicked policies in his
vengeance, and frustrateth them with his mercy, he searches the reins and
Ierom. 27. Revel. 2.
hearts, and will give to every man according to his works. If you dig a pit
to bury the innocent, look to fall into it your selves: if you raise a
gallows to hang them, be you sure, that you shall suffer thereupon: if you
edge your sword to pearce their hearts: trust to it your own intrailes will be
the sheath thereof. What you do, or would do unto them, shall be done unto you.
Hamon set up a pair of gallows to hang Mardocheus the Jew, and he and his
ten sons, did die thereon. The false Judges that sought the life of chaste
Susanna, were themselves stoned to death. Adonibezek that had cut off the
thombes and great toes of three score and ten kings, and had fed them with
Crombes under his table, being taken in battle by Judah chief of the Army of
the Israelites, had his own hands and toes cut off, who confessing that God had
done by him as he did by others, miserably died. If you Atheists regard not
these examples in scriptures because you study not Profane examples of
Atheists punished.
the sacred Bible, look into the examples of profane Cronacles and histories
of time, from whence you fetch you policies and cunning experiments: and you
shall see in all ages, how God returned the mischiefs of the wicked, into
their own bowels. Diomede fed his horses with the flesh of men, and Hercules
made Diomede food for his own Horses. Arnutius Peterculus hearing that the
tyrant Amylius offered great rewards to him that could devise any new kind of
torture, presented the tyrant with a brazen horse, that he had invented.
Amilius just in this cruelty, made him first to suffer the pains which he had
prepared for others. The like was the reward of Perillus, who presented the
tyrant Phalaris with a Bull, which being heat with fire, with the outcrie of
the poor patients would bellowe like a Bull. Apius Claudius called the
prisons the proper houses of the poor people, but he himself by the
commandment of the Tribune of the people, was thrown into prison, where he
died among thieves and murderers. The Emperor Caligula was a notable Atheist,
and would in his ungodly actions always dispight the Gods, but in the end as
Sweronius testifies, he durst not repose in the night, he was so terrified
with horrible visions, and he that so boldly misprised the gods at the smallest
lightning and clap of thunder, would in the night, hide himself under bed,
and in the day, in the most obscure corner, in fine, he was violently slain
by Chereus, Cornelius, Sabin, and other their confederates. Although the
Heathen people worshipped not the true God, yet he seuearely punished the
contemners of their superstitious Religion, not honoring any other.

Pausanius reports, that in the City of Cabira in Boetia, Pausan. lib. 9.
a mile distant from Thebes, there was a Temple dedicated to Ceres, into which
all men were defended to enter save the Cabirians, it fell out that Mardonius
one of Xerxes Captains with his army entered to spoil the same of a great
quantity of treasure, but of the sudden Mardonius and his company were
assailed with such madness, as leaping from high mountains, clifts, and
rocks, they all died miserably. The like destruction happened to the soldiers
of Alexander the Great, who having by force taken the City of Thebes, as they
were at the point to enter the Temple, they were suddenly stricken and slain
by thunder from heaven. Phlegius King of Orchomenia not long after that he had
rifled the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, and had slain Philamon, that with a
strong power came to reskew the same, had the greatest part of his Country
destroyed with an earthquake, and his people which were not slain with strie
darts from heaven, soon after died of the pestilence: for which sacrilege
and contempt of the Gods, Virgill supposes that Phlegias is Aeneyd. 6.
wonderfully tormented, and thus complayneth in Hell. -- Phlegias miserimus
omnes
Admonet, and magna testatur voce per vmbras
Discite iustitiam moniti and non temnere diuos.
In English. Phlegias the most wretched of all.
To all men thus with strained voice, from shadows dark does rore
Be counseled, true justice use, and Gods contemn no more.


The Sabarites desirous to know the continuance of the felicity both of
themselves, and of their City, for their better knowledge counseled with the
Oracle at Delphos, to whom Apollo the Pithian made answer, your land shall go
to ruin, and your felicity have an end, when you begin to make more account
of men then of the Gods. The Ambassadors upon this answer, assured the
Sabarites that their felicity was perpetual: persuading themselves, that it
was a thing almost impossible, that there should be more reverence given unto
men, then unto the Gods. But it fell out not long after, that a Citizen beat
his slave near unto the Temple, who for his refuge fled into the Temple,
mounted the Altar, Antho. Verd de diui. lect. 173.
and embraced the Idol, from whence his master irreverently plucked him and
gave him many fresh blows: the bondsman escaped again, and ran for his last
succor unto the tomb of his masters father: who for the reverence he bare to
his father, not only forbear to punish him, but cleerelie forgave his
bondsman his fault: which Amyris one of the former Ambassadors seeing, gave the
Citizens warning that the time of the Oracles answer was accomplished: who
for his labor was accounted a fool: whereupon he counterfeited himself to be
forth of his wits: and in this fained madness he sold all his goods in the
market place: and having got together a great mass of money: he went and
dwelled among the Moors, waiting still for the news of his countries
destruction: and according to his expectation the city of Sabyra, was shortly
after leuiled with the ground. The army of Cambises being 50000. with
outrageous storms and tempests was destroyed: whose purpose was to sack
Justin. lib. 1.
the temple of Hamon. All they that were with the Consul Q. Cepion, at the
pillage of the Temples of Toulouse in Aul. gel. lib. 3 cap. 9.
France, they and all their family died in one year, so that there was not
one that carried a peace of the treasure into his own house. The Romans
having taken Carthage, one among the rest dispoiled the image of Apollo of a
rich robe of gold: but ye hands of him who committed this sacrilege, were
found cut of, and fast nailed to the said robe. The example of Ptolomie the
thunderbolt, of Brennus and diverse other Heathen Atheists, and contemners of
their Gods and religion, might be applied to enlarge this admonition to our
christened (for I cannot truly say christian) Atheists (who seeing this severe
vengeance inflicted upon these Pagan infidels: and conte^ners of false Gods:
if their wits be not as little as their grace) may assure themselves, that God
will lay a more heavy vengeance upon them, that contemn his Godhead, or at
the least are careless of it, using religion as a garment, which at pleasure
they put of and on: of all bads it is better to be of the worst, then of no
religion, it is thus set down in the Revelation: I know thy works, that thou
art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wart cold or hot: So then because
Reave. cap. 9.
thou art neither cold nor hot, but between both, I will spue thee out of my
mouth. A miserable sentence, and yet justly and daily executed upon these
accursed reprobates, there is an opinion among wise and grave men, that a
fourth part of christendom is inhabited by Atheists: who in the exercise of
their tyranny, ambition and revenge outragiouslie violate the laws of God,
nature, and man. But albeit as the Psalmist says: Their throat is an open
sepulcher, and that Psalm. 14.
the poison of Aspes is under their lips: though their feet be swift to
shed blood: though destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, and the way
of peace they have not known, etc. Yet the said Psalmist says to comfort the
godly: That they were afraid where no fear was: for God Psalm. 5^.
has broken the bones of them that besieged them: yea they have put them to
confusion, because God has despised them: I counsel the Atheists,
Machiuillians, and other Timepleasers: to examine the success and ends of the
Disciples of Simon Magus and Machiuell, that were before them: few or none of
them but have rid the horse Saian: their miserable ends show that their
practices are odious to God and man: Simon Magus to disgrace the Apostles,
would take upon him to fly, but in the midst of his journey he fell down
toward Hell: his cunning brought him to confusion: Machiuel taught the Duke
of Florence a policy to cut of his own head, and (as it is daily seen)
their policies are the halters that strangle most of their fellows: if folly
(for ouerweening wit is no better) made them not dronken, they would not be so
mad to raise their advancement upon the overthrow of Princes and commonweals. The Ancients say that they must overcome a great many enemies, as
envy, detraction, suspect, etc. and must step up with opportunity in a
pleasing hour, that shall by any means obtain the least favor of a Prince.
Through how many millions of dangers then must he run, that by his single
policy and strength laboreth to pluck a Prince from his throne? through more
then the most of these Atheists can pass by the half, and he that with
desired opportunity arriueth unto his purpose, by common destinic departs not
without destruction. Solomon says, that there Proverbs. 30.
be three things that go stiffely, yea four that be comely in going: A Lion
which is strongest among beasts, a Greyhound which is strong in the hinder
parts, a Ram also, and a King, against whom, no man rises up: experience
daily shows, that no man undertakes that bold adventure, but he that
wilfully falls into destruction. These reprobate people for examples, have
the destruction of hundred to dismay them, to the advancement of one to
encourage them, and where the odds is so unequal, he that aduentureth upon
the peril, may be compared unto him, that seeks to darken the Sun with a
Candle. To conclude, albeit it were rather to be adjudged a miracle, then any
act of humane persuasion to convert a grown Atheist, to the fear of God, and
true obedience toward his prince, yet such as through wicked perswasiens, and
want of good instructions, are but newly fallen from the fear of God, into the
exercise of the damnable and disloyal practices of Atheists, may no doubt be
counseled by the examples of the confusion of these vipers, to loath and hate
they: ungracious ways: and of the contrary part waighing the sure
advancement with which virtue honoreth her disciples, they may (which God
grant) be encouraged earnestly to follow those courses whereby God may be
honored, their Country profited, and their own credit dignified. There are
two old verses among other precepts printed at the end of Magna Carta, of the
old impression, which contain a great persuasion to the study of virtue, the
right ladder of honor and estimation, with which for the virtue they contain,
I conclude this present Chapter: Vt ver dat flores, flos fructus, fructus
odores,
Sic studium mores, mos census, census honores.
In English. Even as the Spring does flagrant flowers bring,
Fair flowers, fruits, and fruits a pleasant taste:
From study so, does perfect manners spring,
From study lore, in lore is honor plast.


CHAP. 9.
A conclusion of moral documents, concerning the duties of every estate.

THese rites men owe to thee O God, which in the heavens art, Duties due to God.

Reverence, honor, glory praise, and prayer from the heart.
The gracious Prince a father is, where subjects live in awe, Virtues of a
good Prince.

The good regarding with rewards, the lewd with scourge of law.
The subject true unto his Prince, this homage here does owe, Homadge of
subjects.

A faithful heart, a fear through love, an inward Zeal in show.
The reverent Judge from doming right, whom no regard may strain, Duties of
Judges.

Must Aristotle's blames forsake, love, hate, and private gain.
The inferior sort must reu'rence give, unto the higher power, Obedience of the
inferiors.

Obey, and listen to their lore, let fortune laugh, or lowre.
These special virtues from a friend, still should or do proceed, Offices of
a friend.

Advise, assistance, faithful love, and constancy in need.
The Landlord should so lot his land, as his poor Tennant may Conscience of
Landlords.

Both pay his rent, sustain his house, and for his Landlord pray.
All Tennants slaves, and bondmen were, of your records do show,
Though now not so, yet to their Lords, they Zeal and fealty owe. Duties of
Tenants.

The neighborhood of the neighbor good, this neighborhod does claim
Good still for good, in casual harm, a charitable blame. Claim of
neyghberhood.

The Wise man says the child is spilt, where parents spare the rod,
But cherishment with chastment join, and see, they honor God. Charge of
Parents.

You children that long life do seek, unto Gods law give ear,
Honor Parents, sustain their age, that for your youth did care. Obedience of
Children.

You that a faithful servant seek, regard this charge as law, Office of
Masters.

His wages pay, his service ask; and keep him still in awe.
Sometime the Romans by their law their servant lewd might slay,
And by all laws the masters will the servant must obey. Duty of Servants.

Fresh youth, whose judgment is but green, above each other vice,
Forsake these three undoing evils, women, wine, and dice. Warning for young
men.

These properties (regard them well) to you fair maids belong,
A bashful grace, a modest eye, joined with a silent tongue. Virtues in a V^rgen.

You that have wealth, think others want, and thus impart your store,
Lend, give, relieve* as need requires, for to sustain the poor. Rules for
the rich.

You that are poor, abase your thoughts, for naught agrees worse
Then this foul fault, a proud conceit, joined with a beggars purse. Item for
the poor.

In every trade an honest gain well gotten good men hight,
And God will surely bless the hand, that ways and measures right. Counsel
for Citizens.

You souldyers both by land and sea, Gods woonders still escrie, Target for
Soldyers.

Live you to dye, for fearful death is always in your eye.
Assure your selves you Atheists vile, that make at him a face, Caveat for
Atheists.

That God in vengeance is at hand, where he is far with grace.
As I began, so I conclude, let all men fear the Lord,
And Preachers see that godly works, with holy words accord. Conclusion to the
Clergy.

To the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, I give thee knowledge that upon special occasion I have
before printed certain appendants to this book, viz. one Treatise called A
mirror for Maiestrates, which contains at large in the grave orations and
government of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus, what is for the honor of
Gentlemen, Citizens, and diverse other estates, and what is the disgrace and
undoing of themselves and their posterity, as also a moral Treatise of the
reputation, virtues and (by abuse) dishonors of a soldier, which I wish thee
for thy further pleasure and profit to adioyne to thy general Mirror, to
which in right they belong. Thus commending unto thee the fruits of my labor,
and thee to the tuition of the highest, giving most humble thanks to his
divine Majesty, by whose goodness this work is brought to an end, I end.

FINIS.

