A DEFENSE OF THE WAY TO THE TRVE CHVRCH against A. D. his Reply. Wherein The
MOTIVES leading to Papistry, And QVESTIONS, touching the RVLE of Faith, The
AVTHORITIE of the Church, The SVCCESSION of the Truth, and The BEGINNING of
Romish Innouations: are handled and fully disputed.


By JOHN WHITE Doctor of Divinity, sometime of Gunwell and Caius Coll. in
Cambridge.

I entreat and desire you all that, setting aside what this or that man
thinks touching these matters, you will inquire what the Scripture says
concerning them. Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. hom. 13. LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM
BARRET dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the three Pigeons. 1614.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, JAMES, BY THE grace of God King of great
Britain, France and Ireland: defender of the Faith.
MOst dread and renowned Sovereign, may it please your excellent Majesty:
Such is the power of true Religion, and the hope that all men have to be
delivered from error and their natural misery, and to attain supernatural
and eternal good thereby, that they which have tasted it cleave unto it more
then to all the hopes of this life beside: The law of thy mouth, Psalm. 119.
says David, is better to me then thousands of gold and silver. This is the
reason why the cause of religion, and the state of our Church, this day under
your Highness most happy government, is so dear and acceptable to us, that
the opposition and violence of our greatest enemies can never make us weary of
defending it; but as the servants of Isaac, Genesis 26.
when the Canaanites stopped their wels, opened them again, and would never
yield the inheritance of their master to the herds men of Gerar, no more can
we endure the truth of religion to be choked with Popish heresies, or the
inheritance of our Lord to be taken from us by the Swains of Rome: Nazianz
orat. 2. de Pace.
Gods blessed truth being of that value that, in defense thereof, his meekest
servants will stir, and the mildest fight before it shall be indamaged by their
forbearance: Our assurance through Gods mercy, of that we profess, and the
benefit of our faith, and the certain knowledge of our adversaries ungodly
and reprobate practices against it, is such, that no course of theirs can
discourage us, no contention beat us off, no importunity make us shrink from
that which we know to be the truth. Aen. Sylu hist. Bohem.
When a certain iester (set on by others as it was thought) in the presence of
the king of Hungary, spoke to a Noble man of Prage touching his religion,
because he fancied not the Romish Service, but was addicted to Rochezana a
follower of Husse, the Noble man gave him this answer: If thou speak of thy
self, thou art not the man thou conterfets, and so I will answer thee as I
would a wise man; if by others setting on, it is meet I satisfy them; Hear
me therefore: Every man uses Church ceremonies agreeable to his faith, and
offers such sacrifices as he believes are acceptable with God: it is not in our
own power to believe what we will; THE MIND OF MAN CONQVERED WITH POWERFVLL
REASONS, WILLING OR NILLING, IS TAKEN CAPTIVE: I am sufficiently resolved of
the religion I follow; if I follow thine I may deceive men, but God that
searches the hearts I cannot deceive; nor yet is it fit I should be like to
thee: one thing becomes a Iester, and another thing a Nobleman; this you may
take to your self, or report, if you please, to them that set you a work.
This zeal of the truth, and conscience surprised with the authority thereof,
is it which leads forward so many learned men of all sorts into contention
with the Papists, and constraines them, both by vehement preaching and open
writings, to oppose them who never cease to corrupt the faith, and poison all
sorts of people with discontent and violent hatred against their brethren, and
by the working of Jesuits and Seminaries (much after the fashion of Antheninus
the Mathematitian mentioned in Agathias) to shake all the quarters of your
kingdoms: in which course, through long practice, and some conniuency, and for
want of straiter execution of the laws against them (the dangerous sequel
whereof we will daily pray God to turn aside) they are grown so vehement and
fiery that scarce any part of our faith can please them; no not the truths
that we hold in common with themselves, nor any part of your Highness
government, because it is not holde^ in capite of the Pope. Athenae.
The Stoikes believing that none but a wise man could do any thing well,
concluded, that therefore none but a wise man could make good pottage, or
season a mess of broth well: and because, in their conceit, their master Zeno
was the wisest of all men, they concluded again that the broth could not be
good if it were not made after Zenoes direction; whose use was to prescribe to
the twelfth part of a Coriander seed: possible that he might have primatum
ollae, or least the cooks of Lacedaemon should exempt themselves from his
jurisdiction. This Hildebrandine humor, of ouerruling all things, so possesses
our Adversaries, that now the Church of England has neither God, nor faith,
nor religion; the King of England no crown, no dominion, no subjects; the
state no justice, no laws, no government; because the Pope gives not the
ingredients, or confirms them not.

I am the meanest person and least able of many, and the best I can do falls
short of that which these exquisite times require. Theodor. de prouid. l. 8.
Theodorite says; The majesty of things depends not a little upon the manner
of handling them; and therefore such as meddle with any high argument, have
need of great power both of tongue and conceit; because such as weigh the
force of words more then the nature of things, judge of the things according to
the weight, or weakness of the words. But the condition of the place where
sometime I lived, tra^sported with much superstition, and importuned with
Romish Priests and their books, and, sometime, their libelles set upon our
Church doors, drew upon me a necessity of doing what I was able; when for
diverse years I was enforced, by private writings and conference, to maintain,
or expound, what I preached openly. The benefit whereof I found to be such,
both in stablishing my own conscience, and recovering the people, and
repelling such as seduced them, that I was easily drawn forward to proceed,
and much of my time to bestow in dealing with the Seminaries: until at the
length it is now come to this, that I am enforced in the open veiw of the world
what I have spoken in the ear, Mat. 10.27.
secretly, that to publish on the housetop, and, now again the second time,
to do that which I thought at the first, to do but once. My own private
condition is not such that I should greatly care what any man write against me,
and all that read my Adversaries Reply will easily perceive him unworthy to be
honored by an Answer, and most unworthy to have his name or Caracters
mentioned in your Highness presence; but when the cause it self is Gods, and
belongs, as part thereof, to the common cause of our Church, I would not by
despising a mean Adversary forsake it, or give occasion to any that had used
my former Book to misdoubt what I have written: but having, in my private
life, many spare hours (whereof I must one day give account) I would bestow
them the best way, in doing something that might help my countrymen out of
their superstition. And although my Adversary with whom I deal be of no great
note (for the Heralds cannot find his pedigree till they come to Noah's Ark)
yet his arguments and discourse transcribed from Doctor Stapleton, and Gregory
of Valence (two of their chiefest writers) being such as are most used, for the
depressing of the Scripture and succession of our Church, and for the advancing
of the Popes authority in the matters of faith; I understand to be so grateful
to Zenoes disciples, by reason they relish so pleasingly of the Coria^der, that
I have thought it not amiss to bestow my answer; that if, reason and the truth
will do it, they may be satisfied. The truth is of that composition and
strength it self that God can relieve it by his weakest instruments, in whom
he shows his power and workmanship against his proudest adversaries. Deus ita
artifex magnus in magnis vt minor non sit in minimis. And therefore S. Austine
confesses to him: Omnipotens manus tua, semper vna and eadem, creauit in coelo
Angelos, in terra vermiculos, non superior in illis, non inferior in istis: And
this my poor endeavor I most humbly present to your Highness, whose gracious
speeches, not long since, to me, both touching my former writing, and this
Defense thereof, then scarce begun, have imboldened me: though my own
affection, I think, it self would have swayed me herein if I had never seen
your Highness.

The general apprehension of the good which the Church obtaines by your most
gracious zeal and constancy for religion (the lively sense whereof infuseth it
self, as the soul into the parts of the body, into all quarters, not of your
kingdom alone, but of the Christian world round about us) moves all men to
your Highness, whose sufferings, endured for the same, at the hands of
Antichrist and his ministers, have taught us that the greatest Princes living,
as well as meaner persons, may be persecuted for the testimony of Christ; and
being possessed with the zeal of his house, can and will in defense thereof,
expose themselves, their crown, their reputation, their children, their life,
and all the hopes of this world, to the most imbruted enemies that ever were:
and neglecting the deceivable pleasures of their Court, and trampling their
own greatness under their feet, can tell how to make themselves a way to
eternity; and, by cleaving to the Church, and resisting Antichrist, assure
their state, and make their honor greater, and lay up in their bosom the
assured hope of a better kingdom in the world to come. This is it, most dread
Sovereign, that affects us all, and leads your poor subjects, toward you:
that now whatsoever any is able to speak, to write, to think, to breath; he
thinks to be yours by right, by whose means and example all men speak, and
write, and think, and breath the purer: Veget. procem. ad Valentinian.
and in affection (where Princes reign but by permission) we feel our selves
to be yours so far, that unfeignedly we think Neque recte aliquid inchoari
nisi post Deum fauerit Imperator. Which our Adversaries shall now give us leave
to say the freelier, where the Kings learning matches his power, and (without
the help of any man's flattery) is seen to board their Colleges; that, whose
countries and persons he gouernes not by his laws, their Schools and
consciences he begins to ouerrule with his disputations. Which thing we hold to
be so far from impairing Royal dignity, that Suarez.
he who has said it, must hereafter be deemed one of the King of Arragons
oxen, when, Non hominis sed Bouis vocem este respondit. Alphons apud Anton
Panorm. l. 1. Naueler.
after so many mighty Princes in all ages honored more for their learning and
writing^ then for all their greatness besides: David, Solomon, Julius Caesar,
Constantine, and Charles the Great; Justinian, Leo, Palaeologus, Cantacuzenus,
the Alphonsi, and diverse more: after the Emperor Sigismund, commended for
playing the Deacon at the Council of Constance: Henry the eight writing for
the seven Sacraments, whose book, subscribed with his hand, they glory to
have in the Vatican; Posseuin. Council. Mediol. 1. sub Borthom.
the Cardinal of Millan thinking it the highest commendation he could give the
late king of Spain, in eius regia dignitate, vt verbo complectar, sacerdotalem
animum licet aspicere: he will now have the use of your Highness pen in
maintenance of your laws and religion, and whereby most graciously it pleased
you to offer them instruction before you would execute your authority against
them, to be the laying by of your imperial dignity; never remembering that for
a king to descend to the Preacher, I the Preacher have been king in Ierus.
Eccl. 1.12.
is the work of piety and clemency toward his subjects, but for the Priest to
climb into the kings throne and play the Monarch, is the brand of Antichrist.

2 Samuel 14.
The King is as the angel of God in hearing of good and bad, his words will
seasonably give your Highness occasion, by speedy and diligent execution of
your laws, to let Jesuits and Seminaries, and the disciples of Hildebrand,
see you are a King still, that by assuming the Doctor, when you please, can
teach them their duties; and by exercising your power when you have done, will
repel their practices with effect, and free your people from their
presumptions. Their shameless abusing your Highness lenity, and taking spirit
by being suffered to multiply their contestations against your sacred person,
government, and people, makes us all wish, when Edicts do no good, they might
hear the Lion rore, that his voice might once chase such cowardly beasts out
of the forest, and vnearth them too if they would still be running into their
holes for harbor. The Landgraue of Hesse (a mild and gracious Prince, but
whose clemency was much abused) being cast, by adventure, on a Smithes forge,
ouerheard what the Smith said all the while he was striking his iron: Oath.
Meland.
Duresce, inquam, duresce, vtinam and Langrauius durescat. And the presumption
of this generation is such in corrupting the truth with their books, and
opposing it with their heresies, in casting the state also and your sacred
person into those manifest and dismal perils, (from which they will never
desist so long as they are among us) that your subjects are generally of the
Smiths mind, to wish, these sons of Beliall, that fly-blow Religion, and
blast the laws, and honor, and the estimation of Princes, with their breath;
placing their greatest piety in the greatest mischiefs they can bring to
their Prince and country, may feel the metal harder that by law is tempred
for such as are of their spirits, and know not how to use your Highness
clemency. I speak not of simple Recusants, but fugitive Jesuits, and
Seminaries, that have renounced their allegiance to their natural Sovereign,
and made themselves the Popes creatures, and vowed him blind obedience in all
that he shall command them. For many Papists, Maffae. vit. Ignat.
when their seducers are removed, shall come home to obedience, and repenting
them of their Idolatry and superstition, embrace your Highness government,
and the Religion stablished: but when unnatural fugitives, and such as they
have Iesuited, have attempted to consume us, and, by blasphemous writings,
unnatural reports, traitorous libells, barbarous conspiracies, from time to
time these fifty years together, have undermined our state, and, by the
woeful ruin of some, have showed what they intend to all Kings and Princes
that entertain not their vassallage, Sylu. Girald. Topograph: Hib. M.
Wrightinton and M. Brettergs horse, oxen and kine, killed in their pastures, a
little before the late Queens death: and now lately, the messengers horses;
poisoned at Wigan in Lancashire.
it is not to be hoped that their fair protestations can give us assurance, as
we had experience lately in him that writ the QVODLIBETS: but as it is noted of
the Irish long ago, A securibus nulla securitas; si securum te reputes securim
senties: est long fortius timenda eorum ars quam Mars, eorum pax quam fax,
eorum mel quam fell, malitia quam militia, proditio quam expeditio, amicitia
praefucata quam inimicitia despicata. Their poisoning of so many your Highness
subjects with heresies, and reuiling Gods blessed truth, their preying upon the
states and persons of their followers, and filling them with hatred and
reprochfulnesse against their brethren, till it come to the killing of our very
cattle and dumb beasts; is the least of their doings: the state and
government has been odiously defamed, the laws reviled, the Judges railed on,
and threatened; the Nobles disgraced, and in favor of the formallest
Miscreants, and to bolster out the damnablest treason that ever was, the
PVBLICKE ACTS AND RECORDS of the kingdom, entered in the view of God, and men
and Angels, are discredited, and denied. Yet these are the persons, beginning
where the Devil did when he seduced Adam, that become our ghostly Fathers, and
are canonized for Martirs: Sine Scriptura Theologi, sine miraculis Apostoli,
sine veritate Catholici, sine pace sacrifici, sine patientia Martyrs: sine
vera fide religiosi. Their zeal for the Catholic faith and salvation of
souls is pretended, but their drift is to captiuate all to the Popes Monarchy,
and their own ambition. Plutarch. Zonar.
When Caesar was desirous to lead Cleopatra in triumph, that she should not
mistrust, or prevent him, he sent her word that he was in love with her.
Philostrat.
Philip of Macedon, leading an army against Byzantium, said, that hearing of
the beauty of the city he was going a wooing, and would make love to her. But
the Orator told him again, it was not the manner, in his country, to go a
wooing with swords, but with music, and they that were in love brought not
instruments of war, but of melody. It were to be wished that as Philip, by
this conceit, was entreated to spare the city, so your Highness clemency
might have persuaded these men to let the Popes plenitudo tempestatis alone,
and spare their country: but when their practices are made the profession of
their Catholic faith, and their loathsomest treasons the cause of the
Catholic Church, and the punishments inflicted for the same accounted
martyrdom; when they have made their private quarrels the public faith of
their Church; what hope is there but they will persevere? When Ephesus was
distressed with a dangerous battery, Polyaen.
in a time of siege, the Governor, with ropes, tied the walls and gates to
Dianaes Temple, that so, being consecrate to the goddess, the enemy should
assault them at his peril. This is now become the Jesuits policy, first to
tie every thing to the Temple, making their innouations and conspiracies the
Churches cause, and then cry them down for heretics that find any fault:
that so neither Church nor state, nor magistrate, nor subject, nor laws, nor
Religion, nor Court, nor country, can be free from their intermedling. Cedren.
There was a time when the Eunuchs were so potent and busy in the Greek
Empire, ouerruling and disturbing all things, that it became the saying of a
great man; if you have an Eunuch in your hand dispatch him, but if you have
none, buie one and dispatch him. The Jesuit and the Mass Priest has plied
his statizing in such fashion that his name may well be put in the room of
the Eunuch: and before your Highness laws against them be put in execution,
that their haunts and harbors may be stopped, and the places of their
entertaintment scoured, and the femall hierarchy, where they breed, be put
down, their plots will never have end; nor is it possible your Highness
state, or person, should have security. Our words against them are many, and
some mislike our earnestness; But the Kings danger made Croesus dumb son
speak: Herodot.
and we had rather sustain the envy of our words then another day feel the
issue of their deeds. Silu. Girald.
When the King of Meth asked advice of one Turghesie, how certain noisome
birds, lately come into Ireland, that did much harm, in the country, might be
destroyed, he answered, Nidos eorum vbique destruendos: the next way was to
destroy their nests where they bred. They are none of Saint Colmans birds that
there should be any such danger in chasing them: but what manner of birds they
are your Highness may perceive by a story in Maximus Tyrius. One Psapho, Max.
Tyr. sermon.
dwelling in the parts of Lybia, desirous to be canonized a God, took a sort
of prating birds, and secretly taught them to sing, PSAPHO IS A GREAT GOD; and
having their lesson perfitly, he let them fly into the woods and hills
adjoining; where continuing their song, other birds also, by imitation, learned
the same, till the hedges rang with nothing but Psaphoes dittie, GREAT IS THE
GOD PSAPHO. The country people hearing the birds, but ignorant of the fraud,
thought Psapho to be a God indeed and began to worship him. This same is the
Popes practice: desirous to effect his ambition, and show himself to be a God,
he maintains a sort of discontented fugitives in his Seminaries, as it were in
so many cages, where dieting them for the nonce, he easily teaches them what
tune he pleases; and having done, takes off their bells and sends them home
again, where filling every hedge and out-house with their tunes, no marvel if
other birds of the same feather, and as wise as themselves, by conuersing with
them, learn the like. This is the guile of Heretics, August.
the learned to plie with their art, and the simple with their errors.

It is incredible and enough to amaze a man to listen them, whether he read
their books, or hear their peoples wild discourse. Modesty is banished,
christian charity, that should guide all men in seeking the truth, is
extinguished; confidence and prefidence carry out all things; the sacred
Scriptures are put to silence, the persons of men are sacrilegiously disgraced,
Genesis 37.31.
as Joseph's coat was dipped in blood: the Popes Breues, and bare lust, sway all
things with them; no rule of reason, no example of the ancient Church, no
president of antiquity, may be opposed against the Popes will: his breast must
inspire all things, his determination must be the rule of all men's faith, Not
what is spoken, but who speaks must be regarded. Staplet. Albertin.
The Bishop of Rome is the infallible rule of faith. Hence it comes that all
their questions and disputations Hildebrandize, and are fortified with such
conclusions of the Popes infallible and unerring authority, and grounded
thereupon, as the ancient Church never heard. This was the uttermost that
Mahomet could do for the establishing of his Alchoran. Alchor.
Three Angels taking him into a mountain, the first ripped his breast, and washed
his bowels in snow; the second opened his heart, and took out a black grain
which was the portion of the Devil; the third closed him up again, and made
him perfect: then they weighed him in a pair of balance, and ten men being not
able to counterpoise him, the Angel bad, Let him go, for no number of men
should be able to weigh against him. If it had not been the Popes good fortune
in this manner to have been washed, and cleansed, and weighed by the latter
Deuines of the Church of Rome, the Jesuits specially, in their Schools, he had
fallen short of Mahomet, and the controversies between him and us were soon
at an end, when not his will, but the word of God, in a free council, should
determine them.

We are not the first that have complained of the corruptions of Rome, and the
Popes usurpations, but all ages have done it before us. Clemangis, in a
certain Epistle to Gerson, says, That all things falling to decay, and going
to naught, in such manner as never was before, yet no man might bewail or
utter it: and what means of remedy, what hope of amendment, says he, can
there be where we may speak neither of amendment nor remedy: where they that
give the wounds are counted good, and excellent, and rare men, worthy of all
commendations and reward; and they which endeavor to keep them off are called
leaud, perfidious, and wicked persons, worthy of all shame and reproach? The
immoderate and unbounded ambition of the Pope, being the Patriarch of the West,
and the pride of his Clergy, were the first occasion that so many errors and
corruptions came into the Church: for the administration and managing of all
things being in their hands, it was an easy matter, howsoever men complained,
for the court of Rome to bring in what it pleased. De Sept. stat. eccl.
Vbertine says, Albeit among the Locusts there be but one King that has all
manner of principality in evil, yet the sanctity of Prelates could not, on the
sudden, be brought to such wickedness, until first, for a long time
together, they began to fall, by pompous ambition: and multiplying the
superfluous state of temporalities; by Simoniacall covetousness, perverse
elections, and carnal promotion of such as they favored, and neglect of
spiritual worship: these wicked dispositions going before, the Devil, at
last, by these means might fully bring in the complete form of the GRAND
MISCHIEF. In Lament. Ierem.
Pascasius complained 700 years ago, that there was almost nothing belonging
to secular life but the Priests of Christ administered it, nor no worldly
affairs but those that served at the altar put themselves into it. And hence
it comes, and not from any ordinance of God, or example of the ancient Church,
that the Pope, with his Bishops and Cardinals, so presumptuously contest with
Gods anointed Kings. It was not so when Christ said, it shall not be so among
you. Luc. 22. Liberat. breuiar.
Nor when Leo the first, with many of his Bishops, UPON THEIR KNEES, ENTREATED
THE EMPEROR and his wife for a Synod. Nor when Leo the fourth, Great.
said to the Emperor Lewis, That if he had done any thing inconueniently, or
not holden the path of his laws, he would reform what he had offended, AT HIS
IVDEGMENT. Nor when the Emperor Justinian began his laws with we COMMAND the
Bishops and Patriarchs of Rome, Constantinople, Novel.
and Alexandria. Auentin.
Nor were his Prelates the companions of Princes, when Charles the Great took
down the Bishop of Mentz about his proud Crosiar staff, with such words as
these: See, our Shephards, that profess the Cross of Christ, in ostentation,
in wealth, in excess, challenge the greatest Emperors. But these monsters
grew up since. Thomas of Aquin, (or Thomas of England) says, that which bred
them was the love of temporalties. Tho. in 6. Genesis
Ex TVNC exorti sunt in Ecclesia gigantes, in magnis and mirabilibus supra se
ambulantes, qui potius videntur Reges, vel Marchiones, quam Episcopi, vel
Abbates, and ideo no^ mirum si per eos erigatur statua Babilonis, and terrena
ciuitas dilatetur. These men (not remembering that howsoever in picture, the eye
be one of the noblest parts, Plato Timae.
yet every color is not fit to paint it: least so it cease to be an eye) with
outward greatness and usurpations would set forth their Priesthood. And in
very deed abusing the favor and liberality of godly Princes, (who thought
nothing too much they did for the Church) to their own lusts, and ambition,
The Emperor yaue the Pope some time, So hy power him about, That at the last
the silly kime, The proud Pope thrust him out. Chaue. Sim. Schard. Hypomnem.
thus at last they shouldred into their thrones, and stole their scepters. One
Rupescissanus, a Friar, told the Cardinals, some 300 years since, that the
Pope and they were the Peacocke whom all the birds had enriched with their
feathers, whereby she was grown so proud that she would never know her self
til the Kings of the earth should come, another day, and taking every one his
own feather, leave her as bald and naked as they found her. And then as their
pride was the beginning of all these errors and corruptions in Religion, that
trouble the world, so their humiliation shall be the end of them.

It has pleased God in a special manner to call your Highness to this work,
and by your hand to dedicate it; your most Christian MONITORY to the Emperor
and Princes, performed with admirable learning, and invincible spirit has made
the entrance, and as it has purchased your Highness that reputation in Gods
Church, and honor with strangers, and authority with adversaries, and
admiration with all, which few Princes, since Constantine, have had before; so
shall it, in time, and by degrees, Apoc. 18.
awaken the Kings of the earth, and declare it self to be the loud cry and
mighty voice of the Angel which God has sent to raise them up and to call
his people out of Babylon. And although the Jesuits, and their accomplices by
their busy writing, would seem to oppose it, yet it so sticks in their
crown, that from the Cardinal to the Friar, they give themselves no
satisfaction in answering, but still as one of them sallies forth another
follows him, as if they meant openly in the field to bewray their weakness
and cry for help; and though they fight desperately, yet is it as the Goth,
mentioned in Procopius, with his enemies weapons stricken, and sticking in the
top of his pate, whereof he died as soon as he returned out of the field. And
albeit their words be vile, and all honest ears abhor so sacred Majesty to be
violated thereby, yet the love of your subjects, and the service of Gods whole
Church toward you for the same, shall weigh them down. And God who has called
your Highness with David, and Constantine^, to be reproached, and threatened,
by such as Shemei, Doeg, Zosimus, and Ennapius were, will give you the same
honor in all generations to come, that they have had: and when the Jesuits
have that opinion that their Lord the Pope is God upon earth, so far above
Emperors and Kings, no marvel if their burden give them courage and make them
lusty. Alchor.
For the Ass that bare Mahomet in his Nurses lap feeling the pretiousnesse of
his load, pricked up his ears and out went all the company; and when some
asked, if this was the beast that yesterdaie was not able to stand on her legs,
but was feign to be lifted up, that now went so lustily, she answered, O that
ye knew who I carry on my back. It was the conceit she had of her burden
that gave her this courage and lift up her ears.

But leaving the^ to their presumption, who, as Isidodorus Pelusiota speaks,
bear themselves on their Priesthood as if they had a tyranny, when they have
wearied themselves with resisting the truth offered them, and are swallowed up
of their own pride and turbulency, your Highness throne shall be established,
and the soul of your enemies shall be cast out as out of the midst of a
sling; and all their followers of what sort soever which so unthankfully have
been content to reap the fruit of your peaceable government, and gracious
favor, and bounty and clemency toward them, but will not join in the
worship of God, nor follow your Highness in the exercise of the word and
Sacraments; shall see their turpitude. The rest by their prayers to God for
your Highness safety, and sacrifice of their best affection thereunto, will
make it appear that your care of their peace, and zeal for the truth, has
not been in vain. And let not your Highness doubt the good success of your
cause. When Luther first began to stir against the Popes pardons his friends
cried he would never be able to prevail, Chemnit.
and bad him go to his Cell, and pray Lord have mercy on him, for there was no
dealing against the Pope. But his fatal hour being come, God showed the
contrary, and throwing down the Tables of those money changers, made it soon
appear that there is no counsel or power against the Lord. Nazianzen says,
that the Emperor Iouian, taking the cause of Religion into his hand, and
laboring to have the world consent therein (which is your Highness most noble
and proper endeavor) thereby both strengthened religion, and brought strength
from religion to himself. Your Majesty in our late Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth has observed, that no power of the enemy can hurt Gods anointed
that honor him; and such as have heard your Princely speeches, many times
touching this matter, can tell you have fixed your confidence in him that will
preserve his servants, when a thousand shall fall at their side and ten
thousand at their right hand. Psalm 91.
Your Highness is more then an ordinary man: God has set his own image, as
it were upon his gold, in an eminent manner upon you, which he has not done
upon other men: your cause is Gods cause, your zeal and constancy is for Gods
truth; they are Gods inheritance and peculiar people you defend, it is your
right you stand for, and a blessed government you maintain. Your enemies are
Gods enemies, and uphold themselves with the basest dishonesty, foulest means,
and detestablest practices, that ever were: And therefore as God has suffered
you for the manifesting of his glory, to be the object of their fury, so he
will make you the president of his mercy to al posterity. His promise made to
Iosuah shall never fail you, Josh. 1.5. Psalm 46.
I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. We will not fear though the earth be
moved, and the mountains fall into the midst of the sea. Though the waters
thereof rage, and the mountains shake at the surges of the same. Yet is there
a river whose streams shall make glad the City of God, even the Sanctuary of
the Tabernacles of the most high God is in the midst of it, and it shall not
be moved. Our God shall relieve it early: when the nations raged and the
kingdoms were moved, God gave his voice and the earth melted; the Lord of
hoasts is with us, and the God of Jacob is our refuge. Our enemies, like
Arians, are ceased to be Christians. Lucifer Caralitanus says, Cum sitis
Ariani, inhumani, impij crudeles, homicidae, non amplius eritis Christiani. And
your people that obey and serve you, Isid. Pelusiot.
being a company holden together by true faith, and the best policy, are part
of the Church of God for which Christ gave himself to die. Your Highness most
happy government is the fountain of our weldoing: when Princes maintain
religion and execute justice, punishing wicked men, and rewarding the godly,
Psalm. 72.
then they come down like rain upon the mowen grass and as showers that
water the earth. One part of the King of Persia his Title in ancient time was
that he did Rise with the Sun, and give eyes to the blind night. Theophy^.
Simocat. Lips. pol.
And the King of Mexicoes Crown oath had wont to be, I will minister justice
to all, the Sun I will make to shine, and clouds to rain, and the earth to
be fruitful; the rivers will I store with fish, and all things with plenty.
For godly Princes procure all these things from God to their people, which must
be acknowledged, when tyrants and such as fear not God, by their evil
government, and neglect of religion, many times darken the air, and hinder
the rain, and make the fields barren, and rivers empty. Pliny enquiring the
reason why the fields, adjoining to Rome, in old time were so fruitful, says,
It was because they were tilled by the chief governors, such as Fabritius,
and Cincinnatus were, Ipsorum tunc manibus Imperatorum colebantur agri,
gaudente terra vomere laureato and triumphali aratore. Which your Majesty doing
so painefully with your own hands, in a more noble field, the Church of God;
all godly minded shall bid God speed the plow, and daily wait till the briars
and thorns be rooted out, and the dew of Gods grace fall on the barren part,
that the Plowman may never be weary nor his hand weak, nor his workmen
unfaithful to him, but all that are about him, and his Noble servants by his
example may give over sleeping, and put their hand without looking back, to
the same work; that the envious man, that sows tares, may be driven forth,
and their own houses may be the greenest and cleanest part of the field: till
he come that shall give end and rest to every labor, and recompense, beyond
all that can be thought, the workmans travel: and binding the good corn in
sheaues, cast the tares into unquenchable fire. God evermore continue and
increase his mercies to your Highness, and lay your enemies at your feet,
that you may see an end of all dissentions, and stablish peace and unity in the
Church.

Your Majesty's most humble subject JOHN WHITE.

To the Reader.
IT is now five years since I published a book called THE WAY TO THE TRVE
CHVRCH, wherein my purpose was nothing else but only to show the weakness
and insufficiency of those Motives which lead so many to Papistrie, and to
bring to trial such reasons as the Jesuits and Seminaries ground themselves
upon, in persuading their people against us: making it more then plain that
the corruptions of the Church of Rome are maintained, and the communion of our
Church in the doctrine, preaching, and the Sacraments thereof, is refused, by
such as follow the Papacy, upon weak and false grounds that cannot be
defended. This poor book, it seems, has not a little incensed my Adversary,
and discontented many that yet should follow reason and the truth of things,
and not be transported with rumor and common impression. For man being a noble
creature, endued with reason, and faculty to discourse, and having a rule left
him of God, whereby to examine things, should not tie his faith and conscience
to the authority, or person of any, more then the truth and the reason and
evidence of that be says will bear him out. It was never heard of in the
world, till now of late years, that the Pope and his definitions were the rule
of faith, or that men were bound to follow whatsoever he should appoint; but
the Church of God, every where, till tyranny oppressed it, examined his
doctrine, accepting and allowing that which agreed with the sacred Scriptures,
and the first antiquity, and rejecting the rest; and albeit many errors had
long prescription, yet the godly still held them to that rule of our Savior:
BUT FROM THE BEGINNING IT WAS NOT SO. Mat. 19.8. Our Adversaries therefore may,
in some points possible, pretend antiquity; but PRIORITIE, which is the first
and best antiquity, they cannot in any one thing wherein they refuse us: and
whether the zealous and resolved Recusants will believe it or no, yet it is
certainly true, there is no one point of Papistry Catholic, that is to say,
such as has been from the beginning, generally received as an article of faith
by the universal Church. And though it be granted that many parts of his
religion have long continued in the world, yet were they never the certain or
general doctrines of the Church, but the corruptions of some therein, which,
in time and by degrees, obtained that strength and credit which now they have:
it being the easiest thing of a thousand for the Pope and his clergy sitting
at the stern, when themselves had once embraced them, with their strength and
learning to give them authority in the world: when Mahomet himself by policy
and tyranny was able, in time, to spread abroad, and a universally, the
doctrine of his Alchoran, which now is 800 year old, and is followed by many
and great nations, as close as Papistrie is either in England or Italy. But
when the Scripture makes it plain, that FROM THE BEGINNING IT WAS NOT SO; and
the Histories and monuments of antiquity, and the books of the elder Papists
and such as were chief in the Church of Rome, bear witness that these things
were misliked, and in all ages complained of; and that which the Church of
England now professes was the faith of most godly men and holy Bishops (though,
the power of the governors in the Church of Rome increasing, they were
suppresed) they do but deceive themselves that think our faith a new faith, or
the points of Papistrie the old religion. I have, as well as I have been able,
and as diligently as I could, with an impartial eye, and many tears to God,
for his direction in the business, and with a heart hating contention, and
possessed as much as any man's living, with desire of peace and unity: (whereof
my 17 years residence in Lancashire can give plentiful witness) read the
Scriptures, and traveled through the writings of the Fathers, and observed the
course of former times, and well advised my self of that which the learned of
the Church of Rome in later times have written from the elder Schoolmen to the
later Jesuits; (though with all humility I acknowledge my self to be the
meanest of any that have taken this course; and much lament my own weakness)
yet am I ready, whenever God, the Judge of all secrets, and the terrible
revenger of falsehood and partiality, shall call me forth of this world, to
testify that my faith and religion and the points thereof maintained in my
writings and preaching, is the truth; agreeable to the first antiquity; and the
contrary, defended by the Jesuits, and followed by Romish Recusants, error and
vncatholicke. And if any persons presumed to be learned, on the other side,
have either in their life or death, showed extraordinary zeal for their Roman
faith; I desire I may be allowed my own knowledge, both of some such persons
and of their judgment, and outward carriage: and not be importuned to follow
that which unskillful and unable, and partial friends have apprehended, rather
then my own clear knowledge both of them and their cause. And if the Church
of Rome have in it diverse learned (between whom and us, my Adversaries will
endure no comparison) that write against us, yet my certain experience of
their manner of writing one against another, and against known antiquity, and
their strange maintenance of the foulest and unworthiest things that are; and
my knowledge of the means whereby, and the ends whereto, they are trained up
to this writing; and my daily exercise in their books, have long since
removed from me all opinion of them; and taught me that learning, as beawty,
can play the baude, and make them love it that shall fall by it, and inamoured
of it, that little know the danger of it. Let the several points of their
faith, which with that learning they maintain, be well understood, and
considered, (for the most understand them not) and let the manner of their
proceeding in that they defend be iudiciously looked into, and it will easily
appear that learning and wit, Genesis 38.
like Thamar, has prostituted her self, and sits in the highway, and so she
may have children, she will deceive Judah her own father. And when all
learning, and the ripest wits, and holiest Divines the Church of Rome has, are
now wholly employed in maintaining the Popes power over Princes, absoluing
subjects from their alleagiance, excusing equiuocating, and the POWDER TREASON;
and making the actors Martyrs; and dissoluing the very ioints and bands whereby
the world, and Christian society, is holden together; it is high time to let
the authority of men's persons alone, and look another while into the reasons
and causes they maintain; and when they have found the truth to cease from
contending, and labor by obedience and submission thereunto to bring glory to
God, that our tongues may profess, and our lives glorify his heavenly
Majesty.

Having therefore written, in my former book to this effect, and plainly
showed all this and much more; that my countrymen, and the people of our
nation, if they pleased, might see the trial of things: it is fallen out, that
the Romish side finds it self, in an extraordinary manner; touched therewith:
and after many rumors, and vows to confute me, at last, about 18. months
since, I received this Reply which here thou see. And, although I take no
pleasure in contentious writings, but (as time shall show, if I continue my
course and God give means) intend that which shall clear the controversies
without contention; yet when I had heard many reports of something that would
be done, with effect, against me, I was willing to give satisfaction again,
least the ignorant might be persuaded something was written indeed that could
not be answered. It is not unlikely but others also (for they have more helps,
means, and leisure then I have) as soon as they can be furnished, will be
doing: and more may yet be written: for so he sends me word that writ the last
Triumph of Purgatory (an Author that sure will overthrow the Chariot and lay
all in the mire if he be set to drive it) and so I have been often told, and
sent word: and therefore if any shall chance to write in form and without
passion (whereof this man is full) and with modesty will say what he thinks,
speaking directly and home to that I have said, without declining or shrinking
from the point that presses him, that I may find him an honest minded man, and
not a Mercurialist; I will gratify him again, with the same that he brings;
and freely revoke and confess any error that he shall show to have escaped me.
If I be otherwise dealt with that nothing be sought but the disgrace of my
person, and indirect discrediting of my book; it is likely that I shall take
my resolution from the circumstances of my adversary when I see him, and do as
his book against me shall deserve. In the mean time, be admonished of 4.
things touching this Reply and my own Defense. First, that whereas he has in
the same book, written against M. wootton, a learned Divine, as well as me; I
meddle only with that which concerns my self: and therefore, taking his
book before me, I answer only the passages that are against me. Next, all
that I meddle with is set down verbatim as it lies; and the number of his page
in the margent over against his text. Then I have in this sort gone through his
whole book, til within a little of the end; which containing no new matter,
but the same that I had occasion to answer diverse times before, I would lose no
time about it. Fourthly, I have answered fully and directly to every word he
says: by which diligence, I have benefited the Reader so much, that howsoever
my Adversary may seem mean, and unworthy confuting, yet he shall not lose his
labor in reading, but find my pains bestowed profitably upon him such as he
is: who yet (to give him his due, though he rail hard and uncivilly, and write
an obscure and unpleasing style) has replied with all the best and sutablest
arguments he could find in Stapleton, Bellarmine, and Valentia; touching the
points depending, and only fails in replying to that which I had answered
before.

Hereafter let me entreat the good and courteous Reader, if he will vouchsafe
to use my writings, not to judge of them but by his own trial and
examination. For they have secretly to their wel-willers, laid imputations upon
them, who being surprised with conceit are afraid to make the trial or to
meet the truth. The quotations, for example, or Authors alleged may be
challenged, and reported to be false: yet this Reply has charged but only one
in all his book: and they which have been lowdest and earnestest, may find in
such a multitude possible some, to prove that the diligentest writer may be
ouerseene: but the substance they cannot discredit. If I have erred in any
thing, or mistaken an Author, I acknowledge my self to be a man that may err;
and I humbly submit what I have done, not only to the Church wherein I live,
but to every moderate and peaceable minded man therein: yea I will, with all
respect of his person, hear, and advise of, any thing that an adversary shall
inform me of, if he will hold the rules of Christian truth and charity; and go
forward with me in that course to seek the truth: which all men see evermore
to be lost where words and wrangling give the sound. And I entreat, even those
that cleave most to the Church of Rome, to persuade themselves that whatsoever
I have written is for their sakes, that if it were possible they might discern
the truth offered them, and the wickedness of the Jesuits that lead them. I
malign no man's person, I hate none that is among them; but being called to be
a Preacher of the Gospel, I am desirous to bestow my spare hours in
maintenance of that I preach: and for the which I were ready to sacrifice my
life, much more to bestow my time and travel; that if it might so please God,
we might be all as one; and the state and government wherein we live, be no
longer tossed and entangled with our disagreements. They cannot but see that
God, by establishing the Kings throne, and blessing it against the malice and
unnatural practices of their Church, gives testimony on our side, and checks
the Pope and all his counsels, thereby to inuit them to peace and unity: they
know that we invoke one God, and believe all the articles of the Creed and
rule of faith, and preach and press godliness of life without partiality,
punishing sin and rewarding well doing, as much as can be done in any
kingdom or state that themselves allow: they have seen, within the memory of
man, innumerable souls giving their life for the testimony of that we believe:
only we differ in diverse articles, which potent and skillful adversaries, at
several times, in ages past, brought into the Church: let our writings be
impartially weighed, and the Scriptures be diligently read, and the first
Antiquity well considered, and it will appear they are in an error, and kept
in bondage thereto, only through the subtilty and cunning of their mass
Priests. God of his goodness open their eyes and ears that they may embrace
the truth and come forth of Babylon, and, shaking off their superstition,
content themselves with the Testament of Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor
and power ascribed for ever. Amen. xij. Maij 1614.

A Table of the Questions and Controversies, either purposely and largely
handled, or, by occasion, briefly falling out, between my Adversary and me, in
this Defense.
A

ANtichrist and his persecution, with the time of his Reign, as the Papists
hold it. page 361. and 378. Apocrypha, not Canonical Scripture. page 61. and
62. in the marg. Assurance of grace and salvation. Chap. 16. Antecedent and
Consequent will of God. page 212. Authority of the Church and Scripture. Chap.
30. nu. 4.
B

Baptism of infants, by Scripture. page 151. nu. 3. The Bull against Mich.
Baius. page 48. nu. 5.
C

Catholic discipline what. page 5. Church defined and distinguished. page
365. nu. 2. The visiblenesse of the Church, at large. Chap. 37.38.39. In what
sense the Church Militant is, sometime, invisible. page 355. 360. 373.
Hypocrites not true members of the Church. page 369. Where the Church was
before Luther. 386. 390. 394. How the Church is subject to error. page 421. nu.
2.
Councels subject to error. Chap. 47. Charles, the Emperor, his book against
Images. page 458. nu. 5. Conception of the B. Virgin in sin. Chap. 49.
Communion in one kind. Chap. 55.
E

Celebration of Easter. page 150. nu. 2. Err: the Church may err. page 421.
nu. 2. And how Councels. Chap. 47.
Errors came in by degrees, into the Church. page 519. nu. 1.
F

Fathers, their consent with Protestants. page 410. and Chap. 45. They
professed not Papistrie. Chap. 43. The Papists manner of rejecting them. page
177.
Fundamental and not Fundamental points of faith. Chap. 17. Frankford
Council against images. Chap. 48.
G

Grace, assurance of grace. Chap. 16. Gregory what faith he taught. page 433.
H

Hypocrites no true members of the Church. page 369. Hildebrands doctrine
touching the Popes power over Princes. page 27. nu. 2. and inde.
I

Jesuits when, and to what purpose, ordained. page 13. The maintainers of
turbulencie and treasons. page 25. and 81. Charged with purging books. page
56. and 72. with inhumanitie. page 87. with training up their people in
ignorance. page 54. and 92.
Invocation of Saints by prayer. Chap. 13. and 14, Implicit faith and all the
doctrine of the Papists touching the same. Chap. 23. Image worship, and the
doctrine of Rome touching the same. page 453. and 528. and Chap. 53.
Justification of the Gentiles. Chap. 22. nu. 1.
L

The Laity forbidden the Scripture. page 479. Permitted, in ancient time, to
read them. Chap. 51.
Luther whence he had his assurance, and who taught him. page 320. nu. 8. His
rejecting the Fathers. page 310. nu. 2. He sought reformation with all
humility. page 317. Where the Church was before his time. page 386. and 390. and
394.

M

Marriage of Priests. Chap. 52. and Chap. 58. nu. 2. Mass Priests: see
Jesuits. Mass. page 74. and Chap. 58. nu. 5. Merits. Chap. 7. and Chap. 58.
nu. 4.
N

The second Nicen Council. Chap. 48.
O

Original sin. page 530. nu. 6.
P

Peter's being at Rome, and being Bishop of Rome. page 534. nu. 2. Pope, how
many Princes he has bin Traitor to. page 34. nu. 3. The Papists make him the
rule of faith, and judge of all. page 67. and 79. and 299. and Chap. 34. and
35. His supremacy chap. 54. and page 525. His succeeding of Peter. page 537.
nu. 2. and 3. He has erred and been an Heretic even in Cathedra. page 543.
nu. 7.
Purging of books. page 56. and 72. Prayer to Saints. Chap. 13. and 14. For
the dead. Chap. 57. nu. 3.
Protestant religion whether it bring men to desperation. p. 401. nu. 8.
Pardons. Chap. 57. nu. 2. Purgatory. Chap. 57. nu. 2. Priests marriage. Chap.
52. and, Chap. 58. nu. 2. Predestination whether for grace foreseen. page 220.
nu. 10. and inde. Predetermination of man's will by Gods will. page 236. nu. 21.
Papists cast off the Fathers. page 177. maintain salvation without the
knowledge of Christ. page 162. have changed the ancient faith. page 339. purged
the ancient writings. page 56. and 72.
R

Rome a whore. page 11. n. 2. Roman Clergy, their covetousness, Chapter 4. nu. 1.
and Chapter 5. Their charity. page 23. nu. 3. Real presence. page 76. Rule of
Faith and the properties thereof. Chapter 26. and Chapter 35, nu. 6.
S

Scripture put down. page 9. and 65. and 79. and 250. Translation thereof into
the vulgar tongue. page 63. and Chapter 51. Such translations forbidden the laity.
page 479. nu. 2. Scripture proves and expounds it self. Chapter 19. and 20. and
32. The sufficiency thereof against Traditions. Chapter 27. and 30. and 31. and
page 274. Obscurity and perspicuity of it. Chapter 29. The light of it. page 280.
What certainty or infallibility there is in translations. Chapter 28. How
particular men are assured of the sense of the Scripture. page 314. Spirits
private. Chapter 32. and page 315. Saints their invocation. Chapter 13. and 14. How
they are supposed to hear us. page 105. Sufficient grace whether given to all.
page 231. nu. 15. Succession of the true Faith in the Church how it was. Chapter
44. Succession of the Romish faith set forth in Catalogues how answered; page
406. Service in an unknown language. Chapter 50.
T

Transubstantiation Chapter 56. Traditions preferred, and Scripture put down. page
9. 65. 79. 250. Treasonable doctrine and traitorous practices defended by
Papists. page 27. and inde. Translation of the Scripture into the mother
tongues. page 63. See Scripture.
V

Vacancy in the Sea of Rome. page 541. nu. 5. Virginity of the B. virgin Mary.
page 149. nu. 1. Woman Pope, page 542. nu. 6.
Scripture expounded at large.

1. Tim. 2.4. God will all men to be saved. page 210. nu. 4. 2. Tim. 3.15. All
Scripture is inspired of God, etc. Chap. 31. 1. Cor. 14. Chapter 50.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Several Chapters of this Book.
CHAP. 1. THe title of A. D. his Reply. A wonder not far from Rome. Writers
not putting their names to their books censured by the Jesuits. The Popes
Iester. The name of Minister and Priest. Church the pillar of truth. The way of
Catholic discipline is the way of the Scripture. The Jesuits Method in
persuading to Papistry. The manner of A. D. his Replying: and his promise to
rail. Chap. 2. The Papists trampling of the Scriptures and preferring their
Church. The Church of Rome touched in her honesty and reputed for a whore. The
conditions of a whore. Chap. 3. The order of the Jesuits, why and to what
purpose erected by the Pope; they are that to the Pope that the Ianisaries are
to the Turk. Their aboadments. Chap. 4 Some examples of the Jesuits rapine.
Touching the present Pope Paul 5. and his nephew Burghesi. The Jesuits
devouring those that entertain the^. Chap. 5. Touching the rapine and
covetousness of the Romish Clergy. And their single life; and what the world
has thought thereof, Chap. 6. Touching the turbulency of our Jesuits and
Maspriests in the State, and their unthankfulness to the King. The seditious
doctrine of the Church of Rome, leading to all disobedience against the
Magistrate, and rebellion whensoever occasion shall serve. Tyrones rebellion,
and the Spanish invasion promoted by the Pope. A Catalogue of about forty
Emperors, Kings, and Princes destroyed or vexed by the Pope and his Clergy. A
consideration upon the doctrine of the Popes power to depose kings. Chap. 7.
Concerning the doctrine of Merits taught in the Church of Rome, and touching
the Bull of Pius and Gregory against Michael Bayus the Deane of Louane. Chap.
8. The Papacy brought in by Satan. The Jesuits spirit of contradiction. The
Church of Rome revolted. The five Patriarchs were equal at the first. Plain
Scripture against the Papacy. The ignorance of Popish laity. Corruption of
writings by the Papists. Reformation desired long before it came. Advice given
to A.D. Chap. 9. The Apocrypha not accounted Canonical Scripture. Papists
professing to expound against the Fathers. The new English translation of the
Bible. Traditions equalled with the holy Scripture. About the erring of
Councels. And the sufficiency of the Scriptures. Chap. 10. The practice of the
Papists in purging books. The sacrifice of the Mass and real presence
denied. Points of Papists absurd. The Pope Lords it over all. Papists need pay
no debts. May be traitors to murder Princes. Jesuits plots in the
powder treason. The Popes dispensing with sin. A meditation for all Papists.
Chap. 11. The Papists manner of dealing with immodesty, and uncharitableness
Briarly and Walsinghams books noted. Some reports of the Papists meekness and
mildness. Hunt a Seminary arraigned at Lancaster. The dumb cattle slaughtered
in Lancash. The general desire of us all to reduce them to charity. Chap. 12.
Touching the ignorance that Papistrie has bred among people. Their barbarous
manner of praying auoched. Of John the Almoner, a legend. The manner how a
certain Priest baptized. The Replies zeal for recusants of the better sort. A
Lancash. gentleman alleged by the Reply A note of a French Knight. The
success of preaching in Lancash. Chap. 13. Touching prayer to Saints.
Mediation of redemption, and intercession. Bonauentures Psalter. Christ the
only mediator of intercession: Reasons why we desire not the dead to pray for
us as we do the living. The prayers of a Friar and an Archbishop. It cannot be
showed that the dead hear us. Devices of the Schoolmen to show how they hear
us. God not like an earthly King. In their Saint-inuocating they Platonize. Men
equalled with Christ. Chap. 14. More touching the worship of Saints. The same
words used to Saints that are to God The formal reason of worship. The harsh
prayers made to Saints how excused. Nauarres form of devotion. Counterfeits
bearing the name of Fathers; S. Austines doctrine to use no mediator but
Christ. Chap. 15. The Jesuits insolency censured. Note books. A relation
showing how the Jesuits train up their nouices to dispute The doctrine of the
Jesuits touching formal lies and equivocation. The Repliars motion to
Protestant Ministers answered. Chap. 16. Touching assurance of grace and
believing a man's own salvation. Perfection of the Scripture and necessity of
the Church Ministry. How the justified conclude their salvation from the
Scripture. The justified have the assurance of faith. This is declared: full
assurance void of doubting taught by the most in the Church of Rome. Touching
perseverance. Chap. 17. Concerning points fundamental and not fundamental:
the distinction expounded and defended. Who shall judge what is fundamental
and what not. A jest at the election of Pope Leo the x. Chap. 18. Touching the
perpetual virginity of Marie. The celebration of Easter. The baptism of
infants. The Jesuits halting. And the Scriptures sufficiency. Chap. 19. How the
Church proves the Scripture. The Jesuits plainly confess that the Scripture
alone proves it self to be Gods word. The Scriptures are principles,
indemonstrable in any superior science. All other testimonies resolved into the
testimony of the Scripture. Touching evidence and the compossibility thereof
with faith. Chap. 20 A continuation of the same matter, touching the Churches
authority in giving testimony of the Scriptures. The Scripture proves it self
to be Gods word. The light of the Scripture. How we are assured of the
Scripture by the Spirit. The reason why some see not the light of the
Scripture. The Papists retyring to the Spirit. And casting off the Fathers. A
Council is above the Pope. The Pope may err. Chap. 21. Which is the Militant
Church. And the Catholic. The Church of the elect invisible. A rancid
conceit of the Jesuit. Chap. 22. Reports made by Papists, that the
Protestants are without religion. They hold the justification of the Gentiles,
without the Gospel or knowledge of Christ. No salvation but in one true
religion. The Repliars tergiuersation. Chap. 23. Touching the implicit faith
that is taught in the Church of Rome. How defined by them. In what sense the
Protestants mislike, or allow it. Arguments made for it, answered. The ancient
Church allowed it not. Chap. 24. Touching the necessity and nature of the Rule
of faith. And how it is revealed and communicated to all men, that none need to
despair. Chap. 25. The text of 1. Tim. 2.4. God wills all men to be saved, etc.
expounded. The diverse expositions that are given of those words. Gods
antecedent will, as they call it, is not his will formally. The antecedent and
consequent will of God expounded diverse ways. Chap. 26. The properties of the
rule of faith described. None follow private spirits more then our adversaries.
How the Rule must be impartial, and of authority. Chap. 27. The Repliars
tergiuersation. The state of the question touching the sufficiency of the
Scripture alone, and the necessity of the Church ministry. The speeches of
diverse Papists against the perfection of the Scripture. In what sense the
Scripture alone is not sufficient. Chap. 28. Touching our English translations
of the Bible, their sincerity and infalliblenesse. How the unlearned know them
to be sincere. The new translation lately set forth by the Kings authority
defended. Momus in his humor. The subordination of means. Chap. 29. Touching
the obscurity of the Scripture. The necessity of means to be used for the
understanding of the Scripture proves not the obscurity. Traditions debarred.
A Council is above the Pope. The Scripture, of it self easy to all that use
it as they should. The certain sense of the Scripture and the assurance
thereof, is not by tradition. Chap. 30. Touching the all-sufficiencie of
Scripture to the matter of faith. It shows it self to be Gods word. Luthers
denying S. James epistle. How the Papists expound the light of the Scripture.
What they, and what we hold about the authority of the Church. How express
Scripture is required. Chap. 31. Wherein the place 2. Tim. 3.15. alleged to
prove the fullness and sufficiency of the Scripture alone, is expounded and
urged against the Jesuits cauils. Chap. 32. Touching private spirits that
expound against the Church. Such private expositions refused by the
Protestants. And yet the Papists have no other. All teaching is to be examined
even by private men. Certain propositions showing how the Church teaching may
be, or may not be examined and refused. Chap. 33. How a private man is assured
he understands and believes aright touching the last and highest resolution of
faith. Luthers rejecting the Fathers. Occhams opinion that no man is tied to
the Pope or his Councels. The Beraeans examined the doctrine that they were
taught. The faith of the believer rests upon divine infused light. M. Luther
sought reformation with all humility. Scripture is the grounds of true
assurance. Who the Pastors were of whom Luther learned his faith. His
conference with the Devil. By the Church the Papists mean only the Pope.
Chap. 34. The Papists pretending the Church, have a further meaning then the
vulgar know. The Popes will is made the Churches act. Base traditions expounded
to be divine truth. Chap. 35. The Papists pretending the Church mean only the
Pope. How and in what sense they understand the doctrine of the Apostles to be
the rule of faith. They hold that the Pope may make new articles of faith. And
that the Scripture receives authority from him. Unlearned men may see the
truth when the Pope and his crew sees it not. And they may judge of that they
teach. The Jesuits dare not answer directly. Chap. 36. An entrance into the
question touching the visibilitie of the Protestant Church in the former ages.
Wherein it is briefly showed where and in whom it was. Chap. 37. Not the
Church, but the Scripture is the rule. The question touching the visiblenesse
of the Church, proceeds of the Militant Church. In what sense we say the
Militant Church is sometime invisible. The Papists think the Church shall be
invisible in the time of Antichrist. Their contradictions touching Antichrist
breefly noted. Chap. 38. The Papists cannot prove the Church to be always
visible in that sense wherein we deny it. The diverse considerations of the
Church distinguished. His quarrels made for our doctrine touching the Churches
several states answered. The faithful only are true members of the Church.
Upon what occasion the question touching the visiblenesse of the Church first
began. Chap. 39. The Papists are enforced to yield the same that we say
touching the inuisiblenesse of the Church. Their doctrine touching the time of
Antichrists reign. And the state of the Militant Church at some times.
Arguments for the perpetual visiblenesse of the Church answered. In whom the
true Church consisted before Luthers time. Chap. 40. Again touching the
visiblenesse of the Church, and in what sense we say it was invisible. Many
things innouated in the Church of Rome. The complaints of Vbertine and Jerome
of Ferrara. All the Protestants faith was preserved in the midst of the
Church of Rome. A jest of the Terinthians. What religion has bred desperation.
Chap. 41. A narration of a popish Doctor and professor of divinity in the
Church of Rome, translated out of Acosta de temp. nouissimis. lib. 2. cap. 11.
and Maiolus dies canicul. tom. 2. page 89. and inserted for answer to that
wherewith the Jesuit reproaches our Church in the last words of his precedent
reply. Chap. 42. An objection against the Repliars Catalogue. Diverse articles
condemned by the Fathers mentioned in the Catalogue, that the Church of Rome
now uses. What consent there is between antiquity and papistrie. Chap. 43.
Whatsoever the Fathers of the primitive Church believed, is expressed in their
books. The Repliar is driven to say, they held much of his religion only
implicitly. What implicit faith is according to the Papists. The death of
Zeuxis. The Fathers writ that which cannot stand with papistrie. Chap. 44. The
whole Christian faith delivered to the Church has succeeded in all ages, yet
many corruptions have sometime been added, how, and in what sense the Church
may err. A Catalogue assigned of those in whom the Protestants faith always
remained. What is required to the reason of succession. Chap. 45. The Fathers
are not against the Protestants but with them. Touching the Centuries rejecting
of the Fathers. The cause of some errors in the Fathers. Gregory's faith; and
converting England. The Papists have been formal innouators. How they excuse
the matter. Chap. 46. The errors broached by the later Divines of the Church of
Rome. Their errors maintained by that Church, and their writings to good
purpose alleged by Protestants. How that which they speak for the Protestants
is shifted of. One reason why we allege their sayings. That which is said in
excuse of their disagreement, answered. Chap. 47. Councels have erred and may
err. What manner of Councels they be that the Papists say cannot err. It is
confessed that both Councels and Pope may err. Chap. 48. Touching the Councels
of Niece the second, and Frankford. How the Nicene decreed images to be adored.
What kind of Council it was. And what manner of one that of Frankford was.
Frankford condemned the second Nicene. Touching the book of Charles the Great,
and of what credit it is. Chap. 49. The ancient Church held the blessed Virgin
to have been conceived in sin. The now Church of Rome holds the contrary.
Chap. 50. Touching Service and prayer in an unknown language. The text 1. Cor.
14. expounded and defended against Bellarmine. The ancient Church used prayer
in a know language. Chap. 51. The Church of Rome against all antiquity
forbids the lay people the use of the Scripture in the vulgar language. The
shifts used by the Papists against reading: spiteful speeches against it.
Testimonies of antiquity for it. The Repliars reason against it. Chap. 52. The
marriage of Priests and Bishops lawful and allowed by antiquity. Some examples
hereof in the ancient Church. The restraint hereof is a late corruption.
Priests were married even in these western parts a thousand years after
Christ. Chap. 53. Wherein is handled the doctrine of the Church of Rome
touching the worship of images, and the distinctions whereby the same is
maintained are examined. And our adversaries finally convicted of giving Gods
honor to their images. The ancient Church was against image worship. Chap. 54.
The Popes supremacy was not in the ancient Church: neither is it acknowledged
at this day by many Papists. Nun Brigets speech touching the Pope. And Cyrils
riddle. Chap. 55. The Communion in ancient time was ministered to the people in
both kinds. An innovation in this point, in the Church of Rome. The pretenses
used against the Cup. Chap. 56. Touching Transubstantiation. It was made an
article of faith by the Lateran Council 1200 years after Christ. How it came
in by degrees. The Fathers never believed nor knew it. Chap. 57. Touching the
first coming in of errors into the Church, with the Persons, Time, and Place.
Purgatory and pardons not known in the ancient Church, nor in the Greek
Church to this day. The true reason why the ancient prayed for the dead. Chap.
58. The Popes supremacy. Single life of Votaries. The worship of images. The
merit of works. The sacrifice of the Mass. And the Popish doctrine touching
original sin: all of them innouations. The disagreement of Papists in their
religion. And namely in their doctrine of original sin. Chap. 59. Objections
against the outward succession of the Pope. Touching Peter's being at Rome. His
Pastoral office, what it was. Whether there be any divine authority for the
Popes succession. Not certain what Popes have succeeded one another. Vacancies
diverse times in the Sea of Rome. The story of the woman Pope, of what credit.
The Pope has been an heriticke, and erred e Cathedra. The Pope succeeds by
Simonie and violence. Such succession is a nullitie by his own law. The
Pharisees in Moses chair, how? A. D. defends the succession of an ASS. Many
Popes at once. Vrbanus his cruelty toward the Cardinals. What the Protestants
say touching the succession of the Church of Rome.
Good Reader, in the printing of this Book, some faults are committed: some
whereof are not great: but the rest, noted with this mark, * concern the
sense or reading more materially. The marginall quotations some excepted I
could not correct, but hope they are reasonable perfect. Correct them as
follows.

The first number signifies the page, the second the line.

Page. 3. line 26. shreene, skreene. 8. 12 it is good, it is a good. 11 25.
down, down. 14. 11. use, uses 16.14 Lonel, Louel. 20.11.* her mot er, our
mother.* and it was, when it was, 24 19. Cuyckins, Cuyckius, 34 5.* the king.
Now may, the king: how may. 15. * possible, impossible. 36.5. not so much, not
much. 38.11.* seventh, second. 45. 26. Anard, Ruard. 60. 2 * of mind, of
wind 71. 3 ingeniously, ingenuously. 80. 27 * serves, seems. 81 16. *
against him his, against his. 86. 26. compiled fraud, fraud compiled. 94. 35. *
see, see. 103. 13. Sato, Soto. 105. 15.* uncertain. And, uncertain, and 106. 11.
please. pleases. 109. 1. * to heaven, to have. 112.28. the like, the life. 113
5.* in cause, in state. 116 1.* charging. Charge. 138. 9.* one promise, on
praemis. 145. 20. none, now 14^. 10.* Casenists, Casuists. 148. 10. this, a
poor, this poor. 14 and them, put it forth. 34. to believe, not to believe
156. 27. contrived, contained. 157.30 yeed. yield. 174 4 * in themselves, in
the Scripture. 180. 35. * visible, invisible. 181.14.* invisible members,
invisible, the members. 188. ^6. answer for, answer. For. 192. 23. that which,
the which 194. 11 Henriquex, Henriquez. 199. 33. * Eusebius, Justine Martyr.
200. 20. daughter, son. 213 9.* this of God, this will of God. 12. as they
call, such as they call. 226. 21. or* his purp. for his purp. 228. 5. none, noe
229. 18. * no man's, one man's 230 2. by oaths, by others. 12.* the works eu^^,
the sin even of corrupt mass was not, but was. 238. 29. * deliberate, not
deliberate. 245. 34. * the cause, since, the conscience. 259. 29.* He replies
sec. he replies: Secondly. 264. 23. says it over, says it over and over. 265.
25. or translation, of translation. 275. 28. * motion, notion 286. 31. lastly,
put it out, and set the figure 7 that follows there. 287. 16. conceived,
contained 21. dives, diverse. 299. 1. * what heresies, what he replies. 304.
35. * in the fourth proposition, in four propositions. 311. 3 is is it, is it.
315. 9. * first and last, hiest and last. 318. 12. RIGHR, RIGHT. 319. 26. may
do, can do. 335. 16 knownes not, knows not. 341. 20. we might impart, we
impart. 367. 32. * universal, univocal. 368. 7 manner, matter. 373. 21. held
in the substance, nor held the substance. 381. 37. ever by, even by 403. 18.
them them that, them that. 414. 30.* yet many yet the maine. 437.9. Nan^us,
Nonnus 448. 26. Council, Councels. 460. 15. had been, have been. 471. 24. * as
the profit, all the profit. 485. 18. * Then I have, Thus J have. 450. 8. And
expounds how, and he expounds how. 505. 6. not with, not only with 504. 23. *
to any other, to ^^^ther. 511. 31. * be reuolued, be renewed 513. 33. * showed
them, thawed them. 527. 17. that contrary, the contrary. 529. 4.* Again
whether, Again whereas 532.1.* that it is sin, some that it is sin. 11.
That it, some that it. 13. That it, some that it. 544 4.* alleged,
alleging. 29. VNLERA, VNLEAR.

In the Margent I observed by the way.

Page ^7. letter c c. 52. Chapter 53. 23. r orthodonograph, orthodoxagraph. 24. *.
see c. 53. see Chapter 52. 38. r Sano, Saxon. 67. c. Chap. 35. 1 Chapter 34. 1. and 35.
^. 77. ^ * Chapter 54. Chapter 53. 95. d (...), 108. u put forth the whole quotation *
*. 113. d Abulens. parad. l. 34. Abul. parad. l. c. 34. 121. * came to, come
to. * 133. line 15. action, occasion. * 148. * cap. 35. and 36. chap. 34. and
35. * 158 * cap. 28.3. chap. 27. 3. * 194. * see verse, see Gerson 261. e
Philocrat, Philostrat. 280. i noted before, noted before page 62 in the marg.
528. ^ Abul. in Sent. Abul. in Deuteron.

THE WAY TO THE TRVE CHVRCH defended against A.D. his Reply.
CHAP. 1.
1. The title of A.D. his reply. A wonder not far from Rome. 2. Writers, not
putting their names to their books, censured by the Jesuits. The Popes
iester. 3. The name of Minister and Priest. 4. Church the pillar of truth. 5.
The way of Catholic discipline is the way of the Scripture. 6. The Jesuits
Method in persuading to Papistrie. 7. The manner of A.D. his replying: and his
promise to rail.

THis A.D. having taken my book into his correction, intitles what he has
written against it, A REPLY made unto M. Anthony Wootton, and M. John White,
MINISTERS: wherein it is showed, that they have not sufficiently answered the
TREATISE OF FAITH; and wherein also the truth of the chief points of the said
TREATISE is more clearly declared, and more strongly confirmed by A.D. student
in Divinity. Wherein I mislike diverse things. First that he styles it A REPLY,
which is nothing less: when he replies neither to all, nor in form to any
thing; but only repeating the conclusions and arguments of some part of the
Treatise mentioned; and without any order, making choice of what he lists, in
my book, to confute, he sets down my answers imperfectly: and skipping from
one thing to another, and dissembling or quite omitting the strength and
substance of that I writ, he replies to few things in comparison: and most an
end occupies himself in rehearsing things that he should have defended. This
is a sorry kind of Replying, and We hold it UNWORTHY the title of an Answer
wherein all the authors best reasons are dissembled, and quite omitted. B^^arl.
protest apol. p 61
unworthy the Title, especially in these days, when our Seminaries have
challenged to themselves such an opinion of substantial dealing, and going
through-stitch with every thing they take in hand, and the poor Book having
been so terribly threatened. They have had it now four years to blow upon, and
many heavy imputations have been laid upon it, by no mean persons of their
sect, that would seem to have skill and courage; and is all now resolved into
this poor REPLY? If they thought it unworthy the answering, why would they
meddle with it? If they would needs be meddling, why have they not done it
sincerely and in form? I have Onus eccl. p. 30. n. 13.
read; how not far from Rome, there has been heard in the air as it were
the noise of an army, and blowing of trumpets, and going off of gunnes; as if
there had been some great business toward: and yet when men have come near
to view, they have seen nothing but a heard of swine, and the footings of
certain strange beasts upon the ground: this, be like, was to warn the Pope,
that the noise of his champions, and clamou^s of his people, was but a meteore,
that would end in a little gruntling and trampling.

2 Next, I mislike the concealing of his name, and shrouding of himself under
a couple of letters: yet because the ordinary practice thereof seems to have
legitimated it, I will forbear all other kind of censuring, and only in the
words of three of his own side, let him see what I might say of it. The first
is Search p. 16.
Walsingham: When I came to view and peruse the book --, and finding it to be
without name of author, having only a most bitter intitulation; I began first
to marvel at that, because I did see no reason why any Protestant writer
should conceal his name in so worthy a matter as is the defense of his
religion --: for which his labor and learned travel, he might assuredly hope
for so great praise and commendation, not only from men, but reward from God
also; whose truth and Gospel he should acquit from such and so great blemishes
of falsehood and untruth, as were by the adversaries thereof objected against
it. So he. The second is Cardinal Bellarmine: Tract. de potest. sum. Pont.
adu. Ba^cl. praefat.
He that set forth Barklies book, neither put to his name, nor the name of
the Printer, or place where it was printed --: he was afraid belike, and not
without cause, either that he should be punished or discommended for it --.
These are no signs of a good work. For he that evil does, hates the light,
lest his works be reproved; whereas he that does the truth, comes to the
light, that his works may be known to be of God. Ioh. 3. The third is Jesuit
Becane: Quaest. Batav opusc. tom. 3. p. 140.
Yea, but you have another name, which you dissemble. What Is the reason? Your
Hollanders will think one thing; but I think another. MY OPINION IS YOU DO
IT, THAT YOU MAY THE MORE SECVRELY LIE AND PLAY THE IMPOSTOR. It is not said
for nothing in the Gospel, He that evil does, hates the light: and in the
Epistle to the Thessalonians, They that are drunk, are drunk in the night.
And certainly, IF YOU WERE A GOOD MAN, YOU WOULD NOT BE ASHAMED OF YOUR NAME,
to confess who you are: now when you do otherwise, how can any man choose but
suspect you? When you fly the light, WHO WILL NOT TAKE YOU FOR A NIGHT-BIRD?
But Papists may do that which is not permitted us. For Poggh. face^.
the Pope was wont to have his iester, when he told him tales to make him
sport, to do it standing behind a cloth, in a corner, for being outfaced. And
it should seem our Seminary-priests have obtained the same favor; that
standing out of fight, behind the shreene, they may be the bolder to utter
that, which, being bashful, they would be loath to speak bare faced. If this
be so, I am satisfied: good reason every Order enjoy his privilege.

3 In the Title also he calls us Ministers, Such is the ordinary and common
ignominy and dishonor, to be reputed a MINISTER in the English Church, that I
suppose very few or no Catholic Priests of that nation would change their
HONOR, even in England, with so base and infamous a generation. R. B. resolut.
relig. p 54. Of which HONOR of Popish Priests in the times past, one writes:
Nam homines Ecclesiastics sua cul^a ita profanarunt, and s^, and ordinem suum,
quod iam plane, and a magnis and a paru^s, in toto mundo, habeantur despectui.
Ioh. Mar. Belg. de schism. and council. page 467. ex Alan. Chartier.
in contempt. But we have the vantage of him: for whereas he cannot show one
place in all the new Testament, where the Preachers of the Gospel, and Pastors
of the Church, are entitled Priests, as he is: albeit the name may be used well
enough in his due sense, by those that are the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and
not the vassals of Antichrist; we can show where they Act. 13.2. and 20 24. 1.
Cor. 4 1. 2. Cor. 3 6. and 5.18. Ephesians. 3.7. and 4.12. and 6.21. Col. 1.7.23.27.
and 4.7 1 Thessalonians. 3 2.1. Tim. 4.6. 2. Tim 4.5.11.
are called Ministers, and their work Ministry: and our contentment is, that
being called to the work of this Ministry, we carry a Name that imports no
more. Whereas Mass Priests, and Soulepriests, Friars, Jesuits and Seminaries,
not only are the titles of those that wear Christ's liuerie, and do service to
Antichrist, but are become the names of the vnnaturallest monsters and wickedst
persons that live in the world; as all the Churches and States thereof, this
day, feel by experience, and this kingdom can well testify.

4 Under the Title he writes this sentence of Scripture: Ecclesia est columna
and firmamentum veritatis: The Church is the pillar and firmament of truth. 1.
Tim. 3. He had read belike in Rat. 3.
Campian, that the name of the Church would terrify the Protestants, and make
them pale for fear: and therefore he would affixe it: though I, for my part,
will think he do it not so much to terrify us, as to gull his own with the
name of the Church. If he had, in any good fashion, defended the exposition and
application he made of it, THE WAY, 15. Reply, page 223
in his Treatise, he might have used it the better, and it would have made us
the more afraid: but having left it in the lash, where I answered it, he is not
worthy so fair a text should come under his title. Nevertheless, there is
good use to be made of it against himself. For if the Church be the pillar of
truth; and the Papacy, which he strives for, in his Reply, be the pillar of
lies: then it will follow, the Papacy is not the Church. The first proposition
is his text. The second, neither his Reply nor Treatise can put by. The
conclusion therefore is the truth. And so the Text may keep his place to good
purpose.

5 On the backside of the same page, he has placed in Latin and English this
sentence of Saint Austin, de vtil. cred. c. 8. If thou seem to thy self to be
sufficiently tossed, (to wit, in doubts, questions, or controversies of faith)
and would make an end of these labors, follow the way of the Catholic
discipline which did proceed from Christ himself by the Apostles, even unto
us; and from hence shall be derived to posterity. I guess his mind was to
allude to the title of my book, which I called THE WAY: and because therein I
defend the way of the Scripture, followed by the universal Church, which he
likes not; therefore he brings S. Austin reuoking us to the way of Catholic
discipline. This man, sure, has a strange apprehension, Denique addimus
Ecclesiam, quae nunc Pontifici Romano obtemperat -- ture ac merito Catholicae
nomen sibi vendicare; eademque ratio ne fidem eius Catholicam esse censendam
and appellandam. Suar. de fens. si^ Cathol. aduers. Anglic. sect. err. l. 1. c.
12. nu. 9.
to think, that wheresoever the Fathers use the word Catholic, they
understand thereby this New-Roman-Catholicke: and when they speak of
Catholic discipline, they understand his Church proposition determined by the
Pope: when they affirm nothing else, but the doctrine contained, and written
in the Scriptures to be Catholic, and the discipline whereby men are
directed, both in faith and manners. So S. Austin expounds himself Cap. 6.
in the same place: Believe me, whatsoever is in those SCRIPTVRES, is lofty
and divine; THERE is altogether IN THEM, the truth and discipline most
accommodate for the renewing and repairing of our minds, and so qualified,
that there is NO MAN BUT FROM THENCE HE MAY DRAW THAT WHICH IS SVFFICIENT for
him, if to the drawing he come devoutly and godly, as true religion requires.
So also Theophilus Alexandrinus Epist. 1. Pas. chal. page 377.
calls the medicines taken out of the holy Scriptures, for the curing of
heresies, the ecclesiastical discipline. The WAY to the Church therefore, and
S. Austins WAY of Catholic discipline, are both one, because they both are
the way of the Scripture, and that sufficient and easy way, which the simplest
that is may find, though the Pope with his authority and traditions
intermeddle not; and he that will seek the Catholic discipline by Saint
Austins consent, must do it in the SCRIPTVRE, which I doubt will not greatly
please this Jesuit, who has spent all his time in groping for it about the
Popes stool, he being the man, when all is done, that must determine this
discipline, and Cum Pontisex definit, Ecclesia per caput suum loquitur. Suar.
vbi sup. c. 2^. nu. 7.
the mouth whereby their Catholic Church must utter and expound it.

6 In the next page follows a Table of the contents of his book: and after
that, a short Preface to the Reader, wherein first he commends his book that I
confuted, and his Method used therein, to bring men to resolution, and then
shows how he was urged, by our writing against it, to this Reply: excusing
himself for the plainness of his style, and concluding with a grievous
complaint of our insincere dealing; which he proceeds to show in that which
follows. The Commendation that he gives his Method, may not be denied: for we
allow Apes to hug their young ones, and heretics to conceit their own
devices; and I must confess, it is good round Method indeed for the purpose,
and profitable, for them, to be followed. For if you will see it, this it is:
Good Eve for your souls health, I were ready to shed my best blood: and
therefore have ventured my life, as you see, (upon the entertainment you know
of, such as I find in the hiding rooms) to bring you home to the Catholic
Church, your Method is this: Close up your eyes, and examine nothing, but
obstinately renouncing the Protestants, and stopping your ears against the
Scriptures, in all things believe us, who on my own word are the Church of
God; and submitting your self to the direction of your ghostly father, without
more ado be resolute, and you shall easily be persuaded of our Roman faith.
This is a good sure Method to resolution, and makes many resolute, indeed: and
the Jesuit having found by experience how kindly it works with good natures,
had reason to commend it; though in any indifferent judgment, it be a poor
one, as will appear. The rest of his Preface is trash: come we to that which
is material.

7 After the Preface, to show my insincere dealing, whereof he complains, he
makes a title of examples of gross untruths, gathered out of M Woottons, and
M. Whites books; by which the discreet reader may see how little sincerity
or care of truth they have had: and consequently, how little credit is to be
given to their writings: and having dispatched M. Wootton, he comes to me with
these words: Now to come to M. White, whose book is said to do much more harm
among the simple, then M. Woottons does; I hope I shall lay open such foul
want of sincerity, and care of truth in him, as it will plainly appear, that
those which shall hereafter take harm by giving credence to his words or
writings, shall show themseluis to be very simple indeed. So that, in all
probabilie, he should have some great matter to show, that makes so large an
offer; and yet every one of these examples will prove in the scanning, so many
testimonies of his own weakness and immodesty: when having had the book four
years in his hands, and so many of his consorts to join with him in replying,
(all which time their rage against it, and desire to discredit it, and vows to
confute it, appeared well enough) yet now at the last can object no other
examples of untruth, then these. And that we may know he comes furnished, he
calls for a railing room to brawle in. Jtaque ne in posteru^ quidem, Lipsi
rosas: ogita sesamam aut papauer, sed spinas si as a^^ynthium and acetu^. Lips.
constable 1.10.
I must crave the readers patience, if contrary to my usual course, he find
me in this passage something sharp; because M. Whites outrages are such, as
require more then an ordinary sharp reprehension. Let him therefore take the
Gun room, or if he will the Lucian Iupit Tragoe 1. (...).
cart where in old time they used to rail freeliest. I am indifferent what he
say, having propounded to my self to answer not his scurrilitie, but his
Divinity: though he keep so good promise, in this he threatens, and his
insolences both in railing and bragging be such, that it were able to dissolve
into some passion or other, the best patience that an adversary can have. And
had he as well performed the gross untruths he undertakes to show, as he has
his sharpness which he promises, he might have gone for a good play master: but
to rail, and run away, is women's fight. If he would have men to think my
outrages are such, as he says; he should have expressed some of them, and
quoted the pages of my book, where the reader might see them; which when he
does not, nor cannot do, the reader may suspect he says this to make way for
his own railing. For the Book it self will testify what I have done, better
then any thing I can say here; wherein there are, I deny not, many sharp and
bitter speeches against the abuses of the Church of Rome, but they are not
mine, but the Papists, whom, being urged thereunto, I allege: it is one of the
things that has always made me have a base opinion of our adversaries; that
these foul tales of their Church, being blabbed out by themselves, yet they
would never give us leave to report them again, or mention them. Other outrage
or railing then this, I have used none, nor never did in all my conflicts with
the^, neither is it my manner to practice or defend it: but by this my last will
and testament, I bequeath it in legacy to himself, and Namely to D. Harding,
Stapleto^, Sanders, Parsons, Euans, Surius, Feuardentius, Great. ferus,
I'acenius.
his Clergy, and other his consorts, whose spirit I have reasonably tasted
these many years together. Jude v 9.
The Angel disputing with the Devil, about the body of Moses, durst not
blame him with reuiling speeches, but bad the Lord rebuke him. According to
which example I wish there were less bitterness, and more going to the
argument in their writings. For mine own part, (...). Isid. Pelus. page 453.
I think it not so meet to speak every thing that my adversary deserves to
hear, as to let nothing pass me, that becomes not my self.

CHAP. II.
1. The Papists trampling of the Scriptures, and preferring their Church. 2.
The Church of Rome touched in her honesty, and reported to be a whore. The
conditions of a whore.

Page 22.
A. D. First in his epistle Dedicatorie, in which he speaks not to simple
men, but to his most reverend Fathers in God, Toby the Archbishop of York his
Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of England: and to George Lord Bishop of
Chester, his very good Lords: he affirms to our disgrace, that all our speech
is of the Church, no mention of the Scriptures, or God our Father, but of our
Mother the Church: the which he confirms with a scurrilous comparison, Much
like, says he, as they write of certain Ethiopians, that by reason they use
no marriage, but promiscuously company together, it comes that the children
follow the mother, the fathers name is in no request, but the mother goes away
with all the reputation. Thus he. Now how loud, and lewd an untruth this is, I
refer to the judgment of any man almost never so simple, supposing he have
had any ordinary conversation with Catholics, or be in a mean measure
acquainted with their words and writings. For what man is so simple, who cannot
discern this to be evidently contrary to our ordinary practice and common
speech, and contrary to our profession, and public doctrine of faith? And is
it then possible, that a Minister, whose name is White, should have a face so
black, as without blushing, so soberly to asseuere such a notorious untruth,
especially in the sight or hearing of those his good Lords, and reverend
Fathers in God? Surely it is marvel, that those his reverend Fathers, or some
for them, did not examine and mark this and other his gross untruths; or
marking them, that they would, for their credits sake, suffer them to pass
(especially twice) to the print. And much more marvel it is, that in stead of
reproouing the man for such his shameful untruths, (which had been the duty
of reverend Fathers in God) they would permit him to use their names in the
forefront or beginning of his book, by which men may suppose, that they by
their authority do canonize, or at least give countenance to so many his
gross errors, and untruths, as are found in this his book.
1 THe first example of my outrages and insinceritie, is in those words of the
epistle Dedicatorie: All their speech is of the Church, no mention of the
Scriptures, or God our Father, but of our mother the Church, etc. Wherein if
there be any trespass, yet he shows it but meanly, by saying it is a lewd and
loud untruth; and referring the matter to such as are acquainted with
Catholics, and their writings. For this, and the railing that follows, and
his empty maruelling at the BB. that would permit me to say so, purges not
Papists from the imputations, but charges them deeper. For S. Chrysostom
says, that (...). hom. 22. Romans
when a man's adversary falls to scolding, it is a sign he is guilty. And if
the truth must be tried by the words and writings of his Catholics, then the
matter will go well enough on M. Whites side. For how should the common people,
of who^ I properly spoke, talk of the Scripture, which they know not, THE WAY,
2. n. 3. See Staplet. relect. page 535.
which they are forbidden to read, THE WAY 1. n. 3.
which they must believe contains the least part of that which belongs to
their faith? The Rhemists Annot. Luc. 12 11.
teach lay Catholics, when any of them are called before the commission to
answer, that he is a Catholic man, and that he will live and die in that
faith which the Catholic Church teaches: and this Church can give them a
reason of all the things which they demand of him: and he that answers thus,
they say, says enough, and defends himself sufficiently. Here we see, all
their speech is of the Church, no mention of the Scriptures. And he that dwells
among them, or has occasion to discourse with them of religion, shall find
the truth of that I say. And this is agreeing with the public profession, and
doctrine of their Church. For it is holden, Quod ad nos pertinet, certior and
fi^mior est Ecclesiae authoritas quam Sripturae Az^^. Inst. tom. 2 l 5 c. 24.
See Abulens. q. 13 prooem in Matthew. Caiet. apol de author Pap. par. 2. c. 13.
ad 5. Dried, de eccl dogm. l. 2. c. 3. ad 4.
that the authority of the Church is greater then of the Scriptures. Stapl
relect. controu. 4. q 5 page 494. 495.
That the Churches authority is it that makes us receive the Scripture, and
every thing that is to be believed: yea, the Church is to be heard MORE
CERTAINLY then the Scripture, because her doctrine is MORE MANIFEST AND EVIDENT
THEN the doctrine of the Scripture --. And Medin. de rect. in Deum fid. l 5. c.
11 refert Azor. to. 2 p. 602.
our faith, whereby we believe the matters of faith, is reduced to the
authority of the Church; because we give NO CREDIT TO THE SCRIPTVRES, but for
that the Church propounde the canon thereof to be believed. And finally Stapl
relect. page 548.
the Church has the power to expound the Scripture, from whom we must receive
the sense thereof: Page 550.
which authority of the Church, is the tower and bulwark of our faith,
whereto every faithful man must retire when any question arises. Pope
Gregory the 13 D. 40. Si Papa annot.
says, Men do with such reverence respect the Apostolical seat of Rome, that
they rather desire to know the ancient institution of Christian religion from
the Popes mouth, then from the holy Scriptures: and they only enquire what is
his pleasure, and according to it they order their life and conversation. By
which words of theirs it is clear, that I said the truth. For to what purpose
should they allege or mention Scripture for themselves, that thus place all
the power, virtue and efficacy of it in their Church; that in every issue,
fly, for the exposition of it, to their Church? that find such wants and
defects in it, that all things must be supplied out of their Church? If there
were any error in my speech, it lay in another point, because I did not say,
all their speech is of the Pope, no mention of the Scripture, but of the Pope.
I should in stead of the Church, have said, the Pope of Rome. For See below c.
35 n. 1 THE WAY. digr. 16. n. 4.
howsoever they use the name of the Church, yet thereby they mean nothing but
the Popes will: he is the Churches mouth, and head, and from him the Church
receives her prerogatives: neither do we know or believe any thing to be the
doctrine of the Church, or sense of the Scripture, unless he deliver it. This
is their doctrine.

2 So that I might with good discretion compare our adversaries to such as
follow their mother only, and their mother her self to one of the Ethiopian
kind, without any imputation of scurrilitie. And the Jesuit should not have
set up his comb at the BB. about the matter; for they will answer, that a
great Archbishop, Thomas Becket of Canterbury, long before them, did more then
they have done, for they only heard me utter the speech, but he uttered it
himself, Jewel. def. apol. page 762.
Our mother Rome is turned whore for money: which being so, I could not
imagine, when I writ, how our adversaries should call upon any, but their
mother, whose children they were of the surer side. But if he think I have
slandered his mothers honesty, the Court is open, let him take his action
against me, and he shall hear my answer. Francis Petrach a most learned man
Ioh Mar. Belg page 441.
called Rome, The whore of Babylon. Budaeus: De Ass. page 590. and 601.
If we consider the face and habit of our Clergy (speaking of the Church of
Rome) we shall be constrained to say, the spouse has renounced her husband,
and bidden him deal in his matters himself --. Now the spouse of Christ
forgetting the band of marriage, not only lies from her husband, but without
all respect of shame, goes up and dowe the streets and high ways, and plays
the whore, from Province to Province. Matthew Paris: Hist. page 535.
The insatiable greediness of the Roman Church so prevailed, that all
blushing set apart, like a common and shameless whore, she prostituted her
self for money to all comers. Ioannes Saris buriensis: Policrat. page 402.
An incestuous wooer is descended into the bosom of the Church. Mantuan: Silu.
l. 1.
Mars is become father to our Romans, and a whore their mother. Onus
Ecclesiae: Cap. 43. n. 7.
God by the Prophet Ezekiel speaks to the Church of our days, in these words:
Thou have committed fornication exceedingly, and art not satisfied, but have
multiplied thy fornication upon earth, and do all the works of a whore, and
of an impudent woman. All these that thus speak, were of the Church of Romes
bedchamber, and attended on her, and saw who came in and out, and therefore
their testimony proves that I said of her. Besides, Nun-Bridget Meretrix solet
esse Procax in verbis, Leui^ in moribus, Pulcra facie, Ornata vestibus. Revel.
l. 1. c 15.
says, the marks of a whore are four, Shamelessness in words, Leuitie in
manners, A fair face, And gay clothes. All these agree to the Church of Rome,
as every body knows: therefore I demand judgment, and my charges against the
Jesuit.

CHAP. III.
1. The Order of the Jesuits, why and to what purpose erected by the Pope.
They are that to the Pope, that the Ianisaries are to the Turk. 2. Their
abodements.

Page 24.
A. D. It would be too tedious to touch all particulars which may be observed
in this his Dedicatorie epistle; in which like a man run mad or frantic
through fury, he raileth and rages against our religion, and the professors
thereof, without care either of truth, sincerity, modesty, or common
civility. I will, as I purposed, give the reader only a taste, leaving it to
his discretion to think of the rest, as he shall see cause. The Jesuits
(says he) which are the Popes Ianizaries, that guard his person, and were
brought in now at the last cast, when the state of the Papacy was at a dead
lift, to support the weight of the maine battle, have pestered the land with
their writings, and filled the hands and pockets of all sorts of people with
their papers: yea fannes and feathers are lapped up in them, wherein it is
admirable to see, how presumptuously they take upon them, in disgracing our
persons, belying our doctrine, and coining and defending strange opinions of
their own, never heard of before, etc. How false this his relation is, in
diverse respects, the discreet reader, if he be acquainted with Jesuits, will
easily discern. As namely in that he says, the Jesuits be the Popes
Ianizaries, etc: that they have pestered the land, and filled the hands and
pockets of all sorts of people with their writings, etc. that they are
admirably presumptuous in disgracing the persons of Protestants, and in belying
their doctrine, and incoyning and defending opinions never heard of before.
1 THe Jesuit, it should seem, was the son of some passionate woman, that
can neither give over before he be tedious, nor go forward quietly: but in stead
of giving his reader a taste of my insinceritie, will give him a taste of his
own immodestie and intemperance. I said, the Jesuits were the Popes
Ianizaries, that guard his person, brought in to support the maine battle,
when the Papacy was at a dead lift: whose writings farced with lies and
novelty, fill the land, and as follows: but mark his answer, The discreet
reader, if he be acquainted with the Jesuits, will easily discern, how false
this is: and so leaves it to his discretion to think as he shall see cause.
This is a simple reply, when after a boisterous fit of railing, if the reader
favor him not with his discretion and old acquaintance, he has nothing to
say, and to beg credit against that we see with our eyes, and palpably feel
under our fingers. For Maff. vbi infra
this order was first confirmed by the Pope in October. 1540. the reason that
moved him thereto, was that the Papacy being at a dead lift, they might help
to support. The words of Maffaeus a Jesuit himself, are, Lib. 2 c. 12. vit.
Ignat. Loiol
that when Ignatius, by the means of Cardinal Contarenus, offered the Pope
the form of their Order, (wherein among other things it was contained, that to
the other three solemn vows which are common to other Orders, they would add
a fourth special vow; that whithersoeuer it should please the Pope to send
them, about the affairs of religion, into the countries of Christians or
infidels, thither without grudging, stay or reward, they would readily go) as
soon as he had viewed it, he said, This is the Spirit of God, and he hoped God
himself had stirred up the courage of this band, AT SVCH A TIME, to be no
small help to THE AFFLICTED STATE of the Church. Ribadineira, another Jesuit,
Vit Ignat. l. 2. c. 18.
says, God by a singular kind of providence, sent Ignatius to help his
Church NOW WHEN IT WAS READY TO FALL, that he might set both himself and his
sons the Jesuits to be a wall for the house of God --. Let us set before our
eyes the end why the society of the Jesuits was instituted, which verily was
the same which the present time of the Catholic Church required: The society
therefore of Jesus, was chiefly erected for the defense and propagation of the
faith, as is contained in the apostolic letters of their confirmation --.
Since the birth of Ignatius THE LIGHT OF OUR RELIGION WAS IN GREAT PART
OBSCVRED --: and therefore it was by the incredible providence of God, that
this new Society should be ordained principally for the defense of faith. This
plainly shows, how and to what purpose that Order was erected; since which
time it is easy to see, that See Byzar. rer. Persic. lib. 9. page 213. and P.
Iou. hist. l. 14. sub sin.
what the Turks Ianizaries are to him, the same have these been to the Pope,
being also drawn by tricks and devices out of every country, to furnish the
Papacy, and execute the Popes ambition and lust, under the pretense of
Religion; no otherwise, nor honestlier, then the Turk Jn queis, ob confirmatam
bellicae laudis opinionem, in omni Turcarum expeditione, and summa virium, and
vincendi certissima ratio semper fuit. Iou. l. 13. p. 138. See Byzar. vbi sup.
takes the children of Christians, and by education makes them his best
soldiers, and use them to fight against their own parents and country: by
which device the Pope supplied the want of learning and discipline, that began
to fail in his Church, which otherwise by this had been at a low ebb. They
say, God raised them up; we, that Satan. They cry out, that Luther was raised
out of hell by the Devil, (who yet was the servant of Christ, and worthy of
eternal honor) they must give us leave to say the same of Ignatius and his
companions: which of us say true, must be tried by the doctrine that Luther and
the Jesuits teach; and Christ Jesus, the Judge of all controversies, one day
will determine.

2 If I complained (to them that should mend it) of their filling all things
with their presumptuous and heretical writings, until it comes to fannes and
feathers, that also is truth; for to omit our own knowledge, and the Legends
of collapsed Ladies, they object it one against another, how Quod lib. p. 39
the women dote, and run riot after them --, and Page 65.
to huffe and ruff it out, a council of women must be called to cock a
hoope, and that Page 39.
a Jesuit is a pearl for a Lady. And touching their innouating all things,
their belying our doctrine, their coining of new opinions, their turning Popery
into Iesuitisme, their reducing all things into their own course, and
Machauillian managing of the Papacy, I refer the reader to the declarations
made against them by their own fellows the Seminaries, if he list not
himself to see these things, every day in the year, with his own eyes.

CHAP. IIII.
1. Some examples of the Jesuits rapine. 2. Touching the present Pope Paul 5,
and his nephew Burghesi. The Jesuits devouring those that entertain them.

A.D. He passes from the Jesuits to the Seminary priests, Page 24.
of whom in his railing humor, he says, that since the Harpies were chased
away, and Bell was overthrown, never was there such a greedy and ravenous
Idol, as the Seminary with his back and belly, sinking and drowning all that
entertain him. But truly he might better have applied this calumnious
comparison (of Priests with the Harpies, and the Idol Bell) to most of the
married ministry, and to those their hungry and proud brats, that love
little to fast, and desire much to go fine. as also that other gross
similitude of Moloch the Idol of the Ammonites, with the seven aumbries,
ready to receive Meal, Pigeons, a Sheep, a Ram, a Calfe, an Ox, etc.
(which he applies to the same Seminaries) suiteth much better with the said
married Ministers, then with the Seminaries. For the Seminaries as they live
single, have no need of so many aumbries, but can be contented with such poor
pittances from hand to mouth, as the charity of good people will afford them:
whereas married Ministers, especially if they have many children, had need to
have many aumbries filled with all such stuff, as was in the said aumbries of
that Idol, to wit, Meal, Pigeons, etc: saving only that they love not to
have an aumbrie to entertain any bodies children besides their own.
1 THis is the third example of my insinceritie, wherein he gets it missed in
the first word, hoping, that when I begin to speak of the Harpies and Moloch,
I pass from the Jesuits to the Secular priests, as if this imputation (which
indeed is a foul one) were laid only on the Seminary; but he is deceived: for
I pass not from the Jesuit, but stick upon him still, and avouch
indifferently of them both, that since the Harpies were chased away, and Bell
was overthrown, and Moloch polluted, there was never such a greedy and
ravenous Idol. For proof whereof, I referred my self to the Quodlibets,
written by one that lived and died a Seminary Priest himself, and therefore
could best tell the conditions of a Jesuit. He says, page 112.
they collect and hoard up great sums of money; page 85.
they have cosening and conicatching tricks to pick a man or a woman's purse,
and to get all their lands by it. And he shows diverse instances, p. 89. and
inde.
of Gilbert and Drury, that got from diverse gentlemen all they had, whereof the
proverb arose, when one was cosened of that he had, Such a one is Gilberted,
Such a one is Druryed. They tell of Gerard the Priest, that cosened Drury of
Suffolk of his manor of Lozell, and other land to the value of 3500 pounds:
of M. Anthony Rowse cosened of a 1000 pounds: of M. Edward Walpoole, of whom
the said Gerard got 1000 marks. Of M. Linacre being prisoner in the Clinke,
they got 400 pounds. Of 1000 pounds drawn from young Huddleston. Of M. Wiseman
cosened of all his land. Of M. Nic. King, M. Roger Lee, the Lady Lonell,
Mistress Haywood, Mistress Wiseman, Mistress Fortiscus, all of them not Gilberted
or Druried, but Gerarted. And he tells of diverse gentlewomen, whom they
persuaded to become Nuns, and to give them their portions: one of which
portions sometime amounted to above 200 pound. And many such like reports he
makes touching their molochisme in other things. Waldensis the Friar
Sacramental part 2. page 217
makes much ado with a follower of Wickliffe, and a married priest, for
spending a young man's inheritance of 40 pound a year: and says, he was
detected thereof before the Bishop of Norwich: but how true or false soever
that were, it was nothing to the cheating of our Jesuits, whom the most that
entertain them, find to be the ruin of their houses. What my self knew in
Lancashire, and many worthy gentlemen of that country will testify touching
this matter; the sinking and drowning of many a house that has entertained
them, this reply must not think to outface with a little boldness: but give
me leave, for my own part, to abhor them the more, that so desperately deny
what our whole State knows to be true. And I pity the Recusant that sels the
Seminary, his ghostly father, the fox case for half a crown, and buys of
him again the tail in hobby-horses for ten groates.

2 But whereas the Jesuit says, the comparison of Moloch would sort better
with married Ministers, and their hungry proud brats, that love little to
fast, and desire much to go fine; I can easily quit him: for his Priests
fruitfull-single life will not abide the ripping into, whatsoever his stomach
be against Ministers marriage. And if I had been of his counsel when he writ
this, he should have mentioned it with less passion, unless he could have
disputed better against it, Reply page 281, and 282. See below c. 53.
where it fell in question. But if our brats be that which sticks in his
stomach, let him have patience but a little, and I will ease him. The Pope
that now is, has The former Popes, to cast some cloak over their infamy,
were wont to call their children their nephews. Guicciard hist. page 8. Engl.
a Nephew that is a Cardinal, called Burghesi, dearer to him then any of our
children are to us: Nouus homo suppl. ad imp. page 22. and inde.
it is reported of him, that his father Paul has given him, in Ecclesiastical
revenues, 250000 scutes by the year; all Benefices without cure are given him.
The Pope creates such Cardinals, as in the next election may stick to his
Nephew: young men, ignorant and base, that will be content with small revenues,
and hang upon his Nephew, Lantes, Capponus, Barberinus, Spinola, Tontus,
Lanfranke, de Lenis, and Philonardus. Tontus was a poor Attorney, and an
Organist of a Church. Lanfranke a Surgeon in a hospital for the pox. De Lenis
and Philonardus, vicars of hell. Such poor, ignorant, and base Cardinals he
makes, that his Nephew may buy their voices the next election to be Pope. This
is written from Rome, by one that it seems has not been far from his elbow,
and is a Roman Catholic, but yet would have a general Council to reform
these things, and create a lawful Pope, which Ecclesiae vero Pastore caret;
intrusi Papatu^ depraedantur. p. 1.
he says, they have wanted, ever since Sixtus Quintus. Now the Jesuit may the
better digest Ministers brats, when he sees his holy father has one of his
own, that thus deuoures more then all the Ministers children in England do;
and no bodies children besides, can be entertained for him. This Burghesi is a
fit logge to hew a Moloch out of, and his uncle a priest that faithfully
ministers to his Idol. And to purge his humor of railing, yet a little
better, let the Jesuit be advised, that how hungry soever our Ministers
brattes be, yet I am certain, and readers will confess, they are neither
prouder nor finer then disguised Seminaries, whose apparel, entertainment and
furniture, is well known to be both rich and costly, at the least: yea such,
that were they of God, and not the Harpies* I speak of, as things stand with
them, they would not use, but shroud themselves at a lower rate, and with less
charge to their friends; and were I a Jesuit lurking in the land, as they do,
I would disguise my self in motley, rather then my maintenance and lust should
thus overthrow such as gave me entertainment. What I have seen with my eyes on
the back of a Seminary, I may not speak; but it is the report of our Dialog.
between a Secul. priest and a lay Gentl. page 90
adversaries* themselves, that a Jesuit has worn a girdle, hangers, and
rapier, worth ten pounds; a ierkin worth as much; and made himself three
suites of apparel in a year; his horse, furniture and apparel valued at a
hundred pounds; he spent by the year four hundred pounds without inheritance.
That which maintains this, and all the furniture of our swaggering gallants,
the Jesuit may not call poor pittances from hand to mouth: for I am sure he
scorns it, and will leave it to hungry Ministers for them to live upon, who
would be glad, many a one of them, of one moitie of an ordinary Seminaries
maintenance, and yet chearefully and effectually labor in the Church, and are
contented with that they have, and possible keep more true hospitality, then
The Jesuits having gotten Judas his office etc. Quod lib. page 37 70
they that have gotten Judas his office to carry the bag; and my assurance is,
that there be few that shall come to read this, but will witness with me, and
can call to mind, many such Ministers; and testify the general experience
that our State has of our Seminaries covetousness and single life, that Non
est quod fraudem obducas o amice; ex insu lu enim in curia Romanam co^mi.
grass Harpyas comperium est, ibique tam domicilium c^nslitu^sse Alph Aragon.
quem refert Panormit de dict. Alph. p. 3.
I might well compare them, as I did, to ravening Harpies, and wide gorged
Idols, that under pretense of religion and persecution, seek nothing but their
backs and bellies, and the satisfying of their lust and ambition. For we
cannot but speak the things we hear* and see; and we speak it not in hope to
make them ashamed. For words will not chase Harpies from the prey; but in
commiseration of our people, that suffer themselves thus to be abused, and in
detestation of that hypocrisy, that under pretense of long prayers devour
widows houses.

CHAP. V.
1. Touching the rapine and covetousness of the Romish Clergy. 2. And their
single life: and what the world has thought thereof.

1 LEt not the Jesuits, with talking of their single life, and poor pittances
from hand to mouth given them of charity, go about to hide that which cannot
be: for (to supply what was wanting in my former speeches) the young wolves
will take after their damme. The Church of Rome their mother, of whom they are
come, has been noted for a ravening wolf in all ages, that would never be
glutted with spoil. So long as Gaude matter nostra Roma stands in
Vrspergensis, her insatiable ravening will not be forgotten. Thus he Chron. p.
321.
writes, that was well acquainted with her gormandize: Rejoice, O Rome our
mother, to whom the catarackes of the treasures of the earth are opened, that
to thee may flow rivers, and heaps of moneys in abundance. Rejoice in the
iniquities of the sons of men, the price of whose wickedness is given thee
for thy recompense. Be merry with Discord, thy helper, which is broken out of
the infernal pit, to heap up to thee manifold rewards of money. Thou have
gotten that thou thirstedst after; sing a song merrily, for by the wickedness
of men, and not through thine own religion, thou have conquered the world;
not men's devotion, or conscience, but their wickedness and contentions bought
with a price, have drawn them to thee. Matthew Paris Hist mayor. page 56.
says, that the most gracious Sea of Rome, never used to refuse any that used
Dummodo albi aliquid, vel rubei intercedat
the intercession of gold and silver. And that Page 335.
the Roman Church was so inflamed with greediness, and open covetousness,
that Ecclesiastical goods not being sufficient, it shamed not to disinherite,
and make tributarie, Emperors, Kings and Princes: -- and Churchmen, whose
words were sweet as honey, and supple as oil, yet were insatiable
horse-leaches, saying the court of Rome is her mother, and our nurse, and it
was the root of all evils, doing the deeds not of a mother, but of a
step-dame: and Page 747.
he says, it was like a gulf, devouring up all men's revenues, and the
possessions almost of all Bishops and Abbots. And Page 890.
he tells the answer, that a B. elect made to King Henry the third, moving an
accord between him and certain Monks, with whom he was at variance: Knows
not your innocence yet, the dropsie-thirst of the Romans, which has been
felt so often? I know (says the King) it will never be stanched; to whom the
Elect, Nor shall the spring of my treasure ever be dried up, till enough be
powered into their wide chappes, and spongie mawes, that I may have my will of
the Monks. Theodoric. of Niem, Nem vnio. page 379. Laberi. th c. 37.
The Popes exchequer is likened to the sea, whereinto all rivers fall, and yet
it ouerflowes not; so into it are daily carried from all parts of the world
many pounds of gold, and yet it is not filled; wherein there is a generation,
whose teeth are swords to eat the poor upon the earth, and many horse
leaches, crying, Bring, Bring --. O iustissimae g^ntes nostrae, vel quasi recte
cum infernali bus furijs, seu Harpyis, and Tan talo, sortem siti bundi
posituri, qui nunquam satiamur. p. 380.
O most just nation of ours; like infernal furies, or Harpies, and Tantalus,
that are never satisfied. Alanus Chartier: Refert Ioh Mar. Belg. de schism.
page 467
Covetousness has so blinded the understanding of Clergy men, that thereby
their damnation is evident; and it has brought such calamity upon the
temporal goods of all men, that it threatens ruin to the whole Church. Onus
Ecclesiae: Cap. 23. nu. 1.
Our Priests now adays fish not for men, but for honor: -- plying
temporalties, and loving themselves, but neglecting the love of God, and their
neighbor; worse then the laity, sucking the blood and milk of the Church.
Picus Mirandulanus in an oration to Pope Leo, In Fascic ren. expet. and fugi^^
page 209.
calls upon him to restrain the greediness of priests, and set them bounds to
their mischievous covetousness; and to revenge the patrimonies of godly men,
which they have eaten and devoured. This made Paulus Langius cry P. 875.
in his history, Peter, Peter, Christ had thee not milk and sheare, but feed,
feed. All histories and monuments of times complain of this more then I can
say.

2 The States of the Empire in Germany, about the year 1523, exhibited
Grauamin^ Germaniae.
a hundred grieuances touching this matter: wherein they showed, that Nu. 1.
all things in the Church of Rome, tended to the drawing of money. To get money
they dispensed with Nu 1.
fasting, with Nu. 2
the times of marriage, with Nu. 3. and 6.
adulteries, incest, perjury, murder, theft, usury. Jam aut numerandum, aut
absolut. one sibi carendum est: nempe quod in hoc reseruati sunt, vt vel indo
nummorum al^quid eis accrescat. nu 5.
The Pope and his Bishops reserved cases to themselves: Sed and in futurum
im^une, vt eas transgred^ l^ceat, indulto promittitur. n. 6.
gave licenses aforehand to sin. Sent pardoners abroad, Processitque eousque
eius mali serpigo, vt pauperum ac simplicium illorum, sanguine^ vorent and
medulla^. n. 7.
that for money and yearly rents, promised the country people, such or such a
Saint should receive them into their tuition, that they should not be subject
to the disease whereof the Saint was patron. Nu. 8.
The Friars so pilled the country, and lay upon honest householders, that they
eat them out of doors. Nu 10.
When suites arose, the parties were drawn to Rome, and could not have their
cause determined in their own courts at home: Nu. 11 and 12.
or had Judges deputed them by the Pope. Nu. 13.
Immunities and exemptions were granted. Nu. 14.
The Presentation of Benefices void was given to curtizans, and unable
persons: Nu. 18.
who also had devices, by the rules of the Popes Chancerie, to disturb the
possession of the honestest beneficed men that were. Nu. 19.
Such as were officers or familiars to the Pope or Cardinals, defrauded m^^^ of
their right of patronage, that they could not get the Benefices and dignities,
whereof they were lawful patrons. Nu. 20. and ind^.
The Popes Chancery ouer-ruled all things. Nu. 34. 35.
Men were excommunicated for trifles, and many times for nothing. Nu. 40. 41.
Clergy men got other men's inheritances. Nu. 47.
Bishops admitted vile and unable persons to be priests. And for the Nu. 48.
consecration of Nu. 49.
Churches, Nu. 50.
altars, Churchyards, Nu. 52.
baptizing bells, Nu. 52.
making new Holidays, Nu. 53. 54
confirming and consecrating Abbots and Abbasses: drew great sums of money.
Quae ipsi immani vendunt pretio. nu. 54.
The Pope daily made new offices, which he sold for much money. Nu. 56.
Bishops and their officers, for money drew men out of the temporal courts
into their own courts, and there most unreasonably molested and pilled them.
Nu. 67.
They punished sin by the pursed Nu 68.
released none, that was never so unjustly called into their court, until they
had received money. Nu. 75 76.
Officials for money suffered and dispensed with usury, concubinage, adultery.
Nu. 78.
They put the poorest tradesmen that were, to pay them a weekly fee. Ostlers,
Bakers, Butchers, Millers, Badgers. Nu. 82.86.
Priests would minister no Sacrament to such as were not able to give them
money. Nu. 91.
Bishops not only tolerated the concubinage of Priests for money, but made
such as were continent and lived chastely, to pay rent for a concubine; which
being paid, they might live continently or keep concubines as they would. Nu
93.
The Monks and Priests visiting the sick, drew them to give in legacy what
they had to themselves. These are some of the Roman Churches Harpismes, whereby
it may appear what manner of persons the Clergy men of Rome are, where they
rule. There is Pro libert. eccl. Gallic. adu. Romans aul. dosens. Paris. Curiae.
a book that the Parliament of Paris offered to Lewis the 11, King of France,
touching this matter. It is said Nu. 67. and inde
there, that if Decrees of the Pragmaticall sanction were not maintained, there
would yearly be transported to Rome out of the kingdom, above a thousand
thousand crowns. And that the Pope had had in the three years lust past, for
Archbishoprickes and Bishoprics a hundred thousand crowns. For Abbeys a
hundred and twenty thousand crowns: for other dignities a hundred thousand
crowns. For Benefices five and twenty hundred thousand crowns: for diverse
things there mentioned, above two hundred thousand crow^es. Nunc vero, art
Romana, sic exhaustum est aurum ex popularium loculis, vt aerea tantum,
minutaque nobis moneta relicta sit: and nummularijs pontem dica tum iam
pu^rilium pupparum and icuncularum fictores incolant. nu. 71.
By which means the shoppes of Goldsmiths were drawn so dry, that none but
such as made puppets and childrens gawdes, dwelt in them. In England what was
raked together, See B. Jewel def. apol. p. 757
is as monstrous; that an Englishman might well say to the Pope, as Joan.
Sarisb. Polycrat. p. 329.
he did: All things are had for money, and without money nothing will be had
--. The Bishop of Rome himself, is grown heavy and intolerable to all men
--. They ransacke countries for their spoil, as if they would rake the riches
of Croesus together. There is a God, that not only has left this abominable
extortion to be a mark of Antichrist, but will also in his appointed time be
revenged of it. Saint Austin De verb. Do^i. ser. 19. in fin.
says, We cannot say, no man conuinceth us of extortion, no man charge us
with violence: for now and then flattery extorts greater booties from widows,
then can be extorted by torments. All is one with God, whether a man possesses
other folks goods by violence or circumuention, as long as any ways he holds
that which is none of his own.

3 There is as much to be said to his girding at our marriage and children;
which he would never have done, if he had remembered either how weak they are
in disputing against it, or how vile and brutish their own Priests single life
is known to be. Let him that refuses the Protestants Clergy for their
marriage, first enquire whether he can mend himself by following the Popes
single Priests. Theodoricus of Niem Nemo. vnio. pa 5. 377.
writes, that in the parts of Ireland and Norwey, according to the custom of
the country, It is lawful for the Bishops and Priests openly to keep their
concubines; and when twice a year they visited the parish priests that were
under them, they used to bring their concubines with them to the house of the
said priests; neither would their concubines suffer the Bishops to visit
without them. And the same fashion was observed by the Priests of Gasconie,
Spain, and Portugal, and the countries adjoining; WHEREBY there were, in a
manner, more children borne in those parts, then in lawful marriage. Vdalricus
the Bishop of Auspurg Epist. ad Nic. de Coelib. cleric page 1255.
orthodonograph.
writes, that when a certain Pope sent to draw a poole for fishes, there were
taken up and brought him above six thousand infants heads; whereupon he
thought it was better to marry. Aluarus Pelagius: Planct eccl. p 64. col. 4.
The Priests live most incontinently, and would to God they had never vowed
continency, especially in Spain and Regricolae; in which provinces the
children of lay men are not many more then the children of clergy men: -- for
many years together they rise up every day from the side of their concubine.
Alanus Chartier: Refert Ioh. Mar. Belg. de schism and council. page 464, and 467.
Our Churchmen have made their Order most vile and contemptible for their
viciousness; they are despised of all, both small and great: for the Ministers
of the Church leaving the use of marriage, follow wandering, dissolute and
unlawful lusts, that I say no worse. Nun Bridget: Reuelat. p. 64
The Canons marry no wives, because of their canonical name, but impudently
they have concubines, day and night. Priests also and Deacons keep whores,
that with their great bellies walk among other women. Picus of Mirandula:
Orat. de morib. reform ad Leon. page 209.
The priests in that time slept with the women at the door of the Tabernacle,
but in our time they break into the sacred houses, and fie for shame, women
are brought in to satisfy their lusts; and boys that Sodomitically are abused
against nature, are lent and given them by their parents, and these boys
afterward are promoted to be priests. The Princes of Germany at a Diet at
Norimberge, Grauam. German. n. 31. and 91
affirmed, that their priests being forbidden by the Canon laws their lawful
wives, did nothing but attempt the chastity of matrons and virgins, the wives,
daughters, and sisters of lay men: and in most places the Bishops and their
officials, not only tolerated priests concubines for a sum of money, but
made continent priests also that lived without concubines, to pay taxation of
concubinage, and so they might keep if they would. Cuyckins a Bishop of
Ruraemond, has lately written a Spec. concub.
book against concubinary priests, wherein he reports a hundred of these
things, and Paraenet. epi. page 19.
be says of the Canons of a certain Church, that they lived in whoredom,
scarce two in a College were free. There is no history or monument, but
testifies these things; and all travelers and countrymen know the same to be
true. The Roman Catholic may now, if he please, make a stand, and well
bethink himself what such virtue there is in his priests single life, that
the lawful marriage of Ministers should so presumptuously be entertained, See
c. 53.
which in the best ages was allowed, and never misliked by the universal
Church, till the Romish faction for the more liberty of their unbridled lust,
quarreld and refused it.

CHAP. VI.
1. Touching the turbulencie of our Jesuits and Mass Priests in the State,
and their unthankfulness to the King. 2. The seditious doctrine of the Church
of Rome leading to all disobedience against the magistrate, and rebellion,
whenever occasion shall serve. Tyrones rebellion and the Spanish Invasion
promoted by the Pope. 3. A catalogue of about forty Emperors, Kings and
Princes, destroyed or vexed by the Pope and his Clergy. 4. A consideration
upon the doctrine of the Popes power to depose Kings.

A. D. He falsely and slanderously charge both Priests and lay Catholics
with disloyalty to the magistrate; affirming, Page 25.
that all our religion is full of doctrine whence proceeds monsters of
conspiracy against the State. Then turning his poisoned pen against the Pope,
with ministerial railing rhetoric, he says, This is the practice of the man
of Rome: in the palace of Constantine, where formerly of old, godly Bishops
had wont to be entertained, he stalleth up purpled Machiauillians, and
unreasonable beasts, to prey upon Constantines successors, and devour the
Princes of the earth: and to every pillar of our Churches almost in Europe, he
chaineth wolves and Lybards to fly at our throats, whenever we come within
their reach: and these herds that we see, of Friars, Seminaries,
Mass Priests, Jesuits, pretending to be pastors of our souls, be nothing
else but so many Bears and bloody Tygars chained to the pillars of our
Churches, the fatal enemies of Princes and their people, to suck their blood,
etc. And again: The Turks Lions at Constantinople, with feeding and
familiarity of their keepers, become tame and gentle: but the Popes sauadges
of Rome, by no forbearance or mercy showed them, can be mollified: no gentle
usage can tame their nature, no clemency will reconcile them, no diet will
swage their thirst of blood, etc. I might relate more out of this spiteful
epistle, but this is sufficient to let the reader see the man's humor of
shameless, scurrilous, and slanderous lying, and of outrageous, malicious and
pestiferous railing.
1 I Charged the Priests and Jesuits with two things: their doctrine against
the peace and security of kings and magistrates; and their barbarous practices
against their lives and kingdoms. Wherein because they have exceeded the
cruelty of beasts, and the nature of the vntamablest monsters that are,
according to the manner of describing such creatures, I compared them to Tigars
and Lions, etc. This the Jesuit, as if he were one of them himself, storms
and rages at, as you see, as if he would burst the chain. But to no purpose:
for I alleged the words of Posseuine, Zamorensis, and Carerius, with some
particular examples, to confirm my saying; the which either he should have
satisfied, or have confested the accusation, or have holden his tongue. Now
when he does none of these, but calls that railing and lying, which all the
world sees to be true, there is little hope he will ever be tamed. My discharge
is, that I have written nothing but what Reuera imperialis felicitas Papali
semper impugnatur in uidia Pet. de Vin. ep. 31. l. 1. (...). Anna Porphyro.
Alc. xiad. p. 32.
the Kings of the earth have heretofore complained of themselves, and found by
grievous experience, to be true; and what Praef. monito. omnibus Christianis
monarc. etc.
his sacred Majesty that now is, (the mildest Prince that ever ruled) is
constrained to complain of openly to all the world. Nouit ille qui nihil
ignorant, quod Praesidentes Romanae ecclesia suae astuta and sagaci prudentia,
secunda^ temporum vari etatem, sua variarunt statuta: modo imperium sublimando,
modo paulatim deprimendo; sed si quilibet esset contentus fuis limitibus and
vnus alium coad inuaret, sicut facere teneatur, puto quod pax esset in vniuerso
orb. Alberic. de Rosat. quem refert Iacobat. de council. page 779. A.
And had I read nothing in the stories of former times, nor known their doings
in ages past, yet I have seen enough within these twenty years, to teach me
what to think of Mass Priests, and all that follow their doctrine. And if I
said, that no forbearance could mollify them, no gentle usage can tame their
nature, no clemency reconcile them; I did it because the forbearance that
Queen Elizabeth used toward them, many ways, and all her time, was admirable;
yet while she lived, most wretchedly they sought her blood, and most
barbarously handled her fame; and now she is gone, with no less fury and rage
they prosecute her memory, that was the incomparable Princess of the world.
And when his gracious Majesty that now is, ever since his reign has used
them with all respect, releasing many of their fines, granting pardon to diverse
Jesuits and Mass priests, granting them diverse suites, forbearing to execute
his most just proclamations against Jesuits and Semi^^ies; using finally most
gracions and favorable speeches of Papists, better then they deserve, in
Parliament, and otherwise; yet this cursed generation of Amalek could never be
reconciled, but still conspired his death many times over; and then the
ruinating of all by POWDER: and at this day, by books openly published against
him, traduce his Name, Religion, and Government; that the meanest subject in
his kingdom could not be baselier entertained, with railing and presumption:
Seminaries and Jesuits leading the ring in all this; and applying thereto the
holiest things of their religion; so far forth, that hardly an instance can
be given of any injury or vnloyall part against him, since his blessed reign
among us, but these Roman priests have bin the authors: (...). Simoc. hist
Maurit. p. 200.
as if the sacred majesty of a kingdom were no less to be played with then
childrens trifles. You that are thus without humanity, unnatural, ^^pious,
cruel, murderers, how can you be called Christians? Pro Athan. lib. 1. page 65.
says Lucifer Calaritanus to the Arrians; and I to the Jesuits.

2 But for so much as these Assasines so desperately deny their profession, and
plead their innocence, denying that which their religion teaches so
manifestly; I will take a little pains to confirm what I have said, something
more fully; the rather because they bear the world in hand we belie and
slander them; and such as know no more then the Jesuits tell them, imagine it
is so indeed: and therefore I say still, and here write it in capital letters,
that THE CHVRCH OF ROME TEACHES DISLOYALTY AND REBELLION AGAINST KINGS, AND
LEADS HER PEOPLE INTO ALL CONSPIRACIES AND TREASONS AGAINST STATES AND
KINGDOMS: this I show by the doctrine and assertions of the chiefest Divines
therein. Augustinus Triumphus: Sum de eccl. potest. q 40. art. 1.
The Emperor of heaven may depose the Emperor of the earth, in as much as there
is no power but of him. But the Pope is invested with the authority of the
Emperor of heaven: he may therefore depose the Emperor of the earth. Art. 3.
The Emperor is subject to the Pope two ways: first by a filial subjection in
spiritual things, in as much as spiritual gifts from him, as from the
fountain, are derived to the Emperor, and to all the children of the Church.
Secondly by a ministerial subjection in his administration of temporal
things. For the Emperor is the Popes minister, by whom he administers temporal
things. Aluarus Pelagius: De Planct. eccl. l 2. c. 13. p. 3.
The Pope has universal jurisdiction over the whole world, not only in
spiritual, but in temporal things: albeit he exercise the execution of the
temporal sword, and jurisdiction, by his son the Emperor, as by his
advocate, and by other Kings and princes of the world. The Pope may deprive
Kings of their kingdoms, and the Emperor of his empire. Cap. 21.
The Pope may deprive him of the empire that is disobedient, and persecutes the
Church. Such shall every Prince be expounded to be, that receives not the Popes
religion. Capistranus: De Pap. and council. author. page 65.
The Emperor, if he be incorrigible, for any mortal sin, may be deposed and
deprived. The sentence of the Pope alone, without a council, is sufficient
against the Emperor, or any other. It is manifest therefore how much the Popes
authority is above the imperial c^lsitude: which it translates, examines,
confirms, or infringes; approues or reiects. If he offend, he punishes,
deposes, and depriues him: and when he judges his sentence to be unjust, he
reuokes and abrogates it. Thomas of Aquine: 22. q. 12. art. 2
Any man sinning by infidelity, may be adjudged to lose the right of dominion:
as also, sometime, for other faults. The infidelity of those that have
received the faith, may sententially be punished in this, that they shall not
bear rule over believing subjects: for that would tend to the great corruption
of the faith --: and therefore so soon as any one, for apostacy from the
faith, by judgment is denounced excommunicate, IPSO FACTO, HIS SVBIECTS ARE
ABSOLVED FROM HIS GOVERNMENT, AND FROM THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE, whereby they
were bound unto him. And least it might be thought, that the meaning is only
of such Kings as are unbelievers and apostates; mark how Cardinal Tolet
expounds it: Refert Allen answer to the book of Engl. Just. p. 68.
Note, that albeit S. Thomas named only an Apostata, yet the reason is all one
in the Princes case that is excommunicated. For so soon as one is denounced or
declared an excommunicate, all his subjects be discharged of their obedience.
For though the crime of a Prince be notorious, yet before declaration be made
thereof by the Church, the vassals are not assoiled from obedience, as Caietan
well holds: which declaration being made by the Church, they are not only
discharged of their loyalty, but are bound not to obey him any more, except it
be for fear of their lives, or loss of their temporal goods. As it was in
England, in the time of Henry the 8: whom though the subjects were bound not
to obey, after he was denounced excommunicate; yet for that he was a cruel
man, and would either have killed or spoiled them, they were excused in obeying
him. So he. Which words being reported by D. Allen, he adds of his own: Thus
does this notable Schoole-man write; neither do we know any Catholic Divine,
of any age, to say the contrary. But he deceiues the reader touching the point
of excommunication. For the doctrine is, that subjects are discharged from
obedience, before the Prince be denounced or declared. Dominicus Bannes: 22.
page 590. idem Greg. a Valen. vbi infra.
Where there is evident knowledge of the crime, the subjects may lawfully, if
they have strength, exempt themselves from the power of the Prince, before the
sentence declaratorie of the Judge --. This conclusion is followed by Caietan,
and it is the more common opinion with Thomas his disciples, and they approve
it. Excommunicating therefore, or not excommunicating; denouncing his
disobedience by the Pope, or not denouncing it, is all one to the discharging
of his subjects from their alleagiance, if the King give not the Pope
contentment. Nam in casu posito, adest semper voluntas interpretatiua
Pontificis ratiha bitio ipsius. Sed haec voluntas obtinet vim sententiae. Bann.
vbi sup.
For the Popes will has the force of a sentence; and where the King will none
of his religion, or will not subject himself to his lust, his will is always
expounded to be against him; and the evidence of his deed obtaines the force of
a sentence. And so to proceed. Franciscus Victoria: Relect. pa. 83
I say the Pope has most ample power, because, when it is necessary to a
spiritual end, he not only may do all things that secular Princes may, but he
may create new Princes, and remove others, and divide their kingdoms, and
diverse other things. -- Nu. 14. p. 26.
If the Pope say that such a government tends to the detriment of spiritual
health, or that such a law cannot be observed without mortal sin, or that it
is contrary to the law of God, or that it maintains sin; then we must stand
to the Popes judgment, for so much as the King has nothing to do to judge of
spiritual things. Simancha Pacensis: De Cath. inst. tit. 23. n. 11. p. 98.
If Kings or other Christian Princes become heretics, forthwith their
subjects and vassals are freed from their government. Tit. 45. nu. 25. page 209.
If any Prince be unprofitable, or make unjust laws against religion, or
against good manners, or do any such like thing to the detriment of spiritual
things; the Pope, observing due circumstances, may apply a fit remedy; even by
depriving such a King of his government and jurisdiction, if the cause require
it. D. Nicolas Sanders: Visib. monar. page 70.
It is moreover to be supplied, that albeit the King, when he was first made,
were a Christian Catholic, yet if afterward he become an Apostata or
heretic, true reason requires that he be removed from his government --. Page
71.
The matter is now brought to this pass, that it is fit an heretical King be
removed from his kingdom --. De clau. Dau page 25.
If any be so ravenous, that of a lamb he become a wolf, devouring the
flock, stealing, slaying, and scattering the sheep, (which the Pope will say
every Protestant Prince does) if any thing betide this man otherwise then well,
let him thank himself, that voluntarily runs upon the sword of the Church.
Gregory of Valence: Tom. 3. page 444 c.
If the crime of heresy or apostacy from the faith, be notorious that it
cannot be covered, then, even before the sentence of the Judge, the aforesaid
punishment (of being deprived from his dominion and authority over his
subjects) is in part incurred; that is to say, so far that the subjects may
lawfully deny obedience to such a heretical Lord. Mariana a Jesuit: Instit.
reg. page 61.
It is a wholesome meditation for Princes to persuade themselves, that if they
oppress the commonwealth, and grow intolerable through their vices, they
live upon those terms that they may be killed, not only lawfully, but with
glory and commendations --. Page 64.
All this pestilent and deadly brood (thus he speaks of such Kings as he
calls tyrants; which are all Protestant Princes) it is a glorious thing to
root out of the society of men --: it is therefore confessed, that a tyrant
may be slain either by open force and arms, or by making assault upon his
palace --: and if they that have killed him escape, they are honored all their
life after as great personages; but if it fall out otherwise, they die a
sacrifice grateful to God and men. Page 65.
No difference whether ye kill him with sword or poison. When Tyrone rebelled
in Ireland, in the year 1602, the school Doctors of Salamanca sent the
Papists there this determination, Refert quaest. bipart. in M.G. Blackw. p. 156.
That the Bishop of Rome might by arms restrain such as opposed the Catholic
religion. Tyrones war against the Queen was just, and by authority from the
Pope; and all Catholics were bound to further him in the same; and so doing,
their merit and hope of eternal reward, should be no less then if they had
warred against the Turk. But all Catholics had sinned mortally that had
served the English against Tyrone, neither should they obtain salvation, or be
absolved by any priest, from their sins, unless they repented and forsook
the camp of the English. The same thing was also to be deemed of such as in
that war had helped the English with arms and munition, or paid them the
accustomed subsidies. But such as were in Tyrones camp, in no case were
traitors; nor had denied any due obedience, or unjustly occupied the Queens
lands, but rather had endeavored themselves to set at liberty themselves and
their country, being oppressed with unjust and impious tyranny, and to their
power defended the orthodoxe faith: as Christians and Catholics ought to do.
This was the resolution of the Popes University in Portugal, for the
confirmation of as vile and detestable a rebellion, as ever any was. The like
was done in Desmonds rebellion, D. Sanders being sent into Ireland to resolve
and encourage the traitors, Quem virum, magno l^teraru^ incommodo, dolenius
defu^ctum, non multo post, in Hibernia, du^ in eam insulam veram religione^
restituere contendit. Ioh Marian. tract. pro edit. vulg. c. 7. sub fin. page 56.
among whom, by the just judgment of God, he died in extremity and misery. In
the year 1588, Meteran. Belgic. hist. l. 15. p. 473.
when the Spanish fleet should invade our nation, for the promoting of that
desseigne, D. Allen was made a Cardinal, and sent into Flanders with the whole
administration of the English affairs committed to him by the Pope: who, among
other his practices, had the Popes declaration printed in English, that should
be published upon the arrival of the Fleet: in which declaration, the
sentence of excommunication against the Queen, was confirmed, and she deprived
of her kingdom, honor and dignities, and all men commanded to receive the
Prince of Parma. The writings of this Allen, Parsons, Sanders, and Creswell:
their Doleman, Philopater and Rossaeus (a book canonized by the Pope in
consistory) are so scandalous this way, that I abhor to report the things they
write. Bellarmine has taken upon him to be the principal patron of this
doctrine; and, in maint^nance thereof, has published diverse treatises. There
was never any And there was a wicked man, named Sheba, the son of Bicri, a man
of Iemini, and he blew the trumpet and said, We have no part in David, nor
inheritance in the son of Ishai; every man to his tents, o Israel. 2. Sam. 20.1.
Sheba blew the trumpet of rebellion, as he has done. His assertions are
these. De Pont. l. 5. c. 6.
The Pope, as chief spiritual Prince, may change kingdoms, and take them
away from one, to give to another, if it be necessary for the saving of souls,
as we will prove --. It is a good rule that the Gloss gives, when the Imperial
and Pontificiall laws, touching the same thing, are found to be contrary, if
the matter of the law be a thing belonging to the danger of souls; then the
Imperial law is abrogated by the Pontificiall. Cap. 7.
If the Christians, in times past, deposed not Nero, Dioclesian, and Julian,
and Valens the Arrian, and such like; that was because they wanted temporal
strength. For that they might lawfully have done it, appears by the Apostle
--. Besides, to tolerate a King that is an heretic or an unbeliever,
laboring to draw men to his sect, is to expose religion to evident danger --:
but Christians are not bound, nor may, with the evident danger of religion,
tolerate an unbelieving King. -- When Kings and Princes become heretics, or
hinder religion, they may be judged by the Church, and be deposed from the
government: neither is there any wrong done them, if they be deposed --. If
any Prince of a sheep become a wolf, that is to say, of a Christian become an
heretic; the pastor of the Church, by excommunication, may drive him away,
and withal command the people that they follow him not, and so deprive him of
his dominion over his subjects. Cap. 8. Praeterea cogere.
Any Bishop whatsoever, much more the Prince of Bishops, may exercise temporal
power over them that have received temporal power over other. Tract. de
potest. sum. Pont. adv. Gul. Barcl. page 97.
When the Pope sees a Christian Prince infected with heresy, by the sentence
of excommunication he separates him from the company of the godly: and least
he infect others, he absolues his subjects from the oath of their alleagiance:
and, if need so require, he commands them, under the pain of the same
excommunication, that they neither reckon of him, nor obey him as their King.
An. ^089. n. 11.
Caesar Baronius alleges, and commends, out of Ivo, a Breue of Pope Vrbane the
second, wherein it is pronounced, that they are no homicides who kill such as
are excommunicate. For we do not judge them to be murderers, who burning with
the zeal of their Catholic Mother, against such as are excommunicate, happen
to have killed any of them. Gregory 7 commonly called Pope Hildebrand, Baro.
an. 1076 n. 32. Gregor. 7. epist. l. 2. ep. 55.
set down these among the Popes privileges; that the Pope may use the arms
of the Empire: that Princes must kiss his feet: that it is lawful for him to
depose Emperors: that he is no Catholic man, nor so to be accounted, that
agrees not with the Church of Rome: that he may absolve subjects from their
fidelity to the wicked. Suarez the Jesuit, in his Def sid. Cath. adu. Angl.
sect. erro. l. 6. c. 4. nu. 18.
late book against the King, writes thus: It is to be said, that after the
sentence condemnatorie is given against the King, by lawful authority,
touching the depriving him of his kingdom; or, which is all one, when by
sentence his crime is declared to be such, as by the law has such a penalty
imposed; then he that has pronounced the sentence, or he to whom it is
committed may deprive the King of his kingdom, even by killing him, if either
he cannot otherwise do it, or if the sentence be justly extended to this
punishment. -- If the Pope depose the King, yet he may not be killed or
expelled, but by those only to whom he shall commit the doing thereof: but if
he commit the execution to no body, then it belongs to him that is lawful
successor of the kingdom; or, if there be no successor, it shall appertain to
the kingdom it self --: and therefore, as I said, only his lawful
successor, if he be a Catholic, has that authority; (to kill or depose him)
or if he neglect it, or there be no successor, then the community of the
kingdom, so that it be Catholic succeeds in that right thus to kill or
expel him. Let the Reader here note, not only that the Pope and his Church
teach and command the murder of Gods anointed Kings, (which any heart, not
stupefied with Atheism and reprobate sense, would tremble at) but appropriate
the doing thereof to Papists alone, challenging the right of committing so
execrable wickedness to appertain to none but Romish Catholics; and
disdaining that any should have a hand in doing this execrable mischief
against the King, but only a follower of the Popes religion. This is the
doctrine that I mentioned, and meant when I said, their religion was full of
doctrine teaching conspiracy against the State: stirring subjects up to
treason and rebellion. For when Rex autem Jacobus (vt in libro primo
probauimus) a crimine infidelitatis, s^u haeresis, and apostasiae, excusari non
potest. Suar. ibid. c 6. nu. 10.
the King, by reason of his religion, is made an heretic, and reputed a
persecutor of the Church, and disobedient to the Pope: and the Pope not only
has power, but is also bound by his place to excommunicate, deprive and depose
such; and to absolve the subjects from their obedience to them; yea, howsoever,
to rid the world of them, as of tyrants; it being the duty of all, and that
under pain of damnation, and as they will be counted good Catholics, to obey
the Pope in all things against the King. Now may any Papist warrant his
religion from the imputation? and what security can he give to the State? what
pawn to his Sovereign for his loyalty? that the King and his State may be
certain he will never practice or stir against them. For if the Pope, by
right, may do all this; and he believe, as his religion teaches, that he is
bound in all things to obey the Pope, as the supreme Pastor of his soul, and
monarch of the world; he must, whenever occasion shall be offered, do his
uttermost to fubuert the present State, and to plant the Popes religion and
jurisdiction. I will suffer my self per possibile to be persuaded, that many
Recusants and some Mass Priests love the King, and are true hearted to the
State, and will never consent to treachery: but this is that I say; they cannot
do this out of the principles of their own religion, which teaches them to
obey the Pope against all the world: or if they say, the Pope erres, and his
Divines speak untruly in these points; what infallible assurance can they have
that they err not, and misleade them not in the rest of their religion? Let it
be well and seriously considered, if it be not possible that they which
unjustly and erroniously condemn the oath of alleagiance, do as erroniously
condemn the faith which by that oath they say is ratified? They shall give me
leave to think, for my part, that as his Majesty, by the confession of so
many Papists, holds the truth against the Pope, in the matter of the oath; so
he holds the same truth against him in the matter of his faith: and they that
deceive the Papists in forbidding them to take the oath, deceive them no less
in forbidding them to come to Church, and communicate with our religion.

3 The Popes practice has been answerable to his doctrine, in regard whereof I
said as I did, that he and his clergy, were no better then so many Bears and
Tygars, the fatal enemies of Princes and their people, to suck their blood.
The which because the Reply outfaces with passion, I will demonstrate by
examples, and then let the Reader judge if ever any savage Bear or Tygar
filled his den with the bones of men and beasts, as this wolf of Rome has his
church with the spoils of Princes; there being no age, since his teeth were
grown, wherein he has not to the uttermost of his power, made havoc of
their lives and kingdoms. LEO ISAVRVS the Emperor of Constantinople, about
the matter of Images, was excommunicated by Gregory the second: (...) Cedren.
p. 373. P. Diac. miscell. page 617. Sigon. de reg. Ital. page 103.
he forbad the payment of his tribute, and gave away his country to the
Lombards, whereby he and his successors lost all the Western empire, which the
Pope and the French King afterward shared between them. Baronius An. 730. n 5.
says, the Pope, in this act, left a worthy example to posterity, that
heretic Princes should not be suffered to reign in the Church of Christ.
LVDOVICVS PIUS that was King of France and Emperor, 800 years after Christ,
was thrust out of his kingdom Sollicitato in patrem Gregorio Pontifice Romans
Papir. Masson. annal. page 104.
by the French Clergy and the Pope. The story is this: Io. Mar. Belg de
schis. and con. p. 426.
A detestable and pestilent council assembled at Compendium, where the
Clergy men of that time most impiously conspired against Lewis their
sovereign Lord and Emperor. For they, as it is likely, taking it grievously
that Lewis would reform the superfluity of their apparel, conspired against
him, arming the sons (Pipin, Lewis and Lotharius) against their father; so
that they put him him in hold, the Bishop of Rome consenting and helping them.
Then, in the said Council, the same Bishops and Prelates condemned him,
deposed him, and made him betake himself to a Monks cowle. CHILDERICKE that
was King of France a little before him, Aimoin. gest. Franc. p 403. P. A^^mil.
p 71. Papir. Masson. annal. in Child. p 83.
was deposed, and thrust into a Monastery by the Popes advice, who for that
purpose discharged the French of their alleagiance to him. A Bishop was sent
unto him, to demand whether were fitter to reign, Childericke that was of no
authority, or Pipin that swayed the State: and he answered, it was better he
were king that swayed the State; and so Childericke was deprived, and Pipin
crowned. OTHO the GREAT, that was Emperor in the year 963, was in danger to
have been cast out of Italy by Pope John the 12. Jnde eijciendum existimauit.
^igo. reg. Ital. p. 271.
The stories say, he did his uttermost thereunto: and that Luitpr. l. 6. c. 6.
the reason why the Pope hated the most holy Emperor, was not so much unlike
the reason why the Devil hated his Creator. The Emperor, as we see, thinks
and works the things of God, maintains the secular and ecclesiastical
affairs with his power, adornes them with his manners, repaires them with his
laws: Pope John is an enemy to all these things. HENRY the first, the
Emperor, had Pope Bennet against him. Benn. Card. vit. Hildebr. page 42.
The story says, he endeavored to cast him from the succession of the Empire:
for which purpose he sent a crown to Peter the King of Hungary, with this
verse, The Rock has given Rome to Peter, and the Pope has given this crown
to thee. HENRY the fourth, the Emperor, was so shamefully vexed by three
Popes, one after another, Hildebrand, Vrbane, and Paschalis, that it is more
then tragical. The quarrel that Hilderand picked against him, was about
Naucler. page 777.
inuestitures, and Sigon. de regn. Ital. page 342.
symonie, and Confictis, conscriptisque super eo criminibus quae pessima and
immundissima potuit odium and li^or excogitare Vita Henric. 4. page 46. in
Fascic. rerum expet.
other crimes most untruly laid to his charge. But Sigon. page 360.
Hildebrand excommunicated him, and absolved the subjects from their obedience;
and first set up against him Avent page 458. Baron. an. 1080. n. 16. Geneb.
chron. 595.
Rodulfe the Duke of Sueden and Burgundy, sending him a Crown, with this
verse engraven, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolfo. Avent.
The Rock gave the Crown to Peter, and Peter gives it to Rodulfe. But he
miscarried, and perished miserably in his treason. Then Ipsius Vrbani
authoritate regnum aduersus patrem, in Lombardia suscepit. Sigon. reg. Ital. p.
384.
Urban, the successor of Hildebrand, set up Conradus his son, who made war
against him; and dying Neque a Mathildu vnquam Pontificisque concilij,
discessisset. Sigon. page 387.
in that rebellion, Naueler. page 801.
another of his sons, who afterward succeeded him, was armed against him,
Vita Hen. page 49.
who took him prisoner, and forced him to resign up the empire. The
extremities and indignities whereunto the Pope brought this noble Emperor,
have filled the books of writers: among many other, this was one, Benn. vit.
Hildebr. page 41. Fr. de Ros^ers Stem. Loath. page 219.
that Pope Hildebrand would not release him from his excommunication, till on a
time in the midst of winter, he came bare footed to Canusium, where the Pope
lay, and so waited three days before the gates of his palace for his
absolution, which he hardly obtained by the intercession of Duchess Matilda,
and not long enjoyed, being still undermined with the Popes treasons to his
dying day. HENRY the fifth, his son, for maintaining Naucl p. 812.
the privileges of the empire, and the custom of his predecessors, touching
the inuestiture of Bishops, Vrsper. p. 272 and inde. Naucl. generat 38. Sigo.
page 409. and inde.
was excommunicate by Paschalis the second, and by him and his successors
miserably vexed till his death. Vrspe. p. 281.
The Bishop of Traiectum conspiring against him, and making an assault, was
apprehended and put in prison, and afterward delivered. LOTHARIVS, his
successor, Otho Frising. l 7. c. 18.
about the same matter of inuestitures, Otho. c. 20. Naucl. p. 826.
and about the right to the Duchy of Apulia, was molested and crossed by
Innocent the second, who made Rex venitante fores, iura^s prius vrbis honores:
Post homo fit Papae, sumi^ quo dante coronam. Radevic. p. 266. Sigo. p. 433.
the verses, touching the Emperors being the Popes vassal, to be written in
his palace at Lateran; whereupon afterward Rade. vbi sup.
there grew so great contention in the time of Frederick. Naucl. p. 827.
The same Pope joined also with the enemies of the Emperor CONRADVS, his
successor, and hindered him that he should not recover the Empire. FREDERICK
the first, called Barbarossa, was at the time of his empire, entangled with the
Pope and his cleargies treasons. The stories mentioning a dangerous conspiracy
against him, Vrsp. p 301. Naucl. p. 843.
say, the greater part of the Cardinals and the Popes hands were in it; who
took a great sum of money to excommunicate him. The despites and
presumptions of the Pope against him are monstrous: Papir. Masson de ep. vtb.
page 205. Naucl. page 856.
at last, to purchase his peace, he was feign to cast himself groueling upon
the floor, while the Pope set his foot upon his neck, and insulted over him,
with those words of the Psalm, Thou shall walk upon the Lion and the Aspe:
the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet. HENRY the
sixth, that was son to this Frederick, and his wife the Empress, Rog.
Houed, annal. p 689.
were crowned by the Pope, holding the Crown between his feet, and so
setting it on their heads: and having thus crowned the Emperor, he struck it
off again with his foot, to show that he had power to depose him. The next
Emperor was PHILIP, his brother, against whom the Pope so set himself, that he
said, Vrsperg. p. 319 Naucl. page 898
either he would have Philips crown, or Philip should have his miter; and
thereupon continually opposed himself, and stirred up Count Otho against him,
Vrsp. p. 324. Naucl. p. 906.
who miserably slew him in his privy chamber. After him succeeded OTHO the
fourth; Walsi^. ypod Ne^s^^. p. 46^. Naucl. p. 910.
him Innocent, who then was Pope, excommunicated, absoluing his subjects from
his obedience, and forbidding them to call him Emperor. The next Emperor was
FREDERICK the seventh; who first was vexed by Honorius; Vrsp. page 3^7 Pan ^^f
Colle^. hist. Ne^pol p. 245.
then excommunicate by Gregory, for false and frivolous causes, without all
order of judgment, and others made Emperors against him. The treasons, wars
and businesses that were stirred up against this Emperor, by the Pope, are
innumerable. His complaints hereof are in every story: P^^^^e Vin. lib. ^. ep
31.
that the happiness of Emperors was always opposed by the Popes envy. See
Pand. Collenut. hist. Neap. l. 4. page 157. and inde.
Many things are laid against him by the Popes favorites; but yet they all
mention the Popes unreasonable proceeding against him. K^an^z. ano. page 225.
When ALBERT the first, sent to Pope Boniface to confirm his election, he
refused to do it, and said that himself was both Emperor and Pope: in sign
whereof, the time of Iubilee then being, he showed himself the first day in his
Pontifical robes, and the next day in the h^b^t of an Emperor, with a naked
sword borne before him; saying with a loud voice, Behold here are two swords.
This Boniface is he of whom ^^atin. in Bonif. 8.
they write, that he studied with terror rather then religion, to subdue
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and nations: and endeavored according to the lust of
his own mind to give and take away kingdoms, thirsting after gold more then
can be expressed. HENRY the seventh, commonly called of Lucenborow, after
Naucl p 999.
the Pope and his Cardinals opposing his coronation, and Avent p 597.
stirring up enemies against him, Av nt. p 598. Naucler. p 991.
was at last poisoned by a Monk, in the Sacrament. LVDOVICVS BAVARVS
Auinionenses ^^llae vn^^que (...) gescebant vari^. ad con tu^band^m Germantam,
d^s^or d^e m^^a serere ^extabant: n^hil immotum nihil denique in e^de statu
relinquere connitebantur. Auent. page 630. Naucl. page 996.
was excommunicated by John the 22, and miseraby vexed all his life time. In
his cause it was that Occham, and so many other learned men writ in defense of
the Emperor, against the Pope. CHARLES the fourth Naucl. p. 101.
could not obtain his coronation, but on condition that he would not stay in
Rome or Italy; which yet were part of his kingdom. WENCESLAVS Auent. p 645.
Theodor Niem page 68.
was deposed, and another put into the Empire against him, by Boniface the 9.
SIGISMVND, who took so much pains in the Council of Constance against Husse
and Jerome, Venerat in eandem sententiam Eugenius. Naucl. p. 1055.
was yet withstood and resisted in his voyage into Italy, by Eugenius. IONE the
Queen of Naples, Pand. Collen p. 221.
was deprived of her kingdom by Pope Urban; Naucl. p. 1024 Pand. Collen. p.
227.
who consented to her murder. MANFRED the King of Naples and Sicily, Naucl. p.
946.
had the Duke of Anjou armed against him by Urban the fourth, by whom he was
slain. CONRADINVS the King of Naples and Sicily, being taken prisoner by
Charles, brother to the French King, Pand. Collen. p. 186. Paral. Vrsperg. p.
11.
was miserably put to death by the Popes counsel: who being demanded what was
to be done, answered, The life of Conradine is the death of Charles; and the
death of Conradine is the life of Charles. PHILIP AUGUSTUS the French King,
Mart. Polon. append. p. 237. Naucl p 982. Paralip. Vrsper. p 27.
was deprived by Boniface the 8, and his kingdom given to the Emperor Albert,
because he would not acknowledge it to be holden of him. King JOHN of England
Matthew. Paris. p 223. Walsing. ypodig. Neustr p. 461.
was pitifully vexed, and deprived of his kingdom, by the Pope and his
Bishops, and the French King set up against him; and at last was See Act. and
Monum.
poisoned by a Monk. HENRY the second, about the death of Becket, who had
wrought many vprores in the State, Gul. Neubridg page 169. Math. Paris. p. 125.
by the Popes appointment was whipped by Monks. IVLIAN and LAVRENCE, the Dukes
of Florence, Conscio and adnuente pontifice. Volater. page 51
by the Popes practice were assaulted in the Church at the time of the
elevation of the host, and the one grievously wounded, the other murdered
outright. GEMIN OTTO the brother of the great Turk, being prisoner, was
poisoned Guicciar. hist. page 66.
by the Pope, hired thereunto by P. Io^i. hist. page 25. l. 1.
a promise of two hundred thousand crowns, and the seamlesse coat of Christ.
The PRINCE of ORANGE was grievously murdered by Dinoth. de bell. civil. Belg. p
398 and inde.
a Papist: who, for the same, is highly commended by Comment. reru^ in ^^b.
gest. p. 1122. and inde.
Surius the Friar. HENRY the third, late King of France, after Meter. Belg.
hist. page 494.
infinite treasons and conspiracies of the Sorbonists against him, was at last
Ibid. p. 496.
murdered by a Dominican Friar: which murder, the Pope by Orat. Sixth 5. in
consist. an. 1589.
a solemn oration in the Consistory, commended to the skies. His successor,
HENRY the fourth, was wounded by Rod. ^otter. commen. p. 106
a disciple of the Jesuits, suborned thereunto by the Jesuits; in memory
whereof a pillar was erected in Paris against the Jesuits, and they banished
the Realm. There is Fran. de Vero^ apolog. pro Ioh. Castle.
a book written by a Papist in defense of him that did this, wherein his deed
is not only justified, but extolled Page 40.
as a most noble deed, joined with virtue, and heroical, to be compared with
the greatest and commendablest deeds that ever were done, or are mentioned in
any story. Afterward, as we all know, this noble Prince was miserably slain
by a popish miscreant. HENRY the 8. of England, was Sand. de scis. Anglic. ^.
^8.
excommunicate by Pope Clement, about the matter of his divorce; See Gu^cciar
l. 19. page 891.
which in his own judgment he thought to be lawful. GEORGE the King of
Bohemia, Bonfin. deca. 4. l. 2. sab init. Mart. Crom. rerum Polo. page 776
was excommunicate by Pius the second; and Matthias the King of Hungary armed
against him. JOHN the King of Navarre, Plat. in Iul. 2.
was bereft of half his kingdom, by the practice of Julius the second, Bin.
vit. Iul. 2.
who was wont to say; It was not fit the Levites should serve others, who ought
to bear rule over others. The VENETIANS lastly, See Botter. comment. l. 12. p.
267. and inde. Gallo Belgie. an. 16^6.
about the maintenance of their State against the Clergy, were excommunicate
by the Pope that now is; save that he shrunk in the wetting, and durst not go
forward. For Papit. Masson annal. Franc. page 289.
since the time that Popes have been so prodigal of their curses, they have
lost their sting: and no marvel; for rare things are admired, when that which
is daily done is contemned. QVEENE ELIZABETH of most happy memory, since the
tenth year of her reign, See Sand. schism. Angl. page 182.
about which time Pius Quintus excommunicated her, till her dying day was never
free from their malice See the answers that the priests in the Tower made in
their examinatio^s, an. 1582. Maij 13. as they are set down in Concert. ecc
Cathol. in Angl adu Caluinop. page 241. and ind.
: the Popes and their Clergy, by treasons, invasions, rebellions,
conspiracies, infamous writings, and all the fury that the devil could
suggest, assailing her: the whole declaration whereof would fill large volumes.
And now finally, HIS MAJESTY that is, succeeds her in the tasting of the same,
and worse, practices: wherein the Jesuits and Mass Priests have been the
Popes principal executioners Breuia Pont. and the defense thereof by Bellarm.
Less. Coquae. Capel. Sticiop. Suar. Becan. Eudaem. and others.
: his alleagiance refused, the Popes omnipotency maintained: his Person
disgraced, reviled, conspired against, the Powder Treason plotted, by these
men. Yet there is an old prophecy in Telesphor. de tribulat. page 31.
Antichristus non poterit subiugare Venetias, nec Parisios, nec Ciuitatem
regalem Angliae.
Telesphorus, that Antichrist shall never prevail against these cities,
Venice, Paris, and London.

4 Here are upon 40 instances given, in justification of that I said: now the
Reader may judge as he please. In answer whereof, my adversaries will plead a
right the Pope and his Clergy had, to do all this; but the fact it self they
will not deny. And as all States in the world know his right to be none, so
Parisienses de eccl. and polit. potest. Blackw. Widdringt. Barkly: the Divines
of Venice: yea many large books written against it, by great Divines old and
new in the Church of Rome. Many whereof may be seen printed together by
Goldastus in the three tomes of his Monarchia.
not a few disdain it in the Church of Rome it self.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the doctrine of Merits taught in the Church of Rome: and touching
the Bull of Pius and Gregory against Michael Baius the Deane of Louane.

A. D. To pass therefore from this his epistle Dedicatorie, Page 26.
to his Preface to the Reader.. 1. he falsely charge the Church of Rome to
hold doctrine which it does not hold, but expressly condemn. Concerning merit
of works (says he) it holds, that when men, having conuersed godlily and
righteously in this mortal life to the end, obtain eternal life, this is not
to be deputed to the purpose of Gods grace, but to the ordinance of nature,
appointed presently in the beginning, when man was created: neither in this
retribution of good things is it looked to the merit of Christ, but only to
the first institution of mankind, wherein by a natural law it was set down,
that by the just judgment of God, the keeping of Gods commandments should be
rewarded with life, as the breaking of them is with death. Thus far is M.
Whites relation. But how false this relation is, may appear, not only in that
the contrary doctrine is ordinarily taught by our Divines, as may be seen in
Halensis 3. part. 9.69. mem. 5. art. 3.5. D. Thom. 1.2. q. 109. art. 9.
Roffensis refut. art. 36 Tapper de lib. arbit. Bellarmine l. 5. de Iustif c.
12. 14. 15. and others. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. c 16.
Whereunto may be added the Council of Trent, sess 6. c. 16. where it is
expressly defined, that to those that work well unto the end, and put their
hope in God, life everlasting is to be propounded, both as a Grace (note the
word Grace) mercifully promised to the children of God, through Jesus Christ,
and as a hire faithfully to be given to their good works and merits, by the
promise of God himself. By which definition of the Council we may learn,
that by our doctrine, life everlasting is not obtained by nature, but springs
of Gods grace and mercy, and the merit of our Savior Christ. And although our
good works do merit, yet it is not our works, as done by nature, but as done
in and by the grace of Christ, as is further declared by the said Council,
which says, that Christ Jesus does, as the head into all the members, and as
the vine into the branches continually infuse virtue to those that be
justified. Ibidem.
The Church-vertue does always go before, accompany and follow their good
works, without which virtue, these their works could not by any means be
grateful to God, and meritorious. This lo is the doctrine of our Church, and
not that temerarious and heretical proposition, which M. White relates out of
one Michael Baio, who is so far from being an approved author, sufficient to
declare what is the doctrine of our Church, as that he is disallowed, and this
his proposition expressly condemned by Pius Quintus, who was in his time chief
Pastor of our Church.
1 IN the fifth place he accuses me for charging the Church of Rome with that
which one Michael Baius a popish Doctor, and the Kings professor at Louane,
writ touching merits. But I answer three things. First, that I know no reason
why their Church may not be charged with that which Baius writ, as well as ours
is charged with this and that which any Protestant writes. For This made the
Protestants Apology, so often quoted in A. D his Reply, swell so big.
a few private and doubtful places are culled out of the writings of our men,
and objected to the whole body of our Church, by our adversaries, as our
doctrine. But the Jesuit writing in his THE WAY. 6.
Treatise, that all Catholic learned men acknowledge the Popes definitive
sentence, and submit their judgment thereunto; who would think that Baius, so
learned a man, should maintain any thing against that which the Pope allows?
specially being one of those that were at the Council of Trent, and knew the
mind thereof, and printed his book three years after. Secondly, when I writ,
I had Baius De merit op. printed at Louan by John Bogard. an. 1565. in 8.
his book by me, and knew nothing but I might allege it: he was a popish
Doctor, and the Kings public Reader, and Deane of the University of ^ouan:
one that was a principal Divine of the Trent Council, but three years
before: his book privileged by the King of Spain: and no where in all the
Indices that I have seen, either forbidden to be read, or commanded to be
purged, as those books are, which the Church of Rome mislikes in good earnest.
I answer thirdly, that what I alleged out of Baius, is the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, and the Jesuits: this I will prove, and then answer the
Jesuits arguments to the contrary.

2 First I say, that the Church of Rome holds, whatsoever I alleged out of
Baius. For I gathered no more out of his words, but that the salvation of our
souls is expected for the merit of works, and not to be ascribed to the merit
of Christ only. This is the current doctrine of Rome, contained in the words
of the Trent Council, alleged by the Reply to go no further. Next, Michael
Baius words, considered in themselves, as they sound contain the doctrine of
the Church of Rome, for any thing that the Jesuit can show to the contrary.
And if it be objected, that other Papists write otherwise, and confute him, I
care not for that: for they write at this day one against another, in every
point of their faith, and agree in nothing: in the questions of Predestination:
the concourse of Gods help with inferior causes: Praedeterminations: the
Popes primacie: taking the oath of allegiance: worship of Images: Freewill:
Transubstantiation: Antichrist: Latin service: and yet all the Jesuits living
cannot prove this to be their Churches doctrine rather then that. And therefore
as touching his adversaries that deal against him, Baius his opinion may be
the Trent opinion, as well as theirs: nay better: for he was there present,
when the doctrine of merits was concluded and agreed upon, and his book
alleges the Council on his side.

3 But I will show, that the words of Baius affirm no more, then other Papists
maintain. They contain only three propositions. First that our works merit.
This proposition they all hold, as the Jesuit will confess: and it is enough
to euacuate the merit of Christ, and translate it to our selves, and so
consequently to damn him that holds it, because by merit is meant such a
worthiness in the work, as of it own nature, by the way of Dico Deum
reddendo vitam aeternam seruare iustitiam commutatiuam. Pezant. 1.2. q. 114.
page 468. Dicendum est in Deo esse proprium attributum iustitiae, habens
quandam conuenientiam formalem, ^isi analogam, cum iustitia commutatiua creata:
raetione cuius, propria and for malis iustitia commutatius dici potest, licet a
rigore huius iustitiae, prout est in creaturis, aliquando discrepat and
differat, in obiecto formali suo. Atque hanc iustitiam maximo Deus exercet in
retribuendis praemijs me^^^ rum, vel condignis satisfactionibus acceptandis.
Suar. opusc. disp. de iustit. Dei. sect. 2. n 27.
COMMVTATIVE JUSTICE, deserves eternal life. And it is no matter though they
will answer, that the Grace of God makes us able to do these works: for so
much Baius also says for himself: but the point is, that if eternal life be
given properly, by an act of commutatiue justice, to my work, done by what
Grace soever, then salvation is neither the sole nor proper effect of Christ's
death. The second proposition contained in Baius words, is, that Christ only
made us able to do good works, but such works being done, then the reward is
given, not for the merit of Christ, but for the condignitie of the work. This
is holden by others. Vasquez 12. q. 114 disp 222. n. 30 page 917.
says: When the works of a just man condignely merit eternal life, as the
wages and reward that is equal to them, there is no need that the condign
merit of another such as the merit of Christ is, come between, that unto them
should be rendered eternal life: for the merit of every just man, in respect of
the man himself, has some thing peculiar, which the merit of Christ has not;
namely to make the man himself just, and worthy eternal life, that he may
worthily obtain the same: but the merit of Christ, albeit most worthy to
obtain eternal life for us of God, yet has not this efficacy and virtue, to
make us formally just, and worthy eternal life; but men, by virtue derived
from him, attain this effect in themselves. This doctrine allows salvation
and blessedness to us, in the same manner that God, in the covenant of works,
rendered it to Adam, or to the Angels; for Ipsa igitur (Gratia) etiam homini
reparando fuit necessaria: quia non alia stantem Angelum a ruina potuit
custodire, nisi illa qua lapsum hominem, post ruinam, potuit reparare. Vna est,
in vtroque Gratia operata: in hoc vt surgeret, in illo ne caderet: in illo ne
vulneretur, in: flo vt s^naretur: ab hoc infirmitatem repulit, illum infirmari
non sinit; illius esca, istius medicina. Fulgent ad Trasim l 2. page 269. Adam
ante lapsum non fuit per vtres suas naturales, praecise etiam cum Dei generali
influentia, sufficiens ad igendum aliquem actum moraliter bonum, seu vere
virtuosunt, quinimo, vltra praedicta, fuit sibi necessarium aliud Dei auxilium
speciale. Gregor. Arim. 2. d. 29. q. 1 concl. 2. page 107. See Mag. 2. d. 29.
Ibi Tho. Argent. art. 3. Dur. qu. 1. Capreol. qu. 1. concl. 3. and 4. Suar.
tom. 1. disp. 42. sect. 1.. Dico tamen.
they also had the grace of God to enable them to work, as we have the merits
of Christ, but that grace went no further. The third proposition contained in
Baius words is, that good works have the reward of eternal life due unto
them, not of grace, but of their own nature, because God in the beginning by
the law of nature, appointed the reward to be rendered to him that well did. The
same is taught generally in the Church of Rome, by all them that hold, Vasq.
1.2. tom 2. page 803. c. 4. in these words delivers his opinion of merit.
when a man being in the state of righteousness, through the grace of God does
good works, then the said works merit eternal life, and are equally worthy
of the reward, though God make no covenant in Christ to accept them: and that
they have no increase of dignity coming to them by the merits or person of
Christ, but before God make any promise to us in him, they are in justice
worthy the reward: and though God have made a covenant to accept such works,
done by grace, yet the merit and worthiness thereof arises not, nor is founded
on that covenant, but the promise is founded on the merit of the work, because
it were injustice if God should not reward a good work. And thus the greatest
Divines in the Church of Rome teach. Panopl. p^g. 110.
Lindan: I think they do not worthily enough set forth the grace of Christ in
our good works, who think God rewards the good works of just men with
eternal life of free grace, and the vouchsafing of his own clemency; because
the reason of true merit, which is engendered in good works, through the
dignity of Christ's Spirit, their author, seems to deserve GREATER praise,
then that God should only VOVCHSAFE it the reward FREELY. Anard: Artic. 9. page
126.
Far be it from us that we should wait for eternal life, AS A POOR MAN DOES
FOR ALMS; for it is MORE GLORIOUS for us, like conquerers and triumphers, to
possess it as the garland and crown that is DVE to our labors. Suarez: Tom.
1. page 645. B.
It must not be denied, but our merits are true merits, in such sort, that the
works of the godly, proceeding from grace, have in themselves an inward
dignity, and the same proportion to the reward which they should have,
understanding a man to be just, and to work well, without the merits of
Christ: as many think of the Angels, and of man in the state of innocence.
12. disp. 214. c. 4. n. 17.
Vasquez: Although God have made a promise to the works of just men, yet
neither that promise, nor any covenant or favor of God, belongs any ways to
the reason of the merit. Bellarmine: De iustif. l. 5. c. 17. page 993. A
The works of the just merit eternal life condignely, by reason of Gods
covenant and the work together: NOT BECAUSE THE GOOD WORK HAS NO PROPORTION
TO ETERNAL LIFE WITHOUT GODS COVENANT TO ACCEPT IT; but because God is not
tied to accept it to the reward, though it be equal thereto, unless his
covenant come between. D. Stapleton: De iustificat. page 237.
We are said to please God, and to be acceptable to him in and for Christ: and
our justice is said to lean upon Christ's justice, because the beginning and
progress thereof is of Christ, and depends thereon as on the efficient cause
--: and, Christ's justice supplies our defects, NOT BY SVPPLYING ANY IMPERFECT
ACT THAT IS IN OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, and so making it perfect, that it might stand
before Gods judgment seat --; but if such imperfection of our righteousness
be without sin, it is admitted for true righteousness, and admitted in the
just judgment of God. Alph. Virves. Andrad Horat. Caiet. Bonaue^. Mart Distor.
Thom. Ricard. Romae. Conrad. Capraeol. Dried Clictouae. Tilet. Vincent. Soto.
all cited for this opinion by Vasq. 12. disp. 214. n. 9. and 18.
The most of our adversaries hold this; and teach a condignitie in our works,
arising out of THEMSELVES, abstracting from the merits of Christ, and promise
of God: which promise is founded on the work; and which merits of Christ add
nothing to the value of the work, but only eleuates the person of him that
works. Whence it follows, that the reward must needs be given by the first
covenant, made with Adam: which is as much of Baius his opinion, as I alleged.

4 Thus I have showed that Baius in his words by me quoted, teaches no other
doctrine then is ordinarily taught by other Divines in the Church; and the
Jesuits arguments to the contrary, are easily answered. To the first; there
can be no more showed out of their writings, but that life eternal is obtained
by grace, and the merit of Christ, inasmuch as they are the root of merit,
which Quicquid ad humani generis reparationem pertinet, id non nostris moritu
propriis, neque iusto Dei iudicio tribuendum est, quia alioqui saltem ex part,
essemus nostri redemptores; sed tantum proposito gratiae Dei, per redemptionem
quae facta est in sanguine Christi. Page 12.
Baius denies not; but yet for all that, holding that works so done, have in
them an intrinsecall righteousness, and worthiness of their own; they must
needs hold consequently, that God in justice is bound to reward them, in the
same manner that he rewards Angels, or would have rewarded Adam if he had never
fallen, which was by the covenant of works. And it should seem the Jesuit by
his manner of citing them, saw not the books themselves, but borrowed the
quotations of his friends. For first touching Alexander, he quotes 3. part.
9.69. (which I presume is mis-printed in stead of qu. 69.) memb. 5. art. 3. 5:
whereas in the 5. m. there are only 4 articles, and in the 3d art. Page 249.
he speaks expressly against him, that if a man do that which is in himself to
do, God necessarily gives him grace. In which words he plainly ascribes merit
to works done by nature; which is Pelagianisme. The best that he says against
nature for grace, is in Concedendum est ergo necessariam esse gratia^,
indistincte ad merendum and consequendum beatitudinem. m. 1. art. 1.
another place; but that Grace, whereby he says we merit, he expounds to be
our own work, wrought by the power of Gods grace, which is the very point
that Baius holds. Bellarmines opinion is uncertain, he does nothing but chop
and change; a man of no resolution, but a very weather-cocke, yet he has one
good saying on the Jesuits side: De iustif. l. 5. c 7.
By reason of the uncertainty of a man's own righteousness, and for fear of
vainglory, it is the safest way to repose our whole confidence in the sole
mercy and goodness of God. But See Vasqu. 1.2. tom. 2. page 794. c. 7.
his fellows whip him for it. The other three, Tapper, Fisher, and Thomas say
no more, but that our works merit by grace; in which point they cross not
Baius, for he also allows grace, and says not that they merit by nature, but
that being done by grace, the reward is given, not by a new covenant in Christ,
but by the same that God made with Adam in pure nature; from which opinion they
also cannot be freed, inasmuch as they hold the merit of works, not to be
founded on Gods covenant in Christ, but Gods covenant to be founded on the
merit, as I have touched before. To the Council of Trent, I answer, that Baius
was there present, and in all probability knew the meaning of it, either to be
with him, or not against him; else he would not have published his book The
Counce^ ended an. 1563. he printed his book 1565.
two years after the Council was ended: and these very words of the Council
(eternal life is the grace of God) Cap. 6.
he answers, and expounds to his own sense, that it is the grace of God,
because it is due to the merits that proceed of grace; which grace he denies
not to be the root of merit, but he denies it to have any influence into the
reason of meriting: as I have expounded in the third proposition. And if the
Reader will see the true meaning of these words of the Council, whereby so
many are beguiled, here it is: Vasqu. p. 819. n. 84.
Where life eternal is called a grace, mercifully promised to the sons of
God: I answer, that life eternal is not called a grace mercifully promised,
because the works whereto it is given are not equal of themselves to it, or
condignely worthy of it --; but because the merits, whereto it is rendered, are
of Gods mercy; and so life eternal, in respect of the root thereof, is
called grace. Page 820. n. 88
Again: The Council of Trent affirming life eternal to be a reward, which is
to be rendered faithfully by promise: if it be well marked, nothing favors
their opinion (who hold our works not to merit of themselves, but because God
has made a promise to reward them) for that word BY PROMISE, must not be
joined with THE REWARD, as if the meaning were, that life eternal is given as
a reward, because it is given by promise; which it should not, if the promise
were not: but it must be joined with that (TO BE FAITHFVLLY rendered to their
good works and merits) for this to be FAITHFVLLY rendered, it has by promise.
Wherefore WITHOUT THE PROMISE of God, eternal life should be rendered CONDIGNLY
to the works of the just, as the wages, stipend, and crown of righteousness;
taking righteousness for that equality which is to be observed between the
dignity of works and eternal life: but yet it should not be given
FAITHFVLLY, or of fidelity; because where there is no promise, there is no
fidelity: for fidelity is that truth which is in keeping promises. Whereby we
see, that it was not the mind of the Council, to ascribe eternal life to the
grace of God, otherwise then so far forth as that grace makes us able to
merit it our selves; which is the very opinion of Baius, that I alleged.

5 To the Bull, whereby he says, this opinion of Baius is expressly condemned;
I answer, that when I alleged Baius, I knew not of the Bull, but since In
Posseuin. appar. verbo Mich. Baius. and at the end of Vasqu. para. in epist.
Pauli.
I have seen it, and been admonisht thereof; nevertheless Baius his
proposition is not thereby condemned: the words of the Bull, are these, after
it has set down some 80 propositions, extracted out of Baius. Many of these
propositions might in some fashion be defended, yet as they are intended by
such as defend them in the rigor and proper sense of the words, we condemn
them As Paul, the now Pope, in his late censure of ^ecanus his book, says,
Many things therein are false and temerarious, RESPECTIVELY: because this
censure being extorted from him, to avoid a worse inconvenience, should not
simply condemn Becanus his opinion, (which Bellarmine himself, whose hand is
to the Censure, has broached as well as he, in his writings) but only made a
show of condemning them, to serve the present turn, and to delude the Princes
of the world, with hope of that which he will never do, till he see his
occasions fitter then now they are.
respectively, as heretical, erroneous, suspected, rash, and scandalous. By
which condemnation, 1. 2. disp. 190. n 176. page 516.
says Vasquez a Jesuit, maintaining some things mentioned in the same Bull,
it does not appear, what censure does agree severally to each proposition; but
by the words it is manifest, that all those notes and censures together
(temerarious and heretical) do not belong to the said propositions, but every
one by it self, that is to say, every one has his proper censure; and thus
some propositions are only condemned, as lying open to scandal. Thus Vasquez
their great Schoole-man and a Jesuit, answered the Bull, when it was objected
against him, for holding certain propositions therein; in the prosecution
whereof he shows, that many things contained in it are condemned only because
of his manner of defending them, with some violence and intemperance. And he
says, See the Jesuits admonition to the Reader, prefixed to the Bull, at the
end of Vasquez paraphrase; wherein he shows that Baius is mistaken, and not
truly understood by such as have dealt against him; and that the Popes Bull
censures his doctrine no otherwise then Vasquez affirms.
he learned this to be the intent of the Bull from Cardinal Tolet, who was a
commissioner sent by the Pope to Louan, for the composing of these contentions,
and therefore best knew the meaning of the Bull. Belike Baius was somewhat
passionate in the maintenance of his opinions, much like this Jesuit, and so
the Pope by a Bull censured him: which being so, how will the Jesuit make it
appear to me, that this singular proposition, which is the twelfth in number,
is condemned as Note what propositions they be that our adversaries account to
be heretical, temerarious, scandalous, etc. as it is noted by Lud. Carbo. in
his sums. Duo genera propositionum haereticarum -- primum continet errores
manifestos contra veritates in verbo Dei expressa^, aut per Ecclesiam iam
determinatas. Alterum in quo continentur errores contra veritates euidenter ex
primo genere collectas --. And then a little before: Jdeo aliqua propositio
dicitur haeretica, quia haresim designat; sed hoc non facit nisi adsit
pertinacia --. Propositio erronea est illa qua aduersatur veritati ex
propositione de fide euidenter collectae --. Propositio quae dicitur sapere
haeresim est illa quae licet non appareat haerisis manifesta, quin potius
potest habere bonum sensum, tamen ex circumstantijs potest praebere saporem vel
suspicionem haeresis. Vt ista propositio: Iustus ex fide viuit. -- Propositio
temeraria quando asseritur aliquid contra communem Ecclesia and Doctorum
sententiam, sine ratione firmissima. -- Propositio scandalosa est illa quae
apta est gignere scandalum circa doctrinam and veritatem fidei. Ludo. Carb.
sum. tom. 3. l. 1. c. 56.
heretical and temerarious, or further then as he held it with violence and
passion* Let him read the Bull, and he shall find therein many propositions,
that himself will not condemn. The second is, that as an evil work of his
nature merits eternal death, so a good work of it own nature merits eternal
life; yet Sicut se habet culpa ad poenam, ita opus virtutis ad gloriam. Sed
culpa ex condigno meretur poenam; ergo and actus virtutis, ex condigno meretur
vitaem aeternam. Tho. 2. d. 27. art. 3. Quae quidem satis indicant non minus
sempiternam foelicitatem iustorum esse praeclaris operibus debitam, quam
aeternos cruciatus eorum sceleribus qui no^ nouerunt Deum. Andrad. orthod expl.
page 517. God gives as well everlasting life and glory to men for and according
to their good works; as he gives damnation for the contrary works. Rhem
annot. Romans 2. n. 6.
this is generally holden among all their Divines. The eight proposition is,
that in such as are redeemed by the grace of Christ, there can be found no good
merit, which is not freely given to him that is unworthy; yet the Jesuit says
here, that all our works merit by the grace of Christ; which is false, if the
Bull censure truly: for to have no merit, but such as is freely given to him
that is unworthy, and to have merits that are not freely given, but the party
is worthy, are contrary. The 14 is, that our works at the last judgment shall
receive no ampler reward, then by the just judgment of God they deserve: yet
Vega De Iustificat. q. 5.
holds this opinion. The 30 is, that no tentation can be resisted without the
grace of Christ: yet Abulens. in Matthew 19. q. 178. Gregor. Arimin. 2. d. 28.
Cassal. quadrip. instit par. 1. l 1 c. 25. Bellarm. great. and lib. arb. l. 5.
c. 7.
many School men hold it. The like may be showed in other propositions there
censured, and yet commonly holden by the learned in the Church of Rome;
whereupon I conclude, that the Bull is no sufficient argument to prove the
place I cited out of Baius, not to be the doctrine of the Church of Rome: but
the Jesuit would use the name thereof, to serve the present turn, when he had
no true understanding of the drift and purpose of it.

CHAP. VIII.
1. The Papacy brought in by Satan. 2. The Jesuits spirit of contradiction.
3. The Church of Rome revolted. The five Patriarchs were equal at the first.
4. Plain Scripture against the Papacy. 5. The ignorance of popish laity. 6.
Corruption of writings by the Papists. 7. Reformation desired long before it
came. 8, 9. Advice given to A.D.

A. D. In the same Preface I find many other notable untruths, Page 27.
as. 3. where he affirms, that the Papacy was brought in by Satan at the
first, and is still continued, only to seduce the world.
1 BY the Papacy I mean all that mass of innumerable errors in doctrine and
Church-gouernement, wherein they differ from us; and of it I do confidently
affirm, as. 48. n. 1.
I expound in THE WAY, that in process of time it grew as a scabbe or a
disease in the Church, which in the beginning knew no such faith; and for so much
as Mat. 13.25.
all innouations are tares; and the enemy that sowes tares among the wheat, is
the devil: therefore I affirmed, and yet do, that the Papacy was brought in
by the devil, as all other heresies were. And for so much as Parum enim interest
an cum daemone quis habitet, an cum viro Apostata. Effrem test page 793. Mihi
certe ille nunquam aliud quam diabolus erit, quia Arianus est Hilar. cont.
Auxe. sub fin.
there is little or no difference between the Devil and an Apostata, or an
heretic; therefore I add, that to communicate with the Papacy, is to follow
1. Tim. 4.1.
the doctrine of devils.

A. D. And again, Page 28.
that Catholics seek nothing but to be contrary to Protestants: and even
hate the name of peace.
2 I did not only say this, but I showed it also: first by relating the
pains, that in vain, and to no purpose has bin taken with them, to bring
them to reconciliation; and namely at the conference at Regenspurge, where
diverse points being agreed, it is well known how Ecchius a man of an unquiet
spirit, See his Apol. adu. Bucer. sup. act. colloq. Ratispon.
labored to dissolve the agreement, and discredit all that was done with the
Emperor and States, that had taken so much pains therein. Then by the froward
words of two Jesuits, Bellarmine and Maldonate; whereto I add a third, as
refractary as they. Lorin a Jesuit having related the judgment of six great
learned men against the vulgar Translation, in a certain place Comment. in 2.
Pet. 1. pa. 62^
says, They please him not for this cause, because he would have Catholics
more favorable to the vulgar Translation, and more to abhor the sense of
heretics. That is to say: rather then they shall agree with us in the truth,
he would have them follow the old Mumpsimus in a lie. This is the malepart
spirit in our adversaries, that I speak of; whereby the Reader may guess,
what love they have to peace, when upon hatred against us, because they will
not be said to yield, they will not accept of that, which themselves think may
be truth.

Page 28.
A.D. Also. 6. where he affirms, that the present Roman Church in wholly
departed in the questions controuerted from the ancient, and retains nothing
but the title: and that the ancient Church of Rome professed the same faith,
which Protestants now profess.
3 This matter is purposely showed in Digr. 49. and 51
THE WAY, and handled at large in this Defense; and it is not only true, but
so easy also to be showed, that the Jesuit durst not so much as look in the
face, that which I here added, to demonstrate it. He thinks his denial is
confutation enough; and so it is possible with his followers, that read his
Reply, but list not to hear, what I added, to make my word good. First out of
Pelusiot, how a Church may lose the faith, and yet retain her name still. As
Lais many a day after she was turned curtizan, yet was called Lais still: and
then out of Balsamon and Nicephorus, two Patriarchs in the Greek Church. That
in ancient time the Pope had not this primacie, nor Rome the royalty, that now
they have. To them I add another testimony out of Theodore Stuclites: Lib. 2.
ep 129. ad Leo. Sacell.
The divine and heavenly points of faith, are committed to none but those to
whom Christ said, Whatsoever you bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven. But who
are they to whom this was commanded? The Apostles and their successors. And who
be these successors? He that now holds the first sea of Rome: he that holds the
second of Constantinople: he of Alexandria, and Antioch: and he of Jerusalem.
This is the fiuefold top, that is, the power of the five Patriarchs of the
Church; in their power is the judgment of divine doctrines. This man (and his
name stands in Menolog. Grae Nouemb. 11. tom. 4. Bibl. SS. Patrum.
the Greek Calendar) in his time (to fit the controversy depending between
the student and me) thought all the Patriarchs together to have the right of
judgment, and not he of Rome alone: which shows that it is true which the
Cardinal of Cusa Cusan. conc. l. 2. c. 12.
writes, that by custom of men's obeying him, he has gotten beyond the bounds
of ancient observation. And so the head being departed, I hope the body stayed
not behind.

A.D. And. 11. where he affirms, Page 28.
that Protestants have the Scripture in manifest places free from all
ambiguitie for their side.
4 If this be not true, say directly, why do you teach most blasphemously, that
the Scripture is so obscure? so defective? so dangerous for the people to
meddle with? Why do you forbid the people the reading of it in the mother
tongue? What Protestant, if he would study to do it of purpose, can speak
plainer then they against Exodus 20.4. Deuteronomy. 4.15.
images, Apoc 19.10. and 22.8.
the worshipping of Saints, Act. 10.25.
the Popes pride, 1. Cor. 14.
Latin prayers and Service, Luc. 17.10. Phil. 3.12.
Merit, and perfection of works? Psalm. 37.37. Apoc. 14.13.
Purgatory, Luc. 22.25.
the Popes primacie, 1 Cor. 10 16.
Transubstantiation, 1. Sam. 26.8. Romans 13.1.
Deposing and murdering Kings: 1. Tim. 4.3.
Distinction of meats for conscience? what finally can be spoken plainer in
defense of 1. Tim. 3.2.11.12.
Priests marriage, or to show the Pope and his crew to be 2. These ^3. Apoc.
17.18.
that Antichrist? etc. The Scripture therefore is manifest enough for us: but
Hos. de expr. Dei verb.
our adversaries have a rule, that the Scripture, as it is alleged by
Protestants, is the word of the devil; and therefore be it never so manifest,
yet it must not be manifest when we allege it.

A.D. And again, Page 28.
that Protestants have the principles of religion contained in the Lords
prayer, the Creed, the ten Commandments, leading directly to every point of
Protestancie, and that for this reason the Church of Rome forbids the
reading, and exercise of these things to the people, lest they should see so
much.
5 As for example, to pray to God alone, and to no other; for the Lords prayer
teaches us to pray to him that is our Father, to whom it belongs to forgive us
our trespasses, and whose is the kingdom, the power, and the glory: all
prayers being to be made after this form, we are directly lead from praying to
Saints (to whom these things agree not) to call on God alone. Secondly, the
second commandment leads directly against image worship; and that is the
reason, why the Papists have not only forbidden the reading of it, but also In
their Catechismes. Van. Canis. Ledesm. Office of our Lady: and other.
put it clean out, in their ordinary Catechismes. Thirdly, the Creed saying
that Christ being ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of God, from
whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, teaches plainly to
believe that he comes not down every day to be eaten in the Sacrament, under
the forms of bread and wine. In like manner we affirm these three, the Creed,
the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments, to be such a rule, as serves to
conclude in true and perfect consequence, whatsoever we hold against our
adversaries: and whether the Church of Rome have not forbidden the people to
use them, I refer my self to the times of King Henry the 8, what time the
people with incredible joy and admiration first heard them in the English
tongue: I refer me to the manner of their praying, mentioned Chapter 12.
hereafter, which had not been, if they had been permitted the use of these
things. And because the Jesuit denies this, let him say truly, what
encouragement have they given the common people to read the Scriptures? to use
the Lords prayer, and the rest, in their mother tongue? to exercise themselves
diligently in these things? Let them show us the time when, the words
wherewith, the benefit that has ensued thereby? No: they have reviled and
reproched these things, and bred a hatred of them in the people, and all to
keep them in ignorance: my self continued many years in a parish, where
there were not a few Recusants; and in all the number, I did not in the time,
though I made trial of many, find one that could say, and pronounce these
things in the English tongue, unless he were (which few were) book-learned.
Among many other, I came to an aged woman's house, and desiring her to repeat
unto me the Creed, she said it in fustian Latin, (of that sort which I have
expressed Chapter 12.
a little below) and assaying to teach it her in English, she answered, that
seeing her Latin creed had served her turn to this age, she would now learn
no new. And when I asked her, who Jesus Christ was, that the Creed said was
borne of the virgin Mary; she answered, she could not tell: but by our dear
Lady, it is sure some good thing, or it should never have bin put in the
Creed; but what it is, I cannot tell you: for I was never taught so much my
self. This woman afterward heard me willingly, and rejoiced to hear the
understanding of these things; and reported strange things of the barbarous
ignorance, and irreligion of those times, wherein she was brought up. The
experience that we have of these things, shows how, and in what sort Papists
exercise their people in the principles of Religion: and my own particular
knowledge hereof, obtained by conuersing diverse years among them, is such,
that all the Seminary Priests and Jesuits in England, if there were ten
thousand of them, shall never outstare it with their great looks.

A.D. And again, Page 28.
that the ancient Fathers are for Protestants in express terms, in all things
that they held constantly, and certainly with one consent, and that in the
principal points, touching Scripture, Justification, Merit of works, Images,
and all the rest, they write most clearly with Protestants.
6 This I showed throughout my writing in every point I stood upon; and if it
be not so, shrink not, but answer: why have you corrupted the writing of the
Fathers? De unit. eccl. in the Romans and Antw. prints: and in all that follow
them.
Cyprian, to avoid his evidence against the Popes Supremacy? Hom. 49. in op
imperf. Paris. in 8. an. 1557 See Bellar. de verb. Dei. l. 4. c. 11.. Sexto
profert. and Posseu. appar. to. 1. page 847.
Chrysostom, where he iustifies the Scriptures? Ind. expurg. Hisp. page 18.
Gregory Nyssen, where he speaks against the worship of creatures? Why do you
I^d. ex purg. Belg. page 12.
profess, that in the old Catholic writers, you bear with many errors; and
when in disputation they are opposed against you, you extenuate and excuse
them, and many times, by devising a shift, deny them, and feine some fit sense
unto them? Why do you take order, that Posseu. biblio select. l. 1. c. 48. page
38.
in the public Libraries of Princes, and others, every one shall not see the
manuscripts, Greek, Latin, or any other, which are not permitted by the
Church, because these also must be purged? What is the meaning of that speech,
which Apparat. verb Anton. Florent.
Posseuine the Jesuit uses of Antoninus and his writings; that he now enjoying
the blessed light of heaven, no doubt desires that all his writings should be
reviewed, and occupied purer, then of old they were? Say now, and dissemble
not: is it not a violent presumption, that the Fathers are clear for
Protestants, when Papists thus purge and censure their writings, in such things
as are in controversy between us? and are they not resolved in this damned
course of purging books, when they think the authors in heaven rejoice to see
their works hereby made purer? Verily Erasmus Ep. ad Card. Mogunt.
said, that many things are condemned in Luthers books as heretical, which in
Austin and Bernard, are read for good Divinity. And our contentment is, that
daily experience shows this to be true. Ph. Camerar. medit. hist. to. 2. page
39. Macro. l. ^. c. 8.
They write how the Romans at the siege of Carthage, according to their manner,
first coniured the Dij tutelares out of it before they proceeded: Be thou a God,
he, or she, that protectest the people or city of Carthage, but specially thee
the Patron thereof, I worship thee first, and then entreat thee to abandon
Carthage, the city, the places, the temples, every thing thereof, and to come
away to us and ours, and dwell in our city, our places, our temples, and be
our Patrons. So do we vow you plays and sacrifices. Thus play our adversaries
in printing the books of the ancient Fathers and Schoolmen: If thou be a God
or a Goddess, come forth; if a doctrine or a period, that protectest the
Church of the Protestants, come away we entreat thee, forth of the Text, forth
of the Table, forth of the Margent, into our Indices expurgatorij, and we vow
to sacrifice you in the fire.

A D. Again, that Protestants have done nothing against the Church of Rome,
but innumerable people in all ages wished it long ago.
7 I said another thing, immediately before this, that the Jesuit skips: We
have the mercies of God to plead for us, whereby our Church has bin
miraculously vpholden. When they threatened, God defended us: when they
practiced, and expected our ruin, God disappointed them: when they wrought all
manner of treasons, yet God delivered us. The conscience of his own guilt, and
the envy of our well-doing, would not let him mention this: yet here again I
commend it to him, that by considering the behavior of his side toward us, he
may the better discern what they are. And to that he has observed, I answer,
that I showed the truth thereof in the same place, by the example of Gerson,
and testimony of Nauclere; which the Jesuit dissembles, because his occupation
is not to observe the grounds of my speeches, but to rail me down: yet the
Reformatione autem generale^ ecclesiae extreme necessariam fore nostru
temporibus mores corrupit totius orbis praenuntiant: cum reuera pene omnis caro
corrupit viam sua^. Iac. de Parady. Collect. de sept stat. eccl.
willingness to accept reformation, and the joy of all nations when it came,
and the detestations they showed of the Romish tyranny that had oppressed
them, shows, I said the truth. And if I had to do with an adversary of any
worth, or that were fit for a discourse, or saw it otherwise needful to
satisfy others, I would in confirmation hereof, repeat my words that I then
used; What ceremony? what doctrine? what custom? what one parcel of their
superstition have we refused, but the world, long since, complained of it? The
tyranny and oppression of old Babylon, was never so complained of. I will
only mention the speech of Gerson, that was Chancellor of Paris, almost a
hundred years before Luther, whose books, from the beginning to the end,
contain almost nothing but complaints of the Churches state: he Tom. 1. page
241. E.
says: Let experience answer what hurt, what danger, what confusion the
contempt of the sacred Scripture (which yet is sufficient for the government of
the Church, unless Christ were an imperfect lawgiver) has brought; let the
Clergy be viewed, which should have married heavenly wisdom which is
peaceable and chaste, if it have not committed fornication with that adulterous
harlot, earthly, humane, and diabolical wisdom. The state of the Church
also, is it not all become as it were brutish and monstrous? -- That many doubt
not to consult, that this state of the Church were better to be governed by the
inventions of men, then by the divine Evangelical law; as if the soul were
less then the body, and spiritual food less then carnal. This assertion,
on my faith, is not only false, but blasphemous: for the doctrine of the
Gospel, by the professors thereof, has enlarged the Church as far as
heaven; which the sons of Agar, seeking after earthly wisdom, have thrust
into the mire; and it is the mercy of God, that it is not wholly fallen. The
which things, because my conscience testifies, I speak not for gain, or of
ambition, or for mine own credit, but for the maintenance of the truth, and
common good: because this court of Divines has little promoted the truth, if
not contemned it, which notwithstanding has purchased to it self all the
glory it can.

Page 28.
A. D. All these be very gross untruths, and some of them such, as not only
Catholics, but also learned Protestants will confess to be false; yea even M
White himself, either must confess himself to be blockishly ignorant, or
carelessly inconsiderate, or else he must grant, that he has affirmed these
things against his own knowledge, and conscience. Which being so, I might here
make an end, without saying any more, as having given the Reader a taste of M.
Whites want of truth and sincerity, sufficient to make any discreet man beware
how he gives credit to these his writings.
8 Away with this intolerable bragging, and let the pen be put into the hands
of some, if any such be among them, that will dispute; if ever it were a time
to leave wording, and fall to realitie, this it is, wherein our adversaries by
the glorious and unlimited reports of their own sincerity, have raised up the
opinions of so many to the expectation of matter at their hands: and indeed the
distraction of so many peoples minds about religion, require, and even cry for
material and sound dealing; and is this now the performance thereof, with
reuiling words to pester their books, and to the matter to reply, Hoc nihil
inuariabile? Gross untruths: blockishly ignorant: against his own knowledge
and conscience: carelessly inconsiderate: I might here make an end, etc. Was
this all the Jesuit could say against that which M. White confirmed by plain
authorities? could he confute his writing, no otherwise then thus? Then M.
White tells him again, that as he has written nothing, but what all learned men
know to be true; and many have objected against the Church of Rome, long ago,
to far better purpose then himself is able to do: so his knowledge and
conscience, and the conscience of thousands with him, are the firmlier assured
of these things, in that his adversary is able to say so little against them.

A.D. Yet because in the 12. Page 29.
of his Preface he offers (as he says) certain external marks and
sensible tokens, whereby the falsehood of the Roman Church may be discovered,
and the most resolute Papist that lives, moved to misdoubt of his own
religion; I have thought it not amiss to examine these his marks and tokens,
as supposing that if I find him to fail of truth and sincerity in these, men
will not expect to find it in the rest of his book, in regard he intending to
move by these his mark and tokens, even (as he says) the most resolute Papist
that lives, to misdoubt of his religion; it is like he would use all his
diligence and care, that such a careless man in so bad a cause could, not
only to bring sensible, but also sound and substantial matter, and that very
truly and sincerely set down, as knowing that such resolute Papists will not
be easily moved to misdoubt of their (so ancient and well grounded) religion by
any slight marks or tokens, though never so seeming sensible, especially if
they may sensibly perceive them to be vnsincerely and untruly propounded, and
urged against them. That therefore the Reader may better guess what truth and
sincerity he may expect in the rest of M. White his book, I have thought fit
briefly to view, and run through these his marks and tokens.
9 What Reader now, but would imagine the Jesuit to be with child of some
substantial matter, and yet it will prove but a tympanie of mind? and
therefore I desire the Reader diligently to observe what passes between us.
For I say again, that if a man never look further, those very things which I
mentioned as external marks, and sensible tokens of the Roman Churches
iniquity, are sufficient of themselves to move the hotest and zealousest
Papist alive, yet once again to lay his hand upon his heart, and better to look
into his religion. And what account soever the Jesuits resolute Papists, that
will not so easily be moved, make of that I said, yet still I offer it to their
(...). Isid. Pelusio. ep. 191. lib. 3.
more retired, and vnpreiudicate considerations; especially now when this
Jesuit has studied out what he can to lay in against it: and finding the
demonstrations (whereby, though very briefly, yet really, I showed every Mark)
to be too hot for his mouth, meddles not with them, but passes them over, and
says not a word to them, but only repeates the motive, and making a face at
it, so lets it go, not mentioning the arguments whereby I declare it. Chrysostom.
This is the power of truth, and the grace of innocence, when her enemy is
her judge, and the devil her accuser, and wrath, and fury, and calumny, and
hatred are impaneled against her, yet she is quit and justified.

CHAP. IX.
1. The Apocrypha not accounted Canonical Scripture. 2. Papists professing to
expound against the Fathers. 3. The new English translation of the Bible. 4.
Traditions equalled with the holy Scripture. 6. About the erring of Councels.
7. And the sufficiency of the Scriptures.

Page 29.
A. D. The first mark is (says he) their enmity with the holy Scripture:
this is an evident untruth, proceeding either out of ignorance, or out of
enmity and malice against us. For who knows not, that we be so far from
having enmity with sacred Scriptures, as we reverence and respect them far
more then Protestants do? partly in that we accept all the books of them,
which the ancient Church has delivered to us, as sacred and canonical:
whereas Protestants by their private spirit, thrust some of them as it were by
the head and shoulders, out of the Canon: and partly also for that we hold such
reverent regard to the divine truth contained in them, as that we do not
presume either to translate or interpret them according to our private fancy
or judgment, but conformably according to the approved spirit and judgment
of the universal Catholic Church: whereas the Protestants have so little
regard, that they permit every man to rush without reverence, into the sacred
text to translate it, if he have skill in the learned tongues, or to interpret
it by his private spirit, although he have no skill in any besides the vulgar
tongue.
1 THe enmity and rebellion of the Roman Church against the Scriptures, is so
apparent, that the Jesuit thought it his best policy not to meddle with that,
whereby I showed it more fully in the 22 Digr. but to wrangle at that I here
only touched briefly by the way; bearing the Reader in hand, that I have in
this place used all the diligence and care I could, and brought the soundest
and substantiallest matter that I had, when I only in few words pointed at it.
First he says, they be so far from having enmity with the Scriptures, that
they reverence them more then we do. His reasons to persuade this, are two.
First they accept all the books of the Scriptures, which the ancient Church
has delivered us for Canonical, whereas Protestants by their private spirit
thrust some of them (he means the Apocrypha) out of the Canon by the head and
shoulders; I answer, that we deny no part of the Canon which the ancient
Church received; and this bringing in of the Apocryphal books, Wisd.
Ecclesiast. Toby, Judith, Maccab. and the rest, into the Canon, conuinces the
Church of Rome of that contempt of the Scriptures which I mentioned, when it
exalts and aduances to the honor of divine inspired Scripture, that which is
not so, nor was esteemed so in the ancient Church. For Rebels to place another
in the same throne with the King, and to give him equal power and honor with
him, and to make his laws equal to the Kings, is as much as if they thrust
the King out of the throne. For a wife to yield those duties to a neighbor,
that are proper to her husband, makes her an adulteress, though otherwise she
deny him nothing. And it is untrue that the Jesuit says, the Apocrypha was
esteemed canonical Scripture in the ancient Church; for Legit quidem Ecclesia,
sed eos inter canonicas Scripturas non recipit, etc. Iero praef. in Prou. Non
sunt in Canone. Praef. in 1. Reg. (...), etc. Conc. Laodic. e vlt. (...).
Athan. synops. p. 63. Athanasius reckoned the books of Scripture, according to
the mind of the Nicen Council, says B^ron. an. 63. n. 10. (...). Melito apud
Eusebius. hist. page 43. (...) -- Origin. apud Eusebius. page 65. Haec sunt quae
Patres intra Canonem concluserunt, ex quibus fidei nostrae assertiones constare
voluerunt. Sciendum tamen est quod and alij libri sunt qui non Canonici, sed
Ecclesiastici a maioribus appellati sunt -- quae omnia legi quidem in Ecclesiis
voluerunt non tamen proferri ad authoritatem ex his, fi^ei confirmandam. Cypr.
exp symb. n. 36. (...), etc. Epiph. page 534. (...). Cyril. Ierosol. page 30.
Catech. Hic verissimus diuinitus datarum est Scripturarum Canon. Amphiloch.
Icon. Iamb. page 730. -- (...). Naz. Carm. p. 36. In viginti duo libros Lex
Testamenti veteru deputetur. Hilar. in Psalm. page 615. Sunt autem libri veteris
Testamenti 24. Victorin. apocal. page 718. Hij sunt libri -- qui in Ecclesia
pro Canonicis habentur. -- Veteris Scripturae libri sunt viginti duo Leont. de
sect. page 1848. (...). Damasc. orth fid. l. 4. c. 18. page 348.
all Antiquity shows the contrary, that it was used, but not to ground faith
upon; and therefore the Papists putting it into the Canon, abuse the Scripture,
and antiquity; and Protestants judging it not to be Scripture, follow not
their private spirit, but the public spirit of the ancient Church in the
purest times. And Liber Judith, Tobia, Macchabaeorum, Ecclesiasticus atque
liber Sapientiae non sunt recipiendi ad confirmandum aliquid in fide. Occham.
dial. p. 212. Non sunt in Canone sanctorum librorum reputata sieve confirmata:
nec inter libros Legis and Prophetarum, nic inter Hagiographos computantur --
sicut liber Sapientiae, liber Judith, liber Tobiae, liber Maccabaor Turrecr. c.
Sancta Romans d. 15. n. 19. and d. 16. c. Apostolor. n. 5. The Apocrypha denied
to be Canonical Scripture by Antonin. sum. mor. part. 3. tit. 18. c. 6.. 2.
Lyra Praef. in Tob. Hugo Cardin. praef. in Ios. Caietan. in Hest c. vlt. Picus
Mirandul de fid. and ordin. cred. theor. 5. And many others.
the learned also of our adversaries are of the same judgment (the Church of
Rome never wanting those in it, that in all ages gave testimony to the truth)
that it is not Canonical Scripture; whereby the Reader may see the Jesuits
rashness and ignorance, when he says, the Protestants of their private spirit
thrust the Apocrypha by the head and shoulders out of the Canon. For the other
books, as Jerome says, the Church does read for example of life, and
instruction of manners: but yet it does not apply them to establish any
doctrine: say Art. 6. idem R. Jacob. praef. monitor. page 39.
the articles of our Church.

2 His second reason to prove, that the Church of Rome reuerences the Scripture
more then we do, is, because they presume not to translate them, or interpret
them according to their own private judgment, but conformably according to
the spirit of the universal Church; whereas Protestants permit every man to
rush into the Text, to translate or interpret it. Both the parts of this
reason are false. First the Papists out of the reverend regard to the divine
truth contained in the^, presume not either to translate or interpret the
Scripture according to their private judgment, but according to the judgment
of the universal Church. Here are three untruths. First, that in their
expositions and interpretations they follow the universal Church: for therein
they follow only the Popes will, and practice of the present Roman Church,
which are not the universal Church: this is showed in THE WAY, Digr. 16. And
Si quando occurrerit aliquis sensus textui conso^us, quamuis a torrente
doctorum alienus, loctor aequum se prebeat censorem: nullusque detestetur illum
ex hoc, quod dissonat a priscis Doctoribus: Non enim alligauit Deus
expositionem Scripturae priscorum Doctorum sensibus: alioquin spes nobis
tolleretur exponendi Scripturaru^. Caietan p^^oem. in Gen defended and followed
herein by Andrad. pro council. l. 2. Communu opinio Doctorum non est attendenda
quando altera contraria opinio fauet potestati clauium, aut iurisdictioni
Ecclesiae aut p^ae causae. D. Marta de iurisd. part. 4 page 273.
their learned men profess to follow new expositions, that the ancient Fathers
never used. Secondly, that in their Translations they follow the universal
Church. For the vulgar Latin is not the Translation of the universal Church;
neither was any man bound to it, till the Council of Trent; and their
translations into the mother tongues (when they are enforced thereunto)
following the vulgar, follow the universal Church no more then it does. The
corruption of that Translation, I have showed in THE WAY, Digr. 7. Thirdly,
that they translate not the Scripture, but according to the judgment of the
universal Church: as if they used translations into the mother tongue; which
is untrue thus far; that they use them not, but being enforced thereto by some
extremity: but utterly forbid them, and cry out against them, as I have
showed elsewhere.

3 The second part of his second reason is likewise false, that Protestants
permit every man to rush, without reverence, into the sacred Text to translate
it, if he have skill in the learned tongues, or to interpret it by his private
spirit, although he have no skill in any besides the vulgar tongue: for we
mislike private spirits, and expositions more then our adversaries do, who tie
all to the Popes sole will; when we allow no exposition before it be squared to
the rule of faith, and the sense of the true Church. And touching translating,
there is as much regard with us, as was when the Church was purest: no man's
private translation is canonized, but that which is publicly used, is done by
public authority; an example whereof we had these last years, in the new
Translation, The comparison will scarce please those that absurdly hold the
Septuagint, and the author of the Latin vulgar were Prophets infallibly guided
in translating, by Gods Spirit, as the Apostles and Prophets them selves were.
See Io. Marian. tract. pro vulg. edit. c. 13 and 23. Matthew. Aquar. in Capreo.
prol page 7.
PERFORMED WITH AS GOOD ADVICE, AND BY AS LEARNED AND GODLY MEN, AS EVER JOINED
TOGETHER IN SVCH A WORK SINCE TRANSLATION WAS USED. And if some private men,
skillful in the learned tongues, as Wickliffe, or Tindall, for example, when
better means failed, translated the Bible of themselves: so did Aquila,
Theodotion, Symmachus, Origin, Ierom, Lucian, Isychius, and Fuere autem pene
innume rabiles olim editiones Latinae Posseu. appar. v Biblia. p. 223.
innumerable others, and diverse also lately in the Church of Rome. Saint Austin
De Doct. Chr. l. 2. c. 11.
says, They which turned the Scripture out of the Hebrew tongue into Greek,
may be reckoned, but the Latin interpreters cannot by any means: for in the
first times of the faith, as a Greek book (of the Scriptures) came into any
man's hands, that thought himself to have some little faculty in both the
tongues, he would be bold to translate it: the which thing truly did more help
then hinder the understanding, etc. In which words of Saint Austin (besides the
customs of those times in translating the Bible, that in every place the
vulgar might use it, which I presume my Jesuit will grudge at) we see they
translated then, as boldly and commonly, and more, then any among us now do. Or
if the Jesuit will not allow us the privilege of that time, yet he may not
for shame object that to our Church, which is done in his own, where Vatablus,
Munster, Pagnin, Montanus, and others; men as private, as any translator among
us, have translated or corrected the text out of the learned tongues; and which
I commend to the Jesuits good memory and contemplation, and to the
consideration of all the Papists in England, their translations agree with
ours, and differ from the vulgar Latin, as much as ours.

Page 30.
A.D. Now although we hold, that Scripture is not the only rule, yet this does
not argue, that we be enemies to the Scripture, or that we are void of all
means to secure us of the truth. For first we hold the holy Scripture to be
one rule, yea a principal rule of our faith, which we should not do, if we
were enemies to the Scripture. And one reason why we hold something else
besides Scripture, to be with Scripture the rule of our faith, is partly
because so we learn out of the Scripture, as in the Treatise and this my Reply
will appear: partly because we find it necessary to admit some other
infallible rule and This infallible means is the authority of the Church,
Fathers, Councels, and Pope which i^ so far from being yielded by our selves
to be subject to error (in any point of doctrine, authoratiuely concluded) that
even M. White himself, who here affirms the Church, Fathers, Councels and
Pope, to be yielded by our selves to be subject to error, does a few pages
before acknowledge, that it is a principle of our own, that a general
Council cannot err: so careless this man was, what he said or unsaid, so he
might seem to say something against us. A.D.
means, which may infallibly assure us, both what Books be Scripture, and
what translation, and what interpretation is to be followed, for finding out
the divine truth contained in Scripture.
4 This is his reason why the Church of Rome denies the Scripture to be the
whole rule of faith: for the understanding whereof, have your eye upon my
words. I said, that one of their practices against the Scripture, is their
depriving it from being the total rule of faith: and I added, that hereby they
left themselves utterly void of all means to secure their faith by, and to
find the truth: inasmuch as the Church, the Fathers, the Councels, the Pope
himself, which is all the rule they can pretend, are subject to error, and so
by themselves confessed to be. To this he replies three things: first that they
hold the Scripture to be one rule, yea a principal rule of our faith, which
they would not do, if they were enemies to the Scripture. I answer distinctly
three things: first, sometime some of them, when they are pressed, and cannot
shift themselves, say as the Jesuit here does, the Scripture is the rule, and
the principal rule too; yea more, so Bellar. Tho. Antonine, and others, whose
words I have reported in THE WAY. Secondly, howsoever some of them sometime
speak thus, yet again others allow it to be but a part of the rule: that is
to say, such as contains but one part of things belonging to faith. Thus you
see the Jesuit expounds himself in his next words: we hold something else
beside Scripture, to be with Scripture the rule of faith. Becan Circ. Calvin.
page 278.
says, The total and full rule of our faith, is Scripture and Tradition both
together: and this is defined in Sess. 4.
the Trent Council. And it is enough to show their contempt and disdain of
the Scripture, when thus they accuse it of imperfection, and match base and
uncertain traditions with it. Therefore until they can prove, first that this
defect is in the Scripture: next, that this defect is supplied by Traditions;
and then thirdly that these whereof they boast, are the true Traditions
proceeding from the same Spirit, that the Scripture does, and left of God to
supply this defect of the Scripture, they can never shake off the imputation
laid upon them, that they be enemies to the Scripture. Thirdly, they do not
hold the Scripture to be a principal rule, neither as the Jesuit speaks.
Would they did for their own sakes: but the Jesuit knows it is holden to be
the least part of the rule. The Bishops of the Council of Basil Council. Basil.
p. 104. Bin.
say, The authority of an universal Tradition, or of a Council, is equal
with the authority of the Scripture. Caesar Baronius: An. 53. n. 11.
Tradition is the foundation of the Scriptures -- and excels them in this, that
the Scriptures cannot subsist, unless they be strengthened by Tradition: but
Tradition has strength enough without the Scriptures. Cardinal Hosius. Conf
Polon. page 383.
The least part of the Gospel is written, and the greater part by far is
come to us by Tradition. Gregory the 13. D. 40. Si Papa. in annot.
Men do with such reverence respect the Apostolical seat of Rome, that they
rather desire to know the ancient institution of Christian religion from the
Popes mouth, then from the holy Script^re; and they only enquire what is his
pleasure, and according to it they order their life and conversation. And if it
be observed how these Traditions in every question and point of religion are
preferred before the Scripture, this that I say will appear to be true; which
they would not do, if they were not mortal enemies to the Scripture, and
slaves to the Popes absolute will.

5 The second thing he replies, is, that the reason why they hold something
else beside Scripture to be the rule, are two. First because we learn so out
of the Scripture, which he says, he has showed both in his Treatise, and in
this Reply. This is false, as appears in my Answer to his Treatise, and shall
yet further be manifest in this Defense against his Reply. Secondly, because we
find it necessary to admit some other infallible rule and means to assure
us, both what books be Scripture, and what interpretation is to be followed:
which means is the authority of the Church, Fathers, Councels, and Pope. This
reason is answered. 9. n. 3. and there Dig^. 2^
in THE WAY; and hereafter in this DEFENSE: and albeit the true Church of
Christ (which is not the Pope, and his Consistory) be a subordinate means,
out of the Scripture it self, to teach and lead us forward to the knowledge
of the Scripture, and the interpretation, as a Judge shows and expounds the
law; yet this proves not the Scripture not to be the rule, but shows that God
has commanded the ministry of his Church to teach, and guide us by that
rule. For let any Papist say: is the Law it self but one part of the rule of
our obedience to the King, and the Judge the other, so that the Law and the
Judge both together make but one rule, because we find it necessary to admit
the Judge as a means infallibly to assure us, both which is the Law, and what
interpretation thereof is to be followed? Not the Law, in respect of us, has
all his authority in it self from the King: and is the complete rule of every
man's obedience, (for more is no man bound to, then the Law requires) and yet
magistrates are used to expound and publish it. So is it with the Scriptures:
and therefore the Protestants have means sufficient to secure their faith.

6 But where he says in the margent, that this infallible means (that must so
necessarily be admitted to assure us what books be Scripture, and what
interpretation is to be followed) is the authority of the Church, Fathers,
Councels, Pope: I must admonish him, See THE WAY, digr. 16. n. 4. and below
chap. 35. n. 1.
that the current doctrine of Rome, is, that neither Church, Fathers, nor
Councels, exercise this authority infallibly, but only the Pope: and that his
sole definitive sentence is the last and highest authority to secure us: and
therefore the Jesuit is bound out, and all Papists with him, for ever, from
pretending any other infallible means beside the Pope, whose judgment alone
being their Load-starre, they do but flatter themselves, and mock us to our
faces, when they talk of Church and Councels. But because I said, the Church,
Fathers, Councels and Pope, by themselves were yielded to be subject to error,
and so consequently could not secure them; therefore he objects, that, a few
pages before, I acknowledged that it is a principle of their own, that a
general Council cannot err. If by their own principles a Council cannot
err, which I confess there, then it is false that I say here, the Church, the
Fathers, a Council, the Pope, are yielded by themselves to be subject to
error: I answer, that in the Council of Epist. synodal de author. cuiuslibet
council. general. sup. Papam.
Basil, ann. 1432. it was adjudged, that a general Council cannot err,
whether the Pope confirm it or no. Since which time, Alliac. Gers. Mayor
Panorm Almain. Ludov. Romans quos refert Azor. to 2. pa. 565. and 575. Viri
quidam doctissimi sentiunt, Conciliu^ generale, legitime congregatum, etiam
absente Papa, solid^m certamque habere authoritatem, priusquam a summo
Pontifice confirmetur. Can. loc. page 257.
very many of the best learned in the Papacy have followed that opinion; and
thereupon I said, it was a principle of their own, that a general Council
cannot err; speaking nothing of the Church, Fathers, or Pope: and yet
for so much as Iacobat. de conc. p. 347. Bellar. de conc c. 11. Turrecr. sum. l.
3 c. 58. concl. 2. Caieta^ apol. par. 2. c 21. Azor. par. 2. l. 5. c. 12. fauer
Can page 259 loc.
the Jesuits and others hold the contrary, that a Council not authorized by
the Pope may err; for so much as Councels receive all their strength from the
Pope: and Occham. dial par 1. l. 5. c. 25. and 26. fauet Waldenf. doct.
princip. l. 2. c. 19.
some, that they may err though the Pope do confirm them: and Hadr. 4. de
sacram. Euchar page 26.
others, that the Pope may err even in his authoratiue conclusions: therefore
I objected here, that themselves confess all these may err. This is neither
carelessness, nor yet saying and unsaying in me, but in them, that have no
principle, but it is contradicted among themselves: for what I said a few pages
before, I spoke according to the opinion of some; and what I say here,
according to the contrary opinion of othersome. Let the Jesuit show me an
vnforme opinion touching this matter in his Church, and he shall deliver me
hereafter from such quarrels and exceptions as this is. In the mean time, when
there is no certainty or agreement in his church touching that they hold
against us, but some say this, and some that, he must give us leave to charge
it with both opinions, or with neither, until they are agreed upon a certainty.

Page 30.
A. D. On the contrary side, Protestants, who will admit no rule, but only
Scripture, do not this for pure friendship, and good will to the Scripture,
but for enmity, or not very good will to the Church, whose authority while
they do not admit to be infallible, they have left themselves utterly void of
all means sufficient to secure their faith by, and to find out the divine
infallible truth contained in the Scripture, as in the Treatise, and Reply, is
largely showed.
7 The Protestants I grant, and hear solemnly affirm, admit no rule, whereby
to try what is matter of faith, and what is not, but only Scripture: the
Church has her authority, if it be the true Church: and lawful Councels, and
godly Bishops, whereof the Pope is none, are the ordinance of God to propound
this faith unto us; but the whole rule of the Churches judgment, is only
Scripture; which if the student will, I will say over again in capital letters,
ONLY SCRIPTVRE, ONLY SCRIPTVRE, and NOTHING but Scripture: for the exposition
and confirmation whereof, I refer him to THE WAY which he lost, when he made
his Reply, Digr. 3. And this we do for pure friendship and good will to the
Scriptures and Church both: lest ungratefully against the Scriptures, and
perniciously against the Church, by relying upon men, we should leave our
selves void of sufficient means to secure our faith by. For Cyril. Ierosol.
catech. page 15. Graec.
says the ancient Church, the security of our faith, Syllog Whatsoever he
taught by word of mouth, the same by his Epistles he revoked to their memory.
But he taught al things belonging to faith, by word of mouth: Therefore by his
Epistles he revoked the same to memory. But his Epistles are written: therefore
by writing he revoked to their memory all things belonging to faith: Therefore
all things belonging to faith are written.
is from the demonstration of holy inspired Scriptures: Iren. l. 3 c. 1.
For the disposing of our salvation, we have not known by any other, but those
by whom the Gospel came unto us, the which then they preached, but afterward
by Gods appointment they delivered unto us in the Scriptures, to be the
foundation and pillar of our faith. And: Ibid. c. 2.
When heretics are convinced out of the Scriptures, they fall to accusing them,
as if they were not right, nor from authority, because they are variably
spoken, and from them the truth cannot be found of those that know not
Tradition, inasmuch as this truth was not delivered by writing, but by word of
mouth. Thus speaks the ancient Church, in express terms pointing to our
adversaries; whereby the Reader may judge which of us bear most good will to
the Church and Scriptures: and if the Jesuit will yield to that Nicephorus q
writes in his Ecclesiastical history, that whatsoever S. Paul being present
taught by word of mouth among the Corinths, Ephesians, Galatians, Colossians,
Philippians, Thessalonians, Jews, Romans, and many other towns whereunto the
holy Ghost sent him, and whom he begat in the faith of Christ; the same being
absent by his Epistles sent to them, he compendiously reuoketh into their
memory. Then forasmuch as the Apostles preached nothing to any, but what they
set down in the Epistles; the Protestants have good reason to admit only
Scripture, because it contains all the preaching of the Apostles whatsoever.
Let the Jesuit in the course of his studies, and all Papists in the heat of
their zeal, mark these and such like our grounds, and well consider them.

Page 32.
A.D. As concerning his second mark, wherein he says, the very face of our
Church is clean contrary to the first antiquity, if he mean, that there is
some accidental difference, either in personal qualities of particular men,
or in some point of outward estate, and manner of government, betwixt the first
primitive age or infancy of the Church, and that other estate, which after it
had, and now has, when it is at full growth: this is not an argument
sufficient to make men doubt of our religion, more then to see some accidental
alteration betwixt the infancy and elder age of a man is any argument
sufficient to make one doubt whether he be substantially the same man or no:
but if he mean that there is any substantial difference in any doctrine of
faith, his assertion is very false, as I declare in the Appendix annexed to
this my Reply, where particular answer is made to the chief matters, against
which here he takes exception.
8 I mean, and express so much, that between the present Roman Church and
the ancient, there is a substantial difference in many doctrines of faith, and
not such an accidental difference only, as the Jesuit mentions. And because
I desire no man to credit my bare word, I named the Hierarchy of the Church of
Rome consisting in the state and jurisdiction of the Roman clergy, which is
simply the substantiallest point that they count of, and four other points:
and my speech was of that latitude, that it charge them with innovation in
all the rest, the book it self afterward showing it in particular so fully
and directly, that all the Jesuits in England dare not lay railing and
cauilling aside, and answer what I said, temperately and ingeniously: for that
which the Jesuit says in the Appendix, he has made particular answer, is
untrue: he has answered particularly to nothing, nor can he. But knowing his
sectaries were either so slothful that they would not read his book so far,
or so forgetful, that when they came to the Appendix, this matter would be out
of their head, he was bold in this place to promise what he never meant there
to pay; though whatsoever he say there, is sufficiently answered. I am sorry at
my heart for my countrymen, that have these tricks put upon them to seduce and
pervert them. I beseech them by the mercies of Jesus Christ, that as I penned
my book out of my love to them, and desire of their salvation, (for the which
I would sacrifice my life, and all the hopes I have in this world) so they will
faithfully examine how the contents thereof are answered by this Reply; who, if
I be not deceived, is far unable to meddle with these things.

CHAP. X.
1. The practice of the Papists in purging books. 2. The sacrifice of the
Mass, and Real presence denied. 4. Points of Papistrie absurd. 6. The Pope
Lords it over all. Papists need pay no debts. May be traitors to murder
Princes. 7. Jesuits plotters in the Powder Treason. The Popes dispensing with
sin. 8. A meditation for all Papists.

A. D. M. Whites third mark, is set down by him in these words: Page 31.
There is no point of our faith, but many learned in their own Church hold it
with us. And no point of Papistrie that we have rejected, but some of
themselves have misliked as well as we. And this (says he) may be demonstrated
in all the questions that are between us, and they know it, etc. Thus far
are M. Whites words. The which contain in them so many black lies, as there
are instances, which may be given of particular points, both of Catholic
doctrine rejected by Protestants, and not misliked by any of our selves, and of
Protestant doctrine not patronized nor held by any learned men of our Church.
And to omit other instances, I ask M. White, how many learned men of our
Church have denied the Mass to contain a Sacrifice, in such sort as
Protestants do deny? How many also will he find to affirm, that Christ his
blessed body is only figuratively in the Sacrament, or in such sort, that the
real substance of it, is no nearer them that receive the Sacrament, then
heaven is to earth, as by the Caluinists is held against the Roman Church? Let
M. White for his credit produce, if he can, many or any learned men of our
Church, which hold in these points with Caluinists against the Roman faith. As
for the Index expurgatorius (which M. White mentions) and the practice and
use of it, our Authors have sufficiently answered, namely N.D. in his Warnword,
and the author of the book called the Grounds of the old and new religion, in
his answer to M. Crashaw, annexed to the said book.
1 THat which I said, I showed in my book; where in every controversy that
fell out between us, I have produced popish writers one against another,
either justifying our doctrine, or crossing their own: and I have so truly
alleged them, that the quotations being many hundreds, this Jesuit in all
his, Reply, has not so much as enterprised to answer one of them, but only
that of Baius, whereby the Reader may guess, whether in this my assertion I
have lied or not. He says there be so many black lies as there be instances
in my words, (and I confess I have often heard of the sound of a lie, that it
has rung so loud, that it might be heard from Rome hither, though of the
color I never heard before, until the Jesuits began to paint them) yet the
argument I used to prove that I said, the purging, and razing, and forbidding
so many of their own writers, is unanswerable. N. D. in his Warnword, and A.D.
in his Reply, and he that scribbled I know not what against M. Crash. may
satisfy such as are full gorged with prejudice; but let the indifferent reader
judge, if the publishing of books, which the authors, whose names they bear,
never writ, and the razing and purging of their writings, be not a manifest
sign, that they find the doctrine of their Divines in former times to be
against them, and to cross the present opinions of their Church. The which
their practice, the Jesuit makes a light matter, but it must be better
considered. It is our plea against the Church of Rome, that the doctrine
thereof is altered, and that we hold nothing but what the learned in that
Church taught as well as we, many a day since. And this we are ready to show in
every question, out of their books. This is so manifest, that it cannot be
denied. 1. First, ye books thus purged are extant, which are of the chiefest of
their Diui^e^ Caietan, Folydore, Masius, Ferus, Alphonsus, Molineus, Eugubinus,
Lud, Viues, Erasmus, Duarenus, Faber, Rhenanus, and innumerable others. 2. The
directions for the purging of all authors, by putting into them, and taking out
of them, and razing what they writ, called Judices expurgatorij, according
whereunto they are to be newly printed, are extant: one set forth in Flanders,
another in Spain, a third in Portugal, a fourth in Naples, a fifth at Rome;
all which are publicly to be seen; of which sort there are many more, that we
have not yet come by, and daily more are made, as the Jesuits and their
governors can epsy in any book, what they mislike. In these Indices you may
see what is to be put out, and what to be foisted in, in the books mentioned.
3. There is strait order that no book^ be printed before it be thus purged. The
Spanish Index says in the preface thereof, that of necessity some things must
be wiped out, and cut off. The King of Spain authorizing the Index of
Flanders, says in his letters pattents prefixed, that for the propagation of
religion, he had caused all the Libraries both public and private to be
purged --: and learned men to be employed in the reading and reuising of
books, that they might the better and in shorter time be purged; commanding
all Prelates secretly, without the priuitie of any, to have an Expurgatory
Index by them, and according thereunto to blot out in books the places noted.
4. Pope Leo the tenth, in a certain decretall appoints and ordaines, that
hereafter for ever no man shall print or cause to be printed any book or
writing in the city of Rome, or in any other place, unless first by his Vicar
or Minister of his Palace or by some Bishop or other thereunto deputed, it be
diligently examined, and subscribed (7. Decretal. page 534.) To what purpose
this examination is intended, appears by the rule of the Trent Council: Such
books as handle good matter, and yet have some things interlaced by the way,
which belong to heresy or impiety, may be permitted after they are purged by
the authority of the Jnquisition (Ind. lib. prohi^. reg. 8) Again: Such as
publish Manuscript books before they be examined and allowed, shall be
punished. (Reg 10) Let Bishops and Jnquisitors have faculty to purge all
books whatsoever, according to the prescript of this Jndex --. They which are
put in trust with correcting and purging books must diligently look into all
things, and attentively note them; not such things only as manifestly offer
themselves in the course of the work, but if there be any thing that lies
privily in the Annotations, Summaries, Margents, Tables, or in the Prefaces, or
Epistles dedicatorie of such books; the things to be corrected and purged, are
these that follow: heretical assertions, or such as are erroneous, sauouring
of heresy, scandalous, offensive, temerarious, and schismatic, (such as
they will expound any thing to be, that has been written contrary to the
present Iesuitisme, though it were holden never so generally in the Church of
Rome heretofore) such as induce any novelty against the rites and ceremonies
of the Sacraments, and against the received use of the Church of Rome. Profane
novelties also devised by heretics --. But in the books of later
Catholics, written since the year 1515. if that which needs correcting, can
be mended, by taking away or adding a few things, let it be done, otherwise let
it be altogether blotted out. (instruct. post Ind.) 5. Posseuine the Jesuit
says, that in the public Libraries of Princes, and others, special care is
to be had that Manuscript books not permitted by the Church, be not open to
the view of every one, because they also must be purged. (Bibl select. page 36.)
and that Antoninus an Archbishop in the Church of Rome 140 years since, now
enjoying the light of heaven, no doubt desires that all his writings should be
reuiewed and occupied purer then of old they were. (apparat verb Anton. Flor)
M. Witherington says, It is not the Popes manner to permit either the deeds or
opinions of their predecessors, which help the papal authority, to be
impugned or called into question; and therefore as well the Pope himself, as
the Ordinarie^ of places, and Inquisitors are careful enough that no books
come abroad, which any ways derogate from the Popes authority; and if that
they do come abroad, that they be suppressed or not read by any without
special faculty till they be purged, which is the cause why it is so hard a
thing in these times to find any clause in the books of Catholics, calling
the Popes temporal power in question, or to know what such authors thought
touching the same power, who most an end are enforced to speak their mind in
the words of the censors. (Apol. n. 449) Hasenmullerus speaking of this
practice of the Inquisitors, reports many things, that it were too tedious to
report. page 275. And the like does Iunius (praef. Ind. exp. Belg.) to whom I
refer thee.
Wherein to prevent us, daily they raze and wipe those things out, and put the
contrary in, and so publish their books (the most devilish and dishonest
course, that ever any sect used to help themselves) and burn up the old
editions, that are the true copies, which the Authors writ, and whereby that
should be tried that we say. So that in the ages to come, when the old copies
shall be worn out, and their New-purged ones shall have gotten a little
antiquity, these desperate Termagants will resolutely deny that ever any such
thing was written, or any such purging vfed; and so it shall be generally
maintained, that the things that the Jesuits and censors have clapped into their
books, were written by the authors themselves. If this can be answered, what
do pillories and papers, ordained for forgers? when not a poor parchment of
evidence, but the deeds and evidences of the Christian world shall thus be
forged? and all antiquity be Iesuited, and reduced by this practice to the new
cut?

2 In the mean time I answer the Jesuit, that I will stand to my offer, if he
will let the trial be made by books unpurged; such as are the true copies,
that the authors published: that there is no point of our faith, but many
learned in their own Church hold it with us: and no point of Papistrie that we
have rejected, but some of them have misliked it as well as we: and his two
instances of the Mass and Real presence, I accept: though I have answered
them Page 158. letter m. and 178. let. e. and 379. let. f.
in THE WAY so directly, that it was his best policy to dissemble it, and to
require me for my credit to do that, which I had done already. For to his
first demand: How many learned men of our Church have denied the Mass to
contain a sacrifice, in such sort as Protestants do deny? I answered Vbi sup.
in two several places. For the understanding whereof, and the applying my
said answer to this place, the Protestants deny that Christ in his last
Supper, which the Jesuit absurdly calls the Mass, offered any propitiatory
sacrifice (properly so called, according to the real notion of the word
sacrifice) of his body and blood. This I showed by the testimony Can. loc. l.
12. c. 13. Suar. com 3. d. 84. f. 2. Azor instit. moral. tom. 1. l. 10. c. 18.
of three several Papists, to be denied by some Catholics in the Council of
Trent: and they consequently deny as we do, that the Priest offers any such
sacrifice; Christus ea quae ab alijs obseruanda instituit, ipse primitus
obseruarit Tho 3. q. 81. art. 1.0. In hac quaestione initium sumendum est ex
facto Christi, quod exemplar est actioni^ nostrae, and fundamentum ac primum
initium huius mysterij. Fra. Suar. vbi sup. page 949.
because the Priest now does no more then Christ did then in his Supper. They
therefore that deny, Christ offered any sacrifice, deny it also in the
Priest. And then I alleged a discourse of Thomas, where he propounds the
question, Whether in this Sacrament, Christ be immolated, that is, sacrificed?
and his answer is, that the celebration of this Sacrament, is called the
sacrificing of Christ: for two causes. First because images are used to be
called by the names of the things, whose images they be; as when we behold a
picture on a table, we say, this is Cicero. Now the celebration of this
Sacrament, is a certain image representing the passion of Christ, which is his
true sacrificing, and therefore is called the sacrificing of Christ. Next in
regard of the effect of Christ's passion; because by this Sacrament we are made
partakers of the benefit of our Lords passion. In which words making no mention
of such real and unbloody sacrificing, as the Church of Rome now teaches; it
is more then plain, that he believed it not. For if he had, he would have
uttered it as fully as he does other things. Besides these, I ad the Master of
Sentences, who If we talk of all Divinity, the books of Peter Lombard,
Master of the Sentences, is held to be the first methodicall work, that drew
all divinity into a certain form. Walsing. p. 128.
professing to set down all the points of Divinity, most exactly, as our
adversaries say: yet no where in all his book, mentions this kind of
sacrifice, but 4. d. 12. Post haec quaeritur.
propounding the question: Whether that which the Priest does in the Eucharist,
be properly said to be a sacrifice or immolation; and whether Christ be daily
sacrificed, or were only once sacrificed: his answer is: To this it may
briefly be said, that which is offered and consecrated by the Priest, is called
a sacrifice and an oblation, because it is a memorial and representation of
the true sacrifice and holy immolation, made upon the altar of the cross; and
Christ died once upon the Cross, and was there sacrificed in himself, but he
is daily sacrificed in the Sacrament, because the remembrance of that which is
once done, is retained. These words show plainly, that some learned men in the
Roman Church, have denied the Mass to contain a sacrifice, even in such sort
as Protestants deny it.

3 So there be also that affirm, the real substance of Christ's body to be no
nearer them that receive the Sacrament, then heaven is to the earth, as the
Caluinists hold. For Picus Mirandulus Conclus. page 64. nu. ^4. and page 65. n^.
20.
says, the body of Christ is sacramentally on the altar, but locally in
heaven: and one body cannot be in diverse places at once. And the opinion of
the Caluinists is no otherwise then Effectum tandem vt in hanc insaniam
prorumperet (Berengarius) vt verum corpus and sanguinem Christi non esse an
pane and vino docuerit -- haec haeresis, apud Heluetios, hoc nostro tempore per
Caluinum reuocatae est. Prateol. Elenc. verbo Berengarius.
Berengarius; and yet Waldensis Sacrament. Eucharist. c. 19. page 17. tom. 2.
writes, that there were many, that with the Church of Rome condemned
Berengarius (for his manner of speaking) which yet thought as he did. And THE
WAY p^g. 349.
I alleged a saying of 4. d. 10. q. 1.. Quantum.
Scotus, that from the beginning since the matter of this Sacrament was
believed, it has ever been believed, that Christ's body is not moved out of
his place in heaven, that it might be here in the Sacrament, and yet it was not
in the beginning so manifestly believed, as touching this conversion. Where
Scotus affirms, that it has not always been believed, that the body of Christ
is moved out of heaven to be in the Sacrament; Note, touching the form of
recantation prescribed to Berengarius, by Pope Nicolas; wherein the Pope
enioynes him to say: J confess -- the bread and wine after consecration to be
the true body and blood of Christ, and to be sensibly handled in the hands of
the Priest, yea broken and chewed with the teeth of the faithful. Which words
are read de Consec. d. 2 ego Bereng. and pressed by the Papists to explicate
and prove their transubstantiation: that it is confessed to be too gross, and
merely false, if the words be understood as they sound, of the body of Christ.
So the Gloss: Nisi sanc intelligas verba Berengarij, in maiorem incides
haeresim quam ipse habuit.. Dentibus. Turrecremata. Nec iste modus loquendi,
est tenendus. Ibi. nu 1.. Respondeo. Hervaeus. Quod quidem vocabulum, vt sc. a
dentibus tereatur, non est extendendum, sed exponendum and restringendum; vt
sit sensus, non quod corpus verum Christi teratur dentibus, sed quod illae
species, sub quibus realiter est, tereantur dentibus. Et ideo est alia opinio
communior and verior, etc. 4. d. 10. qu. 1. page 17. But this Gloss is proved
untrue by this, that the words thus expounded, contain nothing against
Berengarius opinion, who had denied only the gross and real presence of
Christ's flesh.
it was sometime therefore believed (by some body in the Church of Rome,
belike) that his blessed body, touching the place and manner of presence, was
as far from them that receive the Sacrament, as heaven is from earth. This for
the real and spiritual presence. If the Jesuit dare put his
Transubstantiation to the trial, let him look into Digress. 49. nu. 9.
THE WAY, and hearken what many of his own learned men say of it; and when he
has done, let him take a view of the poor answer, that in this his Reply he
has made unto them.

Page 32.
A.D. The fourth mark is set down by M. White in these words: The most points
of Papistrie are directly, and at the first sight absurd, and against common
sense, and the law of nature. If he mean that they seem at the first sight
absurd, etc. to the seduced people of his sect, who neither believe, nor
rightly understand either the things by us believed, or the reason or
authority for which we believe them; then it may be he says true, but nothing
to the purpose For if this were a sufficient mark to make us misdoubt our
religion, by the like reason other heretics, or infidels, who do not believe
the mysteries of the blessed Trinity, the Incarnation, etc. might think to
make us misdoubt the truth of these mysteries, because they (who neither
believe these mysteries, nor rightly understand them, nor the reasons and
motives which make us believe them) will say that these mysteries are directly
and at first sight absurd, etc. yet in truth they are not absurd, nor against,
but above our reason and sense: so I say to M. White, although other points of
our religion seem to him absurd, yet in truth they are not absurd, neither are
they contrary to, but at most above the reach of natural reason.
4 I do not object against the religion of the Papacy, that it is but above
the reach of reason. For many mysteries of the true faith are so, the which we
must believe, and Nec quisquam potest intelligentiam Dei apprehendere, nisi qui
toto se despecto, conuersus ad sapientiam Dei, omnem quaerendi ratiocinationem
transtuleri^ ad credendi fide^. Oros. l. 6. c. 1.
not examine by sense: but that many points thereof are absurd, and directly
against sense, and the light of nature; which no piece of true religion is: as
for example, that a man endued with reason, should fall down and adore, and
invoke an image; Showed in THE WAY,. 50. n. ^6. and 51. n 7. and below, chap.
54.
the which in the Church of Rome is taught and practiced. As many other points
are as absurd as it. But if it be true, which the Jesuit says, that they are
mysteries, which we understand not, being a seduced people, not acquainted with
the authority whereupon they are believed; that is another matter that I knew
not before: for they are to blame that will demand reason for the mysteries of
Rome, that have authority beyond reason; Apoc. 17.5.
whose forehead has the word Mystery written in it: and I had forgotten Quia
in his quae vult, ei est pro ratione voluntas. Nec est qui ei dicat, cur ita
facis. Gloss.. Very. c. Quanto de transl. ep. Sacrilegij insta^ esset disputare
de facto suo. Glos.. Quis enim. d. 40. Non nos. Jta nos ad iudices reuocas, ac
si nescires omnia iura in scrinio pectoris nostri collecata esse? sic flat
sententia. Loco cedant omnes; Pontifex sum. Paul. 2. Platin. p. 304.
a rule in his law, that forbids men to ask any reason of his doings. But in
the mean time where are the Jesuits Introd. q. 4. p. 100.
prudentiall motives, without which nothing ought to be believed? because the
understanding cannot assent to the thing propounded without some probable
motive? For religion bids not men be stocks.

A. D. And one cause why the common sort of Protestants do at the first sight
think them absurd is, because they have not heard points of our doctrine truly
related, and declared, as our Authors declare them, nor the reasons, and
authorities set down, for which we believe them; but have heard such ignorant,
or malicious Ministers as M White, make false relation of points of absurd
doctrine to be held by us, which we do not hold, but abhor. As to go no
further, M. White falsely relates in this very place that we hold the Pope to
have right to Lord it over the Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, Church, and all
the world. That we teach also men to murder the King: to pay no debts: to blow
up the Parliament: to dispense with murder, and whoredom, etc. These, and
such like, be not points of our doctrine, but shameless and slanderous
untruths, by which simple people are drawn by ignorant or malicious Ministers,
to mislike our doctrine in general, and to be apt to have a worse conceit of
every point of it in particular, especially at the first sight, then by due
examination they shall find it to deserve.
5 Not Protestants only think Popery absurd, but many Papists also,
censuring the points I have named, and misliking them, show plainly that I
spoke true: yet the Reply says, the cause why the common sort of Protestants
think Popery absurd, is, because they hear not the points of Papistrie truly
related, but their ignorant and malicious Ministers charge them to hold what
they hold not. This is false: for first these Protestants that thus condemn
Papistrie, do daily read the Papists own books, which are not restrained and
prohibited with The reading and use of Lutheran books forbidden, not only the
vulgar, but all others, of what state, degree, order, or condition soever they
be: though Bishops, Archbishops, or greater: only the Jnquisitors are
excepted: by a Decretall of Julius the 3. See Sept. Decr. l. 5. tit. 4. de lib.
prohib. c. 2.
that severity wherewith ours are prohibited in popish countries: that if any
ignorant or malicious Minister would falsely report what the Church of Rome
holds, yet they may hear the adversaries tell their own tales, having partly
through their policy, partly through the conniuencie of the Superior, that
liberty to publish their writings, that our selves have not much more. Next,
the Ministers of England, both in their preaching, writing, and conference,
report the doctrine of Papists as truly as it is delivered in their own
books, and observed out of their conversation; but many of them are so foul
and vile, that they may not endure the reporting; and therefore when we mention
them, they deny them, and are ashamed of them, as many are of their bastards:
an evident example whereof, the Jesuit gives in this place; for the points
here mentioned, are truly related, and are neither shameless nor slanderous,
not yet untruths, but the sincere and faithful report of that execrable
doctrine that Papists, and none but Papists, have taught and practiced: and
because the Jesuit is somewhat peremptory in denying this, I must put him in
mind that I showed in THE WAY, every one of these points out of their books;
and for the clearer discharge of my self, and all others that object these
things to them, I will yet again show them, one by one.

6 First they hold the Popes Lordship over the Scripture. Cardinal Cusanus Ep.
2.
writes, The Scripture is fitted to the time, and variably understood; so that
at one time it is expounded according to the fashion of the Church: and when
that fashion is changed, the sense of the Scripture is also changed. Ep. 3.
Again, When the Church changes her judgment, God also changes his. And Ep.
7.
no marvel, seeing the letter of the Scripture is not of the essence of the
Church, if the practice of the Church at one time interpret the Scripture of
this fashion, and another time on that. The Council of Trent has
anathematized him that shall deny this his Lordship: Sess. 24. can. 3
If any man say, that only those degrees of consanguinitie and affinity
which are expressed in Leuiticus, can hinder marriage to be contracted, and
dissolve that which is contracted; and that his Lordship the Church cannot
dispense in many of them, or ordain more degrees to hinder and dissolve, let
him be anathema. D. Stapleton Princip. fid. page 351. Relect page 514.
affirms, that the Church, his Lordship, may add other books to the Canon of
the Scripture, which yet belong not thereunto. Cardinal Hosius De author. sac.
Script. lib. 3. page 169.
defends, that the Scriptures were of no more authority then Aesops Fables,
but that the Church and Popes approved it. Augustinus Anconitanus Qu. 60. art.
^.
says, that his Lordshippe may dispense in the Law of Moses. Delgado De auth.
scrip page 47, and 48.
writes, that the assertions of the Pope in matters of Faith, reach as far as
the teaching of the Apostles, or the holy Scripture: and he says, There are,
who allow them to appertain to the divine Scripture. Trac. de iurisd page 64.
part. 1. Idem Capistra^. de auth. Papae, and council. p. 95.
D. Marta says, The Pope in his administration is greater then Paul, and may
dispense against him in things not concerning the articles of faith. Secondly,
they hold his Lordship over the Fathers. D. Marta says, De iurisdict. par. 4.
page 273.
The common opinion of the Doctors is not to be regarded when another contrary
opinion favors the power of the keys, or a pious cause. Thirdly touching
Councels: Azor. instit. tom. 2. page 574. Bellar. de conc l. 2. c. 13. 17.
Antonin. sum. mor. par. 2. tit. 3. c. 11.. 10. Turrecr. sum. de eccl. l. 3 c.
63. concl. 1. and l. 2. c. 104. Caiet tract. de autho. Pap. and council. c. 6.
7. 10. 11. and apol. eius tract par. 2. c. 7. 8. 9. 10. Capist. p. 104. b.
Allan. de potest dup. n. 74.
the Jesuits hold, that the Popes judgment is to be preferred before a whole
Council. Dominicus Iacobatius a Cardinal, Tract. de council. l. 6. art. 2. page
337. B. Romae per Ant. Blad. an. 1538. in fol.
says, that in causes of faith, if the Pope have the judgment of his
Cardinals concurring with him, then without doubt, albeit the doubt arising
were most difficult, yet the Popes opinion were to be preferred before a
general Council. And that no man think the Cardinals have power to overrule
or sway him, so that he should not Lord it over them also, Palaeotus himself a
Cardinal, and practiced in the Consistory many years, De consist. part. 5.
q. 4. page 295. and jude.
tells us, that when the Pope has once determined a thing, and is come to the
end of his consultations, the Cardinals must be so far from dissenting, that
as obedient sons they must give example to others of obedience --: yea
subscribe to his Bull, though it be against their conscience --. For the Popes
authority depends not on the counsel given by Cardinals, but rests on his
own will, who of diverse opinions propounded to him, may choose that which
serves rightest to himself. Fourthly, touching Scriptures, Fathers, Councels,
Church, and all the world together, Suarez the Jesuit To^. 1. disp. 44. sect.
1. p. 677. B.
says: I grant therefore the Popes determination is the truth, and were it
contrary to the sayings of all the Saints, yet were it to be preferrrd before
them. Nay, if an Angel from heaven were opposed against him, the Popes
determination were to be preferred. Fifthly, they maintain him to be above the
Church, as appears by that has been said of his eminency above and against
Councels. Palaeotus De consist. par. 1. q. 2. p. 61.
says, that as a universal agent he contains under his authority, all
Ecclesiastical powers, as particular agents: and without exception, he alone
may forgive all men's sins, and exercise iurisdidiction over all. Sixthly he
Lords it over Kings: Iacobatius Tract. de Council. in fin. vlt. c page 778.
says The Emperor holds his Empire of the Church of Rome, and may be called
the Popes Vicar or Official. Capistranus, De Authors Pap. and council. page 94.
that to him as to Christ, let every knee be bowed, -- and Emperors, and the
greatest Princes submit their heads. Bozius De temporal. Monarch. page 52.
has written a book to defend that the supreme temporal jurisdiction belongs
to the Pope, so that he is universal Monarch of all the world. D. Marta Part.
1. page 45. de iurisdict.
says, The Pope has the same power that Christ had to rule over all nations
and kingdoms. Seventhly that to Pay no debts, to such as they count
heretics, is the doctrine of our adversaries The way page 317.
I showed in the express words of Ouandus, a late schooleman 4. D. 13. prop.
30 p. 348.
that says, He that fails to make payment sins not, because the other man's
heresy has discharged him -- Debtors may excuse themselves by excepting
against him his heresy that demands the debt. Angelus Clauasinus Sum. Angel. v
Heresim. n. 15 the same is in sum. Armil. v. Heresis. n. 11. and Siluest. v.
Heresis 1. n. 14.. vndecima.
says, whosoever they be that stand bound to heretics, by any obligation,
they are ipso facto discharged: therefore if any man have promised payment to
such heretics, or sworn it, at a certain day, he is not bound to perform
it. And note that even in this our present corrupt time, with scisme and
heresy, Catholics want not good means to pay their tithes duly to God, being
such a number of poor Catholic Priests without any livings of the Church
which were not ordained for Caluinisticall Ministers, but for the provision of
Catholic Priests; to whom in case they now pay their tithes God will reward
it. Hopkins memor. page 333.
Their doctrine also that teaches the people of our country to cozen their
Ministers of their tithes, and pay them to the poor Catholic Priests, is not
far from this. Eighthly they teach to murder the King. This I have showed at
large, Cap. 6.
a little before. When D. Parry came over to murder good Queen Elizabeth, one
of the Popes Cardinals writ this letter to him. Sir, the Holiness of our Lord
(the Pope) has seen your letter with the credence enclosed, and cannot but
praise your good disposition, and resolution, which you write, holds to the
service and benefit public. Wherein his Holiness exhorts you to continue, and
to bring to pass, that which you promise. And to the end you may be the more
aided by that good spirit, which has induced you to this, his Blessedness
grants you full pardon, and forgiveness of all your sins, as you requested;
assuring you that besides the merits, which you shall receive in heaven, his
Holiness will make himself a farther debtor, to acknowledge your deseruings in
the best manner that he may: and so much the more, because you use so great
modesty in not pretending any thing. Put therefore in act your holy, and
honorable thoughts, and look to your safety. And so I present my self
heartily to you, and wish you all good, and happy success. From Rome the 30
of January, 1584. Yours to dispose N. Cardinal of Como. Rod. Botter. comment.
page 109.
When Chastell, that wounded the last French king was examined, By whose
teaching, and persuasion he had learned to kill the King, he answered, that he
had heard of many, that the murder was lawful, because they called him a
Tyrant; being demanded again, whether the Jesuits used to say it were
lawful to kill the King, he answered, he heard many say, that fact was
lawful, because he was out of the Church, and excommunicated. There is Fra. de
Veron. Constant. apol. pro Ioh. Castle. page 133.
a book written by a Papist in maintenance of this Chastels deed. In this
book he says, if Harmodius, and Aristogiton, Sceuola, and Brutus, only for
love of their country, having no other light to go before them, cast
themselves into such danger by murdering Tyrants, what think you, ought a
Christian, and a French man, and one that burns with the zeal of Phinees,
Ehud, and Elias, to do for their Catholic Church, for which Christ died, and
wherein men are sure of their salvation? And agreeably to this Amphith. page
101.
writes Bonarscius a Jesuit: Has the Pope no power against the King of
France? Shall Dyonisius, Machanidas, Aristotimus, Tyrants, Monsters of the
world, oppress France, and shall no Pope encourage up a Dion, a Timoleon to
dispatch them? shall many Monsters hold the Commonwealth in bands, and shall
no Thrasibulus move his hand? -- shall there be no man to play the souldior
upon this beast, the King of France? And that we may know who were the authors
of his death, which not long after ensued, Page 258. Bellarm. gave better words
(Tort. p. 108) but this had more skill in prophecy.
thus Francis of Verone, Chastells patron, prophecies: Though the Prince of
Orange escaped the first With a pistol at Antwerp. whereof he escaped. See
Dinoth. and Meteran.
blow given him in his cheek: yet the next hit; whereof this was a presage: as
the blow given by Chastell shall be the forerunner of another blow, to come
hereafter.

7 Ninthly the conspiracy for the blowing up of the Parliament was allowed and
ratified by Jesuits and Popish Priests: Garnet, Gerard, Oldcorn, Greenewell,
beside others whom we never yet saw. See Act. S. Garnet. M^teran. rer. Belg.
tom. 2 page 385 D. Eliens. Tor. page 279. and inde. D. Abb. anti log. c. 9. 10.
11. 12. Casaub. ad Front.
First certain lay Recusants, Catesby, Percy, Winter, Tresham, Wright, devised
the plot, and then the Jesuits fell in with them. GARNET imparted the Popes
Breues to Catesby, whereby he was stirred up to devise some way how to take
away the King: and when he had bethought himself of this powder plot, first,
in general terms, he breaks with Garnet a case; What if in some case the
innocent should be destroyed with the guilty: and Garnet affirmed they might,
so that it were for a good, able to recompense the loss of those innocent
persons. Afterward the thing was plainly opened to him, (not in confession as
it is said by Garnets Patrons) and he concealed, allowed, and encouraged it;
whose authority was it that drew so many into it. And this is manifest by his
examinations, confessions, and his own handwriting, and his private
conference with Oldcorn in the Tower. TESMOND plotted together with Garnet: and
when the villainy was discovered, went up and down to raise open arms against
the King. OLD CORN, alias HALL, defends the plot after it was discovered, to
his Catholics, and will not have them let down their courage for the ill
success, which many times followed a good cause. HAMMOND, in Winters house,
absolved the traitors, when the treason was revealed, and they all ready to
take arms. GERARD gave them the sacrament to bind them to secrecy. All these
things, with their circumstances are now laid open by the public writings of
our state, and are cleared against the desperate cauils of our adversaries, out
of the public records. Lastly, that the Church of Rome dispenses with murder,
and whordome, is plain, by that which I have showed touching the Popes
dispensing with the murder of Princes. and the Jesuits enterprising it. But
this is yet more fully to be seen in Taxa Camerae: and cancel. apost. to be
seen in Tractat. iur. D D. tom. 10. and in Recusat. council Trident. in 4.
printed Angentor. 1565.
the Taxation of the Popes chamber and Chancery, where there is no sin so
great, but absolution and dispensation may be had for the money rated. Among
the grieuances of the States of Germany this was Grauam. Ger. n. 3. infascic.
re. expet. and fug.
one, that the Popes pardoners granted freedom for Noxas praeteritas nut
futuras.
times to come, and so filled the country with all whordome, incest, perjury,
murder, theft, rapine, usury. Onus Ecclesiae Cap. 15. n. 47. page 27.
says, it is manifest our Mother the Church, with her children, are not a
little perplexed and rent, about the rule and manner of penances and pardons,
and without Gods great help she will never be able to deliver her self.

8 And thus not only the common sort of Protestants, but the resolutest
Papists also, that are, may see whether we relate the points of their doctrine
truly, or no, and the Reasons, and Authorities for which they are believed
among them: and when their deeds are so apparent, that very children in the
streets observe them, and all their books so full of these damnable doctrines,
that they contriue almost nothing else; they must not think with crying out
black lies, ignorant, and malicious Ministers, shameless, and slanderous
untruths, to shift themselves: it were a better way for them, and more
expedient for the salvation of their souls, and the edification of so many
people, from whom with fraud, and treachery they conceal these things, to
confess them, and forsake them, remembering there is a God, that hates lying,
and will be revenged on treason, and falsehood. For our parts, when we report
these things, we do it not in malice, or untruly; but to admonish the world
what wolves they be, that thus iet up and down in sheep clothing.

CHAP. XI.
1. The Papists manner of dealing, with immodesty and uncharitableness. Briarly
and Walsinghams books noted. 2. Some reports of the Papists meekenes and
mildnes. Hunt a Seminary arraigned at Lancaster. The dumb cattle slaughtered
in Lanc. The general desire of us all to reduce them to charity.

A. D. The fifth mark, says M. White, is their intemperate, and unchristian
proceeding against us: for (says he) if they were of the truth, they would not
defend themselves, and deal against us with gross lying, uncharitable
railing, irreconciliable malice, which are the weapons darkness, but with
gravity, and sincerite, as becomes Christ's Gospel. Thus he, who with more
truth might have told, many of his owne-Protestant Whether this imputatio^ made
by M. White against us be more fitly applied to Protestants, or Catholics, J
refer me to those, who shall with indifferency read and compare, their
writings, and particularly J wish the reader to read, and note what after due
examination was found, and is set down in pri^e by M. Walsingham once an
earnest Portestant, and now a good Catholic, converted partly by observation
of the syncerity of Catholics, and gross lying evidently found to be
frequented by not only one, but diverse chief protestant writers.
brethren of these soul faults, with which he falsely charge us, and might
also have found himself so grossly guilty in the same kind, as he should
have been afraid to cast these stones of calumniation against us, least with
shame they should be more justly returned against himself whom I have now so
freshly taken with the manner of intemperate, and unchristian proceeding
aagainst us, to wit, with gross lying, unchristian railing, and malice, I will
not say, (as he does) irreconciliable malice, because I will in charity hope
the best, that he may repent, and amend, and so be reconciled to us: which
reconciliation, when he shall syncerely desire, and seek, he shall by
experience find, that we do not bear irreconciliable malice, but will with
all charity receive him, and that he need not fear, that we will use any
ceremony of exorcizing him, as a possessed person, which is never used by us,
when ordinary Protestants, even Ministers, are converted, as those that have
been converted can tell. He shall then find also that, which now praeiudicate
conceit will not let him see, that our authors, who charge Protestant writers
with absurd opinions, had just cause so to do, and that there is among us
ordinarily that spirit of meekness, and forbearance, far more then is,
(ceteris paribus) or can be expected to be among Protestants: Ordinarily (I
say) because so far forth as any of our men have threatened, or attempted any
unfit thing, or have in their writings or actions demeaned themselves otherwise
then in Christian duty they ought, our Church doctrine does dissalow it, and
therefore no reason, that their private faults, or errors should be ascribed to
our Church: whereas on the contrary side, it may be doubted, whether
Protestants may in like manner plead that their Church doctrine does also
dissalow all misdemeanors of their men, because diverse of eue^ their See the
Protestants Apology.
principal pillars, and chief men, either by words, examples, or writings
have without controlment of any of their Church Canons opened the gap to far
more rancour, impatience, and rebellion against their Catholic Sovereigns,
then can be showed in Catholics against their Protestant Princes.
1 IN all this you see not a word that disprooues my objection, but only a
little passion, and wrinkling of his face, joined with some charitable
speeches, concerning himself, all which is easily done by a man of his
practice, but I contemn it, and therefore to the matter. I named in my Book
for a taste some special points wherein I thought the lying, and malice,
wherewith I charged them might appear: their giving it out that we hold God to
be the author of sin deny good works to be necessary: put women recusants into
the stews: pull down Churches: make hauock of their Cardinals, Archbishops,
Doctors, Nobles, Queens. What not? as if there had never been any persecuted,
as Papists be. That they hold us Protestants to be possessed; that they have an
order in their Church to exorcize, and conjure a reconciled Protestant, that
all the Queens time most unnaturally and barbarously they threatened the land,
and by execrable treasons conspired against it: and that they have reported,
and practiced these things, I showed out of their book, naming the place, and
leaf of every book, as the reader may see; and thereupon charged them with
intemperate, and unchristian proceeding against us, and said that if they were
of the truth, they would not thus defend themselves with lying, railing, and
malice. Wherein how truly I speak, the reader must judge by this, that the
Jesuit excepts not against my quotations, wherein I showed this, which are
true, and full; but answers me with bare denials, and idle passion, alleging
the books of Walsingham, and Briarly, wherein he says they have showed
Protestants to be more guilty of these things (as if he should have replied,
Ask my fellow, if I be a thief) which of themselves are enough to justify my
speech, if there were no other matter extant to charge our adversaries withal,
this ways, that Papists deal against us with the weapons of darkness, for
there cannot lightly be more falsehood and compiled fraud together in so small a
compass, then is in these books; but whereas he says in the margent that
Walsingham was once an earnest Protestant, and is now become a good Catholic,
I advise him not to be too confident, for he knows that some having, upon
Walsinghams grounds, fallen to Papistry, yet have not long continued so, but
upon a new search have with comfort, and peace, returned back again, whence
they went, and therefore the surest way were to follow the order of the
Pontifical, and conjure him, the which way of coniuring such as are reconciled
to the Church of Rome, I say again, is prescribed in a Pontifical. Roman.
part. tit. ordo ad reconciliand. page ^06. of the old. print.
solemn Book containing the form of many ceremonies used therein, that it is
the desperatest, and basest shift that can be, thus to deny such an order:
specially the book containing, and prescribing it, being lately printed again
at Rome. And if the said Walsingham turned Papist, as the Jesuit reports, by
observing the sincerity of Catholics, and the gross lying, that he found in
Protestant writers, I pity his case, that would refuse his religion upon
supposall of that which is not so: for, to speak of that which I have searched
into my self, the places objected to Bishop Jewel, a man of incomparable
learning, and piety, whose name is sufficient to bear down all that speak
against him, I find, that as the things taxed in him, will be justified, so
himself in his life time, in the second edition of his defense, cleared the
most of them, against Stapleton, Harding, and the rest: whose objections they
are that Walsingham has set down, dissembling the answer that the Bishop
himself made unto them; and if I be not deceived, the pretended Walsingham
writ not that book, who being, as he says himself, but a Deacon, and
unskillful at those times in the controversies, could not object, answer,
meditate, and conceive the things contained in that Book: the style, and
matter thereof bewrayes another author, and our adversaries were never yet so
curious, but they could be content, with any forgerie, and fopperie, to advance
their cause, and with policy to promote their religion, which Gods blessed
truth, that needs no man's lie, would abhor to do.

2 And whereas the Jesuit says, there is ordinarily among them the spirit of
meekness, and forbearance more then can be expected among Protestants, and if
any Papist have threatened, and attempted unfit things, our Church doctrine does
disallow it: would this were true. For I have showed, that their Church, and
doctrine, have allowed, taught, and defended the murder of kings, and the
absoluing of their subjects from obedience; their books also are full of vile,
and inhumane speeches against our state, the Jesuits themselves joined with the
rest in the treason of Gunpowder: their books are written not with Ink, but
vinegar. In Queen Mary's time they showed such meekness, as the Turk uses
to do at the sacking of a town; the barbarous rage of the Clergy, in those
days, against the poor servants of Jesus Christ, was such, that it cannot be
forgotten; the common sort of Recusants I have seen so inflamed with fury,
that all the water in Trent would not quench it, if occasion wanted not. I saw
Hunt, a Seminary Priest, behave himself so outragiously at the bar at
Lancaster, where he was arraigned, for an assault made upon the way, upon
certain officers, that were carrying a prisoner, whereof he shot G. Trauis.
one into the thigh with a pistol, that Sir Thomas Hesckith, the Queens
attorney, at that time, giving evidence against him, called to have him set
farther off him, and some company stand between, for doing him mischief, his
outrage, in countenance, and words were such. The Bull of Pius against good
Queen Elizabeth, the writings of Cardinal Pool against the state in king
Henry's time, the devilish behavior of the Popes clawbackes, and vassals in
their writings, this day toward his Majesty: remember Pruritanus with his
Quaere quare: remember M. Wrightintons cattle at one time, and M. Bretters at
another, a little before the Queens death
the poor dumb beasts pitifully butchered in Lancashire, and the Spanish
invasion, with the Zeal and fury wherewith the chiefest of your side advanced
it: remember finally the Inquisition, and the order of the execution, and talk
no more of meekness, and forbearance; all which is not objected in malice
either to incense them, or make them odious, but only, by laying open their
sin, to draw them to repentance, and their followers to obedience; when this
their carriage has so shaken the land, and disinabled the state, that we cannot
think of it, but many a time, and often, for fear of the event, and jealousy
of his Majesty and his children, with weeping tears; nor speak of them, but
as Jacob did of his children, Genesis 49.5.
Simeon, and Leui brethren in evil, the instruments of cruelty are in their
habitation, let not my soul come into their Council; if we could prevail
that way, we would entreat them, that are their acquaintance; the band of
nature, and humanity should conjure them, religion by her sacred majesty
should beseech them, our common Baptism, the Seal of our Christian
profession, should importune them, their dearest country, like Coriolanus
mother, should be sent out unto them with breasts displaied, and weeping
tears, and her hair hanging about her shoulders to reconcile them: but
nothing can do it: no entreaty, no forbearance, no benefits. Rome has
alienated, and imbruted them, and how to show them love we know not, but must
say as the Roman Lady did to her son in arms against his country: (...).
Plutarch Coriol.
We cannot pray both for our own safety, and thy health, but as our enemies
would pray against us, for either the country must perish, or else you must be
taken out of it.

CHAP. XII.
Touching the ignorance that Papistry has bred among people. Their barbarous
manner of praying avouched. Of John the Almoner, a legend. The manner how a
certain Priest baptized. 2. The replies zeal for recusants of the better
sort. 3. A Lanc. Gentleman alleged by the reply. A note of a french Knight. 4.
The success of preaching in Lanc.

A. D. The sixth mark (says M. White) is that prodigious ignorance, whereunto
they fall, who live in papistry, Page 35.
for proof whereof he sets down certain examples which he says, he has
observed from the common people, to wit, these ensuing: Creezum zuum patrum
onitentem, etc. Little Creed etc White pater noster etc. After which having two
other examples of like odd stuff, he further says, Their prayers, and
traditions of this sort are infinite, and the ceremonies they use in all their
actions, are nothing inferior to the Gentiles in number, and strangenes, which
(says he) any man may easily observe, that conuerseth with them, etc. And it
cannot be answered (says he) that these are the customs of a few simple
people: for this which I say is general through the country, the whole body
of the common people, Popishly addicted, practicing nothing else until it
please God by the Ministry of the Gospel to convert them, yea the most men,
and women devoted to Papistrie, though well borne, and brought up for civil
qualities, and of good place in the country, yet lie plunged in this
ignorance. This is the Ministers lying relation, which I thought fit to recite
something at large, as being such, and so gross of it self, as it will
without any thing said by me, sufficiently discredit it self. And I marvel
with what face, he that in his last Mark, has so soberly preached against
intemperate, and unchristian proceeding, gross lying, uncharitable railing,
etc: can now come, and sit as it were on an Ale-bench, and relate such
notorious, ridiculous, and slanderous untruths. Unto which first I say, that
notwithstanding all the conversation I have had this many years, with
Catholics of diverse sorts, rich, and poor, old, and young, learned, and
unlearned, in the South, and in the North, I may protest, that until I read
them in M. Whites book, I never heard of any one of these examples to be used
by any Catholic, nor indeed did I ever before here of any one of these absurd
forms of prayer to be so much as extant in the world. Secondly I say, that
diverse Catholics, of far better credit, then M. White (living in that very
country, where M. White lives, and having far more inward conversation with
Catholics which live thereabouts, then he is like to have) have been demanded,
what their knowledge was about this point, and no one of them did know, any
Catholic man, or woman, that did use to say their prayers in such a ridiculous
sort. But admit the Minister had met at the Alehouse, some drunken old man, or
some doting old wife, of whom he might perchance receive this ridiculous rotten
stuff, to say nothing, of what better knowledge of the necessary points of
Faith, such persons in their better wit, and sense, might have, I ask M.
White, whether he think that these few examples be sufficient to justify this
general assertion, wherein he says, their prayers, and traditions of this
sort are infinite, and the ceremonies they use in all their actions nothing
inferior to the Gentiles in number, and strangenes. What? Have we infinite
prayers, and traditions like the white pater noster, little creed, etc? Do we
use also ceremonies, not only in some, but absolutely in all our actions? And
are these ceremonies nothing, not a jot inferior to the Gentiles, in number,
and strangenes? Surely this is strange, and so strange, that he were a strange
man who would believe it, especially having never seen, nor observed any such
matter: but what man is there, who although he lived never so long in company
of Catholics, did, or could see, or observe, any such matter? yet M. White
(forsooth) will needs persuade us, that any man that conuerseth with Catholics
may easily observe it. Well, let us go forwarward, and believe (if we can) that
M. White with Lynceus eyes has seen, or observed, that which no other person,
nor we our selves have seen, nor possibly can see, and observe. At least good
M. White, give us leave to answer, that if you have seen, and observed some
such matter, yet it is not in all of us, nor in the most of us, nor in many,
especially of eminent quality, or note among us: but at the most in some one,
or few simple people, whose ignorance to attribute to us generally, or
indefinitely, would smell rankely of brutish ignorance, or abundant malice.
Nay (says M. White) it cannot be answered, that these are the customs of a
few simple people: for this that I say, is general throughout the country,
the whole body of the people Popishly addicted, practicing nothing else, until
it please God by the ministry of the Gospel to convert them: yea the most
men, and women, devoted to Papistrie, though well borne, and brought up for
civil qualities, and of good place in the country, yet lie plunged in this
ignorance. And say you so Sir Minister indeed? Do you say, that these customs
be general throughout the country? Do you also say, that the whole body of the
common people popishly addicted do practice nothing else but Creezum zuum,
little creed, white pater noster, etc: And this (not for some short while, till
themselves by their own wit, or some other of the wiser sort of Catholics,
perceive, and correct this foolish custom, but absolutely all the while they
continue Catholics) until (which seldom happens to sound Catholics) they
be converted (or rather perverted) by the Protestant Ministry? Do you also say,
that besides the whole body of the common people, yea even the most men, and
women devoted to Papistrie, though well borne, and brought up for civil
qualities, and of good place in the country, yet lie plunged in this
ignorance? Do you, Sir Minister, say all this? Surely if you say it, and will
stand to it, you deserve the whetstone. For if this be not a gross lie, I know
not what is. If you have a face to affirm this, worthily may your countrymen
wonder, and say (as a person of good esteem, and place in that your country
has affirmed, that many of your countrymen having read this part of your book
have wondered, and said) What truth may we think can be expected in the
process of this man's book, whilst he cites Authors, which few have means
sufficiently to examine, or when he tells of things done in former times, or
foreign countries, when we find him so shameless, and impudently false in
relating home matters, so contrary to our certain, and direct knowledge?
1 LEt the contumelies, and intemperance be swept out, and the matter be
considered: our Seminaries have their disease, that void their excrements at
their mouth, and Rome that breeds them is a Apoc. 17.1. and 19.2. Pro. 30.20.
whore, that neither can blush, nor abide with any patience to hear of her
qualities. That which I writ touching this prodigious ignorance of the people,
that live in Papistry, and the manner of their prayers, is true, when all the
Jesuits in England have railed at it, what they can, and all the faces that
they can set upon it, shall never outface that which for 17. years together, I
had daily experience of, and saw with my eyes. I protest in the words of
Bernard Epist. 42. page 804.
of naked things, I have spoken nakedly, nether do I uncover secrets, but
reprove shameless filthiness. Would God these things were done privately, and in
chambers, would we alone saw, and heard them; would we might not be credited,
when we utter them; would the No's of our time, had left us any thing,
wherewith we might cover them. Now when the word round about sees these things,
must we alone hold our peace? my head is broken on every side, and when the
blood gushes out round about, shall I think to hide it? Whatsoever I put about
it will be bloodied; and my shame will be the greater, thus to go about to
hide, that which will not be hidden. This is it that I say for my self against
the Jesuits reproaches: come we now to his Reply. First he answers, that in all
his acquaintance, here, and there, he may protest, that he never heard any one
of these his examples, and absurd forms of Prayer to be used by any: and diverse
Catholics of far better credit then M. White, being demanded their knowledge
about this point, have not known any Catholic man, or woman to use them.
Wherein he mocks the reader to his face three times over. First in producing
himself, and his Catholics for witnesses, whom no man knows, against M.
White, that stands openly in the face of the world, and is known to all; where
he dwells, and what he is: and lies subject, in his person, and name, to the
open, and secret, censure of the world, if he speak untruly: whereas this
masked Jesuit, and his Catholics of so good credit, and his person of good
esteem, whose words he alleges, are all shadows, and Idols; that no man
knows to whom any thing that they say, can be imputed, because they are
invisible: we hear the sound of an A, and a D. and the Ghost possibly of a
Gentlewoman, but what they are, and where, and how I may let my country see
their face, that thus walk in the dark, I know not: but these are the ways
of Jesuits, a mask, a dark room, a blind lantern, a vault, and two, or
three, blanke letters: and thence they fight with all this noise. Next he mocks
us again, in that he says he never heard any of these forms: for no doubt he
has heard, as bad as these in other words, if he have not heard these: and I
make no question but some of those Catholics, that have been demanded their
knowledge about this point; if they were ouerheard, when they say their
prayers, would speak no better. For I have heard many repeat their prayers,
yet never did I hear one speak in any tolerable form. And any man may
easily perceive it is scarce possible, that they, which understand no Latin,
should pronounce it otherwise, then as I have set down. Thirdly where he
says, he, and his Catholics never heard any of these things: as though
Seminaries ordinarily used to examine, or hear how their people say their
prayers, who are well known to have many things else they mind more: and,
when their people have learned to refuse the Church, that they once possess
them, they greatly pass not, either what they be, or how they pray, so they
pray not with understanding: But he says, M. White, met at an Alehouse some
drunken old man, or some d^^ing wife, and of them he might receive this rotten
stuff. Indeed the Legend tells of John the Almoner, that seeing his people in
the time of divine service, going out of the Church to the Alehouse, took his
book, and followed them, saying that where the sheep were, there the
Shepherd must be also: yet M. White never used that course, when his people
went to the Alehouse, but left it to Seminaries, who were as good Alebeaters,
in their disguised habit, as either the drunken old man, or the doting old wife
here mentioned And to let the Jesuit plainly understand, where I received this
ridiculous rotten stuff, I observed, and learned it of the people, where I
dwelt, diverse whereof I have heard thus to say their prayers, when I have
examined them, or otherwise entreated them, sometime at their own houses where
they dwelt, and sometime at mine; and I know the guise of popish people so well,
that scholars excepted, the laity of them generally, as well young, as old,
sober, as drunken, gentle, as simple, pronounce their Latin prayers no better;
which is the barbarous ignorance that I reported. We read in De consecrat. d.
4. Retulerunt,
Gratian, how Priests baptized in Nomine Patria, and Filia, and Spiritua
sancta; and no man I think will deny, but in king Henry, and Queen Mary's
times, many Mass priests in all parts of the land went ordinarily to the
Grammar school to learn to read their Portuisse: that no man wonder at this
brutishness in the laity, which was little less in a great part of the
Clergy: and what I said of their Ceremonies also, those that live in the
country know to be true. And what they savor of, whether the purity and
simplicity of Christianity, or the fashion of the Gentiles; Tertull. de coron.
militis.
so much detested by antiquity, let who so will judge. For my own part though
I judge not such as use them in their simplicity, and ignorance, yet I abhor,
and detest those wreches, that taking upon them to be their ghostly fathers,
yet suffer them to live in that brutish superstition.

2 But that which the Reply takes most unkindly, is a speech that I added,
after I had set down those forms of prayer: It cannot be answered that these
are the customs of a few simple people: for this is general throughout the
Country, the most men and women devoted to Papistry, though well borne, and of
good place, yet lie plunged in this ignorance; which last words were, it
should seem, a Prophecy. For you see how the touching of this sore puts him
into passion, and my Book was scarce come out, when many of this Better sort,
had it by the end; and quarrelled it: yet if we had means to make the trial,
it would fall out to be true: for I know not what faculty, or privilege a
gentleman, or his wife, for example, that understands no Latin, has to
pronounce it any better, then their tenants; and here I avouch again in his
presence that knows all things, that the same ignorance, and rudeness
wherewith I charge the vulgar people, I have observed in diverse of the better
sort: and the Jesuit is but unwise to deny it. For if white Pater noster, and
little Creed be good Physic for the vulgar, I know not but Catholics of
greater note may use them too. Phil. Camerar. meditat. hist.
When an Emperor lay in the pangue of the gout, he cried out, that now he
differed nothing from a cloune, he felt the same disease, and the same pain,
and pangs without any difference. So I suppose this rude ignorance in such as
are well borne, and of good place, is of no other nature, then that which is in
the common sort: yet the Jesuit you see is earnester for them, then the rest,
and possibly he has reason. Ladies, and Gentlewomen, and men of worth can see
better, then a poor client: its not a drunken old man, or a doting wife, that
can merit a Seminaries zeal; leave them in an Alehouse with M. White, saying
their white Pater noster. But is Sir Minister so bold as to charge any that are
well borne? would to God Sir Minister had not seen Dianaes nakedness: it would
have stayed a great deal of barking, that has been after him. YET WHAT HE
WRIT, IS STILL TRVE, IF ALL THE SEMINARIES IN ENGLAND HAD IT IN CHASE. I will
seek the disgrace of no man's person of any degree; I know the country to have
many good Gentlefolke in it; I only report the barbarism that Popery has
bred in such as follow it: and though I have no acquaintance, or knowledge with
all; yet (...). Eustath. Iliad.
the experience of some allows me to speak as I do: that this ignorance is
general, and the most, yea of the better sort, addicted to Popery, are plunged
in it.

3 And that which the Jesuit reports, my Countryman, a man of good esteem,
and place said of my book, is not greatly material, supposing some Popish
Gentleman, or woman said so. For besides himself, whosoever he be, that
country has many noble, and godly Gentlemen, as good as he: whereof some have
seen my Book, and reported otherwise both of it, and me: and it may be the
Gentleman alleged, if he were well examined, would prove as learned as the
Knight that Claudius Espencaeus In 2. Tim. page 118.
tells of, who being demanded his belief touching the holy Ghost, answered,
he knew not whether there were an holy Ghost or no. And my comfort is, that
when this present place that I now write, shall come into their hand, they will
call to mind the travel I took among them with all instance, and lenity to
do good; and the scandalous, and lying reports, wherewith Seminaries use to
defend themselves: they know me, and Seminaries, and Popish Gentlemen, and have
ability to compare us one with another: in the mean time, I esteem the man
and his deposition alike: he a man of no great esteem, that has not so much,
as a name: and will be commanded by a poor student to stand upon the stage
like a ridle for all readers to guess at: and his deposition is suitable, when
he taxes a man with shamelessness, and impudency, for noting that which, a
thousand to one, will be proved by his wife; and possible by himself, if they
use to say any prayers at all.

4 Whereas I said also this general barbarousnesse did abound in the people,
until it pleased God by the Ministry of his Gospel to convert them: he
replies, that this seldom happens to sound Catholics to be converted, or
rather perverted by the Protestant Ministry: I answer (for let the truth be
known in every thing, that I have affirmed) that the Protestant Ministry has
not been fruitless among the people, but has most happily converted
thousands; and that country, some part of it especially, where the word has
been more frequent, yields at this day, and long has done, as many, and as
sound professors of the truth, as any part of our kingdom. And in the
backwardest part thereof, many people have joyfully received the truth, and
acknowledged the errors, wherein the guile of Seminaries have holden them; and
many that appeared to be sound Catholics, have done this. I heard an aged
yeoman, after a Sermon effectually preached, At Gooznar, near to Pr^ston.
in a parish where Seminaries most haunt, when the preacher had done, stand up
in his seat, and desiring his neighbors to make means to obtain a competent
Preacher into the place, profess, It was true the Preacher said, and that his
old religion (as he termed it) had allowed them to live in all naughtiness.
This shows, that Popish superstition would soon be rooted out there, and
those locusts soon be blown away, if the word were effectually preached among
them.

CHAP. XIII.
Touching prayer to Saints. 1. Mediation of Redemption and intercession. 2.
Bonaue^tures Psalter. 3. Christ the only Mediator of intercession. 4. 5. 6.
Reasons why we desire not the dead to pray for us as we do the living. 5. The
prayers of a Friar and an Archbishop. 6. 7. It cannot be showed that the dead
hear us. 8. Devices of the Schoolmen to show how they hear us. 10. God not
like an earthly king. 10. 11. In their Saint-inuocation they Platonize. 12. Men
equalled with Christ.

A. D. But let us see what M. White brings to give credit to this his
incredible narration, Page 40.
and to take away the wonder of his countrymen, who admire his shameless
impudency in relating home-matters so contrary to their certain, and direct
knowledge. This brutish condition of their people (says he) may the better be
credited, and is less to be wondered at, because the open practice of their
Church gives them example, and encourages them by their Idolatry, and
superstition toward the Saints departed. For how can that people discern
their ignorance, whose Pastors even before their eyes in their open Service,
and printed books serve the Saints, and worship them with the same service,
that they give to Christ? This, says he, I offer for the seventh motive to
induce any Papist to suspect his own religion. For it cannot be the faith of
Christ, that takes his honor, and gives it to another. In their service, and
prayers the Virgin Mary is made an intercessour for sin, as if Christ were
not the sole Mediator, unless the merits, and mediation of another did come
between. These are M. Whites words. In which he frames a far more grievous
accusation against us, then the former; as though not only the common people,
or the most even of our men, and women, well borne and brought up for civil
qualities, and of good place in the country, were in manner aforesaid
brutishly ignorant, but that the open practice of our Church gives them
example, and encourages them by Idolatry, and superstition toward Saints
departed, in that in our open Service, our Pastors serve the Saints with the
same service, that they give to Christ, taking his honor, and giving it to
another: and in our service, and prayers, making the Virgin Mary intercessour
for sin, as if Christ were not the sole Mediator, etc. A grievous accusation
assuredly, if it be proved true, and no less gross slander, if it be (as I
doubt not evidently to prove it) untrue. As concerning the l^st part of this
accusation of the B. Virgin Mary, being made intercessour, as though Christ
were not sole Mediator; I have answered sufficiently in relating, and refuting
M. Wottons untruths, where I show that Saints in heaven, or men living on
earth, being made intercessours, do not hinder Christ to be sole Mediator.
1 THe Jesuit so relates, and confutes my words, as if I had only objected
some small superstition in praying to the Virgin Mary, and no more; whereas the
bare inuocating of her is the least thing, that I stand upon. We urge the
praying to her in They say she is God. Dea matter. Paul. Cortes. in sent. page
65. Lips. virg. Hallens. Psalt. Bonauent. and yet to the Turks they will deny
this, (...), Ricold. cont. sect. Mahum. p. 122. 10.
that manner, that I set down; and the doctrine published, touching her
merits, and mediation, out of Dodechin, Bozius, Galatine, and others: whereby
she is equalled with Christ: and the monstrous impieties about friar Francis
out of Bencius, and Tursellin, Jesuits; the which stuff, and infinite other,
of the like nature, is it we say gives example to the vulgar, and which we
think so odious, that the Jesuit durst neither set it down, nor mention it,
in his book, least the world should see, and abhor it; but only occupying
himself in defending the lawfulness of praying to the Virgin Mary, as if I
had objected no more but that; so he leaves in a manner every thing unanswered,
and touches not those fouler imputations, that lie against him. Nevertheless
come we to that he says. First he denies not, but it were a grievous
accusation, if it were true, that in the Church of Rome the Saints are served
with the same service they give to Christ: and the B. virgin Mary made an
intercessour for sin, as if Christ were not the sole Mediator: and therefore
he answers, that in confuting M. Wottons untruths, he has showed, that the
making of Saints our intercessours, hinders not Christ to be sole Mediator:
Page 14. of his Reply.
Because we do not hold Saints to be mediators of redemption, but of
intercession only. Meaning the ordinary distinction that is Alexan. part. 4.
q. 92. in 1. art. 4. Bellar. de Sancto. beatit. p. 718. and 732. Grego. a
Valent. tom. 3 p. 1273. E. Rhem. on 1. Tim. 2.5.
among them: that Christ only by nature being God and man, and by office and
merits reconciling God to man, and needing no other to procure him grace with
his Father; is the first author of all the good we receive from God: but so
that the Saints nevertheless pray for us, and as persons nearer God, and more
familiar with him, then we, commend our cause to him, and so are mediators of
intercession. Whereto I reply two things. First that more then this is ascribed
to Saints in the forms, that I allege. First, God is inuocated by their
merits, and for them desired to give eternal life: yea the Mas book has a
prayer Breular. Sarisbu. fest. S. Tho. Cantuar.
, that God, by the blood of Tho. Becket would save us, and bring us to heaven.
When all effusion of blood, and merit of work, whereby eternal life is
obtained, belongs to Redemption, as well as to intercession; and to no
intercession, but only to Christ's. Next the holy Virgin is called our Life,
our Hope, our Advocate, the mother of Grace, our Savior, our Redeemer. Viega
Comment. in apocal. 12. page 584. ex Arnold. Carnot.
says, she is set above every creature; that whosoever bows the knee to
Christ, should make supplication to his Mother also. And I am of mind, says
he, alleging the words of another, that the glory of the Son is not so much
common with the glory of the Mother, as it is the same -- and God has in a
sort, given his mercy to his Mother, and Spouse that reigns: and so the B.
Virgin has the kingdom of God divided between God, and her. These words
import more then intercession. Thirdly they say of her These speeches are
alleged in the praeface of the way
that with her Son she disposes of rights. With her Son she redeemed the
world. Her death was for the redemption of the world. For her love God made the
world. She is above Christ to command. They are saved by her, that cannot by
Christ. Francis the Friar is made equal to Christ. All this is showed at large
in their words, whereto the Jesuit replies nothing: and it is Macte Hyacinthe
animo: quicquid petiueris vnquam Me tribuente feres: caelica virgo canit. These
verses are written in a medall (of that sort that are drawn in papers and are
common among Recusa^ts) where Hyacinthus, a Saint of Poland, is portraied
praying on his knees to the Virgin Mary and receiving the answer from her that
is contained in these two verses.
more then can be contained in simple intercession abstracting from redemption.

2 If our adversaries to these things would reply, that they are the foolish
devotion of private persons, which they maintain not; it were an end, and we
would charge them no longer herewith: but they neither can, nor will. They
cannot; for the objections are the practice of the whole Church, set forth in
their public Service books, and open writings of the Jesuits; and our
ancestors in former times, were trained up in this devotion. Neither will they
do it. For first this Jesuit smoothes it up, and falls a distinguishing to
defend it in general, which in particular for shame he durst not look in the
face. Next, all the books of their Church are full of these things: Printed at
Venice, Paris, and Lipsia, and now lately at Paris by Nicol. du Fosse, ad
insigne vasis aurei. See Chemnit. exam p. 595. and inde. and Tilen. syn tagm.
tom. 2. p. 565. n. 24. and Cassand. co^sult. page 156.
and among other practices they have transformed the whole Psalter of David to
the invocation of Mary, where every thing that David attributes to God is
ascribed to her, by putting his name out, and hers in the room. In the end
whereof all the other ordinary hymns and readings of the Church are turned to
her likewise. And this book was publicly used throughout the Church of Rome,
and bear this inscription: The Psalter of the B. Virgin compiled by the
Seraphicall Doctor, S. Bonau. the B. of Alba, and Cardinal Priest of the
Church of Rome.

3 Secondly I answer that the mediation of intercession, whereby our prayers
are offered up to God, belongs to Christ alone. And therefore the Church of
Rome, calling upon Saints to pray for them, and to commend their prayers to
God, if it did no more, robs Jesus Christ of his office. The antecedent, that
it belongs to Christ alone to make intercession, and offer our prayers to God
is proved: for the Scripture says. Heb. 7.24. and 13.15.
Let us BY HIM offer the Sacrifice of praise, ALWAYS to God: Who has an
everlasting Priesthood, and therefore is able perfitly to save them that come
to God by him: seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just;
and he is the propitiation for our sins: in which words we see that all
authority, and power of intercession is immediately attributed to him, that is
the High Prist of the Church, and that intercession is founded upon the
Priesthood, and those merits: that he cannot be intercessour to mediate
between God, and us in any sort, that is not such a priest. Again touching
the offering up of our prayers to God, Apoc. 8.3.
it is said, that an Angel came, and stood before the altar, having a golden
Censer: and much odours was given unto him, (...).
that he should offer with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar,
which is before the Throne. And the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the
Saints, went up before God, out of the Angels hand. The Angel that thus offers
the prayers to God is August. hom. 6. in Apoc. tom. 9. page 670. Pri mas. in
hunc locum. Beda in apoc. tom 5 page 1085. Ambr. Ausbert. in apoc. vis. 3. p.
53. Hunc multi Christum esse existimant. Riber. in apoc. c. 8 3. Christus
Angelus est habens thuribulum. Viega. ib.
Jesus Christ the Angel of the covenant: and it is affirmed of our prayers,
that he stands, for that purpose, to receive them, and offer them, and that out
of this Angels hand, they go up before the Lord. Nothing can be plainer then
that of S. Paul, 2 Timothy 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God, and man, the man Christ. In
which words he affirms as well, that there is but one Mediator of
intercession, as that there is but on redeemer; for they contain a reason why
we should pray for all men, because there is one mediator that would all men
should be saved, by whom we have access to God by prayer. Therefore he says
but one Mediator to intercede for us: the which S. Austine resolutely concludes
out of this place, Cont. epist. Parmen. l. 2. c. 8. p. 32. tom. 7.
saying, If Paul were a Mediator, his other fellow Apostles should be Mediators
also, and so there should be many mediators, and Paul should be against
himself, where he says, There is one Mediator of God, and men, the man
Christ, not only affirming him to be one Mediator, but so to be one, that he
alone makes intercession immediately from our selves to his Father, no other
interceding between either God, and us, or himself, and us.

4 Against this he replies 2. things. The first is Reply page 14
his answer to M. Wotton: whither he referres me also: that the making of
Saints to be Mediators of intercession robbes Christ of his office no more,
then the making living men in like manner Mediators of intercession. But this
latter, to make living men Mediators of intercession, robs not Christ of his
office, Iac. 5. v. 16. Romans 15. v. 30.
because S. Paul, and S. James make living men Mediators of intercession, one
of them bidding us pray one for another, and the other entreating men to pray
for him: ergo neither the former; when we make Saints departed our Mediators
of intercession. The Proposition he proves: Because there cannot any
substantial reason of difference be assigned, why those that pray to Saints,
to pray, or make intercession to God for them, do more rob Jesus Christ of his
office, then those that pray living men to pray, or make intercession to God
for them. To this I answer: there are 3. reasons assigned why it is lawful to
use the prayers of the living, rather then the invocation of the dead. First it
is an unchangeable rule, that no man in Gods worship exceed the limits of his
commandments. Deuteronomy. 12.8. and vlt.
Ye shall not do every man what seems him good in his own eyes -- but
whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou shall put nothing thereto,
nor take ought therefrom. 1. Co 4 6.
That no man presume above that, which is written. Now that we may entreat,
and use the prayers one of another, so long as we live, it is Genesis 20.17. Eoxd.
32.11. Numb 16.48. 1. Sam. 12.23. Mat. 5.44. 2. Cor. 1.11. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Timothy
2.1. Iac. 5.14.
written; and Rom 15.30. Iac. 5.16.
the texts alleged by the Jesuit will show: in which regard by an
improprietie of speech, and equiuocally, the Saints living in this world,
(...). Nazianz. page 36. (...). Nicet. page 536. Multi enim Sanctor^^
mediationis ministerio vsi sunt. Cyrill. Alexand. thesaur. page 156.
are called Mediators: the which commandment, or allowance concerning the
dead can no where be showed in all the Scripture. The Censure of Collen Page
230.
says, The Scripture no where teaches the invocation of Saints, though
notwithstanding for all that, it be to be received, and believed: and in
Antidid. g. page 43.
another book, the same Divines say, the Gospel indeed has given no peculiar
commandment touching this matter, though it may evidently enough be gathered
out of it: but with such gatherings we are well enough acquainted, when the
same Divines in that place, are feign to gather it from Christ's words upon the
cross: Eli, Eli, Lammasabacthani. Eckius, though according to his fashion, he
brag there are innumerable passages of the old, and new Testament making for
it: Enchirid. c. 15. ad 8.
yet confesses there is nothing expressly to be found in the Scripture that
Saints must be inuocated, and he adds: that this invocation of Saints ought
not to be expressly delivered either in the old, or new testament for 2.
reasons. Which he shows at large, and they plainly declare he thought there
is no commandment for it in all the Bible. Suarez the Jesuit Tom. 2 in Tho
disp. 42. sect. 1 page 434.
puts the question. Whether the Saints departed before Christ, did pray for
others: and answers that in particular they could not -- whence it followed
that in that time prayers could not regularly be made to souls in that state
-- and that any man (in that time) directly prayed to the Saints departed, that
they would help them, or pray for them, we no where read. De Sanct. beatit.
c. 19.. item exodus etc. 20.. Atque ex his.
Bellarmine agrees with him: that the Saints in the time of the old Testament
were not inuocated, because they were not yet in heaven. Salmeron another
Jesuit, In 1. Tim 2. disp. 2. ar. 7.. primum.
says, there is nothing touching this matter, to be found in any of the
Epistles. Seeing therefore the Scriptures teach us to desire the prayers one of
another, so long as we live together in this world, but not afterward: this is
one sufficient reason, why the prays of the living, one for another are
allowed, and not the invocation of the dead.

5 Another difference is that the invocation of the dead, used in the Church of
Rome, and wherewith my words charge it, is not like the praying of the living
one for another. For Eorum. (qui sunt in hoc mu^do aut in Purgatorio) suffragia
non imploramus, orando; sed a viuis petimus colloquendo. Tho. 22. qu. 83. art.
4. ad 3.
who inuocates the living? who prays God by their merits to save us? where is
there among all the Texts that can be alleged, one rule, or example, that we
should pray thus to a living man, as they do to a Saint: Save me o Savior:
redeem me o redeemer: and as is the prayers that I alleged? If one of the
thieves upon the Cross, when our Savior died, should thus have prayed to Ioh.
19.25.
the holy Virgin -- standing by, as the Friar lately did in France, when he
was to be executed for murdering a man to have his wife. -- The prayer of a
Friar upon the scaffold, when he died for a murder in France. an. 1609. Boter:
comment. l. 16. p. 300.
But o thou the solace of such as are in misery, our Loadstarre in the midst
of this raging sea; the advocate of men, the Arc of the Testament; the altar
of sinners; by thy suffrages o Virgin effect with thy Son, that I may have
my desire: would the Jesuits, I marvel, commend his devotion, as the reporter
does the Friars zeal? or if this example fume into the Jesuits head, were it
lawful for a man upon his deathbed, to invoke the living standing by, as
the Fra. Ximenius of Toledo. Gomec de reb. Ximen. l. 7. page 242.
great Archbishop did the dead, when he died himself, to be his Patroness:
All the Saints: but above all the mother of God: Michael the Archangell, Peter,
and Paul, James, and S. Francis? or if at an open Sessions, at the Council of
Trent, Sato, or Mus, or one of the Friars, should have begun hs Sermon, with a
prayer to Cardinal Barrhomaeo sitting by, mutatis mutandis, as Stephanus Arch.
Patrace^s. in conc. Later. sub Leo. p. 621.
an Archbishop sometime began his at the Council of Lateran with his Omnium
sple^dot, decus and perenne Virginum lumen, genetrix superni, Gloria humani
generis Maria Vnica nostri. Sola tu Virgo do^ina^s astris Sola tu terrae, maris
atque coeli lumen: inceptis faueas rogamus inclita nostris. Vt queam sacros
reserare sensus, qui late^t chartis nimiu^ seueris, ingredi, and celsae, duce
te, benignae Maenia terrae.
invocation of the Blessed Virgin: O blessed Charles our Churches hope, and
glory of our fading light: The best of all our Cardinals, in Consistory
shining bright: Thou only show the way that leads to heavens bliss and
virtues lore: Thy life our safest loadstarre is to guide us to the heavenly
shore: I pray thee give me of thy grace, and fill me with thy verities: that I
may boldly speak in place, and beat down Luthers heresies. If, I say, the
Friar should have made such a prayer to him, would not his fellow Cardinals
have envied his deity, and thought that invocation would have come soon
enough after his death, when he had been Sainted? The living therefore are not
prayed unto, nor entreated to pray to God, or make intercession, for us, nor
any ways made mediators by their intercession, and merits; as the dead are;
for that were against the office of Christ, but only as feeling members of this
state, that see, and know the wants each of other, and that have a calling from
God thereto; they join their prayers to the rest of the body, no man's merits,
or aduocation being interposed, but every one, with, and for others,
immediately flying to Jesus Christ.

6 A third reason why it is lawful to entreat the prayers of the living
rather then the dead, is, for that the living, who^ we entreat to pray for us,
understand, and see our particular wants, and are in state to take knowledge of
our desire to be prayed for; as when Saint Paul bad the people pray for him,
they heard, and understood him what he desired; which the Saints in heaven
departed, though full of glory, and great indowments, do not. And here it is
not enough to bring conjectures, and with show of words, and disputations, to
lead our judgment, as in this cause our adversaries have taken great pains
to pull upon themselves a learned error: but before I can pray in this fashion
to the dead with faith; if all other difficulties were cleared, I must have a
sure ground in my conscience, that they hear me. And he that will persuade me
to believe they do, must not come with Iffs, and Ands, and Metaphysicall
speculations, and the seeming opinions of men: but with that which may bring
full assurance, and may support faith, as the Holy Ghost does. 1. Tim. 1.15.
This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received. Ioh. 4.22.
We worship that we know: 2. Cor. 4 3.
We approve ourselves to every man's conscience. Let it be made thus sure unto
us, that when I pray, the Saints hear me, and it shall willingly be received,
and believed. This reason does not immediately proceed to show, that praying to
the dead robbes Christ of his office, but only that it is against faith; which
being showed, thence it will easily be concluded, that then Christ is robbed of
his office, because all prayer against faith is against Christ's mediatorship in
some part of the latitude thereof. Now if it so please the reader, let us see
what assurance the Church of Rome can give, that the Saints know our prayers.

7 First, it is clear that in all the Scripture there is nothing to prove it;
but the contrary. For 2. Reg. 22.20.
when Josiah should die, God told him his eyes should not see the evil which
he would bring upon Jerusalem. And Solomon Eccl. 9 5.
says, the dead know nothing at all. And Es. 63 16.
the Prophet, in a prayer he makes to God, says, Thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not; the which texts show
manifestly, that the dead have as little knowledge of our state here, as we
have of theirs, there. Or if it were otherwise, God would somewhere have
revealed it; especially the revelation thereof being so necessary for the
confirmation of this point, touching invocation: which Superfluum videtur abeis
ordinary petere us pro nobis oreni; quia non possunt ordinary cognoscere quid
agamus in particulari. Bellar. de purgat. l. 2. c. 15.. praetere a animae.
by the Jesuits own confession is in vain, where they do not ordinarily, as
in Purgatory hear our prayers, the which for the most part being seated in
Plerunque hoc negotium plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur: plus flet^ quam
affatu. August. epist. 121. c. 10.
the heart, and thence immediately, without any noise of words, ascending up,
who can understand them, but he that searches the heart? which Philo (...).
Philo iudae. page 328. Paris.
says, is the musical, and loud instrument of our voice, and is heard by no
mortal creature, but only by him, that is immortal, and unbegotten.

8 Secondly our adversaries could never give themselves satisfaction in the
point. They have raked together See them in Serrar. Litane^t. p. 141. and inde.
and Bellar. de Sanct. beat ^. c. 20.
a number of ways whereby they think to expound themselves: but still they
are uncertain. And their ways insufficient to stablish their own conscience,
as appears by the multiplying of their questions. The knowledge of our prayers
supposed to be brought them by Angels, and other Saints, is disclaimed by
Bellar. vbi sup. yet Serrar. allows it. Horum december moderum nullus omnino est
qui adhiberi aliquando non possit. page 154.
Whether the souls of those that are prayed to be present, or not. If they be
present, then whether it be really, so that they be in the place, where the
party praying to them is: or virtually, only by, I know not what understanding
the things uttered to them in our prayers. Or whether they have the
understanding of our prayers from others, that give them knowledge. If this
way, then who they be, that give them this knowledge: whether the Angels, that
are about us, and know our actions, or God. If it be God, that gives them this
knowledge, then how he does it? whether immediately by himself, or by the
ministry of others: if by others, then who they be? whether Angels that are
about us: or the spirits of holy, and just men, that go from hence, and tells
the Saints in heaven, what our prayers are. If immediately by himself, then
how? whether directly, and formally; Oration relucet in diuina essentia. Tho.
Argentin. p. 178. ad 2. Beati vident in verbo deuotiones mentales. Aquar. in
Capreol. 4. d. 45. concl. 2. Beati in coelo cognoscunt orationes nostras in
verbo. Ouand. 4. d. 45. page 94. see Mag. 4. d. 45. and ibi scolast*
communiter. Tho. 22 q. 83. art 4. ad. 2. and 3. qu. 10. art. 2. This seeing of
things in the word, as in a glass, is denied by many Schoolmen, Deus est
speculum voluntarium -- Occham 4. q. 13. art. 3. Si quaeratur an beati,
cognitione beata, cognoscunt orationes nostras; dicendum quod non. Duran. 4. d.
45. qu. 4. p. 463. Intellectus creatus, videndo diuinam essentiam, non videt in
ipso omnia quae facit deus, vel facere potest. Tho. 1. q. 12. art. 4. Nostra
sententia affirmat nihil ex vi visionis, sed aliqua peculiari reuelatione
cognosci. Vasqu. disp. 50. n. 51. tom. 1. idem Aureol. quodl. and Alliac. 1.
qu. 12. art 3.
so that they see in him as in a glass, by reason of the Beatificall vision,
what is in the creature, and so consequently the prayers of the creatures? if
they see them in God as in a glass: then whether it be Beati, qui vident in
verbo, vident a principio. Pezant. 1. Tho. page 72. concl. 2. Ca^et. 3. q. 10.
art. 2.
from the beginning of their blessedness, so that instantly upon their
glorification; and so soon, as they come into heaven, and see God, they see
all things, that we do in him; or Serrar. says this is the most usual and
certain opinion. p. 155.
successively, one thing after another. But if God reveal the knowledge of our
prayers to his Saints, not formally in this manner, by force, and virtue of his
vision, but only accidentally, then whether it be not by Dicendum quod
essentia diuina non est necessarium speculum, in repraesentando creaturas: imo
voluntarium. Communicate enim effectiue notitiam matutinam. Deus autem est agens
liberu^, respectu omnis actionis ad extra. Aureol. quodli. 10. in sine. p. 107
Non est imagi nandum, sicut multi credunt, quod causa videndi creaturam in
verbo sit, quia verbum est imago, vel idea ipsius; and eodem actu quo videtur
idea, videatur ideatum: sed quia voluntary causat visionem creaturae. Alliac.
1. q. 12. page 184. This is followed by Vasqu. vbi sup. and it necessarily
destroys the ^lasse. See Albertin. Corol. qu. 4. and 5. ex primo princip.
immediate revelation, so far forth, as it please him, by his peculiar will,
to let them see what we pray: as in this life, he reueals sometime, things that
are secret, to his Prophets. It is incredible, and such as cannot be presented
in any reasonable compass of words, how the Divines of the Church of Rome
labor to show these things; and to make every man his own opinion, seem most
reasonable. But to no purpose: for albeit we acknowledge nothing to be
impossible to God, yet it is not lawful to believe any thing, as his will,
which he has not revealed. For we must judge of his will by the Scriptures,
which touching these speculations says never a word: and being in manifest
places appointed to pray in Faith, how shall we pray to them, of whose hearing
us we can have no Faith? For these things thus taught by the Schoolmen,
relish well of man's wit, and learning; but what is there in the word of God to
assure Note the words of a Jesuit. Notandum est, quod est de fide beatos
cognoscere orationes quas ad eos fundimus, sed quod illa^ videant in verbo, non
est certum de fide, sed credo tamen esse probabile. Pesant. 1. part. qu. 12.
page 77.
my conscience they be true?

9 And were not the Church of Rome disposed to subvert the whole order of Gods
worship, and to rob our most gracious Savior of the Glory, which for his
boundles mercy belongs unto him; they would never maintain this invocation,
and mediation of Saints. There being, by their own confession, no Scripture
for it; and the Scripture speaking so graciously of Christ himself, that it
could proceed from none, but the Devil, and Antichrist, thus to make
Saint-mediators: when no creature in heaven, or earth, is so propense to mercy
as himself. See what the Scripture Es. 54.6.
says: The Lord has called thee, being as a woman forsaken, and afflicted in
spirit, and as a young wife when thou wast refused, says thy Ged. For a little
while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee. For a
moment, in mine anger, I hid my face from thee for a little season, but with
everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
For this is unto me, as the waters of Noah: for as I have sworn, that the
waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn, that I would
not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall remove, and
the hills shall fall down: but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither
shall the covenant of my peace, fall away, says the Lord, that has compassion
on thee. Es. 65.24.
Yea before they call, I will answer, and whiles they spoke, I will hear. And
our Savior himself, has told us, Ioh. 16.23.
Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my
name, he will give it you. The Apostle also teaches, that Heb. 2.14.17.
for so much as the children of God, were partakers of flesh, and blood, he
also himself, the Mediator, took part with them, and in all things was made
like to his brethren, that he might be merciful, and a faithful high priest
in things concerning God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of
the people. These promises are such, that it is the greatest ingratitude, and
impiety, that can be to misdoubt them, or, by flying to any other, to euacuate
them. Pet. Crysolog
One man trusts another upon a bond, or bill written in paper, and a few lines
of writing secure the greatest contracts that are, yet the promises of Christ
are still called in question, and men mistrust his mercy: so many books as
there be in the Bible, and so many lines as we have written in the Scripture:
so many assurances we have of his goodness: Every word of the Gospel, and every
Sacrament of the Church, and every drop of his blood shed upon the cross,
being our security to embolden us to come unto him.

10 And whereas the pretense is, Alexan. 4. part. qu. 92. in. ^ art 4. Bonau.
4. d. 45. art. 3. q. 3. n. 46.
that it is for reverence to God, and to show our Humility; that Gratias
agimus, Porphyri, quod libris tuis, Deorum tuorum substa^tiam nobis prodidisti:
didicimus per te, quatenus dij tui hominibus viuentibus serniant. Iul Firmic.
error. prof. rel. c. 14.
like as men seek to the King by the mediation of his servants, so we seek to
God by the mediation of his Saints: This is expressly against the Scripture
alleged, that conclude; our prayers are to be offered immediately to, and by
Christ; and when all things in this life are depraved with sin, it is folly to
make any thing therein the rule, and example of our serving God, Es. 55.8.
whose thoughts, are not our thoughts, and whose ways are far above ours.
Princes do not always understand, who give attendance, and sometime pride, or
state, or business lets them: but it is not so with God. Vopisc. in Aurelia.
paulo ante sinem. p. ^08.
The Emperor Dioclesians speech in Vopiscus, will a little open this matter. He
would say, after he was retired from the Empire, to a private life: That there
was nothing more difficult, then to govern well. Four, or five persons
combine themselves, and take one counsel to deceive the Emperor. He being shup
up at home, knows the truth of nothing, but is constrained to understand that
only which they tell him. Thus the good, and wary Emperor is bought and sold.
This inevitable ignorance in Princes mentioned by Dioclesian, which appertains
not unto God; is reason why we use mediators to them. Let the words of
Chrysostom touching this point, be noted: speaking of the woman of Canaan,
that cried after our Savior to heal her daughter. Mark, Chrysostom. hom. 16.
ex var. in Matthew. Loc. tom. 2.
says he, Page 1193.
the wisdom of the woman, she asks not James, nor beseeches John, nor goes
to Peter, nor minds the company of the Apostels, she seeks no Mediator, but in
steed of them all, she takes repentance into her company, which was instead of
her Advocate, and so she goes to the fountain it self: Therefore says she,
he descended, and therefore he was made man, that I also might have confidence
to speak unto him, Page 1199.
for if thou will entreat man, possible he sleeps, or is not at leisure, or
his servant will vouchsafe thee no answer, but unto God there is need of none
of these things: but wheresoever thou be, or wheresoever thou call upon him,
he hears thee. There is no need either of a porter, or a mediator, or a
Minister, only say, Have mercy on me, and presently, God will be with thee.
Comment. in Romans c. 1.. reuelatur. p. 177.
Tom. 3. p. 1047
Learn of this woman, that praying BY OUR SELVES we more prevail with God,
then when OTHERS pray for us. Saint Ambrose Comment. in Romans c. 1.. Reuelatur.
p. 177.
says. There be, that shaming to heaven neglected God, used this miserable
excuse, that by these they may go to God as by officers we go to the king; but
is any man so mad, or so unmindful of his salvation, as to give the kings
honor to an officer? yet these men think themselves not guilty who give the
honor of Gods name to a creature, and forsaking the Lord, adore their fellow
servants, as though there were any thing besides, that can be reserved to God
For therefore men go to the king by Tribunes, and officers, because the king is
but a man, and knows not to whom, he may commit the state: but for the
promeriting of God, who knows all things, and the deserts of all men, there
needs no helper, but a devout mind and he will answer such a one whenever
he speaks unto him. This holy Fathers judgment was, that God must be sought
to immediately, without the intercession of any, whosoever. And this is it, that
Saint Paul meant in those words to the Colossians. Col. 2.18.
Let no man bear rule over you by humbleness of mind, and worshipping of
Angels: wherein he rebukes the customs of those, (...). Chrysostom. tom. 7. in
Coloss. see Balsam. in co^c. Laod. ca. 35.
which made Angels their intercessors, as Papists do, whose pretense was, that
it was too much arrogancy to pray immediately to God, and therefore it were
the better way to use the intercession of Angels. Thus the Greek Scholiast pa.
697. veron.
expounds it. There were diverse that under the pretense of modesty, forbad
them to go to Christ by themselves, because they were not worthy, but the
Angels must be entreated to bring us to God, saying, (...).
it was a greater matter, then to be brought by our selves through Christ: thus
bringing in the superstitious worship of Angels, whom they never saw: and
Theodoret: On Col. 2. page 766.
They, who brought in the worshipping of Angels, using the pretense of
humility, gave counsel to pray to Angels, saying, that we could neither see,
nor comprehend, nor come to God. And therefore must win us his favor by
means of the Angels; and thereupon he says, that in the Council of Laodicea,
it was ordained, that no man should pray to Angels: and reports, as an abuse
against this text, that there were certain oratories of Michael the Angel,
wherein they used to pray to him. It is worth the marking to observe how
Baronius entertaines Theodoret for this exposition. Bellar. de beatit. sanct.
c. 20. Rhem. Col. 2.18.
Diverse before him labor to give him a favorable construction, but mark how
Baronius takes him up: An. 60. n. 20.
You may see (for it must necessarily be spoken) his words are so full against
our invocation of Angels) Theodoret by his leave, has nothing happily attained
the sense of Paul's words, when in his Commentaries upon this Epistle he says,
these things were written by Paul, because heretics then came in who boasted
that Angels should be worshipped. For who these heretics were, let him say
himself; and being once fallen into an error, he stumbled presently upon a
worse, that he says the Canon of the Laodicen Council is to be understood of
such hererickes, as taught the worship of Angels, and erected an oratory to
Michael the Archangel: too inconsiderately attributing that to heretics,
which of ancient time was done by Catholics.

11 This opinion, of using the mediation of Angels, and Saints departed, arose
from the Gentiles, and specially the followers of Plato, Alcino. de doctri.
Platon. c. 15. page 79. Porphyr. de abstinent. animal. l. 2. page 40. Apul. de
deo Socrat. page 91. August. De ciuit. l. 8. c. 18. 19. and l. 9. c. 9.
whose doctrine it was, that the spirits of men departed, and Angels, employ
themselves in carrying our prayers to God, and therefore it is a good way to
invoke them. Eusebius Praeparat. Euang. l. 12. c. 3. p. 338. graec.
reports the words of Plato: Certainly the souls of the Dead departed have a
certain power, and are careful about the business of men. These things are
true, but the reasons containing them are long: it is the best way therefore to
credit that which others have reported concerning them, the reports being so
manifold, and ancient. The which words of Plato, lac. Ziglir. quem refert.
Chemnit. Iesuitism. page 100.
cited sometime by a Papist, as Eusebius own, to prove the invocation of the
dead, show, not only the affinity of the opinions of the Papists, and
Gentiles, touching this point; but also the foundation whereupon they both
stand: the ancient tradition of their elders. Before I leave the point, I must
according to my professed method, show the confession of some Papists touching
this matter. In 2. Tim. digr. 17. page 118.
Espenceus a Sorbonist: Are they well, and godly brought up, which being
children almost a hundred years old, that is to say, old, and ancient
Christians, do no less attribute to the Saints, and trust in them, then to God
himself, and think God himself harder to be pleased, and entreated then
they. Would God I lied, and there were no such. Consult. page 154.
George Cassander: This false, and pernicious opinion is too well known to
have prevailed, among the vulgar, while wicked men, perseuering in their
naughtiness, are persuaded that only by the intercession of the Saints, whom
they have chose to be their patrons, and worship with cold and profane
ceremonies, they have pardon, and grace prepared them with God: which
pernicious opinion has been confirmed in them, as much as was possible, with
lying miracles. And there is another error that men, not evil of themselves,
have chosen certain Saints, to be their patrones, and keepers, and put
confidence in their merits, and intercession, more then in the merit of
Christ: so far that the only office of Christ's intercession being obscured,
they have substituted into his place the Saints, and specially the Virgin his
mother, etc. In Augu. De ciuit. l. 8. c. 27. page 494.
Lodouicus Viues: There are many Christians, which most an end sin in a good
matter, when they worship Saints both men, and women, no otherwise then they
worship God; and I cannot see, in many, that there is any difference between
the opinion they have of the Saints, and that which the Gentiles had of their
gods.

A. D. The which is more easily seen, Page. 4^.
when as all the intercession which we crave Saints departed, or living men to
make for us, does depend wholly upon Christ's merits, and mediation, and so to
depend, as acknowledged by us, when in the ordinary Collects of the blessed
Virgin and other Saints used by our Church, there is added, per Christum
Dominum nostrum, through Christ our Lord. So that for this part of M. Whites
accusation, I need say no more.
12 This is his second reason, whereby he excuses praying to Saints, and would
make it seem to be nothing against the Mediatorship of our Savior, because
they acknowledge the intercession of Saints to depend upon the merits, and
mediation of Christ, and therefore in their prayers, and Collects to them,
there is added Per Christum Dominum nostru^: Through Jesus Christ our Lord: so
that for this part of M. Whites accusation he need say no more: but this answer
is insufficient. For first, per Christum Dominum nostrum, is added in none of
their prayers, used by their Church, that I alleged; nor in any of that sort,
as will appear to him, that will take the pains to sear^h their Primers, and
Portuisses. That clause being added to prayers made to God, where the merits,
and mediation of a Saint are mentioned therein; but not in such prayers as are
directed to the Saints themselves: for then the abomination were greater, to
make Christ their mediator to a creature. Next the adding of per Christum
Dominum nostrum, has no place in their idolatrous protestations touching the
merits, and excellency of Friar Frauncis, Friar Dominicke, the holy Virgin,
and others; to whom I showed, what monsters of merits they attribute, making
them equal to Christ himself. The which may yet more fully be seen in their
doctrine touching Friar Frauncis, wherein Christ, in all things that are
written in the Gospel of him, is paralleled with him, in his Birth, in the
Prophecies forerunning him, in his life, temptations, Disciples, doctrine,
Miracles, Transfiguration, Passion, Ascension, and what not, as may be seen in
the Book of his Conformities, An. 1590. at Bonony.
lately printed; that we may know the present Church of Rome, and the Pastors
thereof, at this day stand in the same damnable idolatry, which we hoped had
been, but the private superstition of some paltry Friars. That book does
contain the most blasphemies against Christ, that ever did any since Julian,
and Porphyry gave over writing: and I do verily think, that as the Devil
stirred up of old, Philostrat. vita Apolon. Tyanae.
him that writ the like of Apollonius Tyanaeus, thereby to overthrow the
Gospel, by writing a story of a damned Necromancer, that should in all things
match Christ the Son of Marie: so the same Devil set the Friar a work to
write this Conformity, that the merits of Christ might be suppressed, and a
stinking idol set up in his steed: and yet the same is newly set forth, and
at this day by open Henr. Sedul. apologet. pro li. conform. Antuerp. 1607.
Apologies justified. But to leave this Roman Alcoran; what do they talk of
the Virgin Mary's intercession depending on Christ's merits, and mediation, who
in their Videtur quod probabiliter sustiners possit, quod B Virgo, etiam merito
condign^, meru^t esse matter D^i, and filium D^i concepisse Gab. 3. d. 4. q.
vinc. dub. 3. Dico quod B. virgo, art incarnationem, meruit filium Dei
concipere, merito congrui. Bonauab. art. 2. q. 2. So others. Maio. ^. ^. in
fin. Ricard. art. 3. q. 1. Alm. q. 1. dub 3. Marsil. q. 5. art. 3. dub. 3.
concl. 2. and 3. Abulens parad. l. 34. and 38. Of which, some think the merit
to be of congruitie, some of condignitie. They are loath to leave room for pure
Grace in any thing that God does for us.
schools, maintain that she merited, if not the Incarnation it self, yet
that Christ should be made man, and born of her? whereof it follows
necessarily, that there is some merit in her, that is not founded on the merit
of Christ, but went before it, because before he was in cause to merit, she
merited to be his mother. Thirdly, Christ has by his obedience so merited all
things for us, that he has done it solely, immediately, and incommunicably;
which are the three conditions of his merits: and therefore he that but
subordinates the merits of a creature to the merits of Christ, robs him of his
office; in that his merits have no condition to eleuate, or advance the merits
of another, to the making of intercession: and the reason is, because
intercession, being for the pardoning of sin, and obtaining of infinite good,
cannot proceed by any merits, but such as are infinite; which are Christ's
merits alone. And if the Jesuit understand not this, let him know that Christ
is not only robbed of his office by denying his merits, or not using them, but
also by using and applying them otherwise then we ought, and not rightly; which
is done when we believe him to be the root of all merit, but other merits
notwithstanding procure us favor, and reconciliation, and eternal life with
God. Therefore having prayed before, By the merits of all Saints, and the
virgin Mary, forgive me my sin, Per Dominum nostru^ Iesum Christum will not
mend the matter, unless it could be showed us out of Gods word, that Christ
had allowed us so to pray; and that his merits accompany not our prayer to the
end, till they come to God, but stop at the Saint, and there give authority to
his merit to carry them forth to God, and apply his grace unto us. Or if our
Lady have any such authority, yet let it be enquired, whether the same
commission be also extended to her girdle, that Papists pray to in the same
fashion they do to her self: Refert e Lippomann. Jewel repl. page 398.
O blessed girdle, make us inheritors of eternal and blessed life: and keep
our present life from destruction. O pure Girdle of a pure Virgin, preserve
thine heritage, let us have thee to be our strength, and our aid, our wall, and
our defense, our haven, and saving refuge.

CHAP. XIIII.
More touching the worship of Saints. 2. The same words used to Saints that are
to God. 3. The formal reason of worship. 5. The harsh prayers made to Saints,
how excused. 6. Nauarres form of devotion. 7. Counterfets bearing the name of
Fathers. Saint Austins doctrine, to use no Mediator but Christ.

A. D. Only here rests to examine, whether we serve Saints, or the blessed
Virgin her self, Page 41.
in our open service, with the very same service which we give to Christ: which
if M. White could prove us to do really and formally, I would grant unto him,
that it could not (as he says it cannot) be excused from formal Idolatry.
But if M. White, for proof hereof bring (as he brings) only names, titles,
forms of speeches, etc. seeming in sound to be the same which we attribute to
Christ alone, this his proof is not a real and formal proof, but an idle
clamor, and a verbal quarrel. For by the circumstance of our inward meaning,
commonly known, both by our ordinary practice, and public doctrine, it is
evident that we do not, by these names, titles, and forms of speech, attribute
to Saint Francis, or our blessed Lady, or to any Saint, the same service or
worship, which we give to our Savior, but in a far inferior respect, more
or less, according to the more or less inward estimation which we have of
their sanctity, dignity and merit, which we always conceive to be inferior
to, and depending of the sanctity, dignity and merit of our Savior Christ.
Which answer if M. White will not admit for good, but do urge, that because the
outward sound of bare words is the same, therefore the honor and worship is
the same; I must tell him, that he does not understand wherein the formal
reason of honor and worship does consist. For although outward words and
actions be the signs by which we outwardly yield honor and worship: yet the
chief thing, wherein honor and worship do consist, is the inward estimation
and reverence thereupon ensuing, from which these outward signs proceed: which
inward estimation and reverence being wanting, outward signs be mere
mockeries, and not true honor and worship; and the inward estimation and
reverence being present, makes those signs to have in them the nature of true
honor and worship, in such difference of degrees, as the inward estimation and
reverence shall be different, as it may be, and is ordinarily very different,
even when the outward words and actions, by which we express it, are the very
same in substance or similitude. As for example, we honor God when we kneel
to him, and call him Father, and we honor our earthly parent by kneeling in
like manner unto him, and calling him Father: here the words and outward
actions are altogether alike, yet because the inward estimation and reverence
which we have toward God, and which we have toward an earthly parent, even in
this action of kneeling, and in calling them by the same name Father, are far
different. Therefore the honor and worship done to God, and done to our
parent, by this word and action, are very far different.
IN all this passage you see, the Jesuit disclaimes nothing of that I
objected; neither the manner of praying to the blessed Virgin, and the Saints;
nor those idolatrous and lying speeches of Bernardine, Bozius and Galatine,
concerning her; nor the execrable narrations of Biel and his fellow; nor the
verses of Turcelline and Bencius; nor Friar Francis his five wounds of Christ;
but presumptuously takes upon him to justify them: which is that I said in the
Dedication of my book, that the Jesuits were bred in Chrysippus school,
Laert. (...) Chrysipp.
who used to make his boast, that many times he wanted opinions to set abroach,
but if once he had the opinion, he never wanted argument to defend it. And by
this the Reader may perceive, that the Jesuit could not say, but I alleged
the places truly: which if I had not, he would never have fallen to this vile
and wretched shift, whereto now he betakes himself.

2 First he says many times over, that though they use the same words to the
Saints, they do to Christ, yet they do not really and formally give them the
same worship: and so thinks, he has excused his Church from idolatry:
whereof let the Reader judge by that I have said, Cha. 13.
immediately before. Next he answers, that whatsoever titles and forms of
speech they use in their service of the Saints, or Friar Francis, yet their
meaning is not to attribute unto them the same holiness and merits that they
ascribe to Christ, but an inferior, and such as depends upon his holiness and
merits: thus, as all idolaters do, flying from the words to the meaning.
Whereto I answer, that it becomes the true Church of Christ, not only to mean
well, but to speak well; and such therein as will keep the Catholic faith,
must also hold the Catholic form of words. The Apostle 2. Tim. 1.13.
charging Timothy to keep the true pattern of wholesome words, which he had
heard of him. Now let the Reply show any one pattern of these inuocations and
narrations in all the Scriptures. Saint Austin has a golden speech to this
purpose: De ciuit. l. 10 c. 23.
Thus spoke Plotinus as he was able, or rather as he listed. For Philosophers
speak with freedom of words, in the difficultest things that are to
understand; never fearing the offense of religious ears: but it is lawful for
us to speak but after a certain rule, lest the licentiousness of words bring
any wicked opinions as touching the things that are signified thereby. Then I
answer again, that this is but a shift to hide the odiousness of their
blasphemy; for albeit it be granted, that by such words they mean not such
merits and dignity as belongs to Christ, yet they mean more then of right
appertains to any mortal creature. For there is no merit or dignity in any
creature capable of these speeches, or of any other that are used in their
Saint-inuocations: but the least that is meant, is more then belongs to any,
but the Lord Jesus. Thirdly the words alleged, and all other whereof any
question is, if we allow them that immediate grammatical construction that
belongs to all words, can import no less then the same service that is given
to Christ, both really and formally. Let the Jesuit take these for example,
part whereof Pref. of THE WAY. n. 14.
I alleged: H^t secund. chor. August. de commem. B. Virginis.
Rejoice O mother celestial, magnify thy God that made thee singular: thou
would call thy self the handmaid of Jesus Christ; but as Gods law teaches,
thou art his Lady, mistress; for right and reason will the mother be above her
son; therefore pray him humbly, and command him from above that he lead us
to his kingdom at the worlds end --. Thou alone without example art she whom
God has chosen to be the Mediator of God and men, the repairer of the world,
the end of our exile, the washing away of our sin, the ladder of heaven, the
gate of Paradise. Such idolatry as this, were fitter to be purged with an
humble confession, then to be excufed with these vain distinctions.

3 But M. White, he says, understands not wherein the formal reason of
worship does consist. But he tells him, the inward estimation of the mind is
it. Words as prayers, and actions as adoring with the body, be signs whereby
this worship is outwardly yielded, and therefore they follow the inward
estimation of the mind, and import no more then he means that uses them: and
therefore though we use the same words and actions to creatures, that we do to
God, yet meaning them in one sense to the creature, and in another to God, this
is no idolatry. This is the full sum of his barbarous and confused
discourse: but I answer again, that thus all idolaters in the world may excuse
themselves in the worship of their idols; for when the Jew to his calfe, and
the Gentile to his image bended the knee, and called it God, they did not
esteem it in that degree that they did God himself, but only gave it an
inferior honor, such as they thought an image capable of; and when they were
put to it, would answer as the Reply does; For they did not think their idols
to be God, but resemblances of the true God. Athenag. Leg. page 20. Dio
Chrysostom. p. 145 Peers. de tradit page 225. Andr. orthod. expl. page 289. and
294 Act. 17.23.
though the word or action were one, yet the honor was far different: but as
I would answer them, so I do the Jesuit, that the inward estimation and
opinion of the mind, determining the said words, prayers, and gestures, to such
an inferior worship, as is mentioned, does not remove the reason of idolatry
thereby from the said words and prayers; because such as it is, it remains
divine worship attributed to a creature. For all religious invocation of a
creature, in what opinion soever, is divine adoration, and a part of Gods
proper worship. Besides, our meaning and intention, limiting our words, cannot
dispense with the commandment, that forbids the using of Abusus ille
reprehensibilis est, si praedicara quae secundum vsum ecclesiae, s^li Deo
Patri, and Mediatori, Christo, attribuuntur; vt, Omnipotens, Saluator, etc.
etiam Sanctis applicantur. Henr. de Hass. quem refert and sequitur Gabr. Lect.
32. lit. 2.
such words to a creature, with any meaning whatsoever. For Christ teaching us
how to pray, bids us pray, Our Father which art in heaven, Forgive us our
trespasses. Deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, the power, and
the glory. We must pray to such a one as is our Father, which is in heaven,
etc. this is a commandment: and Romans 10. How shall they call upon him, in whom
they have not believed? This is the doctrine of Saint Paul: which commandment
and doctrine are violated as well when we pray to a Saint with estimation that
he is but an intercessor through Christ's merits, as when we call upon him with
an opinion that he can help us without them. The reason is, because the
commandment and doctrine of the Scripture, ties us to God alone; which being
transgressed, there is the real and formal reason of superstition, whatsoever
the opinion and intent of the mind be.

4 But the Jesuit replies, that like as we kneel to God, and call him our
Father, so do we the same things to our earthly parents, and yet the honor we
give them hereby, is far different from that we yield to God: therefore we
may use the same inuocations and words to the Saints, that we do to God, when
the mind acknowledges not that excellency in them, that it does in him; as
children use the same kneeling and words to their fathers, they do to God. I
answer two things: first, granting that words and outward gestures are
qualified and conditioned by the meaning of him that uses them, as he that
called the Prophet, 2. Reg. 2.12. and 13.14.
my Father, my Father, meant not that hie degree of Honor, that he did when he
called God his Father: and therefore I will not deny, but Papists, using these
inuocations mentioned to the Saints, may mean them otherwise then they do to
God, as for example calling the virgin Mary their Advocate, their Hope, their
Savior, they may mean she is so, not of her self, but under Christ, and not
principally by her own merits, but subordinarily by the merits, and grace of
her Son. This I will easily grant, may be the meaning of their words: but
then I answer secondly, that it does not follow, that therefore we may, with
such reservation of our meaning, in the same words invoke, and worship the
Saints departed: first because the said invocation is divine honor, from what
mind soever it proceed; whether the Saint be called upon as the supreme and
eternal beginning, or whether only as the friend of God, that by reason of his
nearness to him, can sooner entreat him then my self. If he be inuocated
with the titles of Advocate, Savior, Redeemer; though the intent be but only
to use him as a friend to entreat, yet this is divine honor, belonging to
Jesus Christ. For all prayer is divine honor, and such titles as are given
them in their worship, (Mediator, Hope, Advocate, Confidence, Savior,
Redeemer, Lady, Queen of heaven, etc.) exceed the measure of all civil
reverence and adoration whatsoever, and therefore are not like the calling of
our earthly parent father, or kneeling to him. Secondly the worshipping of a
creature, is idolatry, though he that worship it acknowledge it to be but a
creature, and subordinate to God a thousand times: because the commandment is,
Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve. When the
devil tempted our Savior to fall down before him, he did not require him to
persuade himself that he was Jehovah, or that he had those things of himself;
for he confessed unto him, Luc. 4.6.
he had received them: but only that he would kneel unto him, and accept
those things at his hands. And our Savior refused it, not only because he was
the devil, but also because the commandment forbids the giving divine honor
to a creature, with any opinion, estimation, or judgment whatsoever. Apoc.
19.10. and 22.8.
When S. John would have fallen down and worshipped the Angel, he was not so
ignorant or stupid, as to think he was God, or to intend him that highest
honor that belongs to God, but only by that office he would present his love
to the Angel, and possible procure some favor at his hand: yet the Angel
forbad him, by a reason that proceeds unanswerably against the invocation of
all Saints: See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy
brethren, which have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God. For it is a general
rule in the Scripture, that no creature may, with any estimation, be worshipped
with divine honor.

A.D. If M. White insist and urge, Page 43.
that outward words and actions are signs of inward meaning, therefore where
words and outward actions are the same toward Christ, and toward his Saints,
at least ignorant people have cause given them to think we have the same
inward meaning, and so by our example are encouraged to commit formal
idolatry: I answer, that inward meaning is indeed gathered by outward words
and actions ordinarily, but not always, nor ordinarily by the bare outward
show of the action, or by that precise sound of one or other word or sentence,
but by the whole connection and circumstance of the matter and person, about
which the speech and action is, and by the presupposed and known conceit of
the party which speaks the said words, or does the action. Now although in
some of our prayers, one or other word or sentence may seem harsh, as it is
considered precisely in the outward sound, especially to those that are not
acquainted with the like (as also to those who never had seen men kneel to any
but to God himself, nor to call any Father besides him, it would seem very
harsh to see one kneel to his earthly parent, and to call him Father:) yet
when we consider the whole connection of the words of our prayers, having
respect also to the different circumstances of the persons, and matters spoken
of, and to the commonly known conceit of the speaker, the sense of our prayers
are found neither to be idolatrous, nor superstitious, nor scandalous: none
being ordinarily among us so simple, or ill instructed, but they know that
there is a different inward conceit, and more estimation had, and reverence
done, when the words are applied to our Savior Christ being God and man, then
when they are applied to Saints, who are known to be not Gods, but only men.
5 That which the Jesuit still assumes for his defense, is still false. He
presumes that intending their prayers to the Saints, no otherwise then they do,
they are lawful. And as long as God is confessed to be the first beginning of
mercy and goodness, and Christ the Mediator of redemption, and the Saints no
more but advocates and friends to present our prayers, all is well; and those
Saints may be inuocated, as they are: but the answer is, that even this kind of
invocation, with no further opinion touching them, is unlawful, as I have
showed. And let the Reader always remember, that it is Mat 6.9. Luc 11.1. Nam
qua^libet alia veil a dicamus -- nihil aliud dicimus qua^ quod in ista Dominica
oratione positum est, si recte and congruenter oramus. Quisquis aute^ id dicit
quod ad istam prece^pertinere non possit, etiamsi non illicite orat, carnaliter
orat, etc. Aug. op 121. c. 12. Neque ensm propria tantu^ orationis officia
complexa cit, venerationem Dei, aut hominis petitionem; sed om nem pene
sermone^ Domini, omnem commemoratione^ disciplinae: ^t ^^^era in oratione,
Breuiarium totius Euangelij comprehendatur. Tertul. de orat. c, 1.
no lawful prayer that is not according to Christ's rule. When ye pray, do it
after this manner: Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Let your prayers be made
to him that you may say is your Father that is in heaven: who forgiues us our
sins: and to whom belongs the kingdom, and power, and glory for ever.

6 But that which he chiefly intends in this place, is to excuse the harshnesse
and scandalousnesse of the words of their prayers: albeit if a man should view
them well, he might marvel what excuse could be devised for them. Yet the
Reply, not only excuses them, that they must not be measured by their sound,
and outward show, but by the circumstance of the matter, the conceit of him
that uses them, the doctrine of their church, and I know not what: but also
denies them to be so much as scandalous to the ignorant people, that know none
of these things. And he adds, that there is none ordinarily among them so
simple, but they know the right meaning. This latter is a gross untruth. For
if I should report what I have heard and seen, and what all the world knows,
touching the opinion, that the vulgar sort of Papists have of the Saints; he
would but fall a railing, and face me out of my own knowledge: though it be
true, that of God, and the Church, and his office, they have no knowledge, but
in all things talk of the Saints. Who is such a stranger in that country,
that knows not the opinion that is of our Lady, S. Anthony, S. Loy, S.
Peter? to whom they pray at all assayes, that can say never a word of Jesus
Christ: or if they can, yet think he stands at their devotion, specially his
mothers, no less then many of themselves stand at the devotion of the Priest.
Espenceus 2. Tim. Digr. 17. page 128.
says, that now adays so well are they taught, old folk there be that trusts
in Saints, and ascribe no less to them then to God himself; and think it an
easier thing to entreat one of them, then him. And he wishes he might be found
a liar, and that there were no such. So that we see the Reply excuses that
which his Masters in Israel cannot deny. But what is it, that these men will
not excuse? What hope is there, of any truth or modesty from them, that will
excuse these things? We had sometime a merry jest, of a silly Priest, that
used to say his prayers thus: Pater noster, Aue Maria: that is for thee S.
Peter. Pater noster, Aue Maria: that is for thee S. Barbary. Pater noster, Aue
Maria: that is for thee S. Rook: and so forward, till he had told every Saint
his prayer. This man's devotion is highly commended by Enchirid. de orat. c. 18.
n. 32. page 307.
Navarre: who being himself old enough to have had more wit; for he says, he
was 85 years old when he used it, Miscel. de orat. page 68.
made this his order of prayer: A strange kind of devotion: but permitted to
none till he came to the years of dotage.
with his mind fixed upon the virgin Marie, to say ten Pater nosters, and an
Aue: and at the end of the first ten; the virgin Marie, and all Angels,
Archangels, Principalities, and Thrones, Cherubins and Seraphins, bless me ten
thousand times: at the end of the second ten; the glorious virgin Marie, Adam
and Eve, Elias and Enoch, all Patriarchs, Prophets and Innocents, bless me
twenty thousand times. At the third ten: The glorious Virgin, Peter and Paul,
and all the Apostles, John, and all the Evangelists, Stephen, and all our Lords
Disciples, Sebastian, and all Martyrs, bless me thirty thousand times. At the
fourth ten: All holy Confessors, Syluester, Gregory, Ambrose, Austine,
Hierome, Isodore, Martin, Nicolas, Bennet, Bernard, Dominicke, Francis, and all
Bishops, Doctors, Monks, Heremits, Virgins, Widows, and Married, bless me
forty thousand times. At the last ten, thus: The glorious Virgin, and Anne her
mother, both the Mary's her sisters, Magdalen, Martha, Marcella, and all her
friends and servants, Agnes, Cicelia, Agathie, Lucie, Catharine, and all other,
bless me fifty thousand times. What man is he, that would not rejoice, and
count it his chiefest happiness, that he is come out from among these men,
where idolatry has besotted them, not only to blasphemy and atheism, but
to very dotage and ridiculousnesse, that with their prayers and devotions, they
begin to resemble the common picture of the Apes vntrussing the pedlers
pack? and forgetting the sweet mediation of him, that Heb. 2.17.
in all things became like us, for this very purpose that he might be
merciful, and a faithful high Priest in all things concerning God, and that
he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people; do thus renounce
him, and fly to the thousands and ten thousands of those, who if they saw this
idolatry toward them, would hate and detest it, and all that speak for it.

Page 44.
A. D. If this answer will not stop M. Whites mouth, but that he will
continue in his exclamation, that it is impossible to excuse this kind of
praying from formal idolatry, wherein the same titles are given to the
Saints, and the same things, by the same merits asked of them, that appertain
to Christ alone: I ask him, how he will excuse Saint Augustine from formal
idolatry, Aug. sermon. 18. de Sanctis.
who in his second Sermon of the Annunciation, has these formal words: The
Mother of our kind brought punishment into the world, the Mother of our Lord
brought health or salvation into the world. Eve was auctrix of death: Marie is
auctrix of merit. Eve did hurt by killing: Marie did help by quickening, etc.
Afterward turning his speech to the blessed Virgin her self, he says, O
blessed Marie, who is able to render unto thee due thanks and praises, who by
thy singular assent have succored the world that was lost. And again: Adm^t
(says he) our prayers into the sacrarie of thy hearing, and bring back unto
us the Preservative of reconciliation. And yet more: Receive (says he) that
which we offer: grant that which we ask: excuse that which we fear, because
thou art the These words in outward sound seem harsh: yet we are not to doubt,
but Saint Augustine had a pious meaning in them, (as that she was the only hope
under Christ, or some such like) which pious meaning being admitted in S.
Augustines words, why may it not also be admitted in the words of our prayers,
which to Protestants seem harsh?
only hope of sinners. By thee we hope for pardon of our sins, and in thee
(O most blessed) is the expectation of our rewards. Holy Marie, succor the
miserable, help the faint-hearted, etc. If M. White can with a pious
explication excuse these words of Saint Augustine from formal idolatry,
superstition and scandal, then he must not marvel if our prayers also be in
like manner excused. But if he will for these words condemn Saint Augustine,
we must not marvel if he also condemn us: yet our comfort will be, that as
his condemnation cannot discredit Saint Augustine; so neither shall it be
able, in the judgment of discreet men, to discredit us.
7 These are See Kemnit. exam. council. page 646. edit. Frankf. 1609. The
Papists themselves are uncertain who was the author of the Sermon wherein they
are. Erasm. and the Divines of Louan in their editions of Austin. Rhem, annot.
in Act. 1.14. Baron. notat. in Martyrolog. Mart. 25. It is certain that
neither Austin nor Fulgentius was author, because in their time the feast of
the Annunciation was not holden, nor long after. See Council. Mogunt. l. c. 36.
apud Binn. tom. 3. page 466. an ordinary thing to father bastard writings on
the ancient Doctors. Sixth. Senens. biblioth. page 320. and therefore our
adversaries should not ground themselves on such writings, if they were
desirous of nothing but the truth.
not the words of Saint Austin, but as it is supposed one Fulbert, a
superstitious Frenchman, that lived He died Ann. 1028.
above a thousand years after Christ; whose sermon containing this prayer, is
clapped into Saint Augustines works, by those that with his name would give
authority to their own conceits. This man Baron. an. ^028.
was our Ladies Chaplen, and as they say, was much devoted to her service, and
writ a book in her commendations; and, if the Legend lie not, found the favor
to suck her breast; and therefore had reason to speak her fair, and do her
service: but yet in the mean time, the Jesuit plays falsehood in fellowship,
in offering his words under the name of Austine; yea, seven times over, to
advance them with his name: when Saint Austin was far from that idolatry,
and Saint Austins time; but spoke in another fashion. Confess. l. 10. c. 42.
Whom might I find O God, to reconcile me to thee? should I have gone to the
Angels? with what prayers? with what Sacrament? Many endeavoring to return
unto thee, and as I hear, not able to do it of themselves, have fallen into
the desire of curious visions, and made themselves worthy to be deluded: cap.
43.
but the true Mediator, whom thy secret mercy has made known to the humble,
is Jesus Christ, the Mediator of God and men. These words are far from that
which is here alleged under his name: and possibly the Reply noting in the
margent some harshnesse to be in them, that needs a pious meaning, alleged
them against his conscience, and was contented to use any base cosenage, to set
some antiquity and authority upon his idolatry: but let him set his heart at
rest, neither the holy Virgin, nor any Saint or Angel, in those days were
inuocated, as now the Church of Rome uses. Some private men began to hammer
such a thing, and the Fathers now and then were ventring at it (for 2 Thessalonians.
2.7.
the mystery of iniquity began to work in the Apostles time) with guesses,
surmises, and Rhetoric; but nothing was done certainly, or taught resolutely
this way. Nicephorus Hist. eccl. l. 15 c. 28. sub fin.
writes, that one Peter Fuller (who was a schismatic Bishop of Antioch,
almost five hundred yeates after Christ) invented the invocation of our Lady,
that she should be named in all prayer; contrary to the doctrine of the Church,
reported by page 447. graec
Epiphanius: The body of Marie was holy, (...).
but it was not God: and she was a glorious virgin, but not given us to
worship, but her self worshipped him that took flesh of her, etc. Which words
of Epiphanius plainly show, that the Church of Rome commits the same idolatry
with the blessed virgin, by worshipping and inuocating her, that those
heretics did against whom he writes; and therefore he that condemns them
for it, condemns not Saint Austin, but a wicked heresy, that has forged and
coined many things under many men's names, to win credit to it self.

CHAP. XV.
1. The Jesuits insolency censured. 2. Note books. 3. A relation showing how
the Jesuits train up their Nouices to dispute. 4. The doctrine of the
Jesuits touching formal lies, and equivocation. 5. The Repliers motion to
Protestant Ministers answered.

A. D. I might now (as if need be hereafter I shall) go forward in this my
examination of M. Whites untruths: Page 45.
but I hope it shall not be needful at this time to dig any deeper into this
unsavory dunghill, since by this which is already set down, I suppose the
Reader has had a sufficient taste of the man's talent in this kind of
insincere writing, which may worthily make him suspect every thing that he
shall say against us, or rather may make him Ioath and abhor, for his sake,
to read any English Protestant writers of controversies, especially when (as
appears by M. Walsinghams The title of this book, is a Search made into
matters of Religion by Fr ncis Walsingham Deaco^ of the Protestant Church,
before his change to the Catholic. Jn which is showed (among other things
worthy of note) the falsities of M. Calvin, M. Jewel, M. Io Fox, M. Calfehil,
M. Dove, M Mer. Hanmer, M. Will. Chark, M. Will. Perkins M. Morton, M. Math.
Sutcliffe, M. Willet, M. Bell, M. Rogers, Sir Philip Mornay, and others.
book) so many other of their own principal writers (out of whose books,
this and other petty Ministers do as it seems, take their Note-bookes, with
which they furnish their discourses) are found guilty of many gross untruths,
very ill beseeming such as take upon them to be Professors, and especially
Ministers of the simple Truth. Verily my self have sometime marvelled how it
could come to pass, that Protestant writers should so often, and so grossly
be taken tripping in this kind; and hereupon have sometime discoursed with my
self what might be the cause, being willing in mine own thoughts to see if I
could find out a just excusing cause. But having considered the case, although
I was willing on the one side to imagine the best, to wit, that many of their
errors might be excused in some sort by oversight of wit, pen, or print, or
that some of the persons might be less blamed, having in simplicity received
their errors from other their brethrens Note books, or printed books, not
having perhaps heard how false and insincere these their books and Note-bookes
are commonly sound: yet on the other side, I could not excuse all, because I
saw such store of palpable and inexcusable errors objected by our authors
against Protestant writers, which were all so insufficiently defended by
themselves against our authors, that I could not deem them to have proceeded
from simplicity or oversight, in regard I thought it not likely that men of
their wit, learning, and reading, should not see, or suspect at least, that
these things which they writ were false, and consequently formal lies,
proceeding from, either wilful malice, or gross negligence: which made me
muse, with what conscience, men of their quality, could publish in print such
palpable and pernicious untruths, tending to the seducing of souls, and
matters of religion, and faith.
1 IVstin Martyr Ad Zen. and Seren. page 389.
says, It is time for a man to hold his peace, (...).
when his adversary begins to shout: and I confess, this bragging and
impudency amazes me, that I know not whether I should more abhor him for it,
or vpbraid his followers, that content themselves with such Masters. For what
one point of untruth or vnsinceritie has he showed? what one thing has he
performed worthy of this bragging? that neither had the wit to answer the
whole, nor the fortune to find so much as the least error in any part of that I
writ? yet you see how he comes upon the stage Just. Mart. ib. page 392.
like Orestes, with terrible gesture, his body bombasted, upon high stilts,
with a monstrous face, and roaring voice: not that he hopes hereby to fasten
any imputation upon me, but because this is the art of these men, with words
and boasting to outface their adversaries, and their policy to keep the
vulgar sort of Papists in bondage to Romish drudgerie. For the same Justin
Ibid. page 390
says, clamorous and wording companions (...).
seem admirable to some, whose sloth and carelessness to look into things,
makes them admire other men's loud boasting.

2 For what he has discovered in my writing, will appear of it self, without
this facing and scurrilitie: and I wish with all my heart, that my self, by
that which he has objected against me; and other our writers, by that which
Walsingham has noted in them, might be censured: then should the Reader see,
if he would take the pains to make the trial, as well by our answers, as
their quarrels: this Walsingham to be the man that has prostituted and set
himself to sale, to lie, dissemble and calumniate; and the Jesuit that thus
mentions him, to be a poor Empericke, that has more skill in shriuing, then
booking and disputing. And whereas he says twice over, that I and other petty
Ministers, in simplicity furnish our discourses out of other men's Note-books;
which is the cause why we are so often and grossly taken napping: let him spet,
and speak out, who acquainted him with my reading, that he can tell so well
whence I have that I write? what one place has he showed in all my writing, to
be mistaken by borrowing it from others Note-bookes? What material quotation
is there, but I have so marked it, that he may see I read it in the Author
himself? Although I will not only not deny, but freely congratulate my self,
that I have learned and increased the little knowledge I have, by reading and
using the writings of those, whose books I am not worthy to bear. And if
either I, or any other, had taken any thing out of Calvin, B. Jewel, or M.
Fox, yet might the Jesuit ill vpbraid us with it, who himself translated his
whole Treatise that I answered, from Greg. of Valence his Analysis fidei. All
his introduction, containing a fourth part of his Reply, out of the same man's
tract, de obiecto fidei. His discourse of Predestination, containing ten pages
together, verbatim, out of Becanus. His Appendix, containing another fourth
part of his Reply, partly out of Gregory Valence, and partly out of Stapleton.
The Catalogue being borrowed from Canisius. Besides his continual referring
himself to Walsingham, Briarly, and Coccius. So that he, that so magisterially
censures our reading, himself has stolen the whole carcass of his very book,
wherein he writes this. Besides, let him give a sufficient reason, why it
should not be lawful for us to use and follow, the learned Divines of our
Church, as well as it is for a Papist to follow his Thomas, his Robert, his
Stapleton, his Gretser, his Coccius, his Aius Locutius. The which until he can
do, he shall give us leave to think as well of them, as they do of these,
though we sound not their praises so loud.

3 And yet this conceit of using Note-bookes satisfies him not neither: for
though other men's books might deceive us in some things, yet he sees, at least,
some wit, learning and reading in us; which makes him fall a musing. But to put
him out of his brown study, be it known unto him, and all of his mind, that
we follow our cause and religion with knowledge, and peace, and a good
conscience; and write that we know, and are able to defend against all this
barking, and shameless brags of their own learning: and our grounds are Gods
word contained in the Scripture; and the certain consent of the Church in all
ages: and that which makes us the more resolute, is the loathsome carriage and
behavior of our adversaries, who notwithstanding, with all their endeavor,
cannot remove our grounds in one question. But with forgerie, partiality,
tyranny, railing and bragging, deal against us; which being the weapons of
darkness, and desperation, we detest and loathe: daily praying to Jesus
Christ, that he will hasten his coming, and let it appear who they be that
have the truth, when the malice of men, and the pride of Antichrist thus
suppress it in darkness.

Page 46.
A.D. Among us it is held against good conscience to tell any formal lie, in
whatsoever matter, although without harm of any, although by the speaker
intended for the glory of God, or the good of never so many. But it seems not
so to be thought, by (at least) some of the Protestant writers: nay it seems
rather, that they either have no conscience, or a very large conscience, and
that they either seldom or never enter into consideration what may or may not
stand with conscience, or that they frame in themselves such a gross
conscience, as I have read of some Ministers of In Apol. Eudaemon Johannis pro
Henr. Garnet. c. 2 See also Bolseck in vita Calumi. c. 20.
Geneua, who held it lawful to lie for the glory of God, and for the
advancement of the Gospel: conformably to which, is D. B. in his answer to M.
Abbot.
reported also, that one of our English Ministers, not many years since (being
told that gross untruths were found in the book of a late Protestant writer)
answered, He cannot lie too much in this cause. O wretched cause, which needs
to be maintained by such wicked means! If it were the truth, and especially
(as some Protestants profess it to be) the evident truth, there should be no
need to defend it with lies: neither indeed whatsoever it be, ought it in
conscience or credit, be defended, especially with such gross lies, as
sometimes it is. Wherefore if Protestant writers do think their cause true and
good, and thereupon in zeal will needs maintain it, I would advise them for the
time to come, to be more careful of truth in maintaining it, then hitherto
diverse of them have been, both for conscience and credit sake, and as they
desire to avoid sin and shame.
This passage of the Jesuit, and the continual insolency that he uses
through his Reply, makes me remember the relation of Relat. of the state of
relig.
a noble gentleman, concerning the education of the Jesuits: which being fit
for this place I will here set down. The Jesuits plant in their Scholars with
great exactnes, and skill, the roots of their Religion, and nourish them with
an extreme hatred, and detestation of the adverse party. And to make them for
ever intractable to any contrary persuasion, they work into them by great
cunning, and obstinacy of mind, and sturdie eagrenesse of spirit, to affect
victory with all violence of wit in all their controversies -- And (presuming
perhaps of the truth before hand, and laboring no other thing, than the
advancing of the party) they endeavor (as I said) by all means to imbreede
that fierceness, and obstinacy in their Scholars, as to make them hot
prosecuters of their own opinions, impatient, and intractable of any contrary
considerations, as having their eyes fixed upon nothing, but only victory in
arguing; for which cause (to strengthen in them those passions by exercise) I
have seen them in their bare Grammatical disputations, inflame their Scholars
with such earnestnes, and fierceness, as to seem to be at the point of flying
each into others face, to the amazement of those strangers, which had never
seen the like before, but to their own great content and glory, as appeared.
This being noted, now read the Reply again: and behold a Jesuit whose
profession, and practice is to equivocate, to forswear, to purge books, to
raze, counterfeit, forge, belie all antiquity: to live, and breathe by devising
shifts, and tricks to uphold their state: now complaining of want of truth:
That the Protestants defend their cause with lying against their conscience.
Which might with more probability, and less grudging on our part, have been
said, if himself had not been a Mas Priest, or if in all his Reply he had
discovered but one thing written either against conscience, or against the
truth, or against all the learned in his own Church: but when he cannot
present the Reader with one conclusion, one doctrine, one quotation, one line,
or letter to make him really see, wherein I have failed; all this is but a
small furniture of brags to small purpose, and I despise it.

4 And whereas he says, among Jesuits, and Papists it is held against good
conscience to tell any formal lie in any matter, etc: he belies his own
knowledge, save that when they are showed to be the archlyars of the world, by
equiuocating, and forging, they will answer, they are no formal lies. But if
lying be Mendacium est falsa significatio vocis cu^ voluntate fallendi. Gelas.
22. q. 2. Beatus. ille mentitur qui aliud habet in animo, and aliud verbis, vel
quibuslibet significationibus, enuntiat. Augustine. de mendac. c. 3. tom. 4.
speaking contrary to the truth, with purpose to deceive, the doctrine of
equivocation, so stiffly maintained, will prove them liars both formal, and
real: wherein how far this generation has waded, the affairs of our state,
in our time, have made known to women, and children. But if the lie be free
from evil intent, as an officious, or a merry lie (and Papists can define the
foulest lies that are to be such, for a vantage) then Rosell. Armil. Angel Sa.
v. Mendacium. vocabul. theolog. v. Mendac Tolet. de sept pecc. page 930. Llam
sum. page 615.
the schools allow it well enough, and think it, at most, but a venial. But
Caietan 22. Tho qu. 110. art. 2.
says, He that without purpose of hurt tells a pernicious lie, though he tell
a formal lie, yet he does not formally lie, pernitiously: nor sin mortally:
unless peradventure it be by accident: yet the Jesuit you see says otherwise:
that with us it is held (which know not the doctrine of the Thomists) against
good conscience to tell a formal lie (not in a hurtful matter only) but in
any whatsoever: and so lays it upon the Ministers of Geneua, and England:
alleging Eudemons Apology for Garnet, the father of lies: and Bolseck that
deboisht Apostata, to prove it against them of Geneua, and D. B. a Seminary
Priest, to prove it against an English Minister: but for so much as these men
are all Papists, and in such credit with the Jesuit, let D. Bishop, who is one
of them, make my answer: D. Bish. repr. of D. Abb. def. page 120.
Any man not past all care of his reputation, would be ashamed to cite such
late partial writers for sufficient witnesses in matters of controversy,
wherein themselves were parties. And that he says, of Illyricus and Bale, two
Protestants, when they were alleged against him, the same I return upon these
three: P. 183.
They are heretical, and lying companions, and therefore no sufficient
witnesses: P. 249.
No great regard is to be had, what such lying, lewd fellows relate: and so I
think them worthy of no other answer: by D. B. own rule therefore these,
being our adversaries, are no competent witnesses: and it was but the poor
Jesuits ill hap to light on them, when the first, and principal, is a Creet
by birth, of that nation (...), Tit. 1.12. Callimach. hymn. in lou.
that breeds liars; and writ his book alleged, in defense of him, that was
the fowlest liar, and formallest equiuocator, that ever lived. See Casaub. ep.
ad Fronto. p. 116. and inde.
This man, whom Eudemon defends, (having with grievous protestations, and upon
his Salvation denied many truths: and notoriously his conference with Hall,
the Priest in the Tower:) when afterward he was demanded why he would do so; in
a paper he wrote, and subscribed these words: This I acknowledge to be
according to mine opinion, and the opinion of all the Schoolmen; and our
reason is, for that in causes of lawful equivocation, the speech by
equivocation being saved from a lie, the same speech may be without perjury
confirmed by oath, or by any other way, though it were by receiving the
Sacrament, if just necessity so require. HENRY GARNET. Thus to quit themselves
from lying, and to lay the imputation upon others, the Jesuit has no other
shift, but to quote a lying Creet in defense of an equiuocating traitor: whose
hateful names, he would not have suffered to have appeared in his margent, to
such a purpose, had he well digested, what they were, and what they writ: and
were he not one of those that loves Garnets treason, and Eudemons defense of
it, better then we yet know of, he would have used other witnesses.

A. D. But if they know in their conscience (as perhaps some of them do) their
cause to be false, and bad, Page 47.
then I counsel them quite to abandone it, without delay, and no way, in word,
or writing to maintain it, especially by offering untruths in defense of it;
in regard such men ought to know, that to persist in a known bad cause, and to
maintain it by such a known bad means, cannot but greatly increase both sin,
and shame, and will without repentance, bring upon them certain, and double
damnation. Lastly, if any of them have such seared consciences that they make
no conscience, but think they may with a safe conscience persist in
maintaining the Protestants cause, after they know it to be false, and bad,
under pretense of advancing the Gospel, or the glory of God, especially if
they think, that they may lawfully maintain it by writing apparent, and
known untruths, the better to defend it: If I say, there be any Protestant
writers, of such seared consciences, I would wish they would plainly tell us
this their minds, that so those poor souls, who have been hitherto seduced,
may the better see how unsound the Potestant Religion is, which cannot be
maintained, but with apparent untruths, uttered by their writers, either
without due care of conscience, or against their knowledge and conscience, or
with having such bad consciences, as to think it lawful to lie in this their
cause, pretended by them to be for the advancement of Gods glory, and of the
Gospel: or which is all one, or worse, to think one cannot lie too much in
defense of this their Protestant cause, or Gospel.
5 This is a poor motion, and proceeds from no great conceit, yet I will
satisfy it, upon condition he will rest satisfied with my answer: Let this
content you, and bear not your selves in hand to the contrary: we know our
cause to be Gods own truth: which you have corrupted with innumerable heresies
patched thereunto; and we not only defend it, as we do, with a good conscience
against you; but we would think it our greatest happiness, if the cause should
so require, to shed our blood in defense of it: and it joys our hearts, to see
the weapons wherewith you fight against us: lying, railing, pride, rage,
treason, sedition, fire, and powder, which is a sign that you are not of God:
and this our cause we will maintain with zeal, and synceritie: which shall be
tried not by your calumnies, but by the thing it self. And I am so far from
sedu^ing any, that I would give my life, for the reclaiming of those, whom you
have seduced, and bewitched, with mere cozenage, and impostures. And as I hate
lying to defend Gods truth, so can I not but vpbraide them, that run headily
into Papistry before they know how things stand between us; when upon just
trial, it will fall out, that in the maine question, between the Church of
Rome, and us, our adversaries uphold themselves with mere imposture.

To the Reader.
HItherto reaches that which my Adversary has written against the Epistle, and
Preface of my book: now in the next place, before he fall to replying upon the
book it self, he inserts an Introduction, as he calls it, containing a
Declaration of the word Faith: the which bebeginnes page 49. where his
exceptions to the said Preface, and epistle end. And forasmuch as it is a new
discourse, intended, Since I see M. A Wotton to be either of so dull capacity
of wit that he cannot conceive; or rather of so captious disposition of will,
that he will needs doubt and make a question (what I meant by the word faith)
I have thought good not only to declare what I meant by the word, but also by
this action, to set down certain points of doctrine pertaining to the thing
signified by the word. page 49. of his Reply.
as it should seem, against M. Wotton: and is no Reply to me, but a
superfluous, and impertinent collection rudely, and obscurely peeced together
for the outfacing of that, which he was not able formally to answer: I would
therefore cast away no time, in meddling with it, but only defend my self
against such places thereof, as touch my Book, because I will not be in his
debt for a word. Those places only I have here set down in order, as they lie
in his Discourse, with my Answer to them.

CHAP. XVI.
Touching assurance of Grace, and Believing a man's own salvation. 1.
Perfection of the Scripture, and necessity of the Church Ministry. 2. 3. How
the justified conclude their salvation from the Scripture. 4. The justified
have the assurance of faith. This is declared. Full assurance void of doubting
taught by the most in the Church of Rome. 5. Touching Perseverance.

A. D. Now that it does not at all appertain to that kind of verities, Page 57.
which are to be believed by faith, I prove out of the Protestants own
Principles, to wit, that That this proof must be, by necessary consequence,
without all authority of the Church, is insinuated -- by White. page 46:
nothing is to be believed by faith, but what is expressly set down in
Scripture, or so contained, that (without all Church authority) it may be
(evidently, and by good consequence) proved out of Scripture. But the promise
of Gods special mercy, applied absolutely, and in particular to Luther,
Calvin, etc. is neither expressed, nor in manner aforesaid contained in
Scripture. Therefore it is not a verity, to be believed by faith by the
Protestants own Principles.
1 IN this Chapter where these words lie, he discourses of the object of faith,
and inquires what the things are which belong to it, and must be believed; to
no purpose intruding himself upon an impertinent question touching the belief
of a man's own salvation: and in this period he affirms, that it is against
the Protestants own Principles to believe it: Because by their Principles,
nothing may be believed, but what is set down in Scripture; either expressly,
or by good consequence; which the salvation, or remission of sins to Luther,
Calvin, White, or any particular man, is not. And to show this to be our
Principle, he says in the margent, that M. White in such a place, insinuats,
that nothing may be received, as a point of faith, unless it can be proved by
necessary consequence of Scripture without all authority of the Church:
meaning, as I suppose, that I require no Church authority to assure a man any
thing, but intend such things, only to be believed, as may be proved, at least
by consequence of Scripture, without the authority of the Church. I answer 2.
things. First, that in the place alleged, I deny no authority of the Church,
that is d^e unto it, but only (against them that charge the Scripture with
insufficiency, as if they wanted many things needful to be believed, which
must be supplied by the Tradition, and Authority of the Church) I affirm that
whatsoever is needful to be known, believed, or done, is contained in
Scripture, and by the same ALONE may absolutely be determined. The meaning
whereof is, that what Ministry, and power soever the Church has to teach, and
rule us in the use of the Scripture, and points of faith, (which authority no
Protestant will deny to belong to the true Church, or to be needful) yet all
things, whatsoever belong to faith, and the Church by any authority, may
propose unto us, are contained in the Scripture, and may be proved thereby
alone: the said Church authority being only a requisite condition,
subordinate for the readier attaining to the sense, and use of the Scripture:
but no rule, or principle, either above, or with the Scripture, whereinto any
man's faith, in any point is resolved, so that it may be said, This I must, or I
may, believe, upon the tradition and authority of the Church, though it be not
any way revealed in the Scripture. The which assertion of ours, has 2. parts:
the one affirmative, that the Scripture alone, and absolutely considered in it
own Latitude, and extent, contains all things belonging to faith, without
defect. This is proved Digr. 3. and 1 2.
in the way. The other Negative; that the Churches authority is neither
needful, nor able to supply any necessary, or new point of faith, that is not
contained in the Scripture. I deny it not to be ordinarily, a necessary
condition, for the knowing, and believing, that which the Scripture reueales;
for To. 10.14.
How shall they hear, that they may believe without a Preacher? Act. 8.31.
How can we understand except we have a guide? Mal 3.7.
for the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and at his mouth they should
seek the Law; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of hoasts. I only deny it
to be the rule, and foundation of faith: or so much as the last infallible, and
clear ground, whereupon the believer, in any point that he believes, restes
himself. The which (to hold proportion with the Jesuit) in this place. I only
prove by the Papists own principles, to wit, that the proposition of the
Church is Grego. Val. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 1. page 32.. sit nunc Sexta.
neither the last and clearest motive, whereupon our faith stays, but there
are higher, and clearer, then it; which can be nothing, but the immediate
supernatural light of the verities believed themselves, shining upon our
hearts from the Scripture: whereunto the light of Church authority, when it
has revealed the doctrine contained in Scripture to us, gives place; as all
lesser lights do, when a greater begins to shine.

2 Secondly I answer, that from this Principle of ours: Nothing may be
believed, but what is set down in Scripture expressly, or may be gathered
from thence by good consequence: it does not follow, that a particular man, as
Luther, or White cannot believe the promises of Gods special mercy, touching
his own salvation: because though Luther, or Whites name be not expressly set
down in the promise, yet that which is set down is so offered to us, that
being penitent believers, and justified, and standing in grace, (whereof there
is an infallible assurance, THE WAI^ Digr. 43.
by our adversaries own confession) we may conclude our own particular
Salvation from thence, and must endeavor to believe it. This part of my answer
affirms 2. things. First, that a penitent sinner justified, and elevated into
the state of grace, may infallibly prove, or gather the assurance of his
Salvation, by good consequence from the Scripture. Secondly, that this
assurance, thus to be gathered, appertains to those verities, which are
believed by the habit of faith. I do not say any man can at all times, so
firmly, and without fear of the contrary, believe his own reconciliation
with God; as he can the first articles of faith, that are expressly, and
immediately revealed: I only affirm, that he believes it by the habit of
supernatural faith, and is bound to endeavor, and use the means, that he may
believe it.

3 The first point I have purposely showed Digr. 40. n. 39. and 4^. n. 10.
in the THE WAY, and confirmed by the confession of diverse of our Adversaries,
whither I refer the Jesuit, that he may see how, and in what manner this
assurance is gathered. Only I will here admonish the reader, that if the
penitent believer, could not, by necessary consequence of Scripture, and true
application of the general promises of the Gospel to his own particular
person, conclude his salvation, he were in no wise bound to believe it: but now
when he has received the Testimony of Gods Spirit within him, crying Abba
Father: the power of the same Spirit in his body and soul, renewing him, and
producing the effects of saving grace: the Faith of Christ whereby he gives
consent to the Gospel: the life of Christ whereby he lives, not himself, but
Christ lives in him: the power of his death, whereby he dies to the world, and
sin: when finally in truth, and conscience he performs all the conditions,
that the Scripture requires, and feels within him those very signs, whereby
the Gospel describes the elect: it may not be doubted, but by good
consequence, both in matter, and form, he may conclude his own salvation It
is no where written in the Bible, that Luther, or Calvin shall rise at the
last day, yet the Reply will allow them to believe it, by consequence from that
which is written: All men shall rise. It is no where written, that this
Jesuit, shall come into Judgment, and give an account of this his faith, and
the ways wherein he walks: yet I presume he believes it by faith, in that by
consequence it necessarily follows of that Article, He shall come to judge,
the quick, and the dead. In the same manner a penitent sinner, examining
himself, concludes his own salvation from the Scripture, that says, Marc.
16.16. Romans 10.9.
Every one, that repents, and believes shall be saved. Therefore, if there be
any certainty of a man's own repentance, of his being in Grace, of the
testimony of Gods Spirit (and Paret -- Lombar^um nec v^lu^sse, nec do^^isse, vt
do^erentur Christian de peccatorum remissione, and gratia Dei, and vita aeterna
perpetuo dubitare aut diffidere; quemad modum re vera nec vllus Orthodoxus, and
sani iudicij Ecclesiastes, inter Pontificios, quod equidem sciam, vnquam illud
docuit. Mart. Eisengren. defens. Council. Trid. de cert. great. p. 216.
fie upon that mouth, that will say there is none, when the Scripture 2. Co.
13.5.
biddes us, Try our selves touching them) it must needs be yielded, that there
is a certainty likewise of his salvation.

4 The second point, that the remission of our sins, and eternal life is
believed by Faith, is clear upon 4. points. 1. because in the Creed, those 2.
Articles are made the object of Faith; therefore the penitent sinner applies
them to himself by the same habit. 2. Aliqui Catholici existimarunt, posse
vnumquemque credete fide diuina, sine peculiari reuelatione, dimissa sibi esse
peccata. Vasqu. 12. disp. 200. n. 5.
Many learned Papists confess so much. Fisher of Rochester. Roffenf. opusc. de
fid. and miserecord. dei. axiom. 10.
If we will enter into heaven, we must not come with a double heart, or
wavering Faith, but with that, which is ALTOGETHER VNDOVBTING, and MOST
CERTAIN. For to doubting minds, there is no way open. Gropper, and the Divines
of Collen, Antididag. c. de iustif.. proditum est. p. 29.
We are justified by Faith, whereby WITHOUT DOVBTING, we firmly believe, that
our sins, who are truly penitent, are forgiven us, for Christ: whereof
notwithstanding it behooues us, INWARDLY THROVGH FAITH, TO BE CERTIFIED, BY THE
TESTIMONY OF THE HOLY GHOST. Enchirid. Colon. c. de iustificat.. Non habeo. p.
139.
For we confess it to be the truth, that it is also required for a man's
justification, that a man CERTAINLY BELIEVE, not only generally, that such as
are truly penitent, have their sins forgiven by Christ, but also that they
are forgiven, THE MAN HIMSELF, THAT BELIEVES for Christ, by Faith. And Ibid..
sed hic.
again: No man's sins are pardoned, unless he believe, that he has obtained
pardon, by Christ. Ruard the Dean of Louan, is Vasqu. 12. disp. 200. n. 35.
reported to hold that without revelation, a man may have that assurance of his
justification which shall be without fear, or doubting: but he holds more,
Ruard explic. artic. Louan. art. 9. p 119.
that if any simple man, being persuaded, BELIEVE, out of this will of God
(toward us, for his Son, in whom he has given us all things) that his
sins are forgiven him by Christ, and this CERTAINLY, and as it were OVT OF
THE WORD OF GOD; and thereupon is touched with true love to God, wholly
submitting himse^^ to him, who thus has prevented him with his love, and
repenting him of his sins: it is very likely, that he that is thus affected,
does truly obtain the pardon of his sins, and is made the son of God. The
same special faith is taught us by Ioh. Bacon. and Catharin. quos refert
Perer. select. disp. tom. 2. in Roman. 8. d. 7. nu. 27. 30.
others: and it is the highest assurance that can be. For Fidei cognitio sola
visione beata inferior est claritate, aequalis certitudine: reliquis omnibus
alijs scientijs long superior atque certior. Pined. in Job 19.25. n. 1. p. 96.
the knowledge of faith is inferior to the blessed vision (which the Saints in
heaven have) only in clearenes; but it is equal in certainety, and far above,
and more certain, then all other knowledges. 3. It is Certa est ex fide
conclusio illata ex vna credita and altera euidenti -- neque dubitare, si
maxim cup^rem, valerem; quin mihi certum esset, ex side, me esse in gratia; si
quidem hoc colligere possem, ex vna credita, and altera mihi euidenti, and hoc
ita esse sic suadeo. Primo, multae sunt propositiones de fide, quae non aliter
possunt probari esse de fide, nisi quia sequuntur euidenter ex creditis, saltem
cum aliqua propositione euidenti secundum lumen natural. Andrae. Vega. pro
Council. l. 9. c. 39. p. 289. This is the doctrine of others also. Scot. 3 d.
35. qu. unit. Cano. Loc. l. 12. c 2. page 258. Medina 12. q. 112. art. 5.
Albertin. Coroll. p. 261. nu. 11.
a principle, common among our Adversaries, that every conclusion issuing from
one promise revealed expressly in the Scripture, and another clearly, and
certainly known otherwise, and by evident, or good consequence added to it,
belongs to faith, and is believed by no other habit then of faith. As for
example, all the dead shall rise. Luther is dead: therefore Luther shall rise.
Every one that begets, really differs from him that is begotten: the Father
begets the Son: therefore the Father really differs from the Son. Here both
the conclusions are such verities as belongs to faith. For Luther believed, he
should rise; and all we believe the Father really differs from the Son: yet
neither of them are expressly revealed, or written in the Scripture (as it is
not, that Luther, or White shall be saved, or have their sins pardoned) but
the Minor proposition in the first discourse, and the Mayor in the second, are
known otherwise, and by good connection added to that which is written; and
therefore the conclusion is believed by faith. So it is in this discourse:
every theological conclusion belongs to faith: but the assurance of the
remission of a man's own sins, is a theological conclusion: therefore it
belongs to faith. The first proposition is manifest. The second is proved
thus. All that are penitent, and believe, have the remission of sins assured
them: the which proposition is of faith: because it is immediately revealed,
Esaias the 1.16.17.18. Act. 3.19. Romans 10.9. Ezekiel. 18.21. But I repent, and
believe; this proposition is evident, and certain to him that does so. For
Repentance, and Faith are infallibly known to the justified that have them.
Mark. 9.24. Es. 38.3. 1 Ioh. 3.21. The conclusion therefore, I have the
remission of sin assured me, is a theological conclusion belonging to faith.
Vega says, A conclusion inferred of one thing believed, and another that is
evident, is certain by faith -- I cannot doubt, if I would never so feign, but
it should be certain unto me by faith, that I were in grace, if I could
collect it from one thing believed, and another thing evident unto me, and that
this is so, I thus persuade. For there are many propositions of faith, which
cannot otherwise be proved to be of faith, but because they do evidently
follow of those things that are believed, at least with some proposition
evident according to natural light. And indeed how many propositions of faith
are there, that cannot be showed so to be, Alberti^. Coroll. p. 226. n. 8. and
Vega vbi supr.
but because they follow evidently of that, which is believed? Thus our
adversaries hold the decrees of a Council, and the Popes determinations, to be
matters of faith, and yet suppose one proposition, whence they issue, to be but
humane. Thus they believe by divine faith, that Paul the 5 is right Pope, and
that the Trent Council was a lawful Council: and yet that the election of
Paul was Canonical, or the manner of the assembly of Trident lawful, they
confess is had only by humane faith, that may be deceived. They must
therefore grant the Protestants, as much: that the remission of a man's own
sins (which in all in different judgment, a penitent sinner, justified by
Christ, may as well conclude from the Scripture, as our adversaries can the
Canonical election of the Pope, or the lawful manner of assembling the Trent
Council) is a truth Haec mihi sententia firma insedit. Pontificem Romanum ab
eis desectu^, quibus ius est eligendi, and que^ est Christiana complexa
Ecclesia, verissimum Christi esse Vicarium: idque ea side, cui nullum potest
subesse salsum, ab vnoquoque credi oportere. Paul. Comitol. resp. moral. l. 1.
q. 99. n. 2. p. 212.
to be believed by faith. Fourthly this must be granted upon two other points,
that Soto apolog. c. 2. Ruard. ar^. 9. p. 119. Cassal. de quadriparr. instit.
l. 2 c. 8. Staplet. ^e iustific. l. 9. c 11. Peter. select. q. in Ioh. 14.
disp. 18. Mature tamen omnibus, hinc inde, pe^satis, probabilius profecto, esse
crediderim, posse aliquos viros spirituales tantopere in exercitus
spiritualibus, and in familiaritate diuina, proficere, vt, absque vlla
temeritate, possint, recte and absque vlla haesitatione, credere se inuenisse
gratiam, and remissionem peccatorum, apud Deum: Andr. Vega. pro Council. p. 313.
our adversaries (some few Jesuits excepted, who are but one, and an vpstart
faction against the mayor part in the Roman Church) freely yield unto. First,
that a justified man may have such certainty of the remission of his sins, as
is void of all fear, and doubting, in the same manner as any man may
certainly know, there is such a place as Rome, Constantinople, London. Do.
Bannes In Tho. 22. q. 18. art 4. concl. 3. The same says Tolet. in Romans 5. v.
5. p. 225.
says, Our hope, (whereby we look for Salvation) is, and is called, simply
such, as cannot deceive us, and firm, and safe, both in the Scripture, and in
the doctrine of the Church: because through the divine promise, and power of
Gods mercy, whereupon it leanes, it can no more deceive us, then faith, in
whose testimony it is founded. Martin Isengren has written a whole book of
purpose to show this point: in it he has these words. Eisengren. pro conc
Trid. de certit. great. p. 228.
I have many a time, and often visited the sick, and been with them that have
died, and no man can report of me, but that as soon, as they had declared
their repentance, I exhorted them with all diligence, to have an VNDOVBTED, AND
CERTAIN CONFIDENCE, that our most merciful God would, for the merit of his
Son, WITHOUT ALL DOUBT, forgive them their sins, and after this life give
them his heavenly kingdom: yea he says: Page 217.
All the chiefest Divines of the Church of Rome, whose writings for that
purpose, he had read, and searched, though they did not allow a man to be
altogether secure, and free from all care, and heedfulnesse, yet Vniuersi, vno
ore.
all of them, with one voice teach, that we must NOT TREMBLE, OR MISTRVST, BUT
HAVE A FIRM HOPE, AND CERTAIN CONFIDENCE: Omnes orthodoxi, receptique
theologi, quotquot tam inde ab Apostolorum temporibus, ad hunc vsque annum
vixerint. p. 254.
and he adds that this is the doctrine of all the Schoolmen, and Fathers that
have been since the Apostles, whose testimonies, and words he alleges at large
Dionys. Areo pagit. Cypr. Ambr. Augusti. Chrysostom. Cyril. Basil. Theodor. Leo.
Gregor. Roman Pius 5. Sixth. Senensis. Mich. Medina. Anselm. Bernard. Magist.
Thom. Scot. Altisiodor. Reyner. Alexand. Lyra. Bonauent Dionys. Carthus. Gabr.
Pelbart. Biga. Gotshal. Thesaur. Hos. Ruard. Louaniens. Caietan. Roffens. Ecch.
Nausca. Cassal. Soto. Canis. Vega. Castro. Torre^s. Theses Cathol. disput. adu.
Wittemberg.
to the number of more then 40. Whereby the reader may judge of my Adversaries
learning, and religion: that having derided such testimonies, and signs of our
being in Gods favor, as Isengren auerres to be infallible, Reply. p. 58.
concludes that the persuasion, which any Protestant has, that their sins
are forgiven, is a fond presumptuous fiction, of their own heart: but Isengren
Vbi sup. p. 217.
answers, that such fantastical companions, not understanding the truth of
things, babble of that, whereof they can give no sufficient reason. Secondly,
when it is demanded whence this certainty, so free from doubting and fear,
arises? they grant it arises from the light of the Scripture, that is to say,
the promises of mercy, and forgiveness, revealed in the Scripture, beget, and
produce it in the heart of man. Ruard Ruard. at. 9. page 121.
says, Though it be inferior to the certainty of faith, yet it DEPENDS UPON
THE SENTENCES OF THE SCRIPTVRE, and therefore faith infused mediatly, inclines
unto it. Casalius says, Cassal. quadrip. inst. p. 221. l. 2. c. 8.
This confidence arises, by having respect to the divine conditional promises,
and to the conditions that they require. Vega, following the doctrine of Bacon
the Carmelite, Vega pro Council. l. 9 c. 47. page 321. Is credit, cui aliquid
sine vlla haesitatione, certum and persuasum est. Catech. Roman. page 17.
says, This assurance is not the assurance of faith, but an assurance
following faith, yet, says he, if that will serve the turn to call it the
assurance of faith, I WILL NOT GREATLY STRIVE: but, that there may be peace,
and we may all agree in one, I will grant that you require, and willingly yield
my self. These men as learned, as ever lived in the Church of Rome, you see,
deny not this certainty of faith, or knowledge following faith, howsoever the
said faith be not so intent, and strong in apprehending that object, as it is
in believing, that which is immediately revealed, and expressly written. For
what habit, or faculty is there, in the soul, whereby to receive, and apply
the promises of the Gospel, touching the benefits of Christ for our
redemption, but only faith? For although the holy Ghost, not tying himself to
terms, do 1. Ioh. 4.13. and 3.14.
sometime call it knowledge, yet calling it Rom 6.8. 1. Ioh. 4.16.
again believing alone, or believing and knowing, it is manifest that he
intends such a knowledge as not only flows from the principles of faith but
also is reduced to the same habit: and this only, which the holy Ghost
teaches in terms so express and formal, might serve to stop the mouths of
all our adversaries, if they had not set themselves to resist even Gods own
Spirit, when it speaks against their corruptions. For with what other eyes can
the soul behold the heavenly light of the Gospel? How shall that confidence,
assurance, certainty which is created by the mixture of the light of the
Scripture, with light of a good conscience renewed by the holy Ghost, belong to
any humane knowledge, when the Scripture says expressly, Gal. 3.14.
The promise of the Spirit is received by faith; and wheresoever, in all the
Bible, the Gospel is revealed, men are called upon to believe? I will not
deny, but faith has his degrees, and can believe some things more resolutely,
then other, and one time is stronger, then at another; but this is it, I urge,
that if there be granted a certainety of a man's own special standing in
grace, which certainty arises by the Scriptures: it must needs also be
granted, that it is a work, or effect of faith: and this is confirmed by the
courage, and constancy of Martyrs, and by the admirable resolution, that we see
in good men, when they die. Saint Ambrose In Psalm. 118. sermon. 7. page 641.
says, we see innocent persons in this world, joyfully to run toward
judgment, to hate delays, to hasten their trial, whereas the guilty fly
from it: and he gives the reason: Because the just man knows eternal life,
the fellowship of Angels, the crown of his good merits, is laid up for him.
The Heb. 11.36.
Scripture reports how many of the children of God were tried by mocking, and
scourging, by bonds, and prisonment, they were stoned, hewn apeeces, tempted,
they wandered up and down, destitute, and afflicted: All which the Apostle
says, they did by faith, and confidence of the Promises; and yet their
assurance was no other, nor otherwise begotten, then the ordinary assurance of
all Gods children, which is concluded by joining the light of their conscience,
kindled by the holy Ghost, to the immediate light of the conditions revealed in
the Scriptures.

5 That which our Adversaries assign to be the cause why a man cannot be sure
of his salvation, because no man is sure of his Perseverance, is easily
answered, by affirming likewise, that the grace of perseverance, with other
gifts, is given all the elect in their justification. For S. Paul Romans 8.38.
says, he was certain of it; and what he, in that place, auouches of
himself, belongs to others, as well as himself, by the confession of Staplet.
de iustif l. 9. c. 13. Tolet. in Romans 8. v. vlt.
our strongest adversaries; and he auouches not only that Gods love to him,
but more properly, that his love to God, shall never fail. Perer. in To. 5. d
12. n. 59.
The Jesuit also confesses it to be the doctrine of De Bono perseuerant.
Saint Austine, that grace is given by Christ, whereby not only man may
persevere, but ^^lso that he shall persevere. (...). Chrysostom. hom. 9. in Romans
The fauorits of Princes are advanced to honor, and riches, but their
preseuerance therein is uncertain. But it is not so with the grace of God
bestowed in Justification: and therefore we may believe, as well our
Perseverance, as our Grace. And if the justified be certain of the grace of
Justification that he has, then may he be certain, and well assured of his
Perseverance, because it is a grace purchased us by Christ, and included in
that Peace, which the justified by faith have with God, through him; or else
let him show that can, where any firm and settled peace of mind is, where
there is uncertainty, and doubtfulnesse touching Perseverance. Council. Trid.
sess. 6. can. 22. Vega pro Council. l. 12. cap. 23. Barth. Medi^. 12. qu. 109.
art. 10. ad 3. Greg. de Valent. tom. 2. page 849. c.
And that it is in the power of a justified man, with Gods help, to persevere
in grace, to the end; is defined by the Trent Council, and holden to be the
doctrine of all Catholics: which power 1. Pet. 5.1.
Saint Peter also testifies to be reduced into act by the almighty power of
God, keeping him (...).
as with a garrison through faith to salvation: according to that of Ier. 32.40.
the Prophet, I will put my fear into their hearts that they shall not depart
from me. Which overthrows all them, that make the uncertainty of Perseverance
a reason against the certainty of salvation.

CHAP. XVII.
Concerning points Fundamental and not Fundamental. The distinction expounded
and defended. 4. Who shall judge what is Fundamental, and what not. A jest at
the election of Pope Leo the tenth.

A. D. White p. 100.
M. White, by the foundation, or points fundamental, Page 66.
understands all truths, which are necessary for the salvation of all men;
but this definition is not found in Act. 4.12. 1. Cor. 3.11. Ephesians. 2.19.
the texts of Scripture, cited by him in the margent. Neither does it help the
matter for the question may still be, how many, and which truths those be
which be necessary. The which question if we leave to be determined by every
man's private spirit, or particular judgment, we shall either have no point of
faith, to be accounted a point fundamental, in regard the ignorance of some
may be such, that they may think a man may be saved by moral good life,
although through ignorance he believe nothing at all; or else we may have so
many fundamental points of faith, as it shall please every braine-sicke
fellow to hold to be necessary to salvation. The which how great confusion it
will breed in the Church, every man of mean capacity may easily see. And
therefore every man ought to see how necessary it is, that the determination of
this necessary question be not left to the private spirit, or particular
judgment of this, or that man; but to the judgment of the Catholic Church,
accounting with S. Austine all those points which are diligently digested, and
confirmed by full authority of the same Church* to be fundame^tall or to
pertain to the foundation, and consequently to be such, as must necessarily be
believed actually, or vertually by all men; and such, as may not doubtfully be
disputed of, and much less, rashly, and obstinately be denied by any man.
1 Our doctrine is, that in the things revealed in the Scripture, and belonging
to the object of faith, there is a difference; whereby some are more necessary
to be known, and without error to be understood, then othersome. For though it
be lawful for no man either to misbeleeue, or obstinately not to believe any
thing that is written, yet the simple ignorance, or error, in many things,
hinders not salvation, nor the substance of Faith: but either a private man, or
a whole particular Church thus ignorant, or erring (either inuincibly, or not
affectedly, and obstinately) in such things, and yet holding others aright,
has saving faith, and is in the state of grace. This difference of things
arises from 3. respects. First, of the commandment enioyning, and urging the
knowledge of one thing, more then the knowledge of another: as for example, the
knowledge of Christ crucified, more then the knowledge of his Genealogy: for
though both be revealed alike, yet not both under the like penalty. Secondly,
of the nature, and condition of the things; when this does more properly, and
necessarily belong to salvation, then that: for without the knowledge of story
of Gedeon, I may be saved: but without the knowledge of Christ's nature, and
office I cannot. Thirdly, of their use. When one thing is the foundation, and
ground, that gives light, and subsistence, to another; as the knowledge of
Christ's office, and merits brings light to the understanding of the doctrine,
touching our own unworthiness: etc. Out of these respects, and degrees of
things, that are believed, as they stand in order one to another, and in use to
us, we call some FVNDAMENTALL, and some NOT FVNDAMENTALL; not with relation to
our faith so much as to our knowledge; in as much, as it is dangerous to
misdoubt the truth of any thing, that is revealed to us, if it were but: 2.
Sam. 24.9. 1. Chro. 21.5.
Whether the number of the children of Israel, able to bear arms, when David
numbered them, were 1500000, though no man will say an error, or ignorance in
this matter were against saving faith. A Fundamental point therefore is that
which belongs to the substance of faith, and is so revealed, and so necessary,
that there can be no salvation without the knowledge, and explicit faith
thereof: of which nature are the things contained in the articles of our faith:
a point not Fundamental, is that which directly belongs not to the way of
Salvation, neither does error, or ignorance therein make void, or destoy, that
which is Fundamental. For So Much as such a point is revealed, but for the
manifestation of the other, and is believed but in order to the other: as, that
Abraham had so many children, Paul had a cloak: The dead pray for the living,
etc: wherein it may fall out, that we may err or be ignorant, and yet the
faith not prejudiced.

2 I know none of our Adversaries that deny this distinction, but use, and
explicate it, as well, as we, though none such as this Jesuit is, be grown so
perverse, and malepart, that they will endure nothing, that we say, be it never
so true. 22. q. 2. art. 5. Dicendu^ quod fidei obiectum, per se est id per quod
homo beatus efficitur. Per accidens aute^, aut secundario, se habe^t ad
obiectum virtutis omnia quae in sacra Scriptura continentur; sicut quod Abraham
habuit duos filios, etc.
Thomas, having divided the object of faith into that, which is so by it self,
and that, which is by accident, and secondarily; defines the first to be that
whereby a man is made blessed, and saved: the latter that which is revealed,
whatsoever it be, as that Abraham had two sons; and David was the son of
Iesse. Dialog. 1. part. l. 2. c. 2. page 6.
Occham sets down three differences of verities to be believed: Some touching
God, and Christ, whereon principally depends our Salvation, as that there is
one God, and three persons: that Christ is God, and man: that he suffered, and
died, and rose again, etc. Some whereon our Salvation depends not so
principally, which though we believe, yet do they not Non direct sed
indirecte, quod ammodo, ad salutem humani generis pertinere noscuntur.
so directly belong to our Salvation; as many things written of Pharaoh, etc:
Of the third sort, such as are not revealed, but either agree with that which
is revealed, or follow manifestly of it. And Vbi sup. c. 11. page 9. Sunt
quidam Moderni dicentes quod multae assertiones sunt, quae in rei veritate
aduersantur diuinae Scripturae, quae tamen ab Ecclesia minime sunt damnandae,
nec sint inter haereses numerandae.
he reports it to have been an opinion in the Church, in his time, that many
assertions, which in truth of the matter were against the Scripture, yet were
not condemned by the Church, nor counted heresy. Espencaeus Espencae in 2 Timothy
digress. 17. p 119.
discoursing of things to be known, and believed, says, The infolded faith of
simple people, will serve well enough in such things as are the object of faith
only BY ACCIDENT -- and in subtle considerations that arise about the
Scripture -- but in those things, which OF THEMSELVES are the object of faith,
whereby men are led to happiness, they need an unfolded faith: the Colliars
faith will do no good. Mag 3. d. 23. and ibi Scholast co^muniter, Tho. Bonau.
Dura^d. Ricard. Dionys. Gabr. Occh. q. 8. Bann. 22. q. 2. art 8 dub. 2. Ouand.
4. d. 13. prop. 12. Eyme^ic. director. part. 1. q. 2. ad. 8. and ibi Scoliast.
Pezant. 22 p. 504. a. Syluest. sum. v. fides. nu. 6. Simanch. cachol. instit.
tit 28. nu. 20. Pic. Mirand. de fid. and ord. credend. theor. 12. p. 286.
All the Casenists, and Schoolmen that have written touching the nature of
heresy, and the measure of Catholic faith, agree that there is a certain
measure, and quantity of faith, without which none can be saved, but every
thing revealed belongs not to this measure; and it is enough to believe
somethings only by the Colliars faith. The which doctrine does evidently allow
our distinction, that some things are Fundamental, and some not: for no
Protestant thinks any point to be so not Fundamental, but that every man is
bound with humility, and reverence to accept it, whenever the knowledge, and
necessity thereof shall be offered him by the Church: which is all our
adversaries require in their infolded faith.

3 This distinction, by THE WAY page 110.
me only touched, and that by the way, briefly, upon another occasion, the
Jesuit in this chapter frowardly cauils at: and in this place wrangles with
the definition that I gave of points Fundamental, because it is not found in
the words of the Scripture, that I cited, for it, in the margent. Whereto I
answer three things. First, Act. 4.12. 1. Cor. 3.11. Ephesians. 2.19.
the Scriptures cited show the knowledge, and express faith of Christ's death,
to be absolutely necessary for all men* and two of the places call the matter
of this knowledge a foundation. Therefore such a point as is absolutely to be
known, and rightly holden of all (which every point revealed is not) may be
called a Foundation, or Fundamental point: Therefore again, such as, by the
like confession of our adversaries, some men, and all men of some times, may
err in, or be ignorant of, without prejudice of Salvation, may be called a
point not Fundamental: whence it follows again, that my distinction is
grounded well enough upon the places cited in the margent. Secondly, I answer,
that how scornefully soever Jesuits think of the Scripture, yet we
Protestants had as lieffe borrow our conclusions, distinctions, and words,
wherein we express them, from it; as from the stinking puddles of rotten
Schoolmen, or new found mint of vpstart Jesuits. Thirdly, my adversary
himself, in this very chapter, acknowledges the distinction, if it be not
applied to a wrong end, to be good. For first touching the terms thereof,
Fundamental, not Fundamental: He finds the^ in S. Austin. True it is, S.
Austin insinuates a distinction of some points Fundamental, and some not
Fundamental. Therefore the words are according to Saint Austin, and that is
well. Next in the matters themselves, also, he says, Catholic Divines make
some distinction, and hold some to be more necessary to be actually, and
expressly known of all sorts; then other: therefore he quarrels at that, which
himself confesses to be the truth. There be some humors love to be doing, if
it be but to keep their hand in ure. Maiol dies Canic.
I have read of one that had so used himself to pilfring, that he would pick
his own purse, and steal things out of his own closet. The Jesuit seems to
be of that kindred; that will quarrel, and keep a wrangling with the doctrine
of his own Church, rather then he will cease from his contentious spirit.

4 Yet the saddle, somewhere pinches him, and it may be the easing of him, may
do him good. He complains this distinction, when it is granted, will not help
the matter neither: for the question may still be, how many, and which truths
those be that are necessary: the which question if we leave to be determinated
by every private spirit, either we shall have no point to be counted
Fundamental, in regard the ignorance of some may be such, that they may think
a man may be saved by moral good life, although through ignorance he believe
nothing at all; or else so many as shall please every brainsicke fellow. The
determination therefore of this necessary question, is to be left to the
judgment of the Catholic Church, that all such points that are confirmed by
full authority of the said Church he received for such as must necessarily be
believed by all men. Wherein first I blame his discretion: for where I
mentioned the distinction, I had no cause to inquire, whose the authority is to
judge, what is Fundamental, and what otherwise; but assuming it, as a thing
judged already, I only mentioned it; affirming some points to be Fundamental,
and some otherwise. How it helps the matter therefore, I had nothing to do, in
that my words were not used in this question. Next I pity his wretched state,
that in no controversy running between us, no not so much as in this, a poor
distinction can prevail, unless his own Church, and the Pope therein (for
Showed plainly below, cap 35. and 36.
that he means by the authority of the Catholic Church) be made the judge.
This is a very mean shift, when a question depends between us, and them, to
put the Scripture, and the consent of the Ancient Church by; and require
themselves to be judges. Thirdly this question, as all other matters belonging
to faith, must be judged by no man's private spirit, but by the Catholic
Church of Christ, as the Judge, and by the Scripture only as the Rule: and if
they be no competent Judges, who through ignorance may think a man may be
saved by moral good life, though he believe nothing at all; then away with the
Church of Rome, and let it be acknowledged as erroneous, as any private spirit:
See cap. 22. n. 1.
wherein it is frequently holden, that the Gentiles were justified, and might
be saved, only by their moral life, without beleeueing any thing at all.
Fourthly supposing the Protest, left the determining of this question to
private spirit, (which they do not, but to the true Church of God, following
the Scripture) yet let my Jesuit answer, if the practice of his own Church be
not as bad, where the Pope has power See cap. 36. n. 3.
to make a new article of faith, and that to be a Fundamental point, belonging
to faith at one time, which is not so at another; so that all men, shall then
be bound to believe it, which before were free to believe it? Scot. 4. d. 11.
q. 3. ad argu. Tonstall. de verit. corp. p 46.
as it has already been practiced in the point of transubstantiation, and may
when the Pope will in the points of Dico primo, veritatem hanc sc. virginem
esse conceptam sine peccato originali, posse definiti ab Ecclesia, quando id
expedire indicauerit. probatur. Nam imprimis Ecclesia^ posse controuersiam
hanc, in alterutram partem decidere, aperte supponunt Sixtus 4. and Pius 5. --
Suar. tom. 2. disp 3. sect. 6.
the conception of the B. Virgin, and Paul. Benc. Eugub. l. de effic. auxil. c.
1.
the concourse of Gods grace with man's will: and the Staplet. Princip. doctr. l.
9. c. 4. Relect. co^tro. 5. q. 2. art. 4.
Canonizing of Hermes, or Clement into the sacred Scripture. In which case his
Holiness might possible, if not be brain-sicke, which betides younger men
(which Popes commonly are not, unless it be sometime, when the young Cardin^^
are in an humor to elect a Bennet, or John, or When Leo the tenth, a young man,
was elected in the Conclaue, Alphonsus Petrucius, a young Cardinal, proclaimed
his election at the window: Pontificem habemus Leonem decimum; ac viuant
vigeantque iuniores. Pap. Masso. in Leo^. 10. he should have cried, by the
order, Annuti^ vobis gaudium magnum, Papam habemus, Marcell, sacr. cerem. page
19
Leo) yet do^e at least by virtue of his age; or for his recreation play the
vice of a Play, as Alex. ab Alexand. genial. dicr. l. 3. c. 21.
Amasis the King of Egypt would sometime do among his Courtiers; and as Aelian.
var. hist. l. 12. c. 15.
Agesilaus, ride upon a stick among his children, to make them sport: the
which comparisons howsoever his creatures will take unkindly, yet all the world
knows his Consistory has been a stage whereon he has many a time, and often
played these parts ere now, as formally, as the priuatest spirit, or
braine-sickest companion alive can do: and so I leave him.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. Touching the perpetual virginity of Mary. 2. The celebration of Easter. 3.
The Baptism of Infants: The Jesuits halting. 4. And the Scriptures sufficiency.

A. D. I for brevity sake will omit to urge other points, Page 68.
which Protestants believe with us, viz: the perpetual virginity of the
blessed Virgin, against the error of Heluidius; White page 12.
the celebration of Easter on the Sunday, against those heretics; that denied
it; the Baptism of Infants, against Anabaptists, who will not allow it, etc.
1 HEre my name is cited in the Margent, and the page of my Book; as if I had
written, or some way insinuated, that these 3. points were matters of faith,
and yet not contained in the Scripture. But I writ nothing that sounds that
way, neither in the place cited, nor any where else; yet because I will miss
no place, where he cites me, I answer: he affirms 3. things. First, that we
hold the perpetual virginity of the blessed Virgin, the Celebration of Easter
upon the Sunday: and the Baptism of Infants, to be For that is the question
expressed by himself a little before, page 67. of his Repl.
points of faith, necessary to be believed. ^^condly, that these 3. are not
contained in Scripture, Thirdly that we believe all this with the Papists.
Wherein there is never a true word. For to the first; the perpetual virginity
of the Virgin Marie, after the birth of our Savior, as well as before, we
believe, as a probable, and likely truth; but not as a matter of faith; the
which if my adversary mislike, I require him to forbear me, and answer Saint
Basil, with whom we consent: (...). Basil pa. 233. graec. Froben. an. 1551.
That she denied not the works of marriage to her husband (after the birth of
her Son) though it nothing hinder godly doctrine, yet what was done after
without meddling with it, let us leave to the doctrine of this Mystery. But
whatsoever my adversary will have to be thought of is, August. de temp. sermon.
6. Theodor. in Ezech. page 486. Anibr. in Luc. l. 2. c. 1.. in men sc. and l.
10. c. 23.. stabant au tem. and Epist. l. 1. ep. 5. and 7. Basil. vbi sup.
Hiero. in Ezec. 44.. and conuertit. and adu. Heluid. Epiphan. l. 3 haer. 78.
and sermo. de laud. S. Mar. in Bibl. S. Patru^ tom. 7. page 26. edit. 1.
Hesych. and Chrysip. ser. de Maria ibi p. 33 and inde. Andrae. Ierosolym. sermon.
de salutat. Angel. ibid. page 241. Proclus Cyzecen. homil. in Council. Ephesians
page 251. graec. Commel in. See Zuingl. tom. 3. page 233.
the ancient Fathers brought the Scripture to prove it; that if it were a
matter of faith, it should, in their opinion, be believed, because it were
contained in the Scripture.

2 The celebration of Easter upon the Sunday likewise, is no point of faith,
but only a seemly, and ancient ceremony of the Church, (...): Socrat. l 5. c.
22. page 249. Steph.
at the first not thought so necessary, as the Jesuits now affirm it to be:
specially the holding of it on that day: for Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 23.
the Churches of Asia held it on the 14. day of the month, whether it were
Sunday, or not, (...).
by an old tradition. See Eusebius. ibid. and inde. and l. 7 c. vlt. Socr. vbi
sup. Cassiod. l. 9. c. 38 Niceph. l 12 c. 33. 34. Beda aequinoct. vernal. tom.
2. Gab. Prateol. Elench. haer. and verb. quatuordecimani.
The which many Catholic Bishops, as Polycarp, Thraseas, Irenaeus, Sagaris,
Melito, Polycrates, Anatolius, and diverse others, many years together
maintained: which they would not have done, being all godly Bishops of the
Catholic Church, if the custom of the Western Church, to keep it on the
Sunday, had been an article of faith. Alphons. ^du. haer. v. Pascha.
Our adversaries also confess their custom were, at this day lawful, but for
the determination of the Church. Refert Beda rat. temp. c. 45. and ibi
Ramesiens. gloss. page 15. edit. Basil. per Heruag. an. 1563.
Theophilus Caesariensis, an ancient Father, tells how the French Church in
those days, alwaie kept it on the 8. of the Calends of April, which is the
25. of March, what day of the week soever it fell: because Christ arose on
that day. And with us Bed hist. Angl. l. 2. c. 2 and 19. l. 3. c. 25 l. 5. c
22. The like disagreement among the Spaniards and French, and others testified
by Sigeb. page 83. Cron. Caluis Cronolog. an. 546.
the old Britons, and Scots celebrated it not on that day, that is now used:
whereby it is clear that the holding of Easter, on such a day, is not
Catholic. And whereas the Jesuit says the celebrating it on a Sunday, is not
contained in the Scripture; he says truly: yet the Church of Rome maintaining
that order, in old time, thought otherwise, as he may see in To be seen in
Bid de ve^n aequinoct. sub. fin. page 346.
a Council holden, about that matter, in Pope Victors time, where the
Scripture is roundly alleged for it, against the Asian B.B.

3 The Baptism of Infants, which is his third example, we confess to be an
article of faith; but we do not confess, that it is not contained in the
Scripture: we say the contrary, as appears by our Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 16.
and instruct. adu. Anabapt. art 1.
writings against the Anabaptists: yea, the Papists themselves ordinarily use
to ground it on the scripture. This truth, De bapt. c. 8.
says Bellar. is proved by three kinds of arguments. The first is taken from
the Scripture. This is proved by the Scripture: Tom. 4. page 597. b.
says Gregory of Valentia: the like is done by Tho. 3. part. q. 68. art. 9.
lansen. concord. c. 20. and 100 Suarez. tom. 3. disp. 25. sect. 1 Henriquez
sum. moral. de bapt. c. 21. Vasquez in 3. part. Tho. disp. 149. nu. 6. Tolet.
in Ioh. 3. ann. 10. Maldon in Ioh. 3. n. 20. and In Math. 19. v. 14. he has
these words. illud fortissimum and apertissimum testimonium, quo semper
Ecclesia, vt Infantes baptizarit, adducta est: Nisi quis renatus est. etc.
many others: which is worth the readers observation, because at other times,
when they deal against us, they will cry out, it is a tradition unwritten. Let
them go for egregious impostors, by my consent, that against the Anabaptists,
can prove by Scripture, that which they make us believe is but by tradition.
Beggars for halting at the towns end, and going upright, when they are in the
Alehouse, are set in the stocks, and nailed to the Pillorie: but Jesuits,
counterfeiting after the same fashion, in a higher matter: one while with
Scripture: 3. arguments at once out of Scripture: a most powerful, and plain
testimony of Scripture, for the baptizing of children: another while with their
leg in a string, no cross, but tradition, and Church authority, are made the
guides of many men's faith: Nec pedibus ad insistendum idoneis Pet. M^ff vit.
Loiol. l. 1. c. 2 ^^biae contractae breuitas recte illum incedere prohibuit.
Ribad. vit Ignat. l. 1. c. 1.
The halting of Ignatio, that created them, was a type of the halting religion
of his creatures.

4 That which Gretser Defens. Bellarm. tom 1. l. 4. c. 4. sub sin. page 1598.
Ingolst.
answers hereunto, will not clear them: he says these things may be proved by
Scripture, but not sufficiently, not effectually by Scripture alone, without
tradition, but only probably. This is against the authority, and nature of the
Scripture, for it is the word of God: therefore whatsoever is proved truly
thereby, is proved effectually, and sufficiently, and not only probably, and
this in respect of us; which is confirmed: for 1. Ioh. 5.9.
the witness of God is greater then the testimony of man: therefore if these
things be to be proved at al, out of the Scripture, they are proved to us, and
that effectually, because whatsoever God says, he says to us* and that not
only probably, but necessarily, and evidently; which if we see not, then it is
by reason of some indisposition in us: and allowing tradition or Church
authority to take away this indisposition, and to expound, and declare these
Scriptures to these purposes, yet is it not true that the Jesuit says: for
then the said tradition, and authority puts, and drives some further meaning
and sense into them, then was in them before: or it only declares, and
expounds it. The former Occh, dial 1. part. l. 2 c. 14. Alphon^. adu. haer l.
1. c. 8. Dicimus enim quod, quantum ad ea quae ad fidem pertinent, Romanum
Pontificem nec totam Ecclesiam Dei posse de assertione non vera facere veram,
aut de non, non falsam. Turrec^em sum de Eccl. l 4. part 2. c. 3. ad, 6.
our adversaries deny: the latter is not sufficient to make the Scripture
only probable, in that howsoever for want of Church authority, a man may not
see such texts, to prove the virginity of Marie, or the Baptism of children,
yet the proof is in them, within their own latitude; and if there be any such
matter in them at all, then is it in them more then probably, because no divine
testimony is probable, but necessary: but Gretser, and the Church of Rome use
their traditions, as Alchymists do the Philosophers stone; with the touch of it
they turn any metal into gold: or as Painters do Alum, to give tincture to
their colors.

CHAP. XIX.
1. 2. How the Churches authority proves the Scripture. 3. The Jesuits
plainly confess that the Scriptures alone proves it self to be Gods word.
4. The Scriptures are Principles, indemonstrable in any superior science. 6.
All other testimony resolved into the testimony of the Scripture. 7. Touching
Evidence and the Compossibility thereof with faith.

A. D. I will insist in that example, which I propounded, Page 68.
in the treatise, and thus I dispute: All sorts, both Catholics, and
Protestants, do believe, and hold it a point necessary to be believed, that S.
Mathewes, S. Marks Gospel, etc. are true divine Scripture, and that these
particular books, which the Church uses, are the same true Scripture, at
least in sense, and substance, which was set down by those holy writers. But
these points are not expressed in Scripture: nor (secluding Church authority,
and tradition) so contained, as that they can be proved evidently, and
necessarily out of any sentence of Scripture. Ergo, all points necessary to be
believed, are not so contained in Scripture, as Protestants say they are. M.
Wotton, and M. White both struggle with this argument, as other Protestants
have done before the^, but when they have done and said all, one may easily see
how they stick fast in the mire. To omit their impertinent speeches, there are
only two things, which to the purpose, they do, or can directly say; viz.
either they must deny these to be points of faith, necessary to be believed, or
else they must show, how one may prove these points evidently out of some
sentence of Scripture. For if they admit that these be points of faith,
necessary to be believed, and that these cannot be proved out of Scripture; it
follows ineuitably, that all points of faith necessary to be believed, cannot
be proved by Scripture: and that their Principle is false, which says,
nothing is necessary to be believed, as a point of says, which cannot be
proved (evidently) by Scripture M. White says, that like as in other
sciences, White page 47.
there are some Principles indemonstrable, so in matters of faith, it is a
Principle to be supposed, that Scripture is Divine; and so no marvel, if it
cannot be proved, as other points of faith are. To this I reply, that
Principles in sciences are either evident to us, and known by the only light
of nature, and so need no proof, but only declaration of terms, or words in
which they be uttered; or if they be not evident to us, they must be
demonstrated, either in the same science, or in some superior science, by some
other Principle, more evident to us. But that these books which are in the
Bible, are divine Scripture, is If it were evident, how is it only believed by
faith? For S. Paul calls faith argumentum non apparentium. Heb. 11. v. 1.
not evident; therefore (if M. Whites similitude be good) it must be
demonstrated by some other Principle, more evidently unto us, that these books,
which are in the Bible, be divine Scripture. Secondly, I ask, whether this
point of doctrine (that S. Mathewes Gospel, etc. is divine Scripture) be such
a Principle of faith, as it self is also a point necessary to be believed, and
that by the same infallible faith, by which we believe the blessed Trinity? Or
that it is so a Principle, as it self is not to be believed at all by faith,
or by the same faith, by which we believe the blessed Trinity? If the first be
said; then either the opinion of Protestants, who say, nothing is to be
necessarily believed as a point of faith, which cannot be proved out of the
Scripture, is false, or else this is not a Principle indemonstrable, as M.
White affirms. If the second be said, then it follows, that Protestants do
not believe by faith, S. Mathewes, S. Marks Gospel, etc. nor any other book
in the Bible to be divine Scripture: and consequently not having assurance of
divine faith, in this point, they cannot have any faith at all in any other
points; since other points being not otherwise (in a Protestants judgment)
points of faith, then as they are conclusions proved out of Scripture, cannot
be more assuredly known, then Scripture it self, which is the only Premise,
or Principle, whence Protestants deduce all other points of their faith.
1 MY Adversary in In THE WAY. 9. but, in his printed book, cap. 7.
his treatise that I answered, to show that the Scripture is not the Rule,
whereby to find, and judge of true faith; objected the insufficiency, and
imperfection thereof: because there be diverse questions, and points of faith,
not contained, and determined therein. Which he endeavors to prove, by this
argument here set down. Whereto I answered directly, and in form, as THE WAY.
9. n. 3. and inde.
the book will show. The which my answer in this place, he replies to, as you
see, after his ordinary manner, with bragging, and saying nothing; and casting
out a few insolent speeches; The Protestants struggle with this argument. One
may easily see, how they stick in the mire. Only two things to the purpose.
It seems M. White saw the weakness of his answer, etc: whereto I answer.

2 First he says we struggle with this argument, and stick in the mire; which
in some sense I may not deny: for when I undertook this Jesuit, I struggled
with a dunghill, and therefore Hoc scio pro certo, quod si cu^ sterc^re, etc.
no marvel, if for my penance, I stick in the mire, both here, and in many
other places of this reply: his bragging, and railing, and facing it out with
nothing, when yet all this with many shall be accepted for sound divinity,
being such as will bemire, and weary any man in the world, that desires nothing
but the truth. Otherwise my answer, was direct, and plain: for the point he is
to prove, is, that the Scripture alone contains not, nor determines the whole
object of our faith: but diverse points needful to be believed are wanting in
it, and must be supplied by the authority, and tradition of the Church: his
reason to prove this is the Syllogism here set down. Whereto I answered.
First granting the mayor, and acknowledging it to be a point of faith,
necessary to be believed, that the Canonical books, which the Church uses,
are true divine Scripture: but I denied the second proposition, that they
cannot be proved so to be, by themselves, secluding Church authority and
tradition. And I distinguish: for the Authority, and direction of the Church,
is Gods outward ordinance to teach us, as a condition, how to see the Scripture
to be divine; but not the thing whereby they are proved so to be, and whereon
our faith leans: but this divinity, the Church as a bare Minister, out of the
Scripture it self, proves to be in the Scripture, not by her own authority,
that upon her word, and testimony, either only, or particularly it should be
taken for Scripture, rather then the books of other men. In the same manner
that a man shows a star giving light to it self, which yet another cannot see
till the man point to it. Or as a dead man's will kept in the Register, of
necessity must be sought there, and thence received: yet all the authority of
that court, which is great, and ample (specially in preserving records) neither
makes, nor proves the will to be legitimate, but is only a requisite
condition to bring it forth, and us to the sight and knowledge of it, the will
proouing it self by the hand and seal of him that made it, affixed to it. So
it is with the word of God, which we do not ordinarily see to be the word of
God, until the Church teach, and train us up therein. But when it has done,
the arguments whereby it is proved so to be, and the authority whereupon I
believe it, are contained in the word it self, which I expound, and confirm
by this, that evermore, and perpetually the Church, by the Scripture it self,
and by no other argument, proves it to be divine, to those she teaches, and
upon that ground, at the first received them for such her self: and many times
it falls out, as with some Atheists, and Pagans, that where no Church authority,
ministry, or persuasion is used, by only reading of the Scripture it self, in
respect of the outward means, a man coms to faith; which could not be if the
Scripture it self had not convinced him: for so much as an Atheist, or
unbeliever will not be persuaded by any thing, but that which he evidently sees
to be Gods own word: and this persuasion arises in him, from the very book it
self without Church authority.

3 And this is yet confirmed by that which the Jesuits teach against the
Anabaptists and Swinkfieldians, holding the motions of their inward spirit to
be Gods word: for Bellarmine De verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 1. and 2.
says, that to the faithful, acknowledging the Scripture to be Gods word, it
may be proved, out of the Scripture it self, that the Scripture is the word
of God. Molhusine and Gretsers Gretser. def. Bellar. l. 1. c. 2. page 34. D.
words are these. It is manifest that Bellarmine -- only affirms that it may
be proved, OVT OF THE SCRIPTVRES THEMSELVES, and the Canonical books thereof,
only TO THE FAITHFVLL who receive and reverence them for such, that the word
of God is, not the inward spirit whereof fantastical men boast, but the word
of God is truly it which is contrived in those books which the faithful hold
for Canonical. In which words they say three things. First, that the
faithful, who acknowledge the Scripture to be Gods word, are they persons of
whom they speak: and not such as receive it not. Secondly, that to such it may
be proved, that not the inward spirit of fantastical men, but the Canonical
Scripture, is the word of God. Wherein they affirm two things may be proved:
A Negative: that the inward spirit is not Gods word: and an Affirmative: that
Gods word is truly it which is contained in the Canonical books of the
Scripture. Thirdly, that both this Negative and this Affirmative may be proved
out of the Scriptures themselves. Hence I reason thus: To the godly that
receive and acknowledge the Scripture, this affirmative, that Gods word is it
which is contained in the Canonical Books of the Scripture, may be proved out
of the Scriptures themselves: therefore the Scripture it self can prove it
self to be the word of God. Therefore, that the Scripture it the very word of
God, is contained in the Scripture because otherwise it could not be proved so
to be out of the Scripture it self. Therefore all things needful are
contained in this Scripture. No wrangling can avoid this. If, to such as
receive them, it may be proved, out of themselves, that these Books are the
word of God; then this point, that these books are divine Scripture, is
contained in Scripture: and the cause why some see it not, is their own
indisposition and unbelief, wherewith the Scripture must not be charged: but
to such as receive these Books, the Jesuits affirm it may be proved, out of
themselves, that they are the word of God: that is, without all Church
authority, which is external and not in the Scripture.

4 Secondly, this being admitted, that it is a a point of faith necessary to
be believed, that the Canonical Books are divine; and then again, that they
could not be showed so to be out of themselves; yet does it not follow
ineuitably, that all points of faith are not contained in them: for the
question is not whether the Scripture be Gods word, or no, which is granted of
all hands; but whether being confessed so to be, it contain all such verities,
as a Christian man is bound to know: in such measure, that there is no point to
be believed, that is not contained therein. The reason is, because the
Scriptures are the principles of divine knowledge: and the faith thereof, Not
in nature, but in proportion.
like the credit we yeed to the rules of humane sciences, which are known,
and believed of themselves without any further demonstration. And as the kings
laws contain all things, whatsoever the subject is bound to do, and yet the
said laws, not proving themselves to be of authority; but supposing it to be
known before, and otherwise; are not thereby proved to be imperfect, or
defective, but being received, then there is nothing wanting in them, that is
necessary for the commonwealth: and as in all arts, and sciences, that we
learn, the rules, and precepts thereof need not prove themselves, (for that
which is the general rule of other things is not ruled it self, in the same
kind) and yet it were folly to say, they were therefore imperfect: So may it
be said to be in the Scripture (supposing it had no more light, thereby to
authorize it self, then Princes laws, and humane principles have) that it
contains all points of faith, though it were not expressed, that it self is
the word of God. For the readier understanding whereof, let the Reader again
cast his eye upon the occasion whereof all this question rises.

5 Our Adversaries holding many points of religion, which we refuse, we require
them to show us the said points in the Scriptures, if they will either have us
to believe them, or free themselves from heresy: their Tradition, their
Purgatory, their Mass, their Latin service, their Transubstantiation, their
Images, their seven Sacraments, their Invocation of Saints, and all the rest,
wherein we differ. This is showed c. 28. n. 3.
Their answer is, that many divine truths, and articles of faith are not
contained in the Scriptures, but revealed by Tradition, and Church authority,
which are to be received, and believed, as well as that which is written. The
original cause why the Papists set a foot the question touching the
insufficiency of the Scripture.
This is the original reason why they stand thus, against the sufficiency of
the written word, for their Church authority: and to prove this, they use the
Argument here propounded by the Reply: and descant with it as you see. Which is
an impertinent kind of proceeding; when this point, whether the Books
contained in holy writ, be Gods word, is no question between us, but agreed
upon of all hands: but the question is touching other special articles,
Images, adoration, half communion, and such like, a number more; whether, not
being contained in the Scripture, men are bound to believe them. For touching
these things it is properly that we say, Nothing is necessary to be believed,
as a point of faith, which cannot be proved evidently by Scripture. And
therefore this argument is impertinent. For where we affirm all points of
faith to be comprised, within the body of the Scripture, we distinguish, first,
of the things which we say are comprised: for albeit we firmly hold, the
divine truth, and authority of these Books to be evident in themselves; yet
the points, that we mean in this question are touching other matters: for
neither they nor we deny the Scripture, but both they, and we deny many things
to be contained in it. Secondly, then again of the manner how things are
comprised: for all other things are comprised in Scripture, as the duty, and
obedience of subjects is in the kings laws; and as true speaking is contained
in Grammar, or the right form of resolving in Logic: but this one point is
so contained as light is in the Sun, or sweet in honey, and according to the
same notion, whereby the authority of the Law, and truth of Principles, is
contained in themselves. This is it, which very briefly, I answered in THE WAY
9. 3. and digr. 11. n. 17.
two several places of my Book: Now let us see, what the Jesuit replies to
it. To this, says he, I reply, that principles insciences are either evident
to us, and known by the only light of nature, and so need no proof, but
only declaration of terms, or words, in which they be uttered; or if they be
not evident to us, they must be demonstrated, either in the same science, or in
some superior science, by some other principle, more evident to us. But that
these Books, which are in the Bible are divine Scripture, is not evident;
therefore (if M. Whites similitude be good) it must be demonstrated by some
other principle more evident to us, that these Books which are in the Bible,
be divine Scripture. The substance of his Reply is, that all principles are
either evident of themselves: or not evident: such principles as are evident,
he grants, need no proving, but the Scriptures are principles of religion, not
evident of themselves, but such as need to be demonstrated, to be Gods word, by
some other principle in a higher science, more evident to us: both denying them
to be evident, and also to be made so, by only declaring the words, wherein
they are uttered. And to prove this, he says, in the margent, if it were
evident (that these Books in the Bible are divine Scripture) how is it only
believed by faith, for Saint Paul calls faith Argumentu^ non apparentium? Heb.
11.1. 1. My answer is, that the Scriptures are principles evident of
themselves, to those that have the Spirit of God, and such as need not to be
proved by Church authority, but only to be revealed, and expounded, according
to that which is in themselves. This my answer to help the reader out of the
Jesuits perplexed discourse, I will lay down, and explicate in 3.
propositions. First, the Scripture in divinity has the same office, that
principles have in sciences: that as the rules, and principles of Grammar teach
all true speaking, and as the elements of Arithmeticke teach all right
numbering: so the doctrine contained in the Scriptures teaches all true faith.
Secondly, as they are the principles of religion, and rule of faith, so they
enjoy the same privilege, that principles do in foreign Professions; that is,
to be received, and assented to, for themselves without discourse. For Atist.
Poster. c. 1.
no humane science proves it own principles, or disputes against him, that
denies them: and although the principles of an inferior science may be
demonstrated in a superior, yet this befalles not that which is the highest,
as the Metaphysics; which having no superior science, neither stands to
demonstrate it self, nor to receive demonstration from another, but our
understanding assents immediately to the principles thereof, and so goes forward
by them, to discern of other things. In the same manner the Scripture, having
no superior science, or rule above it, is, like these principles, received for
it self, and is not occupied in proving it self, and the principles therein
contained; but showing other things by them, it self must be assented to
without discourse, by faith, before we can argue out of it. Thirdly, all
demonstration, and proof of principles is only voluntary, not necessary,
against him that denies them: as in Music, the Musician demonstrates his
precepts, not thereby to teach his art, but to convince him that denies it.
Hence appears the insufficiency of my adversaries reply. First in that he
says, principles are not evident, but need demonstration, that so the
Scriptures being yielded to be the principles of religion, yet they should not
be received, unless they prove themselves, until the authority of the Church
come. There is no man acquainted with Principia per seipsa nata sunt cognosci:
reliqua vero per principia. Arist. prio. l. 2 c. 18. idem Procl. in Euclid. l.
2. c. 2.
humane art will say so. His own Thomas Tho. 1. part. q. 1. art. 8.
says, that like as other sciences do not argue to prove their own
principles, but out of the principles argue to show other things: so the sacred
doctrine does not argue to prove the own principles, but from them proceeds to
show something --. The same is said by Capreol. prol in 1. part. q. 1. page 24.
Greg. Valent. tom. 1. page 50. a.
others. Next it is false, that the Scripture is like those principles which
need demonstration by some other principle in a higher art, more evident to us.
Here are two untruths. For first there is no higher art then themselves. Thomas
Vbi supra.
says, The sacred Scripture has no higher science. The setting up of the
Pope, and his Church above it, to give it authority, as a higher science gives
to a lower, is a blasphemous practice of Antichrist. Bozius Boz. de sign. eccl.
tom. 2. page 439.
writes, that the Scripture is not to be reckoned among such principles, as
before all things are to be credited; but it is proved and confirmed by the
Church, as by a certain principle, which has authority to reject and allow
Scripture. Let the Reader, by these words of Bozius, a famous Papist, conster
my adversaries meaning in this place: if he chance to say, he means not, as I
charge him. Again it is false, that the Church is more evident to us then the
Scripture, in that sense that belongs to this question: I see indeed the Church
that teaches me, before I believe the Scripture to be divine (supposing I were
a Pagan, that as yet had not received the Scripture) but I believe the
Scripture to be divine, and am convinced in my conscience that it is the word
of God, before I can believe the Church says true. For I cannot believe it
says true, but upon the grounds of Scripture, which it offers me; and
therefore consequently the truth of the Scripture is more evident then the
truth of the Church. In which case it is, as when a man stands in the door
with a torch in his hand, to give light to such as need; where he holds out the
torch indeed, yet he puts no light into it, nor does any thing, but only hold
it before them. The Church-authoritie, in ministering to us, does no more to the
Scripture then this man does to his torch. I will yet use a more familiar
conparison, whereby the Reader shall see, how absurdly my adversary holds the
Church to be more evident then the Scriptures, and to give them authority,
which they have not of themselves, because it propounds, and persuades them
unto us. Seius owes Caius money upon a bond; that upon trust, and for the better
keeping thereof, is put into the hands of Titius. For the proof of this debt,
it is necessary that Titius bring forth the bond; but when he has done, I
demand, whence has the bond his credit? How is it proved to be Seius his true
deed, rather then a counterfeit? Not by Titius his authority, because he brings
it forth, but by it self; in that the hand and seal thereof manifest
themselves to be Seius his: Titius that keeps it, is but a means to bring it
forth. But what if Seius deny the debt, that Caius be enforced to sue him, and
by law to cast him; who give, Caius the right, and makes Seius his debtor? and
who makes the bond of force? does the Judge; before whom the cause is tried?
The simplest man in the country will not say so: for the bond both proves it
self, and gives Caius his right, and make, Seius a debtor; when the Judge only
gives it execution, and declares no more, but that which was in the bond
before. Let the Scripture be compared to this bond; and let my adversary put me
to prove that it is the word of God, as Caius is put to prove his bond; and it
will manifestly appear, that though the Church have some ministry in
propounding it, yet that ministry or authority, call it what you will, does
no more then the Judge in this case does. It is not a principle above the
Scripture, or more evident, whereby the truth thereof is proved: as the Judges
authority proves not the bond.

6 Our adversaries, when they have wrangled what they can, are enforced to
confess thus much, in that they grant the last and highest resolution of our
faith to be into the authority of the Scripture. And let the Reader diligently
observe, how it comes about. In every controversy, and article of faith, they
say, they are moved by the authority of the Church, they believe the Trinity,
the Incarnation, the Scripture to be Gods true word, because God has so
revealed by the infallible authority of the Church. But how come they to know
this authority to be infallible? by what motive does the spirit of God induce
them to believe it? Can loc. p 48. Stapl princip doctr. page 318. and Tripl.
aduer. Whica page 184 188. Greg. Val. tom. 3. page 31. Rode^. Delgad de auth
Script. page 51. Pezant comm. in Tho. page 479.
They confess expressly, it is the revelation of the Scripture, giving
testimony to the Church, which revelation is believed for it self, and for no
other: therefore the highest and last reason, light, and authority, moving a
man to believe the things of faith, the sense of the Scripture, the authority
of the Church, and al, is contained in the Scripture it self. For thus I
reason: The revelation of the Scripture is believed for it self, therefore the
Scripture is a principle indemonstrable by any other, and evident in it self:
therefore it is not believed by Tradition, upon the authority of the Church,
but for it self: therefore this point, that the Scripture is Gods word, is
contained in the scripture: therefore the Scripture is al-sufficie^t, and wants
nothing that is needful to be believed.

7 Hitherto I have expounded the manner, how the Scriptures are said to be
Principles, that are to be admitted immediately without discourse of other
arguments: and how this their authority is not founded upon, nor demonstrated
by the authority of the Church: and how Church-authoritie is only a condition
and ministry to offer them unto us. Now I come to answer his argument, whereby
he would prove them not to be evident to us: the which is but a poor one. For
S. Paul does not say, Faith is the argument of things not evident, as the
vulgar Latin, cited in the margent, translates; but of things that are not
seen. Now things may be evident and appear manifestly to the understanding,
though they be not seen, when they are evident otherwise, by any light, or
discourse to the understanding. The which kind of evidence, and that also which
is by sense, may stand with faith: for the declaration whereof, note first,
that a thing is evident, Jn assensis principiorum scientiae humanitus inuentae,
est coactio, propter euidentiam speculationis quia in eu intellectus euidenter
conclusionem intuetur and speculatur. August Anconit. q. ^9. ar^ 4. ad 1.
when it moves the understanding so sufficiently, that it cannot choose but
assent unto it: note secondly, that a thing may be evident three ways; first
when it is sensible, as that which we apprehend by our outward sense: secondly
when by the light of nature it is manifest by it self; as two equal numbers
put together, make an equal. Thus the first principles and notions of nature
are evident. Thirdly, when it is manifestly gathered from that which of it
self is manifest: as that a stone cannot move upward of it self naturally,
because all heavy things naturally move downward. Hence it is plain, that
Albeit faith rest not upon that eu dence, but upon duine revelation. Fides non
elicit actus suos, mediante discursu; sed sicut visus immediate fertur in
obiectum, sub ratione lucid^^ta etiam fulei habitus in suum obiectum, sub
ratione diuinae reuelationis. The contrary whereof is Manichisme. Putaru^t
nihil amplius esse ^re dendum quam quod possit euidenti ratione demonstrari.
August. de vtil. credend. c. 1. tom. 6.
many objects of faith may also be evident, because that which is believed, may
also in some respect be seen, as Peter that believed Christ, yet also saw him.
Or otherwise be known by the light of nature, or gathered from that which is
known: as that there is a God. And before I read this in my adversaries
margent, I never knew but there was a compossibilitie of faith, and evidence,
in diverse respects: whereby they might both stand together in the same man,
about the same object. Eymericus Eymeric. Directo. part. 1. q. 2 n. 2.
says, We may know the unity of the Deity by natural reason: yet we believe
one God. Delgado: De Author. Script page 51.
Many divine things touching God, which are received by faith, may also be
found out by natural reason. Caietan Caiet. 22. qu. 175. art. 3.
says, though Paul were rapt into the third heavens, where he saw things which
before he believed, yet the habit of faith touching those things, remained in
him still, etc. Faith and knowledge, Mayro. 3. d. 23. art. 6. page 13
says Francis Mayronis, are habits that may stand together. Faith by
authority revealed; knowledge by evident demonstration. Thus it is no
contradiction, that the same object be believed by authority, and evidently
known by demonstration. Altisiodorensis: Altisiod. sum. l. 3. page 273.
According to diverse apprehensions, the same thing is known and believed,
believed and doubted. Mag. 3. d. 24. Alexand. 3. part qu. 79. m. 3. Tho. 22.
qu. 2. art. 4. cont. Gent l. 1. c. 4 Occh. 3. q. 8. art. 4. c. Duran. prol.
sent. page 4 c. Ricard. 3. d. 24. q. 5. page 85. Gabr. 3. d 24. qu. vnic. art.
2. concl. 2. Henric. Albert. Bonau. Tarantas. quos refert, and sequitur Dionys.
3. d. 24. Simanch. cath instit tit. 28 n. 18. Recte porro Caiet. ex hoc loco
Pauli, argumentatur esse nonnulla quae de Deo euidenter cognosci, and
demonstratiue probari queant. Perer. select. disp. in Roma. page 83.
The principallest Schoolmen that are, do all hold thus: which I would not
have noted so curiously, but to beat the confidence of my adversary, thus
peremptorily auouching against me, that he knows not. For albeit faith exceeds
the dimension of reason, yet reason is subordinate to it, as sense is to
understanding. And therefore as it is no inconvenience to say, we understand
the same things we see; no more is it to say, we believe that which is evident,
in diverse respects. How many things are we commanded in the Scripture to
believe, which yet we can demonstrate by reason? as that there is a God, and
the immortality of the soul? For as one may reveal a thing to another two
ways together: first by showing him a light to see it; and then by proposing
some external sign or mark whereby to find it; or some image or description
whereby to conceive it: so God has showed us the Scripture to be divine, not
only by the light that shines in it, whereby we believe it, but also by the
outward contexture of it, containing the image of the divine wisdom and
purity, as the principles of sciences show their own authority. The place
cited out of the Hebrews, is answered by that I have said.

CHAP. XX.
1. A continuation of the same matter, touching the Churches authority in
giving testimony to the Scriptures. 2. The Scripture proves it self to be
Gods word. 3. The light of the Scripture. 4. 5. How we are assured of the
Scripture by the Spirit. 6. The reason why some see not the light of the
Scripture. 7. The Papists retiring to the Spirit: 8. And casting off the
Fathers. A Council is above the Pope. The Pope may err.

A.D. It seems M. White saw the weakness of this his first answer, Page 70.
White page 47.
and therefore not standing upon it, he secondly attempteth to prove Scripture
to be divine, out of the Scripture. For, says he, S Paul 1. Tim. 3 v. 16
says, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God: and S. Peter 2. Pet. 1.
v. 20.
says, no prophecy in the Scripture is of private interpretation: but the
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Against this I
reply, that my argument does not enquire only how we prove in general, that
there is any divine Scripture at all (which is all that these, or any such like
sentences can prove) but chiefly I ask, how we prove these books in
particular, which the Church now uses, bearing the titles of S. Matthews, S.
Marks Gospel, etc. to be divine Scripture, and to be the same which was written
by those writers, whose title they bear. For upon the certain belief hereof,
depends the certainty of other points proved out of these books. Now it is
certain, that this is not proved by those sentences of Scripture, since it may
be true, that there is some divine Scripture, and that all true divine
Scripture was inspired by God, and yet (if we seclude Tradition, and
Church-authoritie) the question may still be, whether S. Matthewes, S. Marks
Gospel, etc. especially these in particular, which are now used, are part of
that Scripture which these sentences speak of. Secondly I say, that before
these sentences prove sufficiently that there is any divine Scripture at at
all, these sentences themselves must be supposed to be divine: the which cannot
sufficiently be proved, either by themselves, or any other like sentences, if
we exclude Tradition, which does show that they be divine.
1 All this I answered in the words of my Book Digress. 12.
immediately following these words that he has cited; and that so briefly and
directly, that nothing could be spoken plainer. To prove the imperfection of
the Scripture, he had said, it was no where expressly set down and determined
in Scripture that these books are the true word of God; this in particular of
every Book holden for Scripture, we shall not find expressly written, in any
part of the Scripture. Whereto I answered, that it was written expressly, that
2. Tim. 3.16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration: and 2. Pet. 1.20.
No Scripture is of private interpretation: but the holy men of God, spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost: Luc. 1 70.
God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets; therefore it is expressly written,
that all the books of Scripture are Gods word. Any man may see this answer to
be full, his question being touching this Scripture that we use, and have in
our hand, where therein it was written, that it self is Gods word? For I
answer, that it is written in these three places, whereof he has here
rehearsed two. Now he replies, that he does not only enquire how we prove in
general that there is any divine Scripture at all, but how we prove these
books, which the Church now uses, to be the same that those men writ, whose
titles they bear: which, he says, cannot be proved by the Scriptures
alleged; because it may still be doubted, whether these books that we use, as
the Gospel of Matthew and Mark for example, be part of that Scripture which
the texts alleged affirm to be inspired of God: and it must likewise be
proved, that these texts that affirm this, are themselves the word of God.
Whereto I answer first, that granting these places to prove some divine
Scripture to be, and to be inspired of God, it must be granted, that the
Scripture may be proved so to be, by the Scripture it self. For these
sentences, All Scripture is given by inspiration: Holy men spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost, and such like places, could not prove so much as in
general, that any books at all, whether it were these that we use, or no, are
divine Scripture, if themselves were not divine. I say they could not prove it
truly and effectually; they might say it, but they could not prove it, because
that which shall prove it, must it self first be a divine testimony.
Secondly, proving some divine Scripture to be, and to be inspired, they prove
this that we use to be such: because they so mention the Scripture they speak
of, that it appears to be this that we use; and it is agreed upon of all
hands, that there is no scripture but this: and therefore speaking of some
scripture, they speak of this. This is my argument, That Scripture, whereof
the sentences alleged speak, is proved thereby to be divine: But the
sentences alleged, speak of the same Scripture that we use: For the Church
has always understood it so. The sentences therefore alleged, prove this
Scripture that we use, to be divine. And so my adversaries demand is
satisfied: I enquire not only how it is proved by Scripture, that there is
some divine Scripture which is inspired by God: but that these books in
particular are that Scripture? For if it give any testimony at all, to any
Scripture at all, it is to these books in particular, which are now used: in
that it describes these books, neither are there, or have there been any
other; nor dares the Church of Rome it self hitherto canonize any other,
howsoever some therein think it may.

2 To this my adversary replies, that before these sentences can sufficiently
prove the Scripture to be divine, they must themselves be supposed to be
divine: which cannot be proved by themselves, if Tradition be excluded. I
answered this Digr. 12.
in my Book, whereto he has replied never a word, but stands dumb, and
offers the Reader that which I answered, in stead of a Reply to my answer:
nevertheless I answer again, that all places in the Scripture, which affirm
the Scripture to be Gods word, are proved to be Gods word by themselves, and
their own light; and not by Tradition, or Church-authoritie, which is but the
ministry whereby God reueales the proof to us, and it self is judged by the
Scripture. For if the Church-authoritie make them to be canonical, and divine
For that is it properly, that the Papists say, Bellar. Stapl. Grego.
to us, then it is either by adding truth, divinity, authority to them, which
they had not before in themselves by divine inspiration; or only by declaring
and revealing to us that truth, divinity and authority, which they have
immediately from God, of themselves, before the Church approved them, that we
might see and confess it. The former our adversaries will not say; or if they
will, it is Atheism, worse then blasphemy: for so all our faith, and the
highest reason moving us to believe, should not be divine revelation, but
humane authority; and the Scripture, which of it self had no truth or divine
inspiration, should be canonized by men. If the latter, which our adversaries
dare not deny, then who sees not, that they prove themselves, and in
themselves have divine authority immediately from God; the Church-authoritie in
approving them, being nothing else but bare ministry (in respect of the
Scripture, though in regard of us it be authority) in helping us to see that
which is in themselves. When the King stampes coin, and signs it with his
image and superscription, he puts that value and currentnesse into it, that was
not there before. Thus a small piece of copper, of it self originally not
worth a penie, may be made worth six pence. Thus the Church authorizes not the
Scripture. Stapleton Staplet. relect page 505. in explicat. art.
says, The Church approues not the Scripture the first way by making it sacred
and divine, for this approbation it has only from the holy Ghost the author
thereof, of whom alone it has to be sacred, and not humane: nor the second way
by making that through her judgment it should be accepted for true, and worthy
credit -- because that which is in the Scripture, is the divine truth BY IT
SELF, AND IS NOT MADE TRVE BY THE APPROBATION OF THE CHVRCH. But the third
way, in that by the force of her approofe and judgment, they are accepted of
the faithful for sacred and divine, and infallible true. And thus we believe
these Scriptures to be Canonical for the testimony of the Church. The King
sends a commission under seal, by a messenger; this messenger gives no
authority to the commission, but is the Kings minister, authorized to propound
it to the subjects. Thus the Church gives testimony to the Scriptures, that it
is divine, and no otherwise; and it self fetches this testimony from the
Scripture; and all the authority thereof is lastly resolved into the
testimony of the Scripture.

3 Next, these Scriptures are proved to be divine, by their own light shining,
and by their own virtue showing it self in them: as sweetness is known by
it own taste; and the Sun seen by it own light: and as the Kings coin is
known by his image upon it; and the fathers voice is known to his children by
the sound and fashion thereof: so are these Scriptures by the heavenly light,
image and sound, inspired into them, known to be the word of God. The
adversaries against whom I deal, have here with Turks and Infidels debarred me
from alleging Scripture to prove it self, and therefore I will show it
otherwise. Canus a Papist Can. loc. l. 2. c. 8. page 13.
says, A mind well disposed discernes the doctrine of God, as the mouth being
in taste, does the difference of tastes. Saint Austin: Aug. tract. 35. in Ioh.
In the night of this world, the Scriptures as a candle are lighted up unto us,
that we should not remain in darkness. Rob. Parsons in his Directorie, sets
down against the Atheist, how the certainty of these Scriptures is laid
before us. 1. By the Antiquity thereof. page 63. 2. Their manner of writing,
Authority and Preservation. p. 65. 3. Their sincerity, and the uprightness
of the writers. page 67. 4. The Consent of the Writers, one with another. page
72. 5. The Scope whereto they tend. page 73. 6. The Simplicity, Profoundnesse,
and Majesty of the writers. page 76. 7. The Contents. page 80. 8. The
Testimony given to them by heathens. page 100. etc. Pars. Christ. Directorie,
printed ann. 1585.
This light and heavenly majesty, by all men with one consent, affirmed of the
Scriptures, proves that they are the word of God. If the light, Vbi prius,
says the same Saint Austin, be able to show those things that are not light,
shall we say, it fails in it self? does not that open it self, without which
other things are not opened? and do you light a candle, to see a burning
candle? Is not the Sun or a star, seen by his own light to them that have
eyes? And if the ministry of the Church be required to propose, and offer,
and expound them to us, as it were Apoc. 1. vlt.
a candlestick (...). Areth. ibi.
to hold up the candle; so that as the Jesuits use to reply to this argument,
this light should not shine, nor this divinity appear in the Scripture,
unless the Church proposed them; Possib^le est actu cr^dere omma credend^ per
solam fidem infusam, ABSQVE TE^TIM^N^O, D^CTRINA, ^T MAG^ST^RIO ECCLESIAE.
Stapl. princip. l 8. c. 3. PER ILLAM SOLAM Sp sancti persuasione^ quodlibet
credendum credi queat, TACENTE P^ORSVS, VEL NON AVDITA ECCLESIA: fide priuata,
via extraordinaria, testimonio interno. Relect. in Adm. Whitak.. Iam quum.
does this light and majesty therefore arise from the Church? does the light
of the candle arise from the socket that bears it? Does the man that carries a
torch before his master, give light to the torch? and not the light thereof
rather from out of it self enlighten both his master and him? This light has
immediately converted Atheists, enlightened Infidels, reclaimed heretics, that
never so much as received or knew this Church-authoritie and tradition. Which
property of the Scripture, thus to eleuate it self above all
Church-authoritie, inuincibly shows that they prove themselves to be the word
of God. In all this that has been said, I grant we believe the Scripture and
the things of faith, by the ministry of the Church, but not for the
authority of the Church.

Page 111.
A. D Thirdly they hold that by this Spirit they are made inf^llibly sure of
the divine authority of the Scriptures, insomuch that when they hear or read
any book, they can by their spirit discern clearly and infallibly whether it
be divine Scripture or not: holding the Scripture of it self to shine like a
candle to them; and that they discern it from other writings, and the true
sense of it from false, in matters necessary to salvation, as the sense of
taste discerns sweet from sower. Upon this bold presumption of having and
being taught by the Spirit, proceeds their audacious and impudent neglect of
the authority of the ancient Fathers, general Councels, or whatsoever else
stands against that which they imagine to be taught them by the Spirit;
especially when they have seeming words of Scriptures to second that which is
suggested by this their spirit.

Page 114.
A. D. Again: M White says page 126 that the public word of God speaks in
the Scripture openly, though the children of God only know and believe it.


4 He says, it is our doctrine, that we are made infallibly sure of the divine
authority of the Scriptures by this spirit: insomuch, that reading the
Scripture, we can thereby discern whether it be Scripture or no, etc: and to
show this, he alleges some words of mine, M. White says, that the sheep of
Christ, know his voice. To which purpose, my other words also are used, that he
alleges, three pages after, M. White says, that the public word of God,
etc. There is little hope of reducing our adversary to any indifferency, when
they will not so much as sincerely report, nor ingenuously acknowledge that we
hold; for if they would, there were an end, and the world should see, we hold
the truth. Yet I will make all things plain, and let the Reader judge: for in
the ordinary course of attaining to faith, we do not, in the first place,
refer men to their own spirit, but bind them to hear the Church, and
stoop to her ministry: which having done, then we bid them examine
themselves, and affirm, that such as are led by the Spirit of God, through the
help and teaching of the Church going before, are by this Spirit made sure of
the divine authority of the Scriptures, and can discern thereof, as of the
light, etc. This Spirit therefore neither goes before the Church teaching
ORDINARILY, nor is the private spirit of man, but the Spirit of God, For Gods
Spirit testifies to our spirit all truths that are believed: giving that light
that infused faith immediately rests upon. 1. Ioh. 2.20 27.
witnessing with our spirit. This being premised, the Reply says, we hold that
by THIS spirit they are made infallibly sure of the divine authority of the
Scriptures, insomuch that by THEIR spirit they can discern, etc. This is
untrue. For the spirit, whereby the authority of the Scripture is assured unto
us, is neither this spirit, nor their spirit, nor yet For, in p^ocesse of time,
when the Church began to abound in temporals, forgetting in a manner, all
conscience, many rulers therein, cloking the Scriptures with sundry wiles,
feared not to falsify the upright judgments of God therein. We see persons,
having neither conscience nor science, gouern^ the spouse of Christ says
Fascie rerum antiq. an. 1414.
the unsavory spirit of the Pope, and his clergy; but the Spirit of God
testifying to our spirits that it is his word, after the Church has begun to
teach us. So that it gives not testimony to every one, immediately, without al
ministry of the Church: but the^, when the Church propounds and reueales the
Scripture to such as know it not, the Spirit of God by that ministry
descending into their hearts, and assuring them: and then, all the testimony
and authority of the Church, in this her ministry, gives place again to this
greater light of the Spirit of God in the believers heart, and is no part of
that authority, whereon his faith of the Scripture rests.

5 Let our adversaries therefore leave this custom of forging and
misreporting, and let them acknowledge the truth. No matter, to this point,
whether Protestants or Papists be the elect that have this spirit: but say
directly, and shrink not, is there not a Spirit, even the Spirit of God
enlightening the conscience, whereby every one that believes is assured? without
which, the authority and persuasion of the Church can do no good? Then if
there be such a Spirit, why may it not be called the voice of Christ, the light
that shines in the Scriptures themselves? and what defect is there, in saying
that by this Spirit, true Scripture, and true doctrine too, is discerned, The
soul has it taste, it feeling, it smelling: says Gers. sermon. de Bern. tom.
2. page 750. edit. Paris. 1606.
as the taste discernes sweet from sower? such as know not the Scripture, have
not this Spirit? The word of God speaks in the Scripture openly, though none
but Gods children believe it? Here I challenge my adversary, and all his sect,
let them deny this if they can. I would not have them with gesture to
out-stare it, but as Christian men ought to do, show some reason if it be
false; which they cannot do. D. Stapleton that labored in this matter beyond
all others, yet Triplicat. in admonit.
confesses, the internal persuasion of the Spirit to be so necessary and so
effectual for the believing of every object of faith, that neither without it
can any thing of any man be believed, though the church should bear witness a
thousand times: and by it ALONE, any thing that should be, may be believed,
THOUGH THE CHVRCH ALTOGETHER BE SILENT OR BE NOT HEARD. Princip. l. 8. c. 3.
Let our adversaries know, we do no way so extol the outward voice of the
Church, that we should teach, There can be no faith absolutely without it.
sine ea nullam fidei rationem posse absolute consistere. Here we see D.
Stapleton grants, that by the Spirit of God inwardly persuading, we may be, and
are, and without it, are not assured of any thing to be believed: and that such
as have this Spirit, do by IT discern which is the true Scripture, and the
true sense thereof, and which is not; as our taste discernes sweet from sower,
as our eyes light from darkness, does evidently follow of his words. And to
let the Reader see how this ignorant Jesuit censures that he understands not;
his own Canus Loc. l. 2 c. 8. page 43. edit. Colon. an. 1605
says, that as the taste well affected, easily discernes the difference of
tastes: so the good affection of the mind makes that a man can discern the
doctrine of God from error. It is therefore true, that the believer in himself
does taste and see by it own majesty, the Scripture to be Gods word, when the
Church has testified it a thousand times: and this taste and light of the
Spirit in the heart, is a thing distinct from the Churches authority, and
above it, though ordinarily this Church-authoritie in ministering, lead us to
the attaining it, and help to open our eyes that we might see it.

6 And the reason why some do not thus discern the true Scripture, or any
truth, is, not because the Scripture is not evident enough of it self, but
because such as discern it not, want their taste; and such as see, or hear it
not, want their senses: in the same manner that they do, which ca^ neither taste
the sweetness of honey, nor hear the sound of a bell, nor see the light of the
Sun, because they are senseless: for the Sun has light in it self, and
honey sweetness in it self, which are discerned by the sense it self, but
some have no such sense; and therefore Saint Austin Prolo de doctr. Christia.
says, They which understand not the things I write, must not reprehend me
because they understand not: like as if I should show them with my finger the
Moon or a star, which were not very bright, and they had not eyesight
enough to see my finger wherewith I point; they ought not therefore to be
incensed at me: So they, who understand ng these precepts that I give, cannot
yet perceive the obscure things which are in the sacred books -- must not
blame me, but pray that some light may be given to their eyes from God above.
For though I can with my finger point at a thing, yet I can kindle light in no
man's eyes to make them see that I point at. And again Tract. 35. in Ioh.
in another place he says, that as our eyes, though whole and open, yet need
the help of outward light to see: so our mind, which is the eye of the soul,
unless by the light of truth, which illuminates other things, but it self is
not illuminated, it be enlightened, can come neither to wisdom nor
righteousness. In which words Saint Austin affirms all this that we say, that
the Scripture, and every truth therein contained, shines as a light, and by
proportion, tastes of it self, and speaks publicly to all; as the Sun
shines openly to all; and the reason why men discern it not, is not any defect
in themselves, which must be supplied by Church-authoritie and tradition, but
only the def ct of disposition in themselves, whereof the want of
Church-ministery may be one cause. And a little more to show my adversaries
presumption in denying this: let the words of Ad Antolych. l 1 page 285. and 289
edit. Basil. Henrico Petr. an. 1555.
Theophilus Antiochenus, that lived two hundred years before Austin, be
observed: If thou (who art a Gentile) say to me that am a Christian, show me
thy God: I will bid thee again show me that thou art a man, and then I will
show thee my God. Let me see the eyes of thy soul, and the ears of thy heart
open. For as with carnal eyes we see the things belonging to this life: so
(...). --
with the eyes and ears of the soul only, it is possible to behold God, who
is not seen of all, but of such only, as can behold him, having the eyes of
their soul opened. All have eyes, yet some are so dim sighted, that they see
not the Sun: (...).
and yet the Sun has nevertheless light, albeit the blind see it not: who
must accuse themselves for their own blindness. In like manner, O man, are
the eyes of thy soul possessed with blindness, etc. This therefore which our
adversaries so scurrilously call bold presumption, of having and being taught
by the Spirit, was believed in the Church from the beginning: and it was never
called either audacious or impudent, till this Roman Church, and her
creatures, most audaciously and impudently renounced the authority, majesty
and evidence of Gods blessed Spirit, to advance the tyranny, heresy, and
pride of Antichrist. For the intended drift of all this vehemency, against the
authority of the Scripture it self, is but under the name of
Church-authoritie, to make room for their Antichristian tyranny: and by
outfacing us from that which we sensibly feel wrought in our conscience by the
holy Ghost, to abandon our selves over to the most heretical and damnable
authority, of whatsoever the Pope and his creatures shall thrust upon us.

7 But that which my adversary infers upon my speech, that hence (because we
say the children of God and particular men, are assured of the Scriptures, and
sense thereof by the Spirit of God; for I said no more, nor any way deny the
just authority of the true Church) proceeds our audacious and impudent neglect
of the authority of ancient Fathers, general Councels, and whatsoever stands
against us; I can scarce paste over, with any reasonable patience: for the
Fathers and Councels, in things that they held certainly and determinately with
consent, THE WAY,. 44 p. 3. and ibi D gr 47.
I purposely showed we allow and follow, and in every question will stand to:
but when our adversaries themselves cannot deny, that there is not only the
divine truth but a heavenly light also, whereby to see i^, in the Scriptures
themselves, that is not put into them by any testimony of the Church, whereby
a simple man may be able to discern an error in any Father or Council: what
fault is it in us by this light to judge of Fathers and Councels? Occham Dial.
page 18^
says, Catholic men may learn many truths not known before, by the sacred
Scriptures, although the Pope and Cardinals have not formerly attempted to
declare them. -- And whereas possible some may say that the simple people are
to believe nothing but what the Pope and Cardinals deliver to be believed
expressly: nor ought to search the mysteries of the Scriptures, but be content
with common things, not presuming of their own understanding to believe any
thing expressly, but what the Pope and Cardinals deliver: BUT HE THAT SHOULD SAY
THVS, WERE AN INVENTER OF NEW ERRORS: for though the simple people be not
ordinarily bound to believe expressly any thing but that which by the Clergy
is already declared to be believed expressly, yet these simple people BY READING
THE SCRIPTVRES, and THE SHARPNESS OF THEIR REASON, which simple people do not
altogether want, may find something EVIDENTLY to follow of the divine
Scriptures, which the Pope and Cardinals have not declared: in which case they
may, and must expressly believe it, and are not bound to enquire of the Pope and
Cardinals, because they are bound to prefer the Scripture before them. -- And
the reason of this is, for THE POPE AND CARDINALS ARE NOT THE RVLE OF OUR
FAITH. The Divines of Venice, in their late writing against the present Pope,
lay down these conclusions: Tract. de in terdict. prop. 8.
The law of God is the rule of the Popes power. Prop. 12.
Christian men may not obey the Popes command, unless they first examine it:
and he that inconsiderately obeyes, before such examination, sins. Prop. 13.
It excuses not a Christian man, though the Pope constantly affirm his
commandment to be just, but it behoues him to examine it, and to direct
himself according to the rule given above. Gerson Part. 2. recom licent page
832.
says, The spirit of a just man, now and then gives warning of the truth,
better then seven watchmen set in a high place to watch. Do not Quis enim sant
capitis diceret sententiam amplectendam solius Papae, quae potest errori
subesse, and postponendam sententiam Ecclesiae? Anton. de Rosell. monarch. page
67. Dico quod postq^am Concilium est congregatum, and Papae authoritas in
teruenit, authoritas Papae postea confundi tur cum Concilio, and remanet forma
Concilij: and authoritas Papae congregantis finitur, facta congregatione.
Iacobat. de Conc. l. 10. art 6. page 614. D. Cum agitur de fide, Synodus est
mayor quam Papa. Zabarell. de schism. page 701. A. The same is directly holden
by Almain. de author. eccles. cap. 7. page 725. F. Occham. compend. erro. cap.
vlt. sub fin. And the Divines of France at this day. Lib. de eccl. and polit.
Pet. de Alliaco de eccles. author. part. 3 cap. 2. page 924. Mariana says,
Multi viri prudentes, and graves eruditione maxima, Pontifices Romanos
Ecclesiae vniuersae subiecerunt. de Reg. l. 1. cap. 8. page 74. Note the speech
of Almain, Determinatis per summum Pontificem non est necessario credendum:
quamuis non sit oppositum public dogmatisandum: nisi manifestum sit ea sacris
literis, etc. Quest. in Vesperg. page 133.
the strongest champions the Church of Rome has, limit the Popes authority,
making it subject to the Church; and allowing men to examine it before they obey
it? which shows unanswerably, that in the Scripture it self (for that also is
granted at the last to be the the rule whereby to try him) is a light, which
may be seen by a private person against the Popes commandment? and unless
they assume an unlimited authority, and such as is subject to no trial, to
their Church and Pope, which the violentest adversary we have dare not do; they
shall, though they be wrangled till dooms day, be enforced to grant the same
authority and light in the Scripture, that we affirm.

8 Again, before my adversary had charged us with audacious and impudent
neglect of Fathers and Councels, he should have answered the 47 Digression of
my book, where I have related those practices of Papists in contemning,
rejecting, eluding, purging, abusing both Fathers and Councels; that if they
had any spark of grace in them, they would be ashamed to charge others with
that impudency, and audaciousnesse, which none are guilty of so much as
themselves. I will rehearse nothing of that which there I writ: but add
something to it, whereby the Reader shall judge who they be that most
impudently, and audaciously neglect antiquity. D. Marta, in a book dedicated
to the present Pope, D. Marta de iurisdict. part. 4. page 273.
says, the common opinion of the Doctors is not to be regarded, when the other
opinion contrary to them, favors the power of the Keys, or the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction -- or a pious cause. This man speaks plain, that
one may understand him; the Fathers, all of them, must crouch to the Keys, and
pious cause of the Pope: which Keys, and cause, when they come to scanning,
will prove as partial, as any private spirit in the world. And touching the
interpretation of the Scripture, Baron. An. 34. n. 213
says, the Bishops, all of them, who succeeded in the room of the Apostles,
attained not the sense, and understanding of the Scriptures; for the Catholic
Church (now turned Protestant and private) does not always, and in all things,
follow them. How then? I am no less delighted, Pined. in Job 19 v. 26. nu. 3.
says a Jesuit, when I see, and hear, some wise man, of our age (as Fran.
Suarez: a Jesuit, for example) and upon occasion bring him into my
Commentaries; then when I cast mine eyes upon many of the ancient Fathers. Here
antiquity must give place to a Jesuit; and yet if the Protestants do but one
half of this, they are audacious, and impudent upon their bold presumption.
This is that Erasmus Annot in Hieron. Praef. in Dan. tom. 3. p. 28.
noted of them long ago. When it is for our purpose, the authority of Hierome,
is worth any thing; when otherwise, it is not for our purpose, it is worth
nothing: and afterward they condemn us, because we believe them not. The
examples how they cast off Fathers, and Councels, and all antiquity, are
innumerable, they do it in every question that falls out between us, whenever
they join in the trial with us: and they confess that they may be refused,
because they may err. Guido the Carmelite, Guido de Perpin. de haeres. c. 7.
page 8. edit. a Bad. Ascens. an. 1528.
says, Albeit the writings of the holy Doctors be to be handled, and read, and
received with due reverence, yet is their authority, neither so firm, nor
inviolable, but it may be lawful to contradict them, or doubt of them, where
they are not proved, and confirmed evidently, and expressly by the holy
Scripture, and where the Church has not determined their firm, and undoubted
soothfastnes. Whence it follows, that an opinion cannot precisely be convinced
of heresy by the saying of the Doctors: for where where is not infallible
truth, there is no certain faith: since certain faith leanes upon infallible
truth, yea there can be no infallible assent, that a man should firmly cleave
to such things: for when there is no infallible truth, there can be no
certain, and undoubted faith. -- But in the saying of the Doctors, there is no
infallible, certain, or undoubted truth, partly because, they sometime doubt
themselves in their own sayings, whether they have erred therein, or no: --
partly because, their disagreement is a testimony of falsity: -- and what
disagreement there is among the Doctors, no man doubts, that has read their
writings. -- It is not necessary therefore, vndoubtingly to believe them, but
it is lawful to THINK AGAINST THEM, DISALOW THEM, AND REJECT THEM without any
danger of heresy. So he. And yet you see, how busily my adversary taxes
Protestants for neglecting the Fathers, like the crabfish, that chid her young
one for creeping backward, and yet went backward her self: it were an honester
course, and more relishing of piety, for our adversaries to spare our
dissenting sometime from the Fathers, as they do their own: and only inquire
whether we dissent with reason, as themselves sometimes do: but this were
labor, and expense: a Jesuits pen can afford railing, and facing a great
deal better cheap.

CHAP. XXI.
2. Which is the Militant Church. 3. And the Catholic. 4. The Church of the
Elect invisible. 5. A rancid conceit of the Jesuit.

Page 113.
A. D. This (Church) which consists of Professors, M. White White page ^9 100.
calls the Church Militant: that which consists only of the Elect, he
calls the Catholic Church; but to keep the Antithesis, he should rather
call it the Church Triumphant; not Triumphant, as we Catholics take the name,
for the happiest part of the Church, which is now glorious in heaven: but, as
it being a Church invisible in earth, may triumph indeed, as having no need to
fear any persecutions, in that none in time of persecutions can find the^
out, nor can know them, nor consequently can persecute, or hurt the^, for being
members of Christ's true Church. But as, in this respect, it may be called the
Church Triumphant* so on the other side it may be called the Church Lamentant,
as having so just cause to lament, in that the members of it being unknown,
not only to the world, but to one another, can have no society one with
another, requisite to the nature of a true Church; nor can perform those
offices, which should be done, in, and only in the true Church: nor can tell,
whom to repair to, for instruction in faith, or for counsel in direction of
manners, or for the comfort of the holy Sacraments: nor can have any known
Pastors to govern the Church, nor any known sheep to obey these Pastors:
nor can have any Historiographer to write their acts, thereby to edify men,
with the virtues exercised by them, or so much as to make it appear to
posterity, that such a company has been (according to Christ's promise) always
extant in the world. In this respect, it may be called a Church Lamentant, or a
Lamentable Church.
1 MY Adversary being in a deep discourse about the persons, and societies of
men, to whom alone God vouchsafes the assistance of his Spirit, for the
understanding, and believing the things of faith: thinks himself interrupted
by a speech of mine, in the place quoted, touching the Church Militant, and
Triumphant: the which if he had misliked, he should have confuted in it own
place, where I used it, to show the true state of the question concerning the
visiblenes of the Church; saying, the question is of the Militant Church;
though we say also, that the Church mentioned in the Creed, every member
whereof is saved, be in some sort invisible too, in that the Church Triumphant
in heaven, which is one part of the Church mentioned in the Creed, is to us,
that live here, invisible, and only believed. This speech my Adversary,
according to his disordered, and cowardly Method, used in all his book, durst
not confute in it own place, where it lay, but draws in, backwards by the
tail into the den of his discourse, as Apollodo. de orig. deorum.
they say Cacus did the oxen, he stole from Hercules, that he might the better
descant upon it, when his Reader, by this his glancing at it, cannot know the
purpose whereto I intended it, nor the ground whereupon I affirmed it.

2 That which he says is four things: First, that I call that which consists
of Professors, the Church Militant; the which you see he mentions, so that one
would think he meant to condemn it; yet he dares not, but only craftily
repeats it, to expose it to censure, with the rest that follows: for Catech.
Roman. page 112. edit. Colo. an. 1507. Bellar. Eccl. mil. c. 1.
his own side speaks in the same manner. D. Bannes 22. page 94. edit. Venet.
apud D^mian. Z^nar. 1602.
says: The Church which UPON THE EARTH, LIVES IN WARFARE, is called Militant.
-- One way as it is a congregation of such as profess the faith of God --
another way, as it is congregated not only by faith, but also by Baptism. In
this therefore there is no fault; but all is well: for this part of the Church
on earth that lives in the Camp, warfaring with the Devil, the world, and the
flesh, in that respect, by the Papists own confession, is rightly called the
Church Militant.

3 Next he says, the Church, which consists only of the Elect, I call the
Catholic Church. Which he dares not deny neither, when he bethinks himself
a little better, how the Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, Catech. Romans
in symb. Sanctorum communionem.
is no other, then that whereto belongs the Communion of Saints, the
forgiveness of sins, the life everlasting: and though the reprobate, and
unbelievers mingled among these, are called also by the name; Showed cap. 39. n
6.
yet are they no true, or univocal members thereof, in as much, as Ephesians. 5.23.
Christ is the Savior of his body: but the Church, wherein they live, as mice,
and vermin live in a man's house, is called Catholic in respect of the Elect.

4. The third thing he says, is, that this Church Militant, and Catholic, to
keep the Antithesis, I should either have called the Church Triumphant, not as
Catholics mean Triumphant; but because being visible, it may triumph indeed,
in that no persecutors can find, know, or hurt them. But this foolish conceit
auoids not that I said, but idly, and rudely flies from it: for the Church,
which in that place, I affirmed to be invisible, is not the militant, but the
Church of the Elect alone: which considered apart, by it self, and abstracting
from all other respects; our adversaries themselves confess to be invisible,
in that they hold Possunt homines, aliquibus coniectutis opinari quinam sint
qui ad hunc piorum hominu^ nun erum pertineant: certo autem scire minime
possunt -- Haec Ecclesiae pars est incognita. Cate. Romans p 113.
no man can judge, who are elected, nor see the glorified triumphing in heaven:
and so they lie open to the Jesuits raw conceit, as much as we.

5 Fourthly, he gives a reason, why I should rather have called the Church,
Triumphant, then Militant, or Catholic; because being, as Protestants hold,
invisible, it need fear no persecution, but may triumph indeed, when no man
can hurt, or find them. And then spinning out the conceit, he says. It may
also be called a Lamentant, or a lamentable Church, in that being invisible
members thereof can have no fellowship one with another: nor perform those
offices, which should be done, or tell where to seek for instruction,
Sacraments or Pastors, nor finally have so much, as a Historiographer to write
their acts, etc. In this respect, the Protestants invisible Church, may be
called a Church Lamentant, or a Lamentable Church. This is the Jesuits
crudity: and yet a well digested answer, to that I said touching these matters,
would have more prevailed with all that love the truth. For how, and in what
manner, we hold the Church to be invisible; and how all this that is objected
may be answered, I have showed at large. 17. ad 24.
in the WAY. And here I only admonish my adversary, that he had a Lamentable
cause in hand, and as Lamentable a faculty to manage it, when with a
flegmaticke jest, he mentions that, which yet in the place where he was put to
it, thought it his best course to say nothing to it.

CHAP. XXII.
1. Reports made by Papists, that the Protestants are without religion. They
hold the justification of the Gentiles without the Gospel or knowledge of
Christ. 2 No salvation but in one true religion. 3 The Repliers tergiuersation.

Page. 131.
A. D. The conclusion of my first Chapter, to wit, that faith is necessary to
salvation, was chiefly intended to be set down, against such, as think it
sufficient to lead a moral honest life, without care of embracing either one,
White p. 2.
or other faith. Both my adversaries grant this my conclusion: therefore I need
not say much about this matter.
1 The conclusion here mentioned, that faith is necessary to salvation, was not
chiefly intended against such as think a moral honest life sufficient without
care of embracing faith: but against the Protestants, whom Wright. Art. 1.
Posse^in. bibl. select. l 8 c. 1. ad 12.
they report to have no Faith, nor God, nor Religion; but to be mere Atheists.
Hosius, and Prataeolus Prateol. elench. l. 1. c 77. page 71.
write that we worship the Devil; and as Catholics forsooth worship God 9.
times aday, so we invoke, and worship the Devil 10. times aday. D. Stapleton
says, Qu. 3. quod. lib. p. 621.
There is no Religion at all in us, neither true, nor false; neither earnest,
nor fained: and what opinions they have raised of us in Italy and Spain, all
men know, neither is it credible that he thinks the faith of Christ to be so
necessary to salvation, as here he says: for many Divines of his Church allow
salvation to the Gentiles, who have no faith, but only moral honesty of life.
Sleid. comment. an 52. p. 690.
This was preached at the Council of Trent: and published by Andrad. orthod.
explic. p. 291.
a principal man of the Council: the Divines also of Collen Bale cent. 14. c.
59. page 220.
set forth books concerning the salvation of Aristotle, wherein they
maintained that as John Baptist was the forerunner of Christ in the things of
grace, so Aristotle was his forerunner in the things belonging to nature. Yea
Acost. de Indorum salut. l. 5. c. 3. Grego. de Val. ^om. 3. page 302.
a Jesuit blabs it out, that certain School Doctors of this time, very grave
men, confirm, that salvation may be had without any knowledge of Christ: the
which is true, and these Doctors That the Gentiles which know not the gospel,
are justified and saved, by their moral life, and believing that there is a
God rewarding such as come toward him, without the knowledge, or faith of
Christ; is an opinion that has great patrons in the Church of Rome. Gregory of
Valenza says it is holden by Vega, Soto, and Victoria, to whom CASSALIVS (de
quadripart. inst. part. 1. l. 1. c. 12.) adds Aquinas, Lyra, Abulensis, Bruno,
Dionysius Carthus. Arboreus Laudunens. Durand. Capreolus, Paludanus, Ludouicus
Viues: and himself thinks it may be holden safely. Nullum, in hac part,
discrimen rimendum videtur, si quis, sibi concessa optione, sententiam hanc,
vel illam, obnixe tucatur. page 51. ANDRADIVS, Vt quis cum Deo arctissimo
charitatis iustitiaeque vinculo, prioribus illis seculis, constringeretur,
nullam aliam fidem requirebat Paulus quam credere Deum esse, and inquirentium
se munificentissimum remuneratorem esse. Hanc qui, accepta a rebus creatis
disciplina, fuerint consecuti, quid est quod a iustitiae sinibus excludantur?
etc. page 290. orth. expl. VEGA. Atque hinc persuaderi potest non solum
iustificari posse homines, sed and saluari^^ sine fide Christi explicita -- cum
haberi possit ignorantia inuincibilis Euangelij, nullum, ex hac part,
impedimentum erit, quo minus, qui alia praecepta naturalia seruauerint, and
iustificentur, and saluentur. Pro Council. page 59. l. 6. c. 19. and 20. D.
WESTON says of this opinion: susceperunt eam nonnulli sententiam, etiam
orthodoxi, iuxta ac doctissimi viri. de Tripl. hom. offic. l. 3. c. 22. page
324. Whereby a man may see what account they make of the repliers proposition.
Note S. Austins censure of this opinion. An forte and istis qui exhibuerunt
terrenae patriae Babilonicam dilectionem, and virtute civilly, non vera, sed
verisimili, daemonibus vel humanae gloriae, seruierunt; Fabricijs videlicet,
and Regulis, and Fabijs, and Scipionibus, and Camillis, ceterisque talibus,
sicut infantibus qui sine baptismate moriuntur, prouisuri estis aliquem locum,
inter damnationem regnumque coelorum, vbi non sint in miseria, sed in
beatitudine sempiterna, qui Deo non placuerunt, cui sine fide placere
impossible est, quam nec in operibus, nec in cord, habuerunt? NON OPINOR
PERDITIONEM VESTRAM VSQVAM AD ISTAM POSSE IMPVDENTIAM PROSILIRE -- introducens
genus hominum quod Deo placere possit, sine Christi fide, lege naturae: HOC EST
VNDE VOS MAXIM CHRISTIANA DETESTATVR ECCLESIA. l. 4. cont. Iul. cap. 3.
are the principal men, that have lived of late times in the Church of Rome:
Nec hactenus aliquid sit determinatum per sanctam matrem Ecclesiam. Cassal.
page 51.
neither has the Church determined to this day, any thing against them. The
Jesuits conclusion therefore, that faith is necessary to salvation, is not
believed among his own, but he sets it down against us, partly to insinuate,
that we think the contrary; and partly to lay a ground for his Roman heresies;
which afterward he assumes to be this faith. Nevertheless my granting it to be
true, has pleased him, because, in his ignorance, he knew not the contrary to
be so current, as it is, and so he says no more to me about it.

A. D. Concerning the second Chapter -- The conclusion of this Chapter, to wit,
that faith necessary to salvation is but one, Page 133.
was meant against them, that think they may be saved in any religion, or with
whatsoever faith, without care, whether it be this or that, Protestant, or
Catholic, etc. This conclusion is granted by both the Ministers.
2 This conclusion, as the former, was laid, as a ground to build the Papacy
on, which afterward is made the thing, whereby this one faith is defined, and
therefore it was intended against us; who yet abhor the opinion that allows
salvation to any Religion, more then Papists do; and leave it to Alcho. p. 10.
and 40. Cantacuze^. in Maho. orat. 2. n. 10.
Turks, and Philastr. Brixiens. de haeres. in Rheto. p. 28.
Heretics: requiring our adversaries not by such aequiuocating insinuations as
this is, to traduce us, but to speak the truth of us; and in such points, as
we truly differ, in modesty to confute us: which though it be difficulte, yet
the enterprising thereof is not so odious, as this base, and abject
aequiuocating is: but whosoever the conclusion was bent against, I deny it not;
and so he says no more to me about it.

Page 135.
A. D. Concerning the Third Chapter -- The conclusion of this Chapter, to wit,
that Faith is infallible, was directed against such as think, this or that to
be true faith, but do not rest infallibly assured thereof. This conclusion is
granted as the former were, by both my adversaries: save that M. Wotton
mislikes, etc.
3 My granting of this conclusion, you see, contents him; that he leaves me,
and turns upon M. Wotton, as he did in the two former chapters, and this he
does stilly, without any noise; as if there were no more work for him, in the
rest that I said; and so he goes slily forward to another matter. But in the
place cited, besides the granting of his conclusion, I noted, in the proof he
brought for it, a Romish trick that makes Gods word, whence faith has
infallibility, to be the Popes decretals, and Traditions; and I so noted, and
showed in a Digression that if my adversary would have dealt really, and have
had his conclusion truly understood, he should in this place, have confessed
whether the Traditions I mentioned were not part of that word, that makes faith
certain, and infallible? The which he might not deny; and therefore he says
nothing to it: because if he should discover the Popes Traditions to be equal
with the Scriptures in supporting faith; then what he said in his conclusion,
he should unsay in the explication of it. For though faith must be certain;
yet all men know, that if it be grounded on Traditions that are uncertain, it
cannot be so: and therefore he goes slily forward, and stirs not this point.
And in this fashion he turns his back upon all my Book; and only at randon
pickes out from the rest that goes with them, such parcels, as he thought
himself best able to deal with.

CHAP. XXIII.
Touching the implicit faith that is taught in the Church of Rome. 3. How
defined by them. 7. In what sense the Protestants mislike or allow it. 9.
Arguments, made for it, answered. 11. The ancient Church allowed it not.

A.D. Concerning the fourth Chapter -- Page 137.
My principal conclusion in this chapter, to wit, that Faith must be entire,
is against such, as think it sufficient to believe one, or two, or some few
articles of Christian faith; thinking it not needful, under pain of damnation
to believe all: but rather think they may doubt of, or deny other points,
although known to be held, as points of faith, by the Catholic Church.
Against whom I affirm, that Faith must be entire; and it must extend it self,
universally to all points, either expressly, or implicitly: and that it is
damnable to deny rashly, especially obstinately, any one point, which one
either knows, or (in regard he has it sufficiently propounded by the Church)
ought to know, to be revealed by God. Against this my conclusion both my
aduersaies, do oppose themselves -- Again -- Page 139.
Secondly whereas I insinuate, a general or implicit belief of some points
of faith, to suffice some persons, at least in some cases, M. Wotton admits
it, which I gratefully accept: but cannot see how this will please his fellow
M. White, who so hoatly disputes against implicit belief (as it seems) of
any point of faith; White page 7.
when he asks, to what purpose should God propound all the points of our
faith, one as well as another, if his will were not that we should learn all?
This opinion of M. Whites (if he mean it so universally, as his words sound)
is intolerable, and such as might drive, at least unlearned men, to despair
of salvation, in regard it is impossible for them without miracle, to get
express knowledge of all points, contained in Scripture; all which are points
of faith, and consequently are points necessary to be believed, either
expressly, and in particular, or implicitly, and in general, under pain of
damnation. Indeed I do grant, and never did deny, but that there are some
points necessary, to be particularly known of all sorts, necessitate medij,
and some necessary to be known, necessitate praecepti. In which points,
implicit belief does not suffice, but express particular knowledge is
required by Catholic Divines, to be joined to the assent of our faith.
Whereby appears, that M. White does utter two gross untruths, White p. 5.
and 7.
when he says, that we utterly refuse knowledge, and that the Colliars faith
is canonized for our Creed. In other points so far as we neither know, nor
have sufficient means to know them, we may well commend the Colliars faith, in
believing in general, as the Church believes. For in this general act, is
infolded a vertuall, or implicit belief, of all points; both in regard a
general includes all particulars contained in it, as also for that this
particular act of believing the Church, eo ipso (in that we are moved unto it
by the authority of divine revelation, as the primary, or formal cause, and by
the authority of the Church it self, as a necessary condition, or the
secondary cause) does so dispose the mind of the believer, that he is ready to
believe, every other point, revealed by God, and propounded by the Church. --
Again. Page 140.
Thirdly whereas M. White White p. 5.
requires particular knowledge, to be joined with the assent of faith, as
though he meant, that one could not believe any point of faith, which he did
not first expressly, and in particular know; this his assertion is not only
contrary to his fellow M. Wotton, Wotton p. 46.
who admits a general, or implicit belief of some points, which we do not
in particular know; 1. Cor. 13. v. 2.
but it is also against the Scriptures, Fathers, and natural reason it self.
In the Scriptures we have, that not only Faith, and knowledge, Heb. 11. v. 1.
are 2. distinct things; but also that faith is of things not apparent, or not
known, and that faith does captiuate the understanding for the service of
Christ, 2. Cor. 10 v. 5. Romans 10. v. 16.
requiring an obedience in the believer: all which were not verified, if
express, particular distinct knowledge, were presupposed before belief: or if
belief, and such knowledge, were all one thing. The Fathers do not only
distinguish faith, and knowledge, but do also affirm Faith to be without
knowledge of things believed. Iren. l. 2. c. 45.
It is better (says Irenaeus) that one that knows nothing, believe God, and
persevere in his love, which does quicken a man: then by subtilties of
questions, and by much speech, to fall into impiety. Not to know (says S.
Hilary) that which thou must believe, Hilar. l. 5. de Trin. ante medium. Aug.
Ep. 102. ad Euodium.
does not so much require pardon, as reward: because it is the greatest stipend
of faith, to hope for those things, which thou know not. If (says Saint
Augustine) Christ was borne only for those, that can discern these things
with certain knowledge, in vain almost do we labor in the Church: which he
says, in regard the common sort cannot with all the preaching in the world
discern with certain knowledge, the high, and hard Mysteries of the blessed
Trinity, Incarnation, and other such mysteries of faith; and therefore not the
viuacitie or quickenesse of understanding (says the same Saint Augustine) but
the simplicity of believing, Aug. cont. Fund. c. 4. Tract. 40. in Joan.
does make the common sort of people most safe. And again (he says of some)
they did not believe, because they knew: but they believed, that they might
know. And in the same place he asks, what is faith, but to believe that thou
see not? Conformable to which also he says. Sermon. 120. de tempore.
After we have received Baptism we say, I am a faithful man: I believe that
which I know not. Reason also, and experience it self teaches, that belief
and knowledge are distinct; and that belief does not necessarily presuppose
knowledge: but is rather sometimes an antecedent to it. Insomuch, that even in
natural things, the Philosopher acknowledges that one that learneth must
believe before he come to knowledge. M. White may ask, how one can assent to
the verity, which he does not first apprehend, or know? I answer, that some
apprehension, at least confuse, rude, and general, I do not deny to be
requisite, in the assent of faith: but express, particular, distinct, or
clear apprehension, or knowledge is not necessary: otherwise not only the
common sort, but the learnedest in the world might despair of saluation^ in
regard they could not believe the mystery of the blessed Trinity, which no man
in this life can distinctly, and clearly understand, and know: and yet all
sorts of men are bound to believe it explicit: and much less could they
believe both it, and all other mysteries, contained in the whole corpse of the
holy Scripture; all which are necessary to be believed in one sort, or other,
explicit, or implicit, as has been proved: and yet no one learned man, has
particular distinct knowledge of every truth contained in the Scriptures: Quis
enim est hic, and laudabimus eum?
1 FOr the reducing of this wild discourse into some order, and the better
discerning of the controversy, you are to note that the Jesuit, in the
beginning of his Treatise, laid down 4. propositions touching faith; out of
the which he would spin his motives to Papistry: the first is, that Faith is
necessary to salvation. The second, that this faith is but only one. The third,
that it must be infallible. The fourth, that it must be entire, extending it
self to all points universally. This conclusion I granted in one sense, and
denied in another: That our belief must be entire, whole, and sound in all
points by obtaining a particular distinct knowledge of the same in our selves:
that so our faith might include an apprehension, and knowledge of that we
believe, as well as an assent in the will; I granted: but if his meaning were,
that which then I suspected, and now he bewraies; that the implicit faith,
taught by the Jesuits and schoolmen, destitute of knowledge, and only
believing, as the Church believes, were this entire faith so necessary, and
infallible; then I denied it, and gave my reasons: and Dig. 2.
in a special Digress. showed and confuted it. All which he passes by, and
only mentions as you see, my bare assertion against his implicit faith: but
what I said in describing it, confuting it, and showing the drift, and purpose
of it; he touches not, though it concerned his cause, more then that, which he
replies to. This is his method whereto he cleaues in all his book, to reply
entirely, to nothing.

2 That which he says, is two things. First, he repeates, and expounds his
conclusion: Next he touches some small portion of that I said concerning it. In
repeating his conclusion, first he says, he meant it against such, as think
it sufficient to believe some few articles only, though they deny, or doubt of
others, which yet the Church believes: yea rashly, and obstinately denies them:
who these men are, he names not, but he means the Protestants. Because they
deny such points, as the Church of Rome (which he means by his Catholic
Church) untruly propounds unto them. For they must be the persons intended,
that deny any thing, which the Roman Church holds for an article of faith: as
the Popes primacy, Purgatory, Images, and the rest: which in Commonly printed
with the Trent Council. inserted in the WAY praef. n. 15.
the new Creed of the Trent Council are made articles of faith. But the
Protestants answer readily, that they confess no point at all may be denied,
or doubted of either obstinately, or rashly, or at all, that is a point of
faith revealed in the word of God; but the things holden and propounded by the
Church of Rome against them, are the false doctrines, and heresies of
Antichrist, ridiculously called the faith of the Catholic Church. Then
expounding his conclusion, he shows in what manner faith must believe all
things, that it may be entire: and he says either expressly, or implicitly:
wherein he bewrayes, that which I suspected, and signified in my answer for his
conclusion, being, that faith must be entire and sound, steadfastly believing
all things revealed: I The WAY. page 5.
answered, that this might be granted in a true sense; But peradventure his
mind ran upon a further matter, which his Church teaches about infolded faith:
meaning thereby, that howsoever he affirmed that we are bound to believe all
points of faith, as well one, as other, yet that might be done sufficiently by
believing as the Church believes, without knowledge of any thing, that is
believed: the which my suspicion he grants, in this place, to be true; and so
his conclusion, which at the first carried so good a semblance of binding men
to the knowledge of particular verities, and made so honest a proffer against
ignorance; is now resolved into this sense: that by an entire faith you are
bound to believe all things; the which is done, by knowing nothing, but only
believing implicitly, as the Church of Rome believes. Let a man never trouble
himself with inquiring into the mysteries of Christian religion, or
controversies of faith; but only say, Rhem. annot. Luc. 12.11.
he will live, and die in that faith which the Catholic Church teaches; and
this Church can give a reason of the things believed. This is the equiuocating
tongue of the Church of Rome, that can ambush it self in words, and under
fair speeches conceal no small wickedness.

3 His arguments in maintenance of this implicit faith, are five. First the
authority of M. Wootton, who seems to speak against me; next because to get
express knowledge of all points contained in Scripture, (which are points
necessary to be believed) is impossible; at least for unlearned men. Thirdly
faith, and knowledge are two distinct things; faith being of things not known,
captiuating the understanding: therefore this distinct knowledge is not
presupposed before: Fourthly, reason, and experience teach, that belief and
knowledge are distinct: belief not presupposing knowledge, but going before
it. Fifthly the Fathers, Irenaeus, Hilary, and Austin, affirm faith to be
sufficient without knowledge. Before I answer his arguments, note five things.
First, what our adversaries mean hy implicit, or infolded faith; and it is
nothing else, but a blind assent of the mind to whatsoever the Church of Rome
believes, without any knowledge at all of the things themselves. Occh. dialog.
part. 1. l. 3. c. 1. p. 18. Dur. 3. d. 25. q. 1. ^abr. ibi. Notab. 2. Do. Bann.
22. page 349.
The Schoolmen deliver it in finer terms, that it is the assent of the mind
to some general, or universal thing, wherein many particulars are included,
with will to believe nothing, that is contrary thereunto: but the meaning is,
that to the essence, and nature of this entire faith, the distinct knowledge,
or apprehension of any particular truth, or article, is not required; but only
resolution, and profession, to be of the Churches belief, whatsoever it be; in
the same manner that I reported the Colliars faith. Thus any man by an
implicit faith believes the articles of Religion, and particular mysteries of
our faith, touching the Unity, and Trinity, of the Godhead, the Incarnation,
and Office, of Christ, the nature of Faith, the practice of Repentance, the
Resurrection, the Sacraments, Redemption of mankind, state of sin, and the
last Judgment: when he will believe, and hold touching these things, as the
Church of Rome does; and yet in the mean time his understanding, in no
measure, penetrates into these articles, nor can distinctly explicate, or
conceive them. Altisiodorensis, Sum. l. 3. tract. 3. c. 1. qu. 5.
says, To believe implicitly, is to believe in this general, that whatsoever
the Church believes is true. Dionysius. 3. de 25. qu. vnic. p. 215.
This is infolded faith, to believe in general, all that our Holy mother the
Church believes. Summa Rosella, V. Fides, n. 1. quem refert. Bann. vbi sup.
To believe all that which our mother the Church believes, and holds: as when a
Christian man is asked, whether Christ were borne of the virgin Marie, or
whether there be one God, and three Persons, and he answers that he cannot
tell, but believes, touching these matters, as the Church holds. This is the
definition of entire faith, which the Jesuit says extends it self
universally to all points, at least, implicitly. Note Secondly what the things
are, and which be the points, that our adversaries teach to be sufficiently
believed by this infolded faith. The Reply seems to affirm, that it is
allowed only in some points, which a man, for want of sufficient means,
cannot know: I grant, says he, and never did deny, but that there are some
points necessary to be particularly known, of all sorts, Necessitate medij,
and some necessary to be known Necessitate praecepti. In which points
implicit belief does not suffice, but express particular knowledge is
required, by Catholic Divines, to be joined to the assent of our faith -- in
other points; so far as we neither know, nor have sufficient means to know
them, we may well commend the Colliars faith, in believing in general, as the
Church believes. In which words my adversary seems to allow implicit faith
only in some few cases; and charges me with two gross untruths, because I
say, the Papists utterly refuse knowledge, and Canonize the Colliars implicit
faith, for their Creed. But he should have observed that which was under his
eyes, and affixed to my words alleged, whereby I proved what I said. I
alleged Iacobus Graffius, a Friar lately writing from Capua, Decis. aurear. l.
2. c. 8. nu. 16.
that every Christian is not bound to know the articles of faith explicitly,
but only Clergy me^. I cited Antonine an Archbish. and a Saint in the Church
of Rome, Sum. mor. part 1. tit. 5. c, 2.. 1.
who reporting the tale of the Colliar, first says, that a great Doctor being
demanded what he believed, answered as the Church, and being further demanded
what the Church believed, answered that it believed the articles contained in
the Creed. And then falls to commending that faith: which shows that he
thought it was the entirest believing, eue^ of the Creed, to do it by implicit
faith. I alleged Pighius, and Hosius the Cardinal, who Pigh. hier. l. 1. c.
5. Hos. cont. Brent l. 3 p. 146
in the places cited affirm, that it is the safest way to hold a man's self to
the faith of the Church, though it should err in the faith. And that this
Colliars faith is more safe then any meditation, or exercise in the Scripture.
And whosoever shall view the places, Hosius especially, shall well perceive,
that I speak the truth: which I will yet justify further, by showing
Catholic Divines (as my adversaries styles a pack of heretics) to teach,
that it is sufficient by this implicit faith to believe, even the principal
articles of faith contained in the Creed. Tract. de fid.
William the B. of Paris, L. 3. tract. 3. c. 1. qu. 5.
Altisiodorensis, V. Fides. nu. 1.
Summa Rosella, and others, refe^t. D. Ban. 22. qu. 2. art. 8. Dubitatur
secundo.
hold that it is not necessary to believe any article of faith expressly, but
it is enough to believe, all that our mother the Church believes, and holds. So
that if a man were demanded whether Christ were borne of the Virgin, and
whether there were one God, and 3. Persons, he might sufficiently answer; I
cannot tell; but I believe as the Church holds: and this faith would justify,
and save him. The Jesuits Lorin. in Act. Apost p. 438. 1. b. Grego de Valent.
tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 2. punct. 4. page 311. A.
report, that it is the opinion of many Authors, in the Church of Rome, that
the explicit faith of Christ (as he is true God, and man, and the Redeemer of
mankind) even after the sufficient publishing of the Gospel is not necessary
necessitate medij, either for Justification, or salvation: and he cites
Richardus Mediauillanus, Vega, and Soto. Which is true; for these are Vegaes
express words: Pro. Council. Tride^t. l. 6. c. 15. p. 92. edit. Colon. 1572.
It is to be affirmed, that men are so justified by the faith of the Mediator,
that yet the unfolded faith neither of this article, nor of any other must be
thought requisite unto justice: because the explicit faith of other articles
belonging either to Speculation, or moral life, suffices thereunto: -- and
this is it, which our Divines commonly teach, when they say, the Faith of one
mediator either unfolded, or infolded, is enough for justification: neither can
they hold otherwise that think, as Reported before c. 22. n. 1.
many in the Roman Church do, the Gentiles without any knowledge of Christ: or
supernatural faith at all, may be saved.

5 I know well enough some of our adversaries speak otherwise and seem to
require a more unfolded faith, whose doctrine I will not conceal. Eymeric.
part. 1. q. 7. n. 8
The Directorie of the Inquisitors, out of 22. qu. 2. art. 5.
Aquinas, says, A man is bound explicitly to believe the articles of faith,
but other points of faith only implicitly. That which D. Bann. vbi sup.
Alexand Pezant. 22. q. 2. art. 8. disp. 1. Greg. Val. tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 2.
punct. 3. 4. 5. Vasqu. 12. disp. 121.
others speak more at large. First, These are the Propositions of Pezantius a
Jesuit Schoolman.
that in the state both before, and after sin, it was necessary, for all of
years of discretion, both by the command, and necessity of the means, to
believe some supernatural thing by explicit faith. Secondly, The things thus
to be believed are all points needful for the ordering of their life; as to
believe there is a God, and his divine providence, and the immortality of the
soul; that he is the Creator, Rewarder, and Governor of all. Thirdly, that now
in the state of the Gospel, it is also necessary to believe in Christ, as the
Redeemer of mankind, by faith explicit. Fourthly, by the Commandment, all
are bound to believe, explicately the Mystery of the Incarnation, and the
Trinity; the principal articles of faith, contained in the Creed, which by
themselves pertain to the substance of faith; and some other things which tend
to direct them in working aright: But, what those articles of the Creed are,
which thus belong to the substance of faith, Pezant. says, the Doctors are not
agreed: but he lays down his own judgment; that they are the articles
touching the Unity, Essence and Trinity of the Persons in the Godhead:
touching the Creation, the Remission of sins, Eternal life, the Nativity,
Passion, Resurrection, and Second coming of Christ, the Sacraments of
Baptism, Eucharist, and Confession; the precepts also of Faith, Hope, and
Charity, the ten Commandments, and Prayers delivered in the Catechism: It is
also probable, he says, that all good Catholics, should believe explicitly
the virginity of Mary, that they may worship her: but it is certain, that the
article touching the Church, that there is but one congregation thereof, which
is of the faithful, Were you there Sir?
that obey the Pope, Christ's Vicar, must be believed explicitly: and some say
also certain traditions touching the sign of the Cross, and the adoration of
Saints, and Images. This is the largest, and most particular explication, that
I find in any of them, touching the things that all men, unlearned, as well as
learned, are bound, either by Commandment, or absolute necessity to believe by
faith explicit: Yea the Scholiast upon the Directory of the Inquisition Page
60.
requires the articles of faith to be gotten perfectly without Book, which the
Jesuits Grego. Val. p. 320. c Pezant. page 505. d.
deny. But how shall I know this is the doctrine of their Church? how will my
adversary assure me that other Divines in his Church, as Catholic as these,
are of the same mind; that I might truly say, I mistook them, when I said,
they utterly refuse knowledge, and canonize the Colliar? If they would hold
them every where, and constantly to this, it were a good step to an end in this
controversy, and our doctrine were justified, that particular knowledge is to
be joined with the assent of faith, and we must not so believe the Church, but
that we be able also, in some measure, to conceive, and penetrate the things
themselves. If my adversary will urge me with this, and stand upon it, that it
is the doctrine of his Church, I will not strive with him: only I will commend
2. things to his consideration. First, how he will plead the salvation of
innumerable lay people, I will not say in Lancashire, but in France, Spain,
and Italy, every where, that have no knowledge of these things, but only
believe as the Church believes; whom the Church of Rome has hitherto trained
up in this implicit faith of the Colliar? how will he excuse the Colliar, whom
Staphylus commends so, that knew not these things? and what if it should fall
out, that the Gentleman his friend, whom he mentions A person of good esteem
and place, in that your country p. 39. Repl.
before in this Reply, being catechized by his ghostly father, should be able
to say no more, then the Colliar? Next, that even the Jesuits, and these
Divines, who make show to maintain this explicit faith, yet utter that
besides, that unanswerably makes for the implicit, in all articles. Henriquex
De sin. hom. c. 17. n. 1. lit. x.
says, A man may be justified by the implicit faith of Christ, Si plane
contritus, cum plena satisfactione, vel cum martyrio, aut indulgentia plenaria,
decedat.
and if he die, be saved also, with a pardon. Relect. de Sacram. part. 2. q. 2.
concl. 3.
Canus, and In Tho. 22. q. 2. art. 8. dub. vlt. concl. 1.
Bannes affirm, that the explicit faith, or distinct knowledge of Christ is
not necessary as a means to justify us. And Bannes Concl. 4.
adds, that it were neither heresy, nor error, nor rashness, nor scandal, to
avouch that a man may also, in the same manner, be saved, because justification
being the last disposition to glory, it is very probable that he which is
justified by an implicit faith, may also by the same faith without alteration
be saved: Vasquez In Tho. 12. q. 2. disp. 121. c. 2.
says, He doubts not, but many country people, without fault, are ignorant of
some necessary mysteries. Vega Pro council. page 92.
says, as I alleged before: It is to be affirmed, that men are so justified
by the faith of the Mediator, that yet the unfolded faith neither of this
article, nor of any other must be thought requisite unto justice, because the
explicit faith of other articles belonging either to speculation, or moral
life, suffices thereunto. I could allege many other such doctrines; but these
are enough to show my adversary, that his Divines deal but doubly in our point
of implicit faith, and such as make fair offer against it, yet are fast
friends to the Colliar.

6 Note thirdly concerning the persons, who they be, that our adversaries allow
to believe implicitly, and who are bound to express knowledge. Mediauillanus
3. d. 25 p. 89. edit. Venet. per Laz. Soard. 1508.
says, that such as are superiors in the Church must have a fuller knowledge
concerning faith, then inferiors. So that I believe such superiors are bound
to believe all the articles of faith expressly, though every one of the^ be not
bound to believe their number, or artificial distinction. Syluester Sum
Syluest. v. fides. n. 6.
says, Every one that has cure of souls, as Prelates, Priests, Prophets,
Doctors, and Preachers, are bound expressly to believe the whole distinction of
the articles of faith, according to their substance: but others are not so
bound. Direct. Inquisit. part. 1. q. 4. n. 3.
Eymericus, out of 22. q. 2. art. 6.
Thomas: Prelates, and Curats are bound to have the express faith, and
knowledge of all the articles of faith: wherefore the explication of things to
be believed, is not alike, in respect of all sorts of men, necessary to
salvation; because Superiors, which have the charge of instructing others, are
bound to believe expressly more things, then others are. 22. q. 2. art. 8. disp.
vnic. sub sin.
Pezantius thinks thus of the matter, that Bishops are bound, A hard task for
the Boy -- Bishops mentioned by Gerson and others (see Verse. sign. ruin. Eccl.
sign. 3. and 8. Pic. Mirand. orat. ad Leo.) and for some men Bishops too,
mentioned by Theod. Niem. nemor. Semita. and de scism. p. 66. and Cathar. n.
specul. haeret. p. 71. Clemang. de stat. Eccl. p. 15. and 30. and council.
delect. card. and Alliac. reform. Eccl. consid. 3. and for some Popes also. See
specul. Pontif. p. 110. and possible for our young Jesuits and Seminaries, to
say nothing of the old Mas Priests in times past.
expressly to know the articles of Faith contained in the Creed, and Scripture,
and in the definitions of the Church: so that they can both expound, teach, and
persuade them: Simple Priests must know those things that belong to the making
of the Sacrament, and other things contained in the Creed: Preachers such
things as are necessary to teach the people how to believe, and live: parish
Priests are not bound to be so perfect in the knowledge of the articles of faith
that they can assoile hard questions; but it is sufficient, if they can
instruct their charge in such things, as they are tied to believe, and do; and
if they have sufficient knowledge of the Cases of Conscience. And so the
implicit knowledge, and faith is admitted only in the unlearned Laity, and
not in Clergy men of any sort, if our adversaries will hold them to their
doctrine; but they dubble, and persevere not in it, as will appear by viewing
the places of the Archbishop, and the Cardinal, whom The WAY. 2. n. 6.
I alleged in my book.

7 Note fourthly that the things which we mislike, and speak against in this
matter of implicit faith, are these. First, that in teaching of it, the Church
of Rome seems manifestly to seek her own sovereignty, even above the
Scripture in the consciences of men, rather then the true knowledge of God, and
his will. To what purpose they do this 2. Th. 2.4. apoc 18.7. I sit a Queen.
we are not ignorant; but we see it tends to the stupifying of the word by
blind, and brutish obedience, that there need be no travel in religion it
self, but only a religious care, that the Church of Rome be not offended.
Whereunto whosoever will cleave resolutely, to obey all her drudgery, and
tyranny; that man, by some fine distinction or other, and that by the Jesuits
themselves, and such as talk most of explicit knowledge, shall be justified
to be of an entire faith extending it self universally to all points, one as
well as another, though he were as ignorant as a sheep; or as mad as Suid. v.
(...).
Amphistides in Suidas, that could not tell five, nor whether his father or his
mother bare him. Secondly, we mislike that ignorance so much condemned by the
word of God, should thus be bolstered out, whereby true faith is quenched, the
light, and zeal, and comfortable assurance thereof is taken away, and all
sorts of people are imboldened to security, and negligence in seeking that
quantity of knowledge whereto God has enabled them to attain. So that hereby
the people of God, in whom Col. 3.16.
his word ought to dwell plentifully with all manner of knowledge; To. 10.10.
that should be able both to believe with the heart, and confess with their
mouth to salvation, Heb. 5. vlt.
that through long custom, should have their wits exercised to discern both
good, and evil: 1 Pet. 3.15.
that should be always ready to give an answer, to every one that asks a
reason of the hope that is in them: are turned into senseless Idols, that can
neither hear, nor see, nor understand: the which kind of ignorance the ancient
Church never allowed. Thirdly, we condemn the defining of faith, yea entire,
and Catholic faith, by this kind of believing: for albeit the faith, and
knowledge of the best of Gods children be entangled (as Calvin has freely
confessed) with the relickes of much ignorance, when many things believed, and
necessary to salvation, are not yet distinctly understood, yet there is a
progres, and increase in knowledge, whereby the dullest, and ignorantest of Gods
children, are enlightened more, and more, until they reach that quantity of
apprehension that the commandment of faith requires. In which sense we allow
the faith of any man living, specially the unlearned, to be implicit: First,
when he knows, and apprehends in general, the substantial articles belonging
to faith, which are contained in the Scriptures, and rule of faith: Secondly,
when the ignorance is only in the particulars, whereby the said general
articles are demonstrated; as a lay man believing the Unity, and Trinity of
Persons in God, yet is not able to express, or conceive the difference
between the essence, and the Persons, nor the different manner of persons
proceeding. 3. When withal he uses the means to increase in knowledge, by
searching the Scriptures, and hearing the word preached: and in the mean time
obediently submits himself to the ministry, and direction of the Church
herein. The implicit faith of such persons, as have this threefold disposition
concurring in them, we condemn not: but this is not it, which our adversaries
plead for; who defend that it is enough to assent to the Church, though all
this be wanting; that is to say, to profess himself a Roman Catholic,
believing as the present Church holds, without any knowledge of the things in
themselves.

8 Note lastly that the distinct knowledge of things believed, which against
this implicitie of faith, we require, is the knowledge of that which God has
revealed, not of the essence, and reason, of the things. For the understanding
whereof, we must consider, that the Scriptures, and Church, by their
proposition, reveal the points of faith unto us; and bid us learn, and
believe the^: as that there is one God the maker of all things; and one
mediator Jesus Christ, that was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the
virgin Marie; and as follows in the Rule of Faith. Which things thus
mentioned unto us, are profound mysteries, and have many abstruse, and secret
notions belonging to them, as for example the deep reasons of the Trinity in
the Godhead, and the Union of the two natures in Christ. Now when we require
knowledge to be joined with the faith of these things, we mean the knowledge
of the Revelation, not of the reason, and whole nature of the things revealed:
for is any man so presumptuous, as to imagine that a supernatural object,
believed by faith, revealed by God, can by discourse of reason, be reduced to
natural understanding; the Apostle 1. Cor. 2.14.
saying, The natural man perceaues not the things of God, neither can he know
them? Or do our adversaries imagine the knowledge we require to be such as is
in humane sciences, where conclusions are demonstrated by their principles, and
things are comprehended in their causes, and properties? Have they that power
over their people to make them believe, that we require, for example, men to be
able to understand, and utter, the manner, and reasons how God is one? How 3.
in Person? How the dead shall be raised again? How our nature subsists in the
word? How the redemption of mankind could be wrought by the sufferings, and
death of the Son of God? How the Sacraments confer Grace? How man could be
predestinate, before the world was made? We do not require the world to know
these things, (...), etc. Theodor. de prouid. l. 10 sub fin.
which are reserved to the beatificall vision in the life to come: but only in
such sort, and measure, as is revealed; which is by conceauing that God is one:
that the Persons are 3. that the dead shall be raised again, etc. and such
things concerning them, as may, without error, be understood; Deuteronomy. 29 29.
For secret things belong to the Lord our God: but things revealed belong to
us, and to our children for ever. The state of the question.
The true state of the question therefore, touching implicit faith is, whether
the believer, besides his general assenting to the Church, and Scripture, be
also bound to have in himself a distinct knowledge of things propounded him to
believe; so that he can, according to any true notion of conceauing, apprehend,
and conceive, that which is revealed to him? in which question the distinction
of Necessary, as the means, and Necessary by the command, is frivolous:
because whatsoever is omitted against Gods commandment is sin; and
consequently damnable without repentance, and therefore if knowledge be
commanded, it is also the means of Salvation, so far forth, as the
observation of the commandments is the means. But our adversaries apply this
distinction (which in some question is of good use) in this place to lay their
people a sleep on their pillow, when they shall hear knowledge to be
commanded, but yet not as a Necessary means. Now there be twenty ways to
escape from a commandment.

9 These things thus premised, now I answer my adversaries arguments made for
implicit faith against distinct knowledge. The first, that I dispute so whotly
against that which M. Wootton admits: is false. For M. Wootton admits no more,
then he insinuates in his conclusion, that a general belief of some points
may suffice some persons, without danger of damnation: and this pleases me well
enough: for I have showed this not to be the question; but let my adversary
deal sincerely, and hold him to that which is taught in his Church: and it
will please himself never a whit. When that doctrine allows ignorance in all
points; and the other, which is somewhat honester, allows it in more points,
and defines the ignorance otherwise, then M. Wootton will do. My adversary
therefore has not M. Wootton on his side; nor against me; but directly with me
against himself. To the second, that my opinion for the knowledge of all
points of faith, one as well as another, is intolerable, because it is
impossible for unlearned men, to get express knowledge of all points contained
in Scripture: I answer, that my words alleged do not affirm the necessity of
knowing all things revealed (as that Jacob had a lame leg, or Abraham two
wives) but all points of our faith; expounding faith, not as he does, for every
thing that is revealed, but of the substantial articles of faith, which the
vnlearnedst that are may learn, and understand, if they will use the Ministry
of the Church, and exercise their wits therein, as the word requires. The story
may be seen in^ Acts and Monum. of the Chapter
The Church of Rome had experience of this at the sacking of Mirandula, and
Chabriers; where not the elder sort alone, but the very children of lay men,
whom unmercifully they assassinated, and butchered, were found in knowledge to
parallel the Doctors, that examined them. And Iustine against Trypho, Dial. cum
Tryph.
says of his time, that such as could no letter on the book, understood all
the mysteries of faith, And this is manifest by the places of Chrysostom,
Theodorit, and Eusebius following. My adversary therefore must hold him to that
object of faith, that I speak of, and then show it is impossible to be
apprehended, which he cannot do. And whereas he says, He graunts, and never
did deny, but there are some points necessary to be particularly known of all
sorts, wherein implicit belief does not suffice, but express particular
knowledge is required by Catholic Divines: I answer, that when I spoke
against implicit faith, demanding, To what purpose should God propound all the
points of our faith, one as well as another, unless his will were that we
should learn them all? I knew not what my adversary would grant or deny, but
having showed that the Colliars faith was canonized by no small fools, in his
Church, and commended for sufficient in all points I used this reason against
it, which I confirmed by a text of Scripture, and a speech of Saint Austine.
And if my adversary convinced thereby, relinquish that rude opinion, requiring
express particular knowledge, at least in some points, if not Necessitate
medij, yet Necessitate praecepti, this, to requite his kindness to M. Wootton,
I gratefully accept: and wish him, that when he writes again, he will
ingenuously express what those his some points are; and how far forth the
commandment of faith ties us to know them. For these things may be so
expounded, that what in words is granted, in effect shall be denied: and then
the Pope may commend his towardliness, Nub.
as the woman does her daughter in Aristophanes. (...)
A goodly spark with a tongue that will strike on both sides.

10 And whether he mean this, or that, yet my report, that the Church of Rome
utterly refuses knowledge: and that the Colliars faith is canonized for the
Papists Creed, should not have been called a gross untruth, until my reasons
whereupon I grounded it, had been answered, or at least mentioned; but that it
is a privilege, and special indulgence that my adversary has obtained, to
reply without making any answer. For is not the Colliars faith so reported, and
commended by the Authors, whom I cited, that any may fee they allowed it in all
points whatsoever, whether there were means to know them, or no means? does not
Staphylus By this faith of the Colliar every unlearned man may try the spirits
of men, whether they be of God or no: By this faith he may resist the Devil,
and judge the true interpretation from the false; and ^iscerne the Catholic
from the heretical Minister; and the true doctrine from the forged. Fred.
Staphyl. apol. page 53.
make it the best kind of faith, that is: and the rest whom I quoted in the
margent, propose it as the best form of believing any thing whatsoever? and
yet the Jesuit replies, as if they allowed it only in some few points, so far
as we nether know, nor have sufficient means to know them. But his own words
immediately following, in defense of this faith, touching such things, that in
this general action is infolded a particular, or implicit belief of all
points, in as much as a general includes all particulars, and believing the
Church disposes the mind, etc. bewraies that he holds the same thing that I
objected. For this is the very reason, that the grossest maintainers of
implicit faith use to defend it against them that require the knowledge
questioned.

11 To his third argument That faith and knowledge are 2. distinct things,
therefore there may be true faith, without any distinct knowledge of the things
believed: I answer, that the knowledge which I require is not of the essence,
and reason of the things believed, but of their proposition, and that
concerning them, which is revealed; as I have distinguished: and therefore I
deny the consequence. For though such knowledge be not faith, but a habit
distinct from it, yet it concurres to the habit of faith, in as much as no man
can assent to that whereof he never heard: for To. 10.14.
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? The knowledge that
has no ingredience into faith, is the knowledge of that which is not revealed;
for faith not only goes before such knowledge, but also utterly repels it,
never admitting any penetration into Gods secret mysteries: for 1. Cor. 2.9.
the things which the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor can enter
into the heart of man, has God prepared for them that love him. And in this
sense all the texts of Scripture, and places of the Fathers, quoted by my
adversary against knowledge, are understood; and so I answer his last argument.
For it was the constant, and uniform doctrine of the ancient Church, that how
soever faith apprehends mysteries not to be inquired into; yet the proposition,
and doctrine of all the articles of faith must distinctly be conceived, that a
man be able to understand what they are, Saint Chrysostom Hom. 16. in Ioh.
rebuking this ignorance, proceeds into this discourse, which plainly shows,
that he was of this mind: We believe, says he, In the Father, and the Son,
and the holy Ghost: The resurrection of our bodies, and everlasting life. If a
Gentile ask you; who is this Father? who is this Son? this holy Ghost? are
there 3. Gods? what would you say to this? what answer would you make? how
would you dissolve his objections? And when you should stand dumb to these
things, suppose he should bring in another question touching the resurrection,
whether you should rise again in this, or in another body? if he should
demand, why Christ came in the flesh rather at this time, then in the former
ages? what if he should pose us in such and the like things? how great
punishment is laid up for us that (by being able to answer nothing, nor to
dissolve these questions) should be the authors of error to them that walk in
darkness -- for if they so travel day, and night to be able to speak
against our religion, how shall we escape, unless we have skill to beat back
such assaults? Thus 1. Pet. 3.
Peter commands, Be alwaie ready to satisfy every one that demands a reason of
your faith, and hope: and Col. 3.
Paul, Let the word of Christ dwell plentifully in you. But what will these
foolish drones answer? forsooth, that every simple soul is blessed, and Pro
10. This is one of the Papists reasons for the Colliars faith: note
Chrysostomes answer.
he that walks simply, walks surely. But this is the cause of all evil, that
not many know how to bring in the testimonies of the Scripture opportunely. For
in that place alleged, simple is not to be understood for a fool, that
knows nothing, but for one, that is not evil, or crafty, etc. These words of
Chrysostom show against all exception, that Gods words upon pain of
punishment, requires a distinct knowledge of the points of our faith; in such
measure, that if an ignorant man, or a cauiller, should question with us about
them, we might be able to expound, and manifest them; which by the Colliars,
and my adversaries impicite faith we could not do. Theodorit has a narration,
which may fully satisfy any man what kind of knowledge the Christian Church
then practiced. Every where, De curand. affect. l. 5. sub. fin.
says he, you may see these points of our faith to be known not only by
them, who are masters in the Church, and teachers of the people; but even of
Cobblers, Smithes, and Weauers, and all kind of artificers; and of women also
which get their living with their hands, yea maid servants, and waiting women:
husbandmen also do very well know them, and Ditchers, and Neat-heards, and
woodsetters. All these may ye find discoursing of the Trinity, and the
Creation of things, and as skillful in the nature of man, as Plato, or
Aristotle. Justin Martyr requires the same distinct knowledge in all. (...).
Dial. cum Tryph. p. 249.
This Relation of Theodorit makes it clear, that in those days the doctrine
of believing as the Church believes, by implicit faith was not received; but
the Christians generally, even the most unlearned, obtained, and practiced the
same distinct knowledge, that here my adversary disputes against, and impugnes
with the names of the Fathers, that only speak against the curious, and
arrogant inquiring into mysteries.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Touching the necessity and nature of the rule of faith. 2. And how it is
revealed and communicated to all men, that none need to despair.

A. D. Concerning the fifth Chapter, Page 143.
the conclusion of this Chapter (to wit, that God has provided some ordinary
rule, and means by which all sorts, as well unlearned, as learned, may be
instructed sufficiently in that one infallible entire faith, which is necessary
to salvation) serves chiefly for those who either presume to attain this
faith, without using any endeavor, in seeking, or following some ordinary rule
and means; or else despair, in regard they know not, what in particular this
rule, and means, is: nor perhaps in general, that there is at all, any
ordinary rule, and means, (at least accommodated to their capacity) provided
by God, by which they may be sufficiently instructed in faith. To take away
therefore the foresaid presumption of some, and despair of others, in this
Chapter I only intended to prove in general, that there is some certain
ordinary rule, and means, ordained by God, which if one neglect to seek,
find, and follow (according to the ordinary course of Gods providence) he may
not (be he never so learned, or wise) presume, or hope to attain true faith:
and which whosoever does diligently seek, happily find, and obediently follow
(be he never so unlearned, or simple) he need not despair, or doubt, but may
rest assured, that he shall attain unto it. My adversaries do not seem to
deny this my conclusion, so far as it, does properly belong to this Chapter:
but fearing what may follow of it, they oppose against that sense which they
imagine, I intended afterward to draw out of it. But this is unorderly to run
before the hare. Let us now only speak to the purpose of the present Chapter.
M. White expressly White page 8. and 9.
grants, and M. Wootton does not deny, that there is some certain rule, and
means, appointed by God, and left in the world, to instruct men in faith.
Secondly, M. White grants, that by this rule and means we may be infallibly
instructed, what is to be holden for true faith. Thirdly he yields, that the
only cause, why a man misseth of the truth, is either because he does not
find the rule, or having found it, he will not obey it. Fourthly he says,
that the rule is left indifferently to all, in this sense, that it is of such
nature, that it is able to direct any man, be he never so simple, and that the
most unlearned alive, may understand and conceive it sufficiently for his
salvation. Thus far M. White grants, and this is in a manner, as much as I
need desire to be granted, concerning the principal conclusion of this
Chapter. For hence follows first, that no man may presume to attain faith,
without finding, and following some certain, or ordinary rule, and means
ordained by God. Secondly, that no man, for want of learning, or by reason of
his simplicity, etc. need to despair, but that, by seeking, finding, and
following some certain rule, and means appointed by God, be shall be
sufficiently instructed in faith. Thirdly, that every one, careful of
salvation may see; how much it imports to seek, find, and follow this rule,
and means; as expecting by it, and only by it (according to the ordinary
course of Gods Providence) to be sufficiently instructed, what is to be holden,
for that one, infallible, entire, true faith, which is necessary to salvation.
1 MY adversaries fifth conclusion was, that as one entire faith is necessary to
salvation, so God, who wills the salvation of all men, has provided, and left
an ordinary rule, and means, whereby they may be informed, which, and what
this faith is. This conclusion he visites, in this place, to see how his
adversaries have used it, and first he repeates it, then he tells his purpose
in laying it down: next he reports what I said to it, though scarce truly.
Fourthly he tells what follows of that, which he finds I have granted him;
and so lastly leaves the only difficulty that I objected against it
vnassoiled, and leaps into a wilde-goose chase, nothing to the point, about
Praedestination, whither M. White means not to follow him. His purpose in
propounding it, he says was, first to admonish such as presume to attain
faith without using the means: Secondly to help such as despair, when they
either know not that there is such a means, or understand not what in
particular it is. To take away presumption, and desperation, he lays down
this conclusion, touching the rule of faith: the which when he afterward
defines to be his Roman Church, speaking by the mouth of the Pope, you may
perceive what a ready way he takes to keep men from Presumption, and
Desperation.

2 But whatsoever his intent were, he says I grant him 4. things, which is in
a manner, as much as he desires. First, that there is such a rule left.
Secondly, that by this rule we may be infallibly instructed what is to be
holden for true faith. Thirdly, that the cause why men miss the truth, is
because they either find it not, or obey it not. Fourthly, this rule is of
such nature that it is able to direct al men, yea the simplest, and vnlearnedst
alive. The which I granted him then, and by these presents do grant again,
upon condition he will not be proud of that I give him, without any vantage to
his purpose; as if he had obtained some great boon: but hold him to my grant
mannerly, and incroach no further. For I gave him warning that if he meant such
a rule, as all men at all times may have access unto, as being concealed from
none, but visible, and revealed, or manifest to all places, ages, and persons:
I would not grant it him, for the reasons there expressed: the which my
exception in this place he calls unorderly running before the Hare: and in his
next Section, answers by expounding himself, that he did not mean it should
be actually manifest, but only such, as Does he mean I ma^uell, in his
Potentia remota, whereof page 165. and below c. 26.
might be known: but I ran not before the Hare, for I hunted a Fox, that
was closely stealing to the wood, in which game, good Fox-hunters say, it is
not against the law to cross the way, and mark his headding. For his head is
to the wood in every conclusion, aiming at nothing but to train by degrees,
such as follow him, into his visible Church, and the Popes authority ruling
therein: and therefore I distinguished the diverse senses of his words, being
acquainted before with old Reinard, Gregory of Valence, in whose steps I saw
the Reply to tread; and showed which was true, and which false, that there
might be no ambiguity. And although he answer, that I mistake him, when I
thought his meaning was, this rule should be manifest, and actually known to
all: yet I am not satisfied; for though I give him leave to expound himself,
and accept his exposition: yet what I suspected necessarily follows, still of
that he says afterward, as I then observed: for Treat. c. 10. in the WAY,. 13.
he defines the teaching of the Church to be the rule: and this Church he
maintains to be such, as not only is of it nature visible, and such as may be
seen; but Treat. c. 12. in the WAY,. 18. and inde.
manifest, and actually known to all places, ages, and persons in the world.
And it follows manifestly of that; if you say that sometime the Church could
not be known, nor be a means whereby the true faith might be known: then men
living at such time should want the means: and so it were not universally
true, that God would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of his
truth: He that says the Church is the Rule, and such a rule, as all men
universally may at all times know, means that the rule is manifest, and
actually known to all: this meaning he disclaimes, and I am satisfied with it,
yet it follows violently upon his own words.

3 Thirdly from the 4. things I grant, he gathers 3. things more. First, that
No man must presume, or once hope to attain to true faith, without finding,
and following the rule thereof ordained by God. Secondly, that No man need to
despair, though he be never so unlearned or simple, but by seeking, finding,
and follwing this rule, he may be sufficiently instructed in faith. Thirdly,
that it concerns every one careful of his salvation, to seek, and follow this
rule, for his instruction in the faith, which is necessary to salvation. These
three, I likewise yield him, though they be not that, which he principally
alms at, to encourage him: because it will be some little honesty for him,
when his friends read his book, to show them what material points he has
extorted from M. White: but the gift is not great: my adversary will return
the whole 7. back again in exchange for one single one that I can name him.

CHAP. XXV.
The text of 1. Tim. 2.4. God wills all men to be saved, etc. expounded. The
diverse expositions that are given of those words. Gods antecedent will, as
they call it, is not his will formally. The antecedent and consequent will of
God expounded diverse ways.

A.D.. 1. Concerning the meaning of the Apostles words, Page 145.
GOD WILL ALL MEN TO BE SAVED, etc. First it is certain that the meaning of the
Apostles words is not that God has an absolute effectual will and decree to
save every man, or to bring every man, in particular, to the knowledge of the
truth, or to the knowledge of that ^^^diate rule and means which he has
ordained to instruct men in faith* This is evident, because if there were any
such absolute and effectual will and decree in God, then (since his will is
always fulfilled) all should effectually be saved; or should actually come to
the knowledge of the truth; or at least to the knowledge of that Rule and
means, which God has ordained to instruct men in faith: which evident
experience tells us not to be true. By which my assertion M. White may see
how much he mistaketh, when he thinks me to mean that the Rule and Means,
ordained by God, is not only (as I speak) visible, that is, such as may be
assigned and known, White page 9.
but also manifested (as M. White speaks) that is, such as is actually known
to all places, ages, and persons, in the world.

Secondly, whereas there are diverse expositions of these words of the Apostle
given by good authors, the chief question betwixt me and my adversaries is
about the exposition of S. Damascen, S. Thomas and many other learned Divines,
who hold that the Apostle, saying that God will all men to be saved, means
that God has an Antecedent will to save every man, although, considering the
sins of men, he he has a consequent will to condemn some. This exposition
my Adversaries mislike, either in their ignorance, because they do not
understand it aright, or for that they adhere to some part of Caluines error
about Praedestination, with which it cannot stand. Wherefore to instruct their
ignorance in this point, and to deliver them, or at least others, from the
poison of that most pestilent opinion which Calvin holds concerning
Praedestination, I will first declare the foresaid exposition, therewithal
proving it to be good, Secondly I will relate Caluines opinion about
Praedestination, and will show it to be erroneous in it self, pernicious to
men, and impious toward God. It seems that my adversaries, in their
ignorance have a strange conceit of the Antecedent will, by which, according to
this exposition, God will have all men saved. For M. White says, that this
Antecedent will is not Simply, White page 95.
Properly, Wootton. p. 59.
and Formally, the will of God: and M. Wootton, although he do not expressly
say, yet he seems to think the same, when he says, this exposition of S.
Damascen cannot be enforced out of the text; nor is so warrantable for truth as
some other exposition is. How false this their saying is, will appear by the
example of an earthly king; which I will use to declare and explain this point.


1 IF the Reader will understand how, and upon what occasion, this text and the
matter thereof, comes in question between us in this place, he must observe
that my adversary, to show that God has provided and left sufficient me^ (...)
for the instructing of all men whatsoever in the true faith, In THE WAY.. 3.
alleged this text of 1. Tim. 2.4. God will all men to be saved, etc.
concluding from it, that, seeing his will is a true will, it must needs follow
that he has left such a means: Then again, to prove not only that God has
promised such a means of salvation, which is the visible Church, but that he
has also made it manifest and visible to all men, whereby they might be
directed to the faith, he alleges the same text In THE WAY.. 18.
again, God would have all men to be saved: as if this will of God, affirmed
in the text, could not stand, unless the Church, which is the means, were always
visible, because he cannot be said to will that which he allows no means to
effect. It was not therefore brought in against me in any dispute about
praedestination, but as you see, upon the By, to prove the visibility of the
Church, in all ages, for the revealing of the faith to the world. Nevertheless
knowing how grossly the Papists use to expound it, and seeing how absurdly my
adversary applies it, (to prove such a visibility of the Church as he imagined:
affirming that if the Church were at any time not visible, in his sense, the
world should want the necessary means of salvation, and so it should not be
universally true, that God would have all men to be saved) therefore I briefly
expounded it, THE WAY. 3. n. 2.
first, only in the words of Gregorius Ariminensis, a school Doctor of his
own: but in. 18. n. 6.
the second place more at large; confirming the sense I gave, out of the
Fathers, and diverse principal Papists: where I briefly touched an obscure
distinction of Gods antecedent and consequent will: invented, as Damascenus
hanc distinctionem introduxit. Capreol. 1. d. 45 q. 1. ar. 2. co^cl 4. Videtur
primus hoc modo diuinam voluntatem distinxisse. Valentia to. 1. page 360. A.
they say, by Damascen; first noting, out of Durand a popish Schoole-man, the
distinction not to be real: and then showing, that if it were, yet the
visiblenesse of the Church was not proved thereby; which I concluded in a
Syllogism set in the margent, and so held me wholly to the point we had in
hand. All which discourse, my adversary passes over answerlesse; perceiving
well enough the exposition I gave of the words, to be such as cannot be denied;
and the application that himself made of them, to be false and unsound: and
therefore, in this place pretending to inquire out the true sense of the words,
he leaves that which we had directly in hand; inuerts the purpose whereto the
text was mentioned; forsakes his question, how the necessity of a visible rule
is proved by it, and runs into an impertinent discourse about predestination^
wherein if he would have dealt, he had fair opportunity offered him in
Digress. 41.
it own place. Nevertheless, so far as he meddles with that I said touching
the meaning of the Apostles words, I will go with him, and examine what he says.

2 First he grants it to be certain, that the meaning is not, God has an
absolute or effectual will to save all men. Which I say too. For whatsoever
God wills and decrees absolutely, shall be effected; which the salvation of
some never is.

3 Next he says, that by this I may see how much I mistook him, when I
thought him to mean, that the rule of faith is not only such as may be
known, but such as actually is known, to all places, ages and persons. But he
mistakes himself. For whatsoever his meaning be, it follows necessarily upon
his words. For albeit he say, God have no absolute or effectual will to save
all men; yet maintaining that he reprobates none, but for the foresight of
their unbelief, he must consequently suppose the rule of faith to be actually
manifested to all: because God cannot reprobate for unbelief foreseen, those
to whom he never revealed the rule of faith, because it was never in the power
of such to believe. Or if he say, they are reprobated because they find not
the rule of faith, or because it is not manifested to them, then the visible
Church cannot be the rule; for that, according to the doctrine of the Papist,
is always and actually manifest in every age to all sorts of people, as
himself defends in the twelfth Chapter of his Treatise. I might therefore
mistake his meaning, but the consequence of his words I mistook not.

THE DIVERSE EXPOSITIONS OF THE PLACE OF 1. TIM. 2.4.
4 Secondly he grants, there are diverse expositions of those words of the
Apostle given by good authors: and this is likewise true: but yet himselelfe
gave no exposition at all, but barely alleged the text; and therefore he might
the better give me leave briefly to touch an exposition or two, used by the
Fathers and the learned of his own side, and suspect the issue of his own
discourse, wherein he knows he maintains that exposition which the Fathers,
See Sixth. Senens. biblioth. lib. 6 annot. 251. where having set down the words
of Chrysostom, and certain other Fathers, affirming predestination to be for
works fo^eseene, he s^ve^, Haec Patrum dicta, ex quibus colligi videtur
praescientiam meritorum esse causam diuina praedestinationis: quae quidem
sententia in Pelagio damnata est
after the rising of Pelagius heresy especially, condemned: and the Papists,
whom I quoted, that knew it well enough, thought not so probable or likely, as
the exposition that I gave. Tho. 1. p. qu. 19 art. 6. ad 1. Dionys. 1. d. 46.
qu. 1. sub sin. Dom. Bann. in 1. p. qu 19. page 544. Soto Mayor. in 1. Tim. 2.
4 Magalia. op. Hierarch. ib. annot. 2. page 249.
Our adversaries are privy to eight several interpretations at the least, and
yet, to this day, they do not consent in any one of them, but one follows
this, and another that, as he perceiues it will best serve his turn for the
present occasion: the chiefest whereof are these. The first, that Christ, as he
was man, and by his humane will, would that all men should be saved. The
second, that God would all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his
truth, in that he makes us to wish and desire this our selves, by stirring us
up to seek and pray for it, because the will that God works in us, is said to
be Gods will. This exposition Saint Austin De Ciuit. l. 22. c. 1. and 2. de
corrept. and great. cap. penult.
seems, though something obscurely, to imply. Syluius a professor at Doway now
living, Fra. Sylv. explicat. part. 4. art. 1. ad 3.
holds him to it. And Dominicus Bannes Dom. Bann. vbi sup.
says, it is a most elegant exposition, and very literal. The third is, that
such only are meant as are saved, by restraining the universal sign to the
elect alone, and meaning that God wills all to be saved that are saved, by the
virtue of which will they are saved: as a schoolmasters is said to teach all
the children in the town, when he only teaches all that are taught. Aug. ep
107. and Enchirid. c. 103. and de Praedest. c. 8.
Thus Saint Austin expounds it; wherein Sedul. Beda. Haymo. Anselm. in 1. Tim.
2. Magist. d. 46.
others also follow him: and our adversaries Arimin. 1. d. 40. art. 2. Camerac.
1. q. 14. art 1. Durand. 1. d. 46. q. 1 ad 2 Gabr. in Cano. lect 68.
use it and allow it. The fourth is, that God by Voluntate signi.
the signification of his will, revealed in his word, would all men to be
saved, in as much as he offers to all men, either the doctrine of the Gospel,
or some other sign whereby he inuites them to salvation. And this exposition
denies that there is any will of good pleasure in God, referred and determined
to the salvation of all, but only to the means propounded, which of
themselves are sufficient and able to lead to salvation, inasmuch as thereby
he carries himself like one that has a purpose to save them. Thus Thom. lect.
in 1. Tim. 2. Caietan. ibi. Alexand. Bonauent. Marsil. Scot. Maio. Dried. quos
refert Vasqu. 1. q 19. disp. 83. n. 2.
diverse Papists expound it. The fifth is, that God would all men to be saved, by
saving some in all states and degrees of men, in as much as there is no
difference of men, rich or poor, or old, or young, or Jews, or Greeks, or
Barbarians, wherein God saues not some. Thus Saint Austin August. Enchir. c.
103. and de corrept. and great. c. 14. Fulgent. de incarn c 31 Beda. Sedul.
Anselm. vbi supr.
and other Fathers expound it, and diverse of our Tho 1. p. q. 19. art. 6.
Gregor. Arim 1. d. 46. qu. 1. Alliac. 1. qu. 14. art. 1. Eman. Sa annot. 1. Tim
2.4.
adversaries. Magalian Op. Hierarch. vbi sup.
says, The purpose of the text favors this sense. And Soto Mayor, Comment. in
1 Timothy 2. page 273.
Aquinas counted this the best of all the interpretations that are given. And
himself affirms it to be true and solid. The sixth is this that we have in
hand touching Gods antecedent will, that by a true and formal will, it is
antecedently his good pleasure, that all men should be saved, Ergo necesse est
quod in illo instanti velit indifferenter gloriam ita Juda sicut Petro. Auteol.
1. d. 41. page 940. c.
even Judas as well as Peter: touching the which antecedent will, as he
expounds it, the question is between my adversary and me in this place.

5 And first he says, that albeit there be And al of them good and true, say
the Rhem. ann. 1. Tim. 2.4.
diverse expositions of those words given by good Authors, yet this of Damascen
and Thomas may also stand: which he faith, because I had THE WAY, page 94. in
the letter c.
written, that the School distinction of Gods antecedent and consequent will,
would not salve the matter intended by the text alleged: as if this were the
only exposition, allowed and followed by his Thomas. Whereto I answer, that
Thomas uses the distinction indeed, and expounds the place of Saint Paul by it;
but Soto Mayor Vbi sup.
says, that he preferres the fifth interpretation before it, or any other;
namely, that the will of God here meant, is his good pleasure that is always
fulfilled, and that in his elect only chosen out of all sorts and states of
people. Which being so, my adversary must be chidden for calling that Thomas
his exposition, which Thomas held to be inferior to that which I gave. For, if
Soto say the truth, that is and must be deemed Thomas his proper exposition
that I gave, because he best liked it. And whether it were Damascens or no, in
that fence that my adversary expounds it, may be a problem: as I will show by
and by.

6 Next it must be noted how peremptorily he charge me with ignorance, for
saying this antecedent will is not SIMPLY, PROPERLY and FORMALLY in God. But
he should have considered that when I said so, I spoke in the words of Dur. 1.
d. 46. q. 1.
Durand, one of his own side, whom I alleged in the margent: that, if it were
false I said, yet the ignorance should not be fathered on me, but on them that
begot it. For I said the truth, and himself is ignorant of the doctrine of his
own Church. For Thomas 1. p. q. 19 ar. 6. ad 1.
handling this antecedent will, says, We do not simply will what we will
antecedently; and therefore this antecedent will may rather be called a Magis
dici potest velleitas quam absoluta voluntas.
VELLEITIE then an absolute will. A VELLEITIE, that is to say, as Gregory of
Valence expounds him, Comment. in Tho. 1. disp. 1. q. 19. punct. 2.
a certain conditionated will; when that only can be said simply to be
willed, that is willed consequently. Where we see that Thomas reduces this
antecedent will to an imperfect kind of willing, which he calls a VELLEITIE;
which is not a simple, proper, or formal will: and the most Schoolmen follow
him, upon this ground, because there cannot be a formal will in God, which is
not fulfilled, as the salvation of all men is not. Hence it is, Tract. de
praedest. lib. 4. c. 2. nu. 2.
says Suarez, that some have inferred, that this of God whereby he would the
salvation of all men, is NO PROPER and FORMAL act of willing in God: because
he has no imperfect act of willing, as they call VELLEITIE, but only
Voluntatem signi.
a signification of will, which only is METAPHORICAL and INTERPRETATIVE, in
that he carries himself toward men, as if he had that act of willing. Thus
think Caietan and Marsilius. Others say, the formal and proper will of God,
reaches not to the salvation of all men, for that cause because it is not
fulfilled, but only to the giving of sufficient means: which will, only to
appoint sufficient means, is formal in God, and thereof God is said to will
the salvation of all men: and of this mind are many School men. This will of
God, In 1. Tho. disp. 83. nu. 22.
says Vasquez, whereby he would the salvation of all men, even of the
reprobate, very many Schoolmen, especially the newer, think to be only a
CONDITIONATED will, which they call a VELLEITIE: whose act is not absolute and
perfect, but under condition. Now the probabler opinion, 1. p. q. 19. ar. 6
concl. 2. comm.
says Dominicus Bannes, is, that there is FORMALLY no will in God, which is
signified by the name of velleitie. Whence it follows, that since by the
doctrine of Thomas, and many others, this Antecedent will is but a VELLEITIE,
it cannot be formally in God. But to take down this raw student yet a little
more, Soto Mayor Soto Maio. in Tim vbi sup. page 274.
says: This word, God will the salvation of all men, by the good leave of so
many ancient Authors, we will not only expound of will PROPERLY so called,
which is Gods good pleasure, but of his antecedent will; that is to say, an
IMAGINARY and METAPHORICAL will: according to the which, it is no
inconvenience to say, God will have all men to be saved: of which antecedent
will, or will IMPROPERLY so called, Damascen speaks. And Page 276.
again: Damascens antecedent will, is but a GENERAL, METAPHORICAL and
IMPROPER will, which they call a VELLEITIE. Here you see that Damascen and
Thomas his antecedent will, is but a velleitie, and this velleitie is no will
simply or formally in God; and therefore I spoke not ignorantly, but after the
mind of the best School men that write, when I said, out of Durand, that this
antecedent will is not simply, properly and formally the will of God; but knew
well enough what I said: and such as hold the contrary, that this antecedent
will, whereby God is said to will the salvation of all men, is simply, properly
or formally the will of God, Opus est fateri non omnem voluntatem Beneplaciti
semper impleri. Magal. in Tim. page 252.
are driven to hold a paradoxe, that Gods absolute will, which is defined to be
the will of his good pleasure, may be defeated, and not accomplished: which is
a desperate shift, and contrary to the doctrine of Tho. 1. p. q. 19. art. 6.
Magist. 1. d. 46. ibi Scot. Occham. Dionys. Capreol. d. 45. q. vnic. art. 2.
concl. 5. Caiet. in 1. Tim. 2.4. Dom. Ban. 1. p. q. 19. art. 6. concl. 2. in
sum. text. Perer. select. disp. in Ioh 1. nu. 73.
the best ancient Divines in the Church of Rome; and directly against the
Scripture, which says, Psalm. 135.6.
Our God has done whatsoever pleased him in heaven and earth: Romans 9.19.
Who has resisted his will? Ephesians. 1.11.
who works all things according to the counsel of his own will.

7 Thirdly, he says, that in our ignorance possible we understand not this
distinction of Gods antecedent and consequent will; and that is the cause why
we mislike the exposition of Saint Paul's words thereby: which may be true; and
himself also as ignorant therein as we. For, be it spoken in good time,
Ludouicus Viues, a man of his own side, has In August. de ciuit. lib. 22. c.
1.
observed, that the late Divines of the Church of Rome, either to solue, or cut
asunder things objected against them, have found out so many wills, of Good
pleasure, of Signification, Antecedent, Consequent, of simple Complacencie or
Displicencie; that it were to be wished they would better explane what they
say, in words suited to common sense, and not with these absurd novelties of
words seek for admiration. Nevertheless because my adversary is so peremptory
in charging us with ignorance, that we understand it not; and so confident of
his own exposition, that any judicious wit, by the very sound of words, must
needs grant it to be a good and a true exposition: let the trial hereof
proceed between us, and let it be observed, whether my confident Jesuit, with
his wit so judicious, has hit the bird in the eye.

8 The question therefore is, whether we understand the distinction of Gods
antecedent and consequent will, touching the salvation of all men, right;
because we mislike the exposition of Saint Paul's text made thereby; or rather,
whether himself have given the true exposition thereof? For the deciding
whereof, note first, that Capreol. 1. d. 45. qu. vnic. art. 2. concl. 4. Molin.
concor. qu. 19. art. 6. disp. 1. Vasquez 1 p. disp. 83. c. 3. Rispol. de
praedifin lib. 1. q. 1. dub. 2.
the Schoolmen, who are the principal Divines that have been in the Church
of Rome, and labor most to fit it to the text, yet differ, and are contrary
one to another in expounding it. Ariminensis 1. d. 46. qu. vnic. ad 1.
says, This distinction is understood by some one way, and by some another.
Gregory of Valence Tom. 1. disp. 1 q. 19. punct. 2.
says, All Divines do not declare, after one manner, what is to be understood
by the names of Antecedent and Consequent will, but they expound it diversely.
It is therefore an obscure and perplexed distinction conceived in diverse
senses, that on our part, the matter were not great, whether we understood it
or no: but on our adversaries part it is ridiculous to tell us we understand it
not, when they understand it not themselves, and to expound the Scripture by
it, when all Scripture should be expounded in words plain and manifest. Note
secondly, that Damascen, Can. loc. lib. 11. c. 2. Suar. 3. p. to. 2. Suar. 3.
p. to. 2. disp. 43 sect. 3. Baron. because some make him elder by almost 400
years.
who lived 750 years after Christ, was the first that ever expounded Gods will
to save all men, in these terms. Capreolus Capreol. vbi sup.
says, he brought in this distinction. And Valentian. vbi sup.
Gregory of Valence, He seems to be the first that thus distinguished the
will of God. Damascens words be these: (...). de orthod. fid. l. 2. c. 29.
We must know that God ANTECEDENTLY will have all men to be saved, and obtain
his kingdom: for he made us not to punish us, but to partake his goodness, as
one that is good: but such as sin, he will punish as one that is just. The
first therefore is called his ANTECEDENT will and GOOD PLEASVRE; but the
latter, his CONSEQVENT will and PERMISSION, arising because of us. And this
Permission again is twofold: the one Dispensatorie and correctorie to
salvation; the other Condemnatorie to final judgment. Again: (...). Dialog.
de Manich. prope fin.
Albeit God will condemn, yet this he does not according to his ANTECEDENT
will, but his CONSEQVENT. That is an ANTECEDENT will, which a man's wills of
himself; and that is a CONSEQVENT will, which arises from the cause of the
things that are done. For God ANTECEDENTLY of himself, wills that all men
should be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth; but when we sin, he
will punish us so much as he sees expedient. And thus Gods ANTECEDENT will is
of his goodness, and his CONSEQVENT will of his justice. These are the words
of Damascen, expounding the manner how God will have all men to be saved,
wherein he seems to affirm five things touching the antecedent and consequent
will of God. First that his Antecedent will is that whereby he wills a thing
simply of himself, of his own goodness and nature, not moved thereunto by
any thing in the creature, out of himself. As when he wills the good and
salvation of the elect. His consequent will is that, when he wills according to
the disposition, and nature or circumstances of the creature, as it deserves
for the manifestation of his justice: as when he wills the punishment of him
that sins, because in justice sin deserves punishment. Secondly, that Gods
consequent will follows upon the condition of the creature, and upon some
cause therein going before: in which regard it is called consequent; that is a
will ensuing after: as when he wills the punishment of man, after that man has
sinned against him. Thirdly, that the antecedent will of God, is his good
pleasure, whereby he takes delight in that he wills: but his consequent will, is
his permission, suffering judgment to be inflicted on them that sin.
Fourthly, that by this antecedent will, God would all men to be saved, and come
to his kingdom; and by his consequent will, such to be punished as sin
against him. Fifthly, that God by his antecedent will, decrees only good things,
according to his goodness: and by his consequent will, only evil things,
according to his justice, in that he made no man to punish him, but to
participate his goodness. From this sense of Damascen thus explicated, I
gather three things that ensue upon it. First, that by Damascens judgment, the
first root of election should be foreseen merits; and the first root of
reprobation should be the foresight of the reprobates sin: because none is
either saved or refused, but by a consequent will; which will arises in God,
from the cause in the creature. Secondly I gather, that what God wills not
simply of himself, without the condition of the creature, he wills not
antecedently but consequently, because all Gods antecedent will, is simple and
independent: whereupon it Hence it manifestly appears that this Antecedent
will in God, is no Formal will, because it works nothing.
follows, that albeit God by his antecedent will, would all men to be saved;
yet no man is saved by it, forasmuch as all men are saved consequently upon the
condition of their works. Thirdly I gather, that God willing to save all, by
his antecedent will; and yet, de facto, saving none but by his consequent will,
arising from that which he sees or foresees in the creature, it follows that
the distinction of wills antecdent and consequent, is not real, because
according to the one of them, God works nothing. And this touching Damascens
own exposition.

8 Others expound the antecedent will, to be upon the first consideration of a
thing; and the consequent, upon the latter consideration, thus: as God
considers man absolutely, abstracting from every thing that circumstantially
belongs unto him, and representing him to himself only as a creature; he wills
his good and salvation antecedently. But considering him again, not only
according to his nature, but also as he is a sinner, or a just man, so he wills
his salvation or damnation consequently, according to that he finds in him.
Tho. 1. p. q. 1^ art. 6. ad 1.
Thus Aquinas expresses the distinction, out of the Metaphysics: As Gregor.
Arimin. shows at large. ^. 46. q. vnic. ad 3.
clean contrary to Damascens: yea Page 306. e. in 1. part Tho.
says Gregory of Valence, There is a manifest difference between this
exposition of Thomas, and the former of Damascen. And this appears
sufficiently of it self: which must be noted against my adversary, because he
ioynes Thomas and Damascen in a distinction, wherein they are so far from
agreeing, that they are contrary: and when he has done, talks of our
ignorance, and not understanding.

9 A third exposition, is that which I noted in the margent of my THE WAY, p.
94. s.
book, that Gods antecedent will, is when he supplies mankind with all such
helps and means, whether of nature or grace, as are sufficient to bring him
to salvation. But his consequent will, is when he makes these means, not only
sufficient, but effectual also, and thereupon, according to the merit of our
works, conferres salvation: and so he wills the salvation of all, antecedently,
by giving them the means; and by consequence, when he works effectually that
which men deserve. This exposition, as it is the best, so is it the commonest,
Occh. 1. d. 46. q. 1. Camerac. q. 14. art. 1. Bonau. d. 47. q. 1. Dionys. d.
46. q. 1. Dur. d. 47. q. 1. Clicton. in Damasc. orth. fid. l. 2. c. 29.
and most used, and in Gregory's opinion the fittest: but it differs really
from the two former, and falls in with the fourth interpretation of Saint Paul's
words Before, n. 4.
mentioned, whereby God is said to will the salvation of all men, only
voluntate signi, and no further: and how my adversary will like it. I know
not: but whether he do or no, he may blush to see himself and his doctors
thus using Damascens words, and yet retaining so little of his meaning. The
which trick if our adversaries would lay by, and as they use the same terms
and words of the Doctors, so all of them, in the magnified unity, would
retain the same sense and definition of the words, we should have shorter
work with them, and the ignorant should not be so deluded with colorable show
of antiquity, as they are.

Page 146.
A. D. Let us therefore imagine, that there were an earthly Emperor, or King,
who of his own nature were most mild and gracious; and who of his own
gracious and good disposition toward his subjects, did desire with a true
inward primarie or antecedent will, that every subject he has, might live in
all happiness; and yet this notwithstanding, moved with the consideration of
the offenses of his subjects, should determine with a secondary and consequent
will, to execute justice, by taking away life from some of them. In this case
it might truly be said, that the King would have all his subjects live; the
true and proper meaning of which saying, were, that the King of his own part
had a will (to wit, an antecedent will) to save every subject from death,
although by a consequent will, occasioned by the offenses of his subjects, he
decreed to put some to death. The which his antecedent will, were formally and
properly the Kings will, as well as the consequent. And although in one sense,
this antecedent were not simply his will, that is his final absolute
resolution, as the consequent will is, yet in another sense, it were simply his
will, that is, that will which simply and only proceeds from the Kings own
natural inclination: in which sense, the will consequent were not to be
accounted simply the Kings will, in regard it proceeds not only and simply
out of his own natural inclination, but was in a manner contrary to his
inclination, enforced or occasioned by the ill desert of his subjects. Now as
all this is true in such an earthly prince as I have described, so in a
proportionable manner it is as much or more true in God, who is not only most
mild, gracious and good, but infinite goodness it self, whose natural good
disposition, far more inclines him to desire the salvation of all souls, then
any earthly King can by his mild and gracious disposition desire the life and
happiness of all his subjects; and consequently like as that gracious King,
which I have described, has a true inward primarie or antecedent will,
proceeding from his own only good disposition, by which he desires that all
his subjects should live, notwithstanding he have also a secondary or
consequent will, occasioned by the offenses of his subjects, by which he
determines to put some to death: even so God has a true inward primary or
antecedent will, proceeding from the natural inclination of his own divine
goodness, by which he desires that al should be saved, notwithstanding that he
has also, according to our manner of understanding, a secondarie and
consequent will to condemn some, whereunto he is moved by the just desert of
men's sins. And as it may be truly said of that King, that he would have all
his subjects live, the true and proper meaning of which words is, that he has
such a true inward primarie or antecedent will, which is properly, formally,
and in some sense simply the Kings will, so it may be and is truly said of God,
that he would have all men be saved: the true and proper meaning of which words
is, that God has a true inward primarie or antecedent will, whereby he
desires of his own part to save all men, which will is properly, formally,
and in some sense, simply the will of God.
10 Hitherto I have only stood to show how uncertain and variable our
adversaries in the Church of Rome are in expounding the distinction of Gods
antecedent and consequent will; and that it is true I said, this antecedent
will is not simply, properly and formally the will of God: which being so, the
place of Saint Paul cannot be expounded by that distinction. My adversary
therefore proceeds, by an example, to show both what this antecedent will in
his opinion is, and how thereby God may be truly said to will all men to be
saved, even by a formal and proper will. The sum is this, that like as a
King, out of the graciousnesse and good disposition of his nature toward his
subjects, desires to have them all, and every one of them live happily: and yet
moved with their offenses against his laws, determines to put some of them to
death ^ so God, of his natural goodness inclines to the salvation of all
(much more then any King can desire the life of his subjects) notwithstanding
he be determined to condemn some for the just desert of their sins. In which
case, the Kings will to save the life of his subjects, were a true antecedent
will: and though it were not his final resolution, yet were it formally and
properly the Kings will and his determination; notwithstanding, to put such to
death as break his laws, were his consequent will, whereto he were not
naturally inclined, but occasioned by the ill deserts of his subjects: so is it
in God, whose desire that all men should be saved, arising from his own
goodness, is his primarie and antecedent will, which is properly, formally,
and in some sense simply his will: but his purpose to condemn some, arising
from his justice against such as deserve it by their sins, is his secondary
and consequent will, not proceeding out of his own natural inclination, but
the ill desert of the wicked. In which example, he makes the order of Gods
predestination, and willing men, some to be saved, some to be condemned, to be
this: that God in the first instant of his counsel, propounded equally to
himself Jacob and Esau, the elect and the reprobate, and loved the one no more
then the other, but had an equal will indifferently to save them both; this is
his antecedent will. In the second instant, he wills and purposes to save him of
the two, that shall in his life time well deserve it, and to damn him of the
two that shall sin: this is his consequent will. In neither of these two
instances does he yet make any discretion between Jacob and Esau, by either
electing the one, or refusing the other: but only has an intention and
formal will to save him that shall deserve it. In the third instant, he
decrees and wills to give them both, though not equal, yet sufficient means of
salvation, and helps of grace, whereby Esau may as well come to salvation as
Jacob: and this not only in Adam, but also in themselves considered in the
state of sin. In the fourth instant, he decrees to leave them both to the
liberty and free choice of their own will, to use these means of salvation,
or not to use them, Jacob as well as Esau, the elect as well as the reprobate.
In the fifth instant, he foresees Jacob will use the means, and live and die
well, but Esau will not. Hereupon in the last instant, by his consequent will,
arising from the foresight of their good and ill deserts, in his eternal
counsel he pronounces the decree of election to Jacob, and of reprobation to
Esau. This, as near as I can understand, is and must consequently be the
contents of his example; which he also sets down more fully Page 163. and inde.
in the sixth section against Calvin. And I presume I have truly expressed his
mind, because I find Enchirid. page 77.
his Becanus, whom he follows, and Hack. disp. de praed n. 119 Less. de praed.
sect. 6.
others that hold predestination to be ex praeuisis, to deliver it in the same
manner. Lessius a Jesuit, among the rest, has one 5. assert. page 367. n. 75.
assertion, that contains all this: All the justified are elected and
predestinate to glory; but this election and predestination is not complete,
but requires a condition on our behalf, that it may be complete: the which
condition it is in our own power to accomplish or not to accomplish: and
therefore it is also in our own power to make that our predestination may be
complete. Aureolus 1. d. 41. art. 1. page 490. edit. Romans
says, that all School men (which hold predestination ex praeuisis) expound
that God wills all men to be saved antecedently before their working, but not
consequently, by his will following the foresight of their works. Which words
make the doctrine of Gods antecedent and consequent will thus expounded, to set
the first act of Gods loving Jacob after the foresight of Jacobs good life; and
to make the foresight of men's good or ill deserts, to be the cause of their
election and reprobation. The question then, between the Jesuit and me,
touching predestination, The state of the question touching Gods An^ecedent
will.
is this, not whether God from all eternity decreed to punish the reprobate
eternally for their sins, so that their sins should be the immediate cause
of their damnation: for this I deny not: but the true state is touching the
CAUSE OF THE DECREE IT SELF; that is to say, what is the cause why God
foreseeing that all men should equally in Adam be sinners, yet notwithstanding
decreed to show his mercy in forgiving some, and electing them to life, and to
show his justice and wrath in other some, by rejecting them from this election,
and forsaking them in their sins, that they might eternally be condemned? I
say, there can no other cause of this decree be assigned, then only the free
will of God: whereas the Jesuit in his doctrine of antecedent and consequent
will, exemplified in this his comparison of an earthly King, makes the reason
of this decree to be works foreseen: so that on the behalf of the elect,
their foreseen grace should be the cause of their election; and on the behalf
of the reprobate, their foreseen sin should be the cause of their reiection.

11 The which doctrine of my adversary, how plain soever he think it to
judicious wits, (whether predestination were in the corrupted mass of sin or
before, and whether the foreseen works be understood to be of grace or of
nature) is false upon five grounds. First it seems to be the very opinion of
the Massilians, who of all hands are holden to have been Semi-pelagians, or the
relics of Pelagius. Prosper Epist. ad August.
says, This is their profession, that every man sinned in Adam, and that no
man is regenerate to salvation by his works, but by the grace of God:
nevertheless the propitiation which is in the mystery of Christ's blood, is
propounded to all men without exception, that whosoever will come to faith and
baptism, may be saved: but who would believe, and who would persevere in that
faith, which afterward should be helped by Gods grace, those God foreknew
before the world was made, and those he predestinate unto his kingdom, who he
foresaw, being freely called would be worthy of election, and would depart this
life well. And Faustus, that was a Bishop of that sect, De great. and lib arb.
l. 2. c. 2.
says, What God may foresee or foreordaine touching us, concerning that which
is to come, that consists in our well or ill doing. Cap. 3. page 833.
It is one thing for God to foreknow, and another to predestinate: praescience
foresees what is to be done, and then afterward predestination appoints the
rewards; that foresees the merits, this fore-ordaines the rewards: when that
has pronounced a cause, then this foretells the sentence; and so unless Gods
praescience discover something, his predestination decrees nothing. This is the
self same that my adversary Page 166.
writes, how God upon the foresight and respect of men's living and dying well,
in the secret chamber of his divine knowledge and will, pronounces a particular
sentence and decree of salvation to some, and of damnation to others. Which
also is the doctrine whereinto this exposition of Gods antecedent and
consequent will is resolved. Again, if God predestinate no man to his end, but
upon the foresight and respect of his works, then he has no perfect or
formal will to elect any, but after the foresight of his good life; nor to
reprobate any, but after the foresight of his evil life: which being so, I
demand whence it comes that the elect believe, and the reprobate believe not;
and how it comes to pass, that God foresees grace in the one, and sin in the
other? It must needs be answered, either that it is Gods will the elect shall
have grace, and the reprobate no grace given them; or that they believe, or not
believe, of their own free will, by the strength of nature, without any
working of God. This latter is gross Pelagianisme, making nature the beginning
of grace. But if the former be granted, that God foresees no grace but what
himself predestinates to give; nor no sin but what upon the withholding of
his grace, the reprobate will freely work; then, against all discourse, this
makes that the cause of predestination, which is an effect ensuing on it: for
therefore God will and does give grace, because first he has elected; and will
give no grace, because he has reprobated, as I will show by and by.

12 Secondly, it is a ground both in Divinity and nature, that the will
intends the end before the means: hence it follows, that God cannot have this
consequent will, to save upon the foresight of grace. For I reason thus: Quia
volens ordinate finem and ea quae sunt ad finem, prius vult fine^ quam aliquod
entium ad finem; and propter talem finem alia vult. Ergo cum in toto process^,
quo creatura beat^ficabilis perducitur ad perfectum finem, cum finis vltimus
sit beatitudo perfecta; Deus volens huic aliquid istius ordinis, PRIMO VVLT
HVIC CREATVRAE BEATIFICABILI FINEM; ET QVASI POSTERIVS VVLT SIBI ALIA QVAE SVNT
IN ORDINE ILLORVM QVAE PERTINENT AD FINEM: scilicet Gratia, Fides, Meritum, and
bonus vsus liberi arbitrij. Omnia ista ad istum finem sunt ordinata, licet
quaedam remotius and quaedam propinquius. Ergo PRIMO ISTI VVLT DEVE
BEATITVDINEM QVAM ALIQVID ISTORVM; ET PRIVS VVLT ^I QVODCVNQVE ISTORVM, QVAM
PRAEVIDEAT IPSVM HABITVRVM quodcunque istorum. Jgitur PROPTER NVLLVM ISTORVM
PRAEVISVM VVLT EI BEATITVDINEM. Scot. 1. d. 4. qu vnic.. Potest aliter. Media,
vt media, non possunt appeti nisi propter finem, non igitur potuit Deus velle
dare certi^ hominibus media infallibilia ad salutem nisi prius dare vellet,
ijsdem hominibus, ipsam, salutem. Bellarm. de great. and lib. arbi^. l 2. c. 15.
page 472 D.
In the order of reason and causalitie, the will of the end goes before the
will of the means that brings to the end, in that the means are not intended
but for a certain end, and so the said end is entered the will, and propounded
by it, before the means: But Gods will to elect men to glory, is his will of
the end, because glory is the end of faith and a good life; and faith and a
good life, are the means, because they bring to glory: Deus nulli electorum
ab aeterno ideo ordinauit dare finalem beatitudinem in patria, quia
praeordinauit dare ei gratiam and iustitiam in via; sed potius e conuerso, ideo
praeordinauit ab aeterno dare ei graetiam pro via, quia gratis pure
praedestinauit ei dare finalem beatitudinem pro patriae. Andrae. Castrens. 1.
d. 40. concl. 5. Deus prius vult glorium Petro, deinde gratiam, etc. Fra.
Mayro. 1. d. 41. qu. 4.. Hoc autem declar.
Therefore Gods will to elect men to glory, goes before his will to give them
faith and grace; therefore he elects not after or upon the foresight of faith
and grace: therefore before he see faith or grace in Jacob, which he will give
him, he purposes to give him life eternal: therefore he purposes to give faith
and grace after his will to give him eternal life: and therefore he elects no
man consequently upon the foresight of his faith and good life; nor
antecedently wills the salvation of the reprobate, from whom by his eternal
purpose he decreed as the means, to withhold his grace.

13 Thirdly, this antecedent and consequent will supposes, that God elects none
to glory, but for the grace and perseverance he foresees in him; nor
reprobates, or refuses any from glory, but for the sins he foresees in him.
Thus my Adversary says: Page 163.
We must hold for certain, God did not effectually ordain any to salvation or
damnation without foresight of their good or ill desert. Page 164.
God has decreed in general that all and only those, shall be effectually
saved, who, by using the means of salvation, and helps of grace shall depart
this life in good state: and that those, and only those, shall be damned, who,
by neglecting grace, depart this life in the state of sin. Page 165.
Leaving it to the liberty and free choice of men, whether they will use, or
not use those helps and means. And so upon this foresight and respect of men's
living and dying well or ill, pronounces the sentence of salvation and
damnation. Against this I reason thus. He that neither elects nor reprobates
any, upon the foresight of their good or ill using of grace and means offered,
by their own freewill; has no such antecedent will to save all, nor
consequent will, to reprobate any, only upon the foresight of their sin: This
is plain: because this antecedent and consequent will is defined by willing
and not willing, upon foresight of that which man, by his freewill, will do*
and if the definition be not in God, then neither is the thing defined. But God
neither elects nor reprobates any, upon the foresight of their good or ill
using of grace and means offered, by their own freewill. Ergo God has no
such antecedent will to save all, nor consequent will to reprobate any upon the
condition of their works; The second proposition I prove by reason and
authority. By reason: for whatsoever he foresaw in any, that himself purposed
to work. If he foresaw grace and the good use of freewill in Jacob, he
purposed to work it by infusing it: if he foresaw sin and the ill use of
freewill in Esaw, he purposed Romans 9.18. Habemus ex doctrina Thomae, quod
diuina reprobatio est CAVSA de relictionis in peccato, and aeternae poenae.
Bann. 1. p. page 665. e.
to work it by withholding grace and hardening: and he not only purposed to
work this which he foresaw, but to work and effect it as the means, and as a
subordinate second cause, to bring man to the end appointed. For grace,
freewill, perseverance, and the rest are but causes leading to the end, and
therefore Inter primam causam agente^ and secundam, est ordo, quo vna
necessario pendet ab altera. Ergo secunda non agit nisi a prima, ad agendum,
mota and applicata -- ideo enim dici videtur causa secunda, quia mouetur a
prima: alioqui enim solum esset causa eum prima. Azo instit. moral. tom. 1. l.
1. cap. 21 ad 8.
secondary and subordinate causes: and therefore decreed and intended after the
end, and less principally then the end. The Suar. late de praedest. lib. 3. c.
2. and inde. Q^ic. quid est in homine ordinans ipsam in salutem, TOTVM
co^prehenditur sub effectu praedestinationis. Capreol. 1. d. 41. art. 1. Fra.
Mayron. qu 4. D Thom^s, vt Catholicus and in doctrina Augustini and conciliorum
valde versatus, considerat bonum vsum liberi arbitrij, quo quis libere vti ur
auxilio Dei, tanquam effectum gratiae diuinae and praedestinationis
praeordinatum and praedefinitum a Deo. Vnde colligit necessario, quod ille
bonus vsus non potest esse ratio praedestinationis, cum ipsemet sit effectus
praedestinationis and praedefinitionis. Dei. Bann. 1. page 632. e.
Jesuits confess, not only glory in the life to come, but the first grace,
and justification, and all supernatural works, and the cooperation of
freewill, and all the goodness and strength of nature, and perseverance in this
life, to be the effects of predestination, intended and effectually given of
God to the elect for the bringing of them to glory. This glory therefore could
not be intended upon the foresight of them, but by the means of them: and
therefore Jacob could not be elected, nor Esaw reprobated upon the foresight of
the good and ill use of grace and freewill, as any cause moving God thereunto:
but the cause must be his own will moving it self in manner unknown to us:
and Jacobs well using grace was the means intended by God to bring him to
salvation; and Esawes wickedness, which God decreed to permit, was the means
intended by him to bring him to the condemnation whereunto the mass of sin
would lead. Secondly, that neither election nor reprobation, specially
negative (which alone contains the whole reason of reprobation: Odio habere
non sonat solum priuationem dilectionis, sed significat velle malum. Caieta.
comm. in Romans 9.13.
or his purpose not to save or elect Esaw (which is negative reprobation) puts
him into the state that he must be damned) is upon the foresight of works, or
upon the condition of man's will: is the constant judgment of the most of our
adversaries. I will not ground this authority upon the Scripture, or See his
last chap. de praedest. and great. Ambrosius Catharinus vehementer in eos
inuohitur, qui dicunt Deum, ex se aliquos reprobare and excludere a vita
aeterna: non quidem propter eorum praeuisa mala opera, sed quia ipse vult non
dare illis vitam eternam. Et hanc opinionem vocat ipse durissimam and
intolerabilem, and causam desperationis hominum, and impiam, eamque assignat
ipse Luthero; CVMEA TAMEN SIT IPSISSIMA B. AVGVSTINI SENTENTIA. Peter. sel^ct.
disp. in Romans 9. n. 31. And that the judgment of S. Austin is, that neither
election nor reprobation is for works foreseen, is affirmed by Grego. Arimin.
d. 40. Dom. Bann. 1. p. q. 23. art. 5. Sixth. Senens. biblioth. l. 6. annot 251.
Tolet. in Romans 11. annot. 4 Suar. opusc. de auxil. l. 3. c. 16. and 17. and
tract. de divine. praedest. l. 1. c. 8. page 179. Zumel. var. disp. part. 3.
page 358.
S. Austin, because I intend no solemn discourse about the question: and have
to do with an adversary, whose arrogance Rom 9 11. and 11.33. Ephesians. 1 11.
and ignorance is fittest to be buffeted with the authority of his own side:
but I will make it appear, that going about to confute Calvin, and expound
his antecedent will, he is fallen into that gross opinion about predestination
that scarce any of his own Doctors hold. That predestination therefore to
eternal life was, according to the doctrine of Calvin, without and before the
foresight of works, so that it was made without any respect of them, so freely
and in that manner, that grace, and good works, rather are effects of it, is
affirmed by diverse of the principal School Doctors, in the Church of Rome.
Gregorius Ariminensis, and after him the Cardinal of Cambray, lay down Arim.
1. page 163. Camerac. 1. page 175.
their judgment in five propositions; the first: No man is predestined for
the good use of his freewill, which God knew he would have: howsoever the
goodness thereof be considered. The second: No man is predestined for that
he was foreordained to persevere in habitual grace, without let to the end.
The third: Whomsoever God predestined, he predestined only freely, and of
mercy. The fourth: No man is reprobated for the evil use of his freewill, that
God foresaw he would have. The fifth: No man is reprobated because it was
foreseen that he would finally hinder grace. Andreas Castrensis Andrae.
Castrens. 1. d. 40. page 179. and inde
sets down five conclusions. The first: God from eternity never predestined
to give to any justifying grace that should make him worthy eternal life,
because he foresaw any merit of theirs to come, whereby they should either of
condignity or congruity merit that grace. The second: God from all eternity
foreordained to give grace and charity to some in time, not therefore because
he foresaw they would use that grace well. The third: God from all eternity
predestined to give every one of the elect, some grace and supernatural
benefit, of his mere free goodness, and not because he foresaw any merit of
that man, whereupon he should either condignily, or of congruity merit the
gift. The fourth: God from all eternity predestined none of the elect because
he foresaw his good works or merits: nor for his good works to come, or merits
foreseen. The fifth: God from all eternity ordained to give eternal life to
none of the elect, BECAUSE HE FOREORDAINED TO GIVE HIM GRACE, CHARITY, AND
JUSTICE IN THIS LIFE: BUT CONTRARY; therefore he foreordained from all
eternity, to give him grace in this life, because he freely and purely
predestined to give him eternal life. Dominicus Bannes Dom. Bann. 1. p. q.
23. art. 5. ^ Page 634. b.
lays down diverse conclusions, but five to this matter. 1. There can none
cause be assigned not only of the act of Gods predestination, but neither any
reason or motive on the behalf of the creature, 2 Page 6 32. b.
or of God himself. 2. It cannot be said that merits preexisting in this
life, are the reason or cause of the effect of predestination. 3 Ibid. d.
3. It cannot be said that merits following the effect of predestination are
the reason of predestination; the meaning is: that therefore God should be
understood to give any man grace, or predestinate to give him grace, because he
foresaw he would use that grace well, 4 Page 650. b.
4. No cause of predestination is given on our behalf. 5 Page 664. c. cum 665.
a.
5. It is the opinion of Thomas, that, speaking simply, there is NO CAUSE OR
REASON OF REPROBATION ASSIGNED ON THE PART OF THE REPROBATE, AS NO CAUSE OR
REASON OF ELECION IS ASSIGNED ON THE PART OF THE ELECT: and the sense is, not
speaking comparatively, why he should reprobate Esau rather then Jacob, but
absolutely considering the reprobate themselves, THERE CAN NO CAUSE BE ASSIGNED
ON THEIR OWN PART OF THEIR REPROBATION. AND THIS IS THOMAS HIS MEANING, and
this is proved, etc. Capreolus shows his own and Aquinas his judgment in 7.
conclusions, Capreol. 1. d. 41. q. vnic.
whereof the first is. Neither merits nor demerits are the cause of
predestination on the part of the act of him that predestinateth. The fourth
is. The merits, which follow the effect of predestination, are not the cause of
the effect of predestination in that manner that some say, that God therefore
gives a man grace, and predestined to give it him because he foresaw he would
use it well, as when the King gives a horse to him that he foreknowes will use
him well. The fifth. Though some particular effect of predestination have cause
on our behalf, yet the total effect of predestination in common, has no
cause on our behalf. The sixth. The goodness of God is the cause of the total
effect of predestination. The seventh. The reason of the election of some, and
reprobation of other some, is taken out of the goodness of God, whose divine
will alone is the reason why he reprobates these and elects them. A^t. 2. arg 2.
There is no cause in special why this man is reprobated and that man elected,
but the simple will of God. These conclusions of Cameracensis, Andreas
Castrensis, Bannes, and Capreolus, are extracted out of 1 d. 41. qu. 1. and 1.
p. q. 23. art. 2. 3 4. 5. and cont. Gent. l. 3. c. 1 61. and Lect. in To. 9.
Aquine, and followed for substance Magist. 1. d. 40. and 41. Altisiod. sum. l
1. c. 9. (...). 1. and 2. Scot. 1. d. 41. q. 1. Mayron. ibi. qu. 4. art. 1
Maisil. art. 2. Concl 4. Duran qu. 2. Egid. qu. 1. art. 2. Dionys. qu. 2.
Mayor. d. 40. qu. 2. Ferrat. contr. Gent. l. 3. c 61.. pro solutione Gerson.
consol. Theol. l. 1. pros. 3. Soto in Romans 9. tract. de Praedestinat. Caietan.
1 p. qu. 23. art. 3. and in Romans 9. whereof all are clear for election and
many also for reprobation.
by the best and ancient Schoolmen that I have looked into; so that if the
matter were to be carried by number and voices, Caluines doctrine, Reported by
the Reply page 151.
That God has predestined without any merit or demerit of their parts that
are predestined, only because it so pleased him, must be acknowledged the
truth, and my Adversaries doctrine transcribed and stolen out of Becanus a
dozen leaves together, must be awarded to contain The poison of the most
pestelent opinion which Calvin holds. A.D. page 145.
the poison and the pestilence. The Jesuits also and modern Divines of latter
time in the Church of Rome, follow the same conclusions, and maintain them,
though I do not deny that some, by virtue of the unity, always found in the
Church of Rome, dissent from them. Henriquez a Jesuit touching election, Sum.
de fin. hom. cap. 11. n. 3.
says: The true and common opinion of the Divines, supposes no motive cause or
condition, no man's behalf, foreseen of God why he should, by the immutable
will of God, be loved and predestined to eternal life, and to all the
effectual means thereof, but all men that shall effectually be saved, are
freely chosen out of the mass of corruption, and predestinate for the merit of
Christ, before the preuision of the course of their life, and their use of
reason, and so consequently before the preuision of their perseverance in
grace, or any free work, worthy reward and love, and the whole reason is, the
free will of God. Touching reprobation he holds otherwise. Bellarmine, De Great
l. 2, c. 9.
says: there can no reason of our part be given of Gods predestination -- I
say there ca^ no reason be assigned, to exclud not only merits properly so
called, but also the good use of freewill, or grace foreseen. -- Cap. 15. ad 4.
God reprobates before the foresight of works, in as much as he will not
deliver the party reprobated out of the mass of sin. Cap. 16. prop. 9.
Reprobation which S. Austin calls, Predestination to death, comprehends two
acts: the one Negative (whereby God will not save them) whereof there is no
cause on the part of men. The other positive (whereby he will damn them) the
cause whereof is the preuision of sin -- Dried concord. part. 1. c 3. Sixth.
Se^. l. 6. ann. 251. Pomponat. de praedest. page 955. Tolet. in To 9. ann. 19.
and 26. etc. 11. ann. 4. Peter. select. disp. in Romans 9. disp. 5 Suar. de
praedest. l. 1. c 8. n. 32. and l. 2. c 23. nu. 14. 20. 27. Pezant. 1. p. qu.
23. art. 5. disp. 6. and p. 157. concl. 4. Zumel. disput. vv. part. 3. page 343
345. 346. Rispol. lib. 1. qu. 1. concl 3.
the same is affirmed by oaths: and though the most of them hold (which I deny
not) that predestination is in the mass of sin, and reprobation positive,
which only is Gods purpose to punish the reprobate, is to punish them for
works foreseen, yet that helps not my adversaries opinion, who affirms
predestination in what state soever it were, to be ex praeuisis; and says that
not only positive reprobation, which is no more but Gods purpose to damn and
to execute that which is called negative reprobation, but election it self is
for the preuision of works done by our own free will; which the works even
of the corrupt mass are not, but are done by Adams will, which all these
confute. Vasquez Vasqu. 1 p. disp. 95. n 2. the same thing affirmed by Suar. de
praedest l. 5. c. 3. n. 1.
says: There be not a few Thomists that affirm, God to have kept the same
order in reprobation, that he did in election, that before any foresight of
their sins, of his own will alone, he decreed to exclude some from the
kingdom of heaven, though he did not ordain them to the punishment of sense;
and then that such as he would exclude, he permitted to fall into sin, with
that intent that he might exclude them from the kingdom of heaven, as he had
decreed, in such sort, as he calls effectually after election to glory. And
Cardinal Tolet, speaking of reprobation, seems In Romans 9 annot. 26. page 428.
to say the same thing, that our adversaries so much object to M. Calvin, that
by the right of the dominion and power, which God has over man and every
creature, God may without any injustice do and exercise whatsoever it pleases
him, be it good or evil: for if a man, that is lord but of a little wood or
stone, may, of the said wood or stone, make what he list, either a vile and
base, or an honorable work, or burn it; much more may God do the same thing,
whose dominion is full and absolute: and hereupon he concludes, that if it were
so, that no man can resist Gods will, but he hardens whom he will, yet we might
not plead with him, because all men are unto God as the clay to the potter,
and so he may, by his good right, inflict his punishments, and show his wrath
and power according to his own will. I have been something curious in
alleging, or citing, these authors, because I would make it manifest, that
never a one of my adversaries assertions, either that God elected to salvation
upon foresight of grace and good works; or left it to man's own will, whether
he would use the means offered well or ill; or that the reprobate are rejected
from election and salvation, for their sin foreseen, or that the means of
salvation are given alike to all, is the doctrine of the Church of Rome; but
these assertions proceed from the ignorance and rashness of a few therein,
that care not what they say, so they may be barking against Calvin. And albeit
many of these Authors hold all predestination to be in the mass of sin, yet
for so much as out of the mass, God first Reprobat Deus ante praeuisionem
operum, quatenus no^ vult alique^ ex massa peccati liberare. Bellar. de great.
and lib. arb. l. 2. c 15. quarta object. p. 474.
freely; and then determinately; and lastly, absolutely, elects whom he will;
hence it will follow necessarily, that this foresight of the good and ill use
of freewill, and this consequent will, to save and refuse, upon the preuision
of after works, can have no place: because God once for all, in a corrupted
mass, makes his decree absolute, upon the state of sin, wherein he finds
Adam and his posterity, and not conditional, upon the condition and foresight
of that which they themselves shall also do hereafter; their works good or
evil, being subordinate means to bring them to their end, but not any cause
or condition, whereupon God in his eternal counsel ordained them to the end.

15 Fourthly this opinion of Gods antecedent will, necessarily implies, that he
also gives grace and means sufficient for salvation to all men, and supposes
that there is no mortal man, old or young, or Christian or Pagan, from the
beginning of the world to the end thereof, but God reueales to him the means of
salvation, and at the least in some instant of his life, sets him in a state,
that he may enjoy the means if he will, and be saved. The consequence is
proved, because if God will only save such as use the means of salvation
well, and damn such as use them ill, and that consequently because they use
them well or ill; he must in justice, reveal and exhibit these means unto
them, forasmuch as no man of himself can recover them; and he must reveal and
exhibit them to man when he is in such state that he has the use of his
freewill; as my adversaries king that wills the salvation of his subjects, on
condition they keep his laws, is bound to publish and make his laws known
unto them, else if he execute any of them, it must be upon a new point, and not
consequently, upon their not keeping his laws: so it is impossible that God
should only consequently reprobate them for the ill use of his grace, and
contempt of the means of salvation, that never had these means, nor ever
heard of this grace, or ever were in state that they could use them, as many
millions of people in all ages have been and now are. The first sort whereof
are infants that either die in the womb, or unbaptized, or reach not the
years of discretion, and use of reason and freewill: of whom Gregorius
Ariminensis 1. d. 46. qu. vnic. ad argum. Occha.
says, It is false that God antecedently gives sufficient means of salvation
to all, for it is manifest that unto children dying without baptism in their
mothers womb, or after they are borne, he gives no such sufficient antecedent
means whereby they may obtain salvation. The same must consequently be holden
by all them Tom. 1. d. 6. art. 1 qu. 1. ad. 1. Gabr. 4. d. 4. qu. 2. art. 3.
dub. 2. sub. sin. Soto de Not. and Gr. l 2. c. 10. p. 90.
that teach baptism to be the only means (out of the case of martyrdom) of
salvation for infants, and yet many have not the means of baptism provided
them. Vasquez Vasqu. 1. p. qu. 96. n. 2. and 3.
says, The controversy is not whether Christ have instituted means
sufficient of themselves for all infants; But whether he has so provided and
disposed them, that he has left it in the free power of any to apply them: for
if these means, which of themselves are sufficient, be so disposed that by no
diligence of man they can be applied, we cannot say, the infant was provided of
sufficient means, because it must be said that sufficient means are provided
for him alone to whom they may be applied. And his judgment is that such
infants have not this sufficient means, adding that Omnes eodem modo sentiunt.
the School Doctors are all of the same mind, that unto some infants God has
in no wise granted that by any humane diligence, the sufficient means of
salvation can be applied.

16 The second sort are such as are borne naturals without the use of reason;
of whom the same is to be said, that is of infants, that for want of reason and
the use of their freewill, they cannot be said to have sufficient means: Vt
aliquis iudicetur habere gratiam sufficientem ad piam actionem supernaturalem,
requiritur eum habere ea auxilia, quae ad eandem piam actionem exigunt^r
tanquam supernaturales formae, and tanqua^ principi^ sufficientia, quibus homo
vocatus, excitatus, and praeuentus, possit vsu aliquo liberae facultatis suae,
Deo adiuuante, and auxiliante, adqui^ere reliqua omnia huiusmodi dona gratiae,
sieve auxilij. Zumel disp. var. 3. part. page 56. a.
for to the sufficiency of the means must concur not only the perfection of
the help revealed, but also the ability of the subject to whom the said help
is offered; for if God have left his word to lead and direct a man, and yet
immediately withholds reason and faculty from him, that he cannot hear nor use
it, it cannot be conceived how he may be said to have left sufficient means to
that man.

17 The third sort are Barbarians, and Pagans that never heard of God or
Christ, and his Gospel; these also cannot be said to have sufficient means of
salvation, because Ioh. 17.3. art. 4.12. Rom 1.17. and 10.14. 1. Co 1.21.
Fides, and sacramenta fidei, and opera bona, a principio, ad obtinendam
salutem, homini propofita vide^tur. Hugo. quem refert Cassal. de quad. instit.
page 49 b. Sine fide impossible est, de potentia Dei ordinata, quenquam
saluare. Ariminens. vbi sup. Non est adiutorium sufficiens sine fide; nec tamen
omnibus a Deo datur Ruard. art. 7.
the revelation of Christ and his Gospel, is the means, and they never had
it. Ruard. ib.
The Deane of Louan, debating this matter, says, The School Doctors are not
agreed whether all men at some time in this life, have sufficient help whereby
they may turn themselves to God. And setting down his own opinion, that they
have not: he says: It is more agreeable to S. Austin and the ancient Councels,
that unto all men God has not allowed such sufficient help, but as of his
mere will he predestinates some to salvation, to whom of his only goodness he
disposes to give his free gifts necessary to their salvation; so of his mere
will, not for any cause foreseen in the reprobate, he reiects some from glory:
he is not therefore ready, so much as is in him, to give them glory, or grace,
or help to hold and recover that grace. There is no question but God in his
providence, has justly withholden the means of his grace from these men,
either for the sins of their predecessors, or for their own original
sin; but yet it cannot be denied, they have not sufficient means.

18 My Adversary Page 170.
says afterward, in his reply, that he speaks not of infants but men of ripe
age, when he says, God gives sufficient help to all; but he must speak of
infants, if he will speak consequently, and uphold his distinction; for
predestination is of no other reason in infants then in old folk, but upon the
same grounds and in the same manner, that he wills the salvation of the one, he
wills the salvation of the other; and therefore willing the salvation of such as
have the use of reason, antecedently, he must will the salvation of infants, in
the same manner also, therefore he must give them sufficient means also,
which not doing, it is plain he has no such antecedent will at all.

19 He replies secondly, that they have the means (yea all, as well infants as
others) Page 165. 171.
at least in potentia remota, Page 170. 171.
and mediatly, whereby he might come to that which is sufficient. Which I take
to be the same that some say, how God gives even these sufficient help in actu
primo; which is some inspiration as a beginning, which if men would obey, they
might successively and by degrees, rise up to faith and justification, as THE
WAY page 95. in the marg.
I noted out of Paul Windeck. But this will hardly be maintained; for I demand
first, touching these inspirations or motions that are said to be thus offered
and stirred up, in the Gentiles, are they supernatural, or natural? If
supernatural, by what means are they wrought? for the word of God to produce
them, they have not, and Gods Spirit does never sufficiently inspire, when it
does not sufficiently reveal it self to be his spirit. Are they narurall,
arising only from natural knowledge? then I demand again whether being
harkened unto and pursued, they may be able to bring him that has them to
justifying grace? if they be not, they are insufficient; if they be, then this
is Council. Diospol. nu. 10. 11.
Pelagianisme, that a man by natural strength, may eleuate himself, and
obtain the grace of God. Secondly I demand, what he means by his potentia
remota and media? for if the meaning be, God gives means sufficient of
themselves, but no means to use them, ^es, in esse potentiali in causis
secundis, antequam sit in proprio genere, est simpliciter non esse.
then he gives no sufficient means, as I noted out of Vasquez. If the meaning
be that God prepares them for some, no otherwise then the Physician In the
Reply vbi sup.
mentioned, does his physic, so as he never offers it them, nor discouers
himself, or his art, to them, what is this but to mock the world with
Sophistry? If the meaning be that God offers at the least such motions of
nature, and of grace, that by degrees, he may arise, from knowledge to
knowledge, till he come to sufficient knowledge: this is confuted before: for
motions of nature are not sufficient; and motions of grace, cannot be proved to
be given infants and Barbarians, as appears by the difficulty of converting
the wisest and ciuillest Philosopher, or Barbarian, that ever was; or if they
be, yet they are not of that elevation that they can fulfill the just measure
of sufficiency.

20 Thus, I have showed three sorts of people, to be perpetually destitute of
sufficient help in regard of all outward and ordinary means, so far as we can
perceive: yet it is certain that some of these are saved and some reprobated;
their salvation therefore, and reprobation, neither begins in, nor arises
from the foresight of their good or ill use of the means, but from some higher
will and purpose in God, unknown to us, but just and holy in himself: else
were there no such mystery in the doctrine of predestination, that the Apostle
should need to cry, Romans 11.33.
O altitudo, O the depth, of the riches, wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? nor say, Romans
9.20.
what art thou that pleadest with God? Romans 9.18.
he will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens; Romans 9.11.
before the children were borne, and when they had done neither good nor evil,
it was said, I have loved Jacob and hated Esau. For my Adversaries distinction
of Gods willing even the reprobate to be saved, by his antecedent will, and the
rest of his doctrine of predestination, leave no rome for these sayings. They
say, Aug. ep. 105.
says S. Austin, that therefore God loved Jacob, and hated Esau, being yet
unborn, because he foresaw, their works to come; but who would not wonder
that this sense so acute should be wanting to the Apostle? for he saw not so
much, when the question being objected to him, he had not ready this so
brief, so plain, so true, and absolute answer, as these men think this to
be. For when he had propounded a profound matter, touching those that were not
yet borne, and had done neither good nor evil, how it could rightly be said
that God loved the one and hated the other, he objects to himself a question;
What shall we say then, says he, is their injustice with God? God forbid. THIS
THEREFORE WAS A PLACE, WHERE HE SHOULD SAY WHAT THESE MEN THINK, THAT GOD
FORESAW THEIR FVTVRE WORKS, when he said, The greater shall serve the lesser;
but the Apostle says no such thing, but rather, least any man should glory in
the merit of his works, he would have that which he said to be of force, that
the grace and glory of God might be commended: for having said, God forbid that
there should be iniquity with God, as if we should say, how show you this,
(that there is no iniquity with God) when you avouch that, not of works, but
of him that calls, it was said, The elder shall serve the younger: He
answers, because Moses says, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and will show compassion, on whom I will show compassion; therefore it is not
in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. WHERE
NOW ARE MERITS? He excludes, not only the works of nature, but of grace also.
WHERE ARE THESE WORKS, EITHER PAST, OR TO COME, PERFORMED OR TO BE PERFORMED,
AS IT WERE BY THE STRENGTH OF FREEWILL? Does not the Apostle pronounce a plain
sentence touching the commendation of free grace, that is to say, of true
grace? Has not God made the wisdom of Heretics foolish?

21 Lastly, this exposition of Gods antecedent and consequent will is destroyed
by the doctrine of Gods Predetermination, which teaches that the will of God
as the highest, and effectuallest cause, predefines and determines the will of
man to that it wills, and applies it to the work: for whose will in all
things, God predetermines unto one thing (though not by way of necessitation)
by the influxe of his will, their will is no condition or motive of Gods will;
for then Gods will were passive. But man's will in all things God predetermines
to one thing, by the influxe of his own will. Ergo, man's will is no condition,
or motive of Gods will: Therefore God predestinates none upon the foresight of
the good or ill use of their freewill: therefore there is no such antecedent
and consequent will in God as my Adversary maintains. The second proposition
is denied by Martinez de Auxil. p. 134. and inde. Bellar. de Great and lib. arb.
l. 1 c. 12.. Est igitur alia. Quicquid electuri sumus vidit Deus intuitu
aeterno; cognitio necessitatem non affert; vidit, inquam, non lanxit;
praedixit, non praedefiniuit vt sicrent; praescit omnia, sed non omnia
praefinit. Says Marian. tract. de mort. and immortal. p. 415.
some, and the Jesuit cannot reconcile it with his principles. And Fonseca, as
says Rispol. page 3. or Molina, as says Syluius explicat. p. 38.
other some, to avoid it, and for the reconciling of Gods predestination with
man's freewill, have invented the distinction of scientia media, or
conditionata; Fonsec. 6. metap. qu. 6. sect. 8. Molin. concord qu. 14. disp.
52. Suar. opusc. de Scient. Dei, l. 2 c. 3. n. 4.
which importes that God fore-knowes things to come, not by his simple
intelligence, but upon the condition of the second causes, by foreseeing what
they would freely and (merely) of themselves work: which is confuted by
Zumel. disp. vv. part. 3. page 181. concl. 7. Rispol. de praedefinit. l. 1. q.
1. concl. 4. Sylu. explic. part. 2. art. 9.
diverse. But for the understanding of the proposition, that God by his will
effectually predetermins to one thing the will of man, in all things, note:
first, that God may be supposed to concur with our will, as with all other
secondary causes, whether they be natural or free, two ways. First, by
flowing and concurring only into the effect, and so producing it equally with
the second cause. As when two men equally carry a block between them, the one
holding it at the one end, and the other bearing at the other: where one of the
men is not moved or stirred by the other, but both together make one cause
equally producing the effect, which is, the moving of the wood. Thus God
concurs not with our will. Secondly by moving our will it self and touching
it, by his effectual power, whereby it is determined and applied to the
effect, as in a clock we see one wheel to move another. Now my proposition is
understood of Gods moving our will in this latter manner. Note secondly, that
God again may be supposed, in this latter sort, to determine our will 2.
ways. The first is by constraining, and violent enforcing it; as when a man
throws a stone, or shoots an arrow; and thus he mooues us not. The second is
by stirring it up easily and delightfully, to will that which it self allows
and approues withal, the judgment of reason going before; and of this kind
of determination, my proposition is understood, viz. that God by his effectual
will and providence, stirs up, applies, and bends the wills of all men to that
they will, and is the cause of the election. This I prove by the Divines of the
Church of Rome it self: for Aquinas, ( Posseuin. Biblioth. l. 1. c. 10.
whose doctrine is received of the Jesuits, and almost in all their
Universities. So say the Bull before his works: and Sylu. explic. in Praef.
And who so keeps himself thereunto, is never found to swerue from the truth,
but such as impugn him, are always suspected to be in an error) Refert. Sylu.
ib
holds that God is the first moouer that mooues all things, using all inferior
causes as his instruments, and applies their operative virtues, to the
operation, and touches the cause when he mooues it: and so mooues the will that
without necessity he determines it to one thing, Referunt Commbric. physic. l.
2. c. 7. q. 13. art. 1. the same is said by Andrae. Castre^s. p. 105. col. 4.
so that all second causes, before their operation, receive from God a certain
influence and motion, which is Quaesi esse intentionale virtutis diuinae.
as it were the intentionall being of his Divine power, whereby they are
excited to produce their actions, in the same manner as instruments of art are
used, or as an Axe or Hatchet receives motion going before, from the workman,
when they are applied to the work. And indeed this is 1. p. qu. 105. art. 5.
and 12. qu. 6. art 1. ad 3 and q. 109. art. 1. and qu. disp. qu. 3. de Potent.
art. 7. and de Verit. qu. 6. art. 6. and cont. Gent. l. 2. c. 21. nu. 4.5. and
exposit. in Romans c. 9. v. 19.
the perpetual doctrine of Thomas, wherein many Andrae. Casstrens. vbi sup.
see Zumel. vbi sup. p. 136. and inde.
others follow him. Scotus 1. de. 41.. sed contra.
says: God foresees not that a man will use his freewill well, but because he
wills and preordaines that he shall use it well: because -- the certain
preuision of future contingence is from the determination of Gods will. Driedo:
Concord. lib. arb. c. 3.
It is true, that men justified by Gods predestination, by their endeavor, and
deliberation, determine themselves to the election of good works: but God
makes them thus to determine themselves, and to do all these things with a
freewill. Philosoph. de commun. princip. not. l. 8. c. 8.
Pererius: In that which Thomas says, our will is moved, applied, and
determined by God to be willing, though diverse Divines dissent from him, yet I
for my part very willingly, with hands and feet, go into that opinion. For
this is the condition and connection of causes subordinate, that the latter
mooues not, but as it is moved by the former. Bassol. 1. d. 38.
Bassolis: It behoues us to say, that all things are determined in the
knowledge of God, and yet we must not therefore deliberate: because the manner
also of coming to the things (thus determined of God) by deliberation, (with
them to whom they are not determined before they be done) is determined of God.
Dominicus Bannes: Bann. 1. part. Tho. q. 14. art. 13. p. 450. c.
I affirm that the will of the creature will infallibly fail about any matter
of virtue, unless it be effectually determined to well working, by the will of
God. Wherefore God evidently knows that the will of the creature will sin,
and fail, by this, that he knows his own will has not determined the said
will of the creature to well working. Therefore other future things contingent
God knows in their Causes, according as they are determined by the first
cause, but sin to come he knows in it cause, in as much as the said cause of
sin is not by the first cause, determined to well working. Qu. var. part. 3.
p. 109.
Zumel: It is most certain that the will of the creature, that is, our
understanding and freewill, not only as it is a certain nature, but as it is
free: and not only as it is a faculty in man, but even in the use of it own
liberty, depends of God. And, Page 111. concl. 2.
The helps of Gods actual grace concurring, are not only moral, but also
Physical causes of supernatural actions. Page 112. concl. 3.
In supernatural acts God foremooues, or predetermines our will efficiently,
properly.

22 And this is confirmed by reason. First, for Scot. 1. d. 39. qu. vnic. Ioh.
Bassol. 1. d. 38. Dom. Bann. 1. part. ou. 14. art. 13. page 450.
God foresees all contingent effects to come, in his own determination of the
causes thereof; and therefore foreseeing the contingent operation of our will,
he determines it to the effect. Secondly, Else there should be two several
beginnings of one and the same effect, in as much as man's will should begin to
work as soon as God, and concur to the effect willed as principally as God.
Thirdly, The will of man is but Gods Quid dubitamus fateri nos, miseras
creaturas, esse instrumenta Dei, and cum Deo, and per Deum, operari: sicut
instrumentum operatur cum artifice and per artificem: a quo mouetur, excitatur,
applicatur, ad agendum. Fra, Sylu. expl. p. 35.
instrument whereby God works his own pleasure: but every one that uses an
instrument mooues, applies, and determines it to his own will. Fourthly, And
it is a secondary and subordinate cause under the first cause, which is God,
and exceedes not the measure of second causes: but if it were not determined by
the first cause, it should be all one with the first cause it self: for first
and second causes differ in their elevation, the second being always moved to
their effect by the first, and in their operation reduced to the motion of the
universal cause, which is God. Fifthly, therefore the Scripture says, Ier.
10.23.
The way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to direct his own
steps; butz God gives a new heart, Ier. 31.33. and 32, 39. Ezech. 11.19. and
36.26.
and puts a new spirit into men, and takes away their stony heart, and gives
them a heart of flesh, and puts his Spirit into them, and causes them to walk
in his statutes, and to keep and do them. 1. Cor. 12.16.
He works all things in all men. Ph. 2.13.
He works in us both the will and the deed. Pro. 21.1.
The Kings heart is in the hands of God, and he turns it whither soever it
pleases him. Exodus 7 3. and. 9.12 1 6. Romans 9.17.
He stirs up Pharao, and hardens his heart, for he has mercy on whom he
will; and who^ he will he hardens. The meaning whereof Can. loc. l. 2. c. 4. ad 7.
Tolet in Ioh. 12 annot. 22. Perer. select. disp. in Exodus 11. disp 6. and 8.
our adversaries grant to be, that God hardens the wicked, partly by forsaking
them, and withholding his grace, whereby they should be preserved from
hardening; partly by working many things within the^, and about them, whereupon
they become hardened: and so consequently determines their will Minime
periculosum iudico si PERMISSIONI NON NIHIL ADDAMVS quod nec actio proprie Dei
sit, nec sola permissio. Can loc. p. 24.
further then by bare permitting it: so that it may truly be said, that man's
mind and will, (...). Hom. Odyss. Augustinus sententiam Homeri approbat. Zum.
vv. qq. 3. p page 120. A.
is such as it pleases God to give him. Whence I infer, and so will end: God
is not moved consequently by any thing which himself, as a superior cause
mooues and determines to the effect. But God himself as a superior cause
mooues and determines the will of man to the effect, or that which it wills,
whether good or ill. Therefore God is not consequently moved by the good or
ill use of the will of man. Therefore the good use of man's will foreseen
moved not God to elect him: and the evil use of man's will foreseen, was not
the cause that God reprobated him: therefore, God had no such antecedent will
to save the reprobate, if they would by their freewill, use and receive his
grace aright. Therefore Gods decree, touching the salvation and reprobation of
men, is, lastly and finally resolved into his own pure will, as into the first
and highest cause thereof.

To the Reader.
Whatsoever follows in the Reply, from this place, to that wherewith I begin
the next Chapter, is but a continuance of the matter of Predestination,
transcribed out of Becanus his Enchiridion: wherewith I have nothing to do. For
albeit that which he quarrels in M. Calvin be no more then were easily
defended, and then many Schoolmen have written long since; yet I have
propounded to meddle with no more of the Book then directly touches what I
writ: it being a task for him that knows not the price of time, to stand
answering every thing that falls from a Seminary: especially when we plainly
see them to be set a-worke, only with barking (for I dare say, themselves
conceit no substance in their books) to interrupt and detain men from better
duties, then is the answering of their unsavory writings, farced with rudeness
and intemperance, and unworthy, for their immodesty, to bear the name of
Christian Authors.

CHAP. XXVI.
1. The properties of the rule of faith described. 2. None follow private
spirits more then our Adversaries. 3. How the rule must be impartial and of
Authority.

A. D. Page 173
Concerning the sixth Chapter -- having showed in the former Chapter, that
Almighty God, of his part, has provided a means necessary, and sufficient to
the salvation of all sorts, yea of all men, and consequently, that he has
provided some rule, and means sufficient to instruct men of all sorts, in that
one, infallible, entire faith, which is necessary to salvation: In this Chapter
I did set down certain conditions of this rule, and means by which men that
seek, may be directed, toward the finding of it. My Adversaries do not deny,
that the rule, and means must in some sense, have these three properties,
which here I speak of. For the first, to wit, infallibility, M. White says,
White page 10.
that faith must be with full assurance and persuasion, the which (says he) we
cannot obtain, unless the rule give it us. Now it is certain, that the rule,
and means, which here I speak of, cannot give infallible assurance, if it
self were not infallible, and known, or such as may be known to be
infallible. For nothing can give more, then it self has: neither can it breed
more certainety in our knowledge, then it self is, or may be, known to have.
For the second, to wit, easiness to be known, or understood of all sorts, M.
Wootton interprets, Wootton p. 74.
that it must be such, as may be known, although with pains. As for some
pains, I shall not gainesay. For I did never dream that one might attain
knowledge of matters of faith, by only dreaming, as M. Wootton seems to
interpret my meaning. Only I would not have it so difficult, or hard, as that
it should be morally impossible for any sort of men, having sought, found, and
attended to the rule, and means (without miraculous illumination, or
extraordinary, and excessive difficulty) to understand the determinate meaning
of it: In which M. White seems to yield me, for he says, that the rule must
be easy, White page 10.
and plain to all sorts of men, learned, and unlearned, to wit, which use the
means, and are diligent in attending to it; and be enlightened with the Spirit
of God: to all such (says he) it is plain be they never so unlearned, to the
rest it is not. Neither is it (says he) a necessary condition of the rule so
to be: not because it is obscure at any time, but for that sometimes men have
not eyes to see into it, etc. This which he has said, of being enlightened
with the spirit, had need to be declared. If he mean, that one must be first
endued with faith, and in that sense lightened with the Spirit, before he can
understand the determinate sense, and meaning of that, which is appointed by
God to be the ordinary rule, and means, to instruct men in faith; then it is
false, that to be enlightened with the Spirit, is required as a necessary
condition; for so one must be supposed to have faith, before he can by the
ordinary means be first instructed in faith: and so the ordinary means were
needless, for the end to which it was appointed. For what need were there of
an outward ordinary means, to instruct men first in faith, when they are
already supposed to be, by the spirit, sufficiently enlightened with faith? If
he mean only that the Spirit of God, must assist, and concur with man's
understanding, in a special manner to enable the understanding to apprehend
the instruction propounded by the means, and to make it yield assent of faith,
so I shall not strive with him, as having in Introd. q. 6.
the Introduction affirmed as much. Only I would have him note, FIRST, that it
is not the Protestants spirit, whose illumination is required to true faith, as
Ibid.
there I have showed. SECONDLY, that the true Spirit of God, whose assistance
is necessary, is ready (through the merits of our Savior Christ) to assist all
men sufficiently, to the attaining of the truth: and that no man (who has
received exciting grace to move him to seek, find, and attend unto the
ordinary rule, and means appointed by God for men's instruction, in matters of
faith) need fear want of necessary assistance of Gods Spirit, to concur with
him, but rather had need to fear, least himself be wanting to the gracious
assistance of Gods Spirit, in being negligent to concur with it, so much as
he may, and ought: and least in steed of following Gods Spirit, he suffers
himself to be misled with the spirit of Satan, transfiguring himself into an
Angel of light, whose property is to withdraw men from the secure ordinary
means of the doctrine of the Church, to follow private instincts, so colored
with seeming sentences of Scripture, as though they were the very instincts of
the holy Ghost. The third property, to wit, universality, is meant, that the
rule, and means does extend it self to all points of faith; so far as it is,
or may be, necessary to salvation. In which sense I do not perceive my
Adversaries to gainesay. Only the question is, WHETHER and HOW all points of
faith be necessary to salvation? The which question, I have resolved in the
Introduction, and in the fourth Chapter, where I do determine all points of
faith to be necessary to be believed, explicit, or implicit, of all sorts:
and that none is indifferent, or such as may be lawfully misbeleeued
(especially obstinately) at any time, by any persons; and that although all be
not necessary to be known, at all times, expressly by all persons: yet they
are, or may be necessary, so to be known, at least at sometimes, and by some
persons, in the Church; and consequently there must be an universal, ordinary
rule, and means, sufficient to instruct, and to resolve all sorts of men, in
all points of faith, at such times, and in such sort, as need shall require,
thereby to hinder men from misbeleeuing any: and which may tell them
determinately (when controversies arise) whether this, or that point be
necessary to be known, and believed expressly, by all, or only some of the
Church, and by whom. Besides these three properties of the rule, and means.
White page 10.
M. White would have other two. But either they are not necessary; or else they
be sufficiently included in these, which I have set down. For if the rule be
known to be infallible, it little skilleth to our present purpose, whether
there be any higher rule, whereupon it does depend, or no, or whether the case,
which is to be ruled by it, concern the thing it self, which is assigned for
the rule, or some other thing: for where infallibility is, partiality need not
be feared: neither need one seek a higher rule, when he knows the rule,
which he has, to be infallible.
1 MY Adversaries last conclusion was, that the rule of faith must have three
properties. 1 To be infallible, that shall not deceive us. 2 Easy to be
understood of all sorts of men, learned, and unlearned. 3 Universal, to show
what is the truth in all points. Touching my answer hereto, he says four
thing. FIRST, that I grant these three properties to be required in the Rule in
some sense. The first, that it must be infallible; and the last that it must be
universal, I grant simply without any limitation, and this is true. SECONDLY,
touching the second condition, of being easy, he expounds himself, that he
means so easy, that without miraculous illumination, or extraordinary, and
excessive difficulty, any sort of men may understand the meaning of it, and
says M. White seems also to yield him this. The which I did in these words:
The rule is easy, and plain to all sorts of men, learned, and unlearned, that
use the means, and are diligent in attending it, and be enlightened by the
Spirit of God, to such it is plain, be they never so unlearned: to the rest it
is not: nether is it a necessary condition of the rule so to be: not because it
self is obscure at any time, but for that sometimes men have not eyes (for
want of diligence, or Gods illumination) to see into it; for all means, and
rules are vain unless God give eyes to see. This exposition whereby I declared
in what sense the rule must be understood to be easy, he distinguishes: and
says, If I mean no more but that the Spirit of God must help our
understanding, in a special manner, to enable it to apprehend, and yield to
that, which the rule propounds: he will not contend with me. But if my meaning
be, that a man must first have faith, and in that sense be enlightened, before
he can understand the meaning of the rule; then he says my saying is false;
and sets down a proposition against it; that to be endued with faith, is not
required as a necessary condition to the easines of the rule: which is a
needless limitation. For first, I mentioned not faith, but the illumination of
Gods Spirit, whereof faith is an effect. 2. Himself in those words, the Spirit
of God must assist, and concur with man's understanding, not only in general
to preserve the faculty thereof, but in a special manner to enable it to
apprehend, and yield: confesses as much, as I said, or could mean, taking my
words in all their latitude. 3. If faith be taken in one particular sense, as
sometimes it is for the receiving of divine illumination into the heart, as a
dark room, when the window is opened, or a candle is brought in, receives
light: then it is true, ^rgo ante fidem and absque fide, intelligi Scripturas
posse affirmas. Hoc si tibi absurdum non videtur, plus quam Pelagia nus es. D.
Stapl. de author. script. c. 8.. 16.
that the heart must be endued with faith before any man can understand the
rule, and yield his assent to it, unless he will hold Pelagianisme: neither
does my Adversaries argument conclude any thing against this; for the using of
the rule, and this faith go together, as the opening of the eye, and light
concur to seeing. Therefore as he that seeks a thing in a blind room, first
opens the window, and lets in light, and then applies his eye, with the help
of that means to the object: so though it be supposed, that faith cannot be
had before the rule instruct us, yet this light of Gods Spirit, which is the
beginning of faith, as the medium whereby the rule is understood, goes in order
before it. As in all our senses Nihil agit in distans, nisi primo agat in
medium. Allias. ^^^ct. de anim. c. 8. part. 3.
the way from the sense to the object is disposed by the medium: But if faith
be taken in the whole extent for the knowledge, and assent of all that which is
revealed; then I grant the rule must go before.

2 Thirdly touching illumination of the Spirit, which we both agree is
necessary for the using, and understanding of the Rule, he will have 2. things
noted. First, that this is not the Protestants spirit. Whereunto I answer, it
is neither the Protestant, nor Romish, nor any private spirit, much less the
Popes spirit; Showed Chapter 35.
whereby alone they breathe, that thus charge others with private spirits; but
the Spirit of God, that is 1 Cor. 12.6.
given to every man to profit withal. Secondly that this Spirit of God is ready
to assist all men, at least sufficiently to the attaining of the truth and that
no man who^ grace has excited to use the rule, need fear any want thereof:
but all men rather had need fear least themselves be wanting to concur with
this Spirit; and least in stead of following the Spirit of God, they suffer
themselves (as all they do, that follow the Church of Rome) to be misled by the
spirit of Satan, transfiguring himself into an Angel of light, etc. The which
I am also well pleased to note: and commend back again to himself, and all
of his sect, who refusing the light of the Scripture, that so evidently detects
their errors, have suffered themselves to be seduced by the spirit of
Antichrist Apoc. 13.13.
, who has transfigured himself into an Angel of light: and broaching his
own private conceits, yet colors all with the style of S. Peter's successor,
and seeming authority, and spirit of the Church: when the Primum mobile of all
Papistry is now become the Iesuited Popes sole instinct.

3 Fourthly he mislikes, that besides these 3. properties of the Rule, I would
have other two: Vnpartiality, that it be addicted to no side: and Authority to
convince, that there might be no appeal from it. But these conditions I added
for the better explication of the rest, and to exclude the Church of Rome,
which is so partial, that it begges to be it own judge; and so unable to
support the cause, since that the clearest definitions thereof are still called
in question by themselves: as Digr. 36.
I made demonstration. The which being the true reasons of his mislike, he
dissembles, and only replies that these conditions are either not necessary,
or else included in the other 3. the former of which is not true: the latter,
that they be included in the condition of infalliblenesse, I will not contend
about: only I noted them for the more distinct, and particular explication of
that which must belong to the Rule. And so in this point there shall be no
variance.

CHAP. XXVII.
1. The Repliers terginersation. 2. 3. The state of the question touching the
sufficiency of the Scripture alone, and the necessity of the Church Ministry.
3. The speeches of diverse Papists against the perfection of the Scripture. 4.
In what sense Scripture alone is not sufficient.

Page 177.
A. D. Concerning the seventh Chapter -- if my adversaries did not ignorantly
or wilfully, pervert the state of the question, they could not have had color,
to make so long discourse, about this Chapter as they do both make. My question
was not, whether Scripture be the rule of faith, but whether it alone, be the
rule, and means ordained by God to breed in men, that one, infallible, entire
Faith, which is necessary to salvation. This my question my adversaries
pervert, FIRST in that they would gladly (as it seems) make men believe, that
we exclude Scripture, from being in any sort, the rule of faith, and thereupon
Page 10 11.
M. Wootton makes special opposition betwixt the Scripture, which they
assign, and the doctrine of the Church, which we assign for the rule of
faith: whereas we make no such opposition at all, but hold the Scripture (as
propounded to us by the Church) to be part of that, which in the tenth Chapter
I call the rule of faith. For by the doctrine of the Church, which there I call
the rule of faith, I do not mean any humane doctrine; as humane is
distinguished from Divine; but do account the same doctrine, whether written,
or unwritten (which is called divine, because it was first immediately revealed
by God to the Prophets, and Apostles) to be also Church doctrine; because it is
propounded, interpreted, and applied in particular to us, by the Pastors of
the Church. This my adversary might have understood even by the very title of
this Chapter, in regard I said not, the Scripture is not the rule of faith, but
Scripture ALONE is not the rule of faith SECONDLY they pervert the state of the
question, in that they take the rule of faith otherwise, then I do, and
otherwise then according to the drift of the precedent Chapters (whereupon this
present Chapter does depend) they ought to do. For whereas there may be
distinguished in this matter: First, that which is a rule of faith, but not the
ordinary sufficient means, ordained by God to breed faith in men: viz: the
divine revealed verities, as they are in themselves: Secondly that which is so
an infallible rule of faith, as it is also the ordinary sufficient means
ordained by God to breed faith in men: My adversaries for their better
advantage take the question in the first sense, whereas they ought to take it
in the second sense, in regard I so take it in the fifth Chapter, unto which
this Chapter has reference. For whereas in the four first Chapters, I had set
down, for a certain ground, that one infallible, entire faith, was necessary
to salvation; in the first Chapter I proved that God had ordained some rule,
and means, that is, some such rule as was, also a means, sufficient to breed
this one, infallible, entire faith in all sorts of men, yea, quantum ex se, in
all men: In the sixth Chapter I set down certain conditions of this rule, and
means: and consequently, when in this seventh Chapter, I deny Scripture alone
to be the rule, I must needs mean that it is not the rule, which is also a
sufficient ordinary means, of which all my speech went before. Now in this
true sense my adversaries do not gainesay, but convicted by the evidence of
truth, yield that Scripture alone is not the rule, taking the rule as it
signifies that, which is so a rule, as it is also the ordinary sufficient
means to breed faith in men, as here I take it. The Scripture it self (says
M. Wootton) is a rule, Wootton p. 66.
or means made effectual to some by reading without any outward help of man,
but this is not the ordinary course that God has appointed for the instruction
of the people, Page 89.
in the knowledge of his truth therefore if we say at any time Scripture alone
is the rule of faith, by ALONE we sever it from the traditions, and authority
of men, not from their Ministry, and ascribe sufficiently unto it in respect of
the matter to be believed, not simply of the means to bring men to believe.
And again: we require, besides only express words of Scripture, the
Ministry and industry of man together, and conclude points of doctrine out of
that, which is written in Scripture. White page 23.
M. White although he seem to make the doctrine it self of Scripture, to be
the rule, and the letter of the original, or translation to be a means, which
like a vessel presents unto us this rule, yet to the purpose of the question
in my sense, he grants, that the Ministry is the ordinary means, Page 116.
whereby we may learn the faith of Christ, and that no man can of himself
attain the knowledge thereof, but as the Church teaches him, excepting some
extraordinary cases. Whereby I evidently conclude that both M. Wootton, and M.
White yield to the principal conclusion of this Chapter, to wit, that
Scripture alone, whether taken for the original, or translation, is not the
rule of faith in such sense, as I here speak of the rule of faith. Idle
therefore, and impertinent is most of their long, and tedious discourse upon
this Chapter, which consequently I pretermit as unworthy of any reply, if any
thing here brought by them, and pretermitted by me, seem contrary to my
conclusion, it is such, as is answered ordinarily by Catholic Authors, or
such as these my adversaries themselves, if they will not contradict this which
is yielded to by themselves, ought to answer unto, as well as I.
1 HEre I must repeat my old complaint that I am forced to renew in every
question that falls out between us, that my adversary omits and dissembles
the whole substance of my writing, and only descants upon some few remnants
that he rends out, here and there; wisely foreseeing either that his cause
would abide no trial, or himself was not the man that was able to make the
trial For though he could, well enough, translate and transcribe, another man
writing, and patch it together, when he had done, to make a pamphlet; yet the
defense he must leave to his Author, being belike some student, A.D. Student in
divinity.
as he professes himself, that is proceeded no higher then translations; and
yet will serve the turn to bear the name of a Catholic writer. This abject
course, which, now adays, that side cleaues to as devoutly as to their faith,
bewrayes the misery of their side, to say no more: and so I follow him whither
the wind and the tide carry me. For he that rides a jade must take his own
pace or go afoote.

2 First he says his Adversaries either ignorantly or wilfully pervert the
state of the question, else they could have had no color to make so long
discourse. The which is no unprofitable way, when he cannot defend his
question, to pick a quarrel to the state. And possible he has learned it by
po^ching in D. Stapletons books, who, in his time made good use of this
trick. But how was the question mistaken? He says, his question was not
whether Scripture be the rule of faith, but, whether Scripture alone be the
rule, and means, to breed faith. For the trial of this I must entreat the
Reader to take knowledge how things stand between us, though I have once, or
twice, already, upon like occasions, repeated it. The Jesuit, in his Treatise
that I answered, begins with certain propositions which he says are to be
supposed and set down for certain and assured grounds: First, that no man can
be saved without the true faith. Secondly, that this faith is but one, neither
can men be saved in any other. Thirdly, that this faith must be infallible and
certain, so that the believer be fully persuaded of the truth thereof.
Fourthly, that it must be whole and entire, believing rightly all points, one
as well as another. Fifthly, that God has ordained a certain rule or mean,
whereby all men, learned and unlearned, may be instructed in this faith, and
infallibly taught, WHAT is to be holden for the true faith, and WHAT not.
Sixthly, that this rule must have three conditions. First, infallibility, to be
certain, without deceiving us. Secondly, easines, that it may be plainly
known of all sorts of men. Thirdly, latitude, that, by it, we may know
absolutely all points needful to be learned. Then In THE WAY. 5. and in his
printed treatise p. 17. concl. 1.
he proceeds to inquire what, in particular, is the thing which may be assigned
to be this rule? whereto he answers in four conclusions, the first whereof is
this, whereabout he now contends, The Scripture alone, especially as it is
translated In his printed copy it is: Specially as it is, by Protestants
translated into the English tongue.
into the English tongue, cannot he this rule. This I denied in another
conclusion opposite to it, using the words of the public articles of our
Church: The Scripture, comprehended in the Canonical books of the old and new
Testament, is the rule of faith, so far that whatsoever is not read therein, or
cannot be proved thereby, is not to be accepted as any point of faith, or
needful to be followed. And so, from that place to page 57, I disputed that
the Scripture ALONE is the rule of faith: that is to say, That rule which my
Adversary, in his fourth ground, had said, God had provided, whereby every man,
learned and unlearned, may sufficiently be instructed WHAT is to be holden for
the true faith. Now he complains that the State is perverted, the question not
being whether Scripture be the rule of faith: but whether Scripture alone be
the rule and mean, ordained of God to breed all faith. And he notes two points
wherein it is perverted. First, in that I so affirm and defend the Scripture
to be the rule, as if he, and his sectaries, excluded it from being the rule in
any sort: which he says they do not. For they hold the Scripture, as
propounded by the Church, to be part of it. I answer, that I knew well enough
they confessed the Scripture to be part of the rule, and the Divine doctrine,
which is the whole rule, to be, some of it, written. But I knew also that they
denied it to be the whole rule: joining therewith unwritten traditions and the
Popes Decretals, which they call Church authority: I knew also they allowed it
to be no part of the rule but as, and in such sense, as the Church of Rome
should please to propound it: and I saw his conclusion, in terms, denying the
Scripture alone to be the rule whereby men may sufficiently be instructed WHAT
the faith is: therefore I disputed directly opposite to all this, that the
Scripture alone, without traditions, is the whole rule to show us WHAT is to be
holden for faith; and nothing but the Scripture, this is close to the question.
For albeit he yields it to be the rule in a sort, because as his Church
propounds it, it contains part of the rule; yet he denies it to be that whole
and entire rule, that his conclusion inquires of: and so is to be disputed
against as well as if he denied it to be any part of the rule at all. Again,
he holds two things. First affirmatively; that the Scripture is one part of the
rule: then negatiuely: that the Scripture alone is not all the rule. Both these
are contradictory to my assertion: The Scripture alone is the rule. My
assertion therefore affirming what he denies, and denying what he affirms,
contains the true state of the question: and his inuoluing the matter with all
this cauilling, tends only to the covering of his doctrine, the loathsome
visage whereof he is ashamed should be seen.

3 The second point wherein he says the question is perverted, is in that I
take the rule of faith otherwise then he does. For whereas he, by that word
rule, means such a rule as not only is sufficient to REVEAL, all divine
truths that are to be believed, but also to BREED, or produce in us, the faith
whereby we believe them: I, he says, understand such a rule only as is
sufficient to reveal the divine verities, though it be not sufficient to breed
in us faith and assent thereunto. And it is true that I understand such a rule
indeed; the Church, wherein I live, only believing the sufficiency of the
Scripture to contain all the object of faith, but not to enable us to believe
it, or understand it, ordinarily, without the ministry of the Church and other
means. But this peruerts not the question: The state of the question touching
Scripture ALON^.
for about the means there is no question; but the question is, whether
Scripture alone, excluding all Church traditions, and authority, comprehend the
whole object, or matter, of faith: that is to say, All that we are bound to
know, believe, and do, for our salvation; though it be granted that, to breed,
or produce, faith and knowledge, of that which is in the Scripture, the
Ministry of the Church and the help of Gods Spirit, and our own industry,
must concur. For our Adversaries deny this: and hold their runagate
traditions and Church authority to be necessary, not only for the expounding
and confirming to us that which is in the Scripture, if any one chance to deny
it, or not to see it: but for the supplying of infinite articles of faith,
which are no ways at all comprised in the Scripture, but upon the said
authority are to be received as well as that which is revealed in the
Scripture. The Jesuit speaks as if he thought his Church authority to consist
more in breeding faith and leading men to believe what is written, then in
adding any thing to the measure of the divine verities contained in the
Scripture: and indeed sometime there be of his side that will plainly say so.
He that writ the defense of the Censure Def. of the Cens. page 141. NOTE THIS
and inquire whether all Papists will stand to it.
says, it is to be noted that the question between us and the Protestants is
of EXPRESS SCRIPTVRE ONLY, and not of any far fet place, which by
interpretation may be applied to a controversy. For this contention began
between us upon this occasion, that when we alleged diverse weighty places and
reasons, out of the Scripture, for proof of invocation of Saints, prayer for
the dead, Purgatory, and some other controversies: our adversaries rejected
them, for that they did not plainly and expressly decide the matter. Whereupon
came this question, whether all matters of belief are plainly and expressly in
Scripture, or not; which they affirm, and we deny. And this, he says, is is
the true state of the question. Gretser Defens. Bellar tom. 1. l. 4. c. 4. p.
1598.
says: These things may be proved by Scripture, but not sufficiently, not
effectually by Scripture alone without tradition, but only probably. The which
if my adversary and his Church did hold constantly, and in good earnest, I
would confess I had perverted the state of the question. But they do not: but
hold many things belonging to faith to be wanting, and no way at all, neither
openly, nor expressly, nor consequently, contained in the Scripture. Dominicus
Bannes: D. Dann. 22. Tho. p. 302.
All things which pertain to Catholic faith are not contained in the
Canonical books, either manifestly, or obscurely; nor all those things which
Christ, and his Apostles taught, and ordained for the instructing of his
Church, and confirming of the faith, were committed to the holy Scriptures, and
the contrary is open heresy. Melchior Canus Can. loc. p. 151
There are many things, belonging to the doctrine, and faith of Christians,
which are contained in the sacred Scriptures, neither manifestly, nor
obscurely. Cardinal Hosius Hos. confess. Polon. p. 383.
The greater part of the Gospel, by a great deal, is come to us by tradition,
very little of it being written in the Scripture. Peresius Peers. de tradit. p.
4.
Tradition is taken so, that it is distinguished against the doctrine, which is
found in the Canonical books of the Scripture. Bellarmine Bell. de verb. Dei,
lib. 4. c. 1.
The name of tradition is applied by Divines to signify only unwritten
doctrine. Alphonsus Alphons. a Castr. adu. haer. lib 1. c. 5.
This is to be laid for a most sound foundation -- that the traditions of the
universal Church, and the determinations thereof, in things concerning faith,
are of no less authority, then the sacred Scripture it self, though there be
no Scripture to prove them. Hessels of Louan Hessel. expli. symb. c. 69. p. 38.
The Apostles never intended by their writing to commit to writing the whole
doctrine of faith, but as necessity urged them, what in their absence they
could not teach, that they committed to writing. Costerus the Jesuit Coster.
enchirid. p. 43.
It was never the mind of Christ, either to commit his mysteries to parchment,
or that his Church should depend on paper writings. Lindane Lind. panopl. page
4.
We Catholics teach, that Christians are to believe many things, which are to
be acknowledged for Gods word, that are not contained in the Scripture, and
many things finally to be received with the same authority, wherewith those
doctrines of faith are received, which are contained in holy writ. Rodericus
Delgado Roderic. dosm. de author. Script. l. vlt. p. 63
Albeit these things are not found written in the Bible, yet they must, no
less be observed by the godly, that they may fulfill the precepts, and firmly
believe the mysteries of the heavenly faith. Doctor Stapleton: Staplet.
princip. doctr. l. 12. cap. 5.
There both were among the Jews, and are among us, very many things
religiously performed in the worship of God, and also necessary to salvation,
and necessarily to be believed, which yet are not comprehended in the
Scriptures, but are approved, or commended to us, ONLY by the authority of the
Church. Gregory of Valentia, Valent. tom. 3. p. 258. D.
All the controversy is, whether the Apostles, by word of mouth, WITHOUT
WRITING, delivered, any such doctrines, as now afford an infallible argument
for the determining of the controversies of faith in the Church. These words
of our adversaries make it more then plain, that the Church of Rome holds the
Scriptures insufficient, not only in respect of breeding faith, or bringing
men to know, and believe it ordinarily, which we grant, but also in respect of
containing it in themselves, which we deny. And that my adversary holds the
same thing, I will prone directly. For ha-laid down 4. grounds: First, that
true faith is necessary: Secondly, that this faith is only one: Thirdly, that
this faith must be certain: Fourthly, and entire in all points: he adds the
fifth, that it must not be doubted, but God has provided, and left some
certain rule, and means, whereby every man may, in all points, and questions,
be sufficiently, and infallibly instructed, WHAT is to be holden for true
faith: and then immediately, he puts the question, what in particular may be
assigned to be this rule? whereto he answers, in his first conclusion: The
Scripture alone, especially as translated into English, cannot be this rule.
Which I denied. Therefore his question was touching the sufficiency of the
Scripture, as the said sufficiency is opposed to vnwritte^ tradition, and not
as it is distinguished against the requisite condition of the means to be used
for the understanding of the Scripture. And this I confirm: for my adversary
says, they hold the Scripture to be part of the rule, because it is part of
the doctrine of the Church immediately revealed by God: but yet there are many
substantial points of faith not contained in them. Yea Page 67. Reply.
his express words are, The question is betwixt us, and Protestants, whether
God did reveal any thing, to the Prophets, and Apostles, necessary to be
believed, which is not now expressed, or so contained in the Scripture, that by
evident, and necessary consequence (excluding all tradition, and Church
authority) it may be gathered out of some sentence, expressly set down in the
Scripture. I did not therefore pervert the state of the question, but my
Adversary having nothing else to say, thought good, by this shift, to rid
himself from that, which he saw could not be answered.

4 Nevertheless, pleasing himself with his own conceit, he concludes, that
convicted with the evidence of truth, I have yielded to his conclusion, in that
sense wherein he meant it, That Scripture alone is not the rule of faith. And
therefore all my discourse is idle and impertinent. I answer two things, first,
if his conclusion, The Scripture alone is not this rule, which almighty God
has provided whereby every man may sufficiently be instructed WHAT is to be
holden for true faith; mean no more but only to add the Ministry of the
Church, and men's own industry, to the Scripture, as the means, for the
ordinary understanding and believing that which is written in it: in this
sense, the Scripture alone is the rule whereby to judge whatsoever matter
belongs to faith; but Scripture alone is not the ordinary rule and means, by
it self, to kindle in us the true knowledge and faith of that which it
contains, without the Ministry of the Church, and other things, be joined
with it, for the learning of it: then I grant it: and require the Jesuit
again in lieu thereof, either to renounce his traditions, or else confess
they have no other use but only to help to expound and teach that which is
wholly contained in the Scripture, without any power to supply any defect of
doctrine that may be supposed to be therein. And when he has done, the next
treatise of faith he writes, to distinguish a little better between the Rule,
and the Means of applying it: and not say, that is no sufficient rule whereby
to be instructed WHAT is faith and WHAT not, which only is not a sufficient
means to bring men to faith without the subordinate condition of such means
as is required in the application of any rule. Secondly I answer, that his
conclusion means more: viz. That Scripture alone is imperfect and defective 2.
ways. The first, in that, without other means, it does not ordinarily breed,
or draw forth, in us, assent to that it reueales, nor so much as make us see
the revelation to be. And therefore there needs the Church, by her Pastor, to
teach and persuade us: and there needs the Spirit of God, and industry, in
our selves. This way no Protestant ever denied. The second is, in that it alone
contains not all Gods word, or all such truth as he has revealed necessarily
to be believed; but only one small and obscure part thereof: the best part,
or, at least, some part, being by Tradition only, unwritten. This way we deny
with open mouth: and the Jesuit holds it, and in the place now controuerted,
hugges it in his arms: and therefore I discoursed against him as I did, and in
no other sense: and so consequently it is apparent I yielded not his
conclusion, in the whole sense, but only in a part. For view my words: The
Ministry of the Church is the ordinary means whereby we may learn the faith
of Christ. And, no man can of himself attain to the knowledge thereof, but as
the Church teaches him, except it be in some extraordinary cases. How will my
Jesuit conclude from hence that therefore I yield his conclusion as it is
understood the second way, which way I have showed immediately before both his
Church and himself understand it? Does he that says the kings Justices are
t^^ ordinary means whereby to learn the matter of civil obedience; and that
no subject can, ordinarily, attain to the knowledge of the law, unless some
body publish it, yield therefore that the law alone is not the rule of the said
obedience and subjection, prescribing the measure and quality thereof, but the
Justices also, and such as acquaint us with the law, are part of the rule? yea
the greater, and more certain part? No man will say so: when all men see the
Magistrate to be but the executioner, and minister of the law, to teach,
publish, and execute that which is in the law it self: and the Book of the
law to contain the whole and entire object of obedience; that no subject is
bound to any obedience, or to the doing of any thing whatsoever the Magistrate
might happen to impose upon him, but that only which is contained in the law;
either expressly, or thence to be gathered by true consequence. And so my
Jesuits vaunt of our yielding and impertinent discourses relishes but of the
Soldier that created him and his vaunting Order; though his putting us over to
his other Catholic Authors be scarce souldier-like, but tastes more of the
Creeple. He uses this often, and I confess it is a good short cut
home-wardes, if a man be empty: but it sinkes him that uses it into the lowest
bottom of contempt; to give the onset with conclusions and principles, and
then to maintain them with boasting and ignorance. If we were not well
acquainted with this transparent cowardlinesse in our busiest Adversaries, it
would leaven the most settled patience that is among us.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Touching our English translations of the Bible. Their sincerity and
infalliblenesse. 2. How the unlearned know them to be sincere. The new
Translation, lately set forth by the Kings authority, defended. Momus in his
humor. 4. The subordination of means.

Page 179.
A. D.. 1. That English translations of Scripture are not infallible --
concerning my first reason, it is to be observed, that I do not deny the true
Scriptures, either in the original, or in the translation, to be infallible:
but only I prove the ordinary English translations (which ordinarily
Protestants call the Scriptures) not to be infallible; nor consequently to be,
Wootton page 68.
as some make them, the only sufficient rule, and means, to breed faith. M.
Wootton asks, what English Protestant ever affirmed, that they were
infallible, or took them for the rule? To this I reply, first, that I could
wish these his questions could not be answered, with affirming, that many
thousand poor souls, that have, and can only read English Bibles, think the
texts which they read in the^ to be Gods word; and consequently the infallible
truth, and so take them for a rule of their faith, that wbat they find written
there, they most firmly believe; what they find not there, they will not
believe. Secondly, if the English translation be not accounted infallible, nor
the rule of faith, by some Protestants: I ask first, what M. White means to
say, White, page 25.
the Scripture translated into English, is infallibly true in respect of the
matter? Secondly I ask, what infallible rule and means have at least
unlearned Protestants, whereupon to build their faith? It cannot be said, that
the truth of the revealed doctrine in it self is their rule. For this is the
thing that should be believed, and is not the rule and means whereby men are
to be directed to attain belief. The first Hebrew or Greek original text
immediately written by the holy writers, cannot be their rule. For first, where
is this to be found? or how shall they be sure, if they find it, that it is the
very authentical or original, and not a transumpt? Or if a transumpt* may
also serve, so that it be incorrupt, how shall they know infallibly (secluding
Church-authoritie) that that copy which they have, is incorrupt, when they
never saw the first authentical: nor ever did, or are able to compare them
together? Finally suppose they had a copy well agreeing with the original;
what nearer were they attaining faith by it, since they cannot understand it?
White, page 25.
M White is so far from disclaiming from English translations (as M. Wotton
does) that he will needs defend them to be infallible, in the matter contained
in them: in so much, that with a bold brazen face, he says, Martin cannot give
one instance of the sense corrupted. Page 26.
And although he seem to leave himself a starting hole, by saying that he
does not defend tbis or that man's edition, but the Scriptures well and
faithfully translated; accounting it sufficient that there be some translations
faithful, and agreeing with the original in the Church: Ibid.
yet presently after he takes upon him to defend the varieties of
translations, saying, that this variety has been in words and style, and not
in any material point of the sense. Now how false this bold and blind answer
is, the Reader may easily perceive if he will read not only M. Gregory
Martins discovery, but also M. Reynolds refutation of M. Whitaker, and the
Grounds of the new Religion: which books, neither are, or can so be answered
by M. Fulke, and his fellow Protestants to help him, but still it will be
justified and made plain, that not only one, but many instances may be given
of the sense corrupted. The which is not only proved by our Divines, but also
confessed by Protestants themselves. One of which said, Broughtons epistle to
the Lords of the Council. Carlisle in his book, that Christ went not down
into hell.
that the English Bible was full of errors. And what errors? Only in style, or
words? Nay, M. Carlisle says, that our English (Translators) in many places
detort the Scriptures from the right sense; and that they have corrupted and
depraved the sense, obscured the truth, deceived the ignorant. Which their
confession, if it were not also acknowledged for truth by others, what need
were there, after so many varieties of translations, that (with so much cost,
care, and scandal to the Protestant cause) they must needs have order, by
publik authority to coin a new translation of the Bible, different from all
English translatio^s that have bin before? the which also, when it comes
forth, will not be of infallible authority more then the former: neither can
at least unlearned men be infallibly assured that it contains no material
error. For I would feign know, how they (who neither have the authentical
original, or if they had, cannot read, and much less understand, and compare
the translation with it; neither do admit infallible authority in the Church
to assure them) can be infallibly assured that the translation does not
contain any substantial error? To this M. White answers, White, page 25.
that we know this by the same infallible means whereby we know other articles
of belief: namely by the light of the doctrine translated, the testimony of
the Spirit, the ministry of the word, the rules of are, the knowledge of
tongues, and such like. Here is a fair flourish of words: but answer me (good
M. White) directly to the point. Are all of these jointly, or every one
severally, or only some of these necessary, and sufficient to breed in us
infallible assurance of an article of faith? All are not necessary. For else
how shall poor unlearned men do, who want rules of art, knowledge of tongues,
and such like? Every one severally is not sufficient. For neither knowledge of
tongues, rules of art, nor the Protestant ministry, are of themselves
infallible, and consequently cannot be of themselves sufficient to breed such
infallible assurance in us, as is requisite in an article of faith. Well then
it remains, that only some of these (to wit, the light of doctrine
translated, and the testimony of the Spirit) are (even according to the
ordinary course) the only necessary, and of themselves the sole sufficient
means to breed this assurance: but this not. For then it would follow, that
every one, learned and unlearned, that had the Spirit of God, by the only
light of the doctrine it self, without any other help, should infallibly
understand the Greek and Hebrew text, either read by themselves, or pronounced
by a Minister; which is most false: and yet that it follows well, is apparent,
because true doctrine shines, as well, yea better (if M. White say true) in the
Original, White, page 26.
then in the English Translations. We (says M. White) know the divine doctrine
to be one and the same, Page 27.
immediately in the Original, more obscurely in the Translations: and, God (as
the same M. White says) directs the children of light, by the holy Ghost,
who opens their hearts that they know his voice from all others: and that the
light of his truth may shine unto them. Now if the light of the divine doctrine
do shine, as well, and better in the Hebrew and Greek text, then in the
English translations; and that all which be children of light, have the eyes of
their heart so opened, as they can discern Gods voice from all others: and
that the light of his truth shines unto the^; what need is there then of any
other, either private or public means, to open their eyes to see this light,
when the holy Ghost does sufficiently open them? Or if he say, the holy Ghost
does not open them sufficiently without other means: then the light of the
doctrine and the testimony of the Spirit, are not the only necessary, and
alone sufficient means, to assure us infallibly of any article of faith; and
namely yt this or that means must be assigned sufficient to breed in us
infallible assurance, which it self cannot do, unless it self be, and be
known, or at least may be known to be infallible in it self, and infallibly
to open and direct our eyes to the seeing of the infallible truth: which
fallible ministry of me^, fallible rules of art, and fallible knowledge of
tongs, or such like, infallibly do not.
1 HIs reason why the Scriptures translated into English, cannot be the rule of
faith is, because our translations are full of errors. Whereby, he says, his
mind is not to deny the true Scripture in the original or in the translation,
to be infallible, but only the ordinary English translations. My THE WAY,. 5.
nu. 2. 6. nu. 2. 4. 8.
answer was the same that D. Stapleton Relect. page 525.
makes for the vulgar Latin, that in respect of the words only there might be
some error; but in respect of the sense there is none. For if the words of the
translation be not so perfect as they might, yet that hinders not the truth of
the matter, nor the integrity of the sense. For the vulgar Latin canonized by
Sess. 4.
the Trent Council, and In those words: J do not deny the true Scripture,
either in the Original, or in the Translation to be infallible.
granted by the Jesuit himself to be infallible, is not free from error and
corruption in words. Mariana Tract. pro edit. vulg. Multa superius in Hebraicis
and Graecis codicibus vtti esse ostendimus; multae mendacia in rebus minutis:
eorum pars aliquae non exigua, in nostra editione vulgata extat. c. 21. page
103.
says, There be many corruptions in the Hebrew and Greek books, which are the
original, and many lies in small matters; no small part whereof is also in the
vulgar. It may safely therefore be yielded, that our English translations, as
all other translations in the world whatsoever, are not infallible, nor free
from all errors in words: and yet the sense and matter of the Scripture
translated, which is the rule, be still maintained to, be infallible. This my
answer, yielding such a kind of erroniousnes in words, my adversary objects to
M. Wotton; who, belike in his answer to this argument, demanding what English
Protestant ever affirmed that our translations were infallible, or took them
for the rule? He replies secondly, what means M. White then to say the
Scripture translated into English, is infallibly true, in respect of the
matter? M. White answers, that his meaning in so saying, was to accord with M.
Wotton, by distinguishing between the words and the contents of the
translations: M. Wotton denying the words to be the rule; and I affirming the
matter contained in the words so to be. What contradiction is this; when he
grants our translatio^s, as al humane means are, to be subject to error in one
sense; and I deny them to be subject in another?

2 This my assertion, that our English translations, as touching the matter
contained in them, are infallible: howsoever there be variety among them in
words and style, he entertaines, after his accustomed manner, with some passion
For expou^ding my self, that I would not maintain this or that man's editio^, but
the Scriptures well and faithfully translated, in such manner as our Church
allows them: he calls this a starting hole: never remembering how himself will not
defend this or that edition in his own Church, but will retire to those editions
that are approved: as also the primitive Church permitted variety of
translations, and yet followed the purest, as near as it could judge of the^,
for the time being. I will therefore say it again, that OUR ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS,
AS TOUCHING THE MATTER CONTAINED THEREIN, ARE INFALLIBLE, AND THE DIVINE
INSPIRED WORD OF GOD, THAT IS THE RVLE OF FAITH. And my adversary is but a
mean disputer, if he think to disprove this by obiecting some verbal errors.
For either they will prove no errors at all; or if they do, D. Stapleton shall
tell him, they hinder nothing the truth of the matter, nor the integrity of
the text: and I will give him a whole legion of his own writers, that shall
impute as foul errors to his Trent vulgar, which yet he thinks infallible.
Nevertheless his arguments in disproofe of that I say, are three. First, the
testimonies of Martin, Reynolds, and the Grounds of the new religion. Secondly,
the testimony of M. Broughton and Carlisle. Thirdly the diversity of
translations in our Church. Whereto I answer first in general, that I satisfied
these reasons sufficiently in my book; and gave direct answer to them: whereto
he has replied nothing, but only repeates his objections. He was therefore
too hasty, to call that bold, blind, and false, which he could not reply to;
and me brazen faced that said no more but what himself gives experience of For
I said Martin could not give one insta^ce of any sense corrupted in our
tra^slations; and himself, in stead of producing somewhat out of Martin, breaks
out into railing: which is folly. For cocks of ye game are not allowed to crow
til they have beaten their mate: for he that crows, and yet runs away, is a
crauin, and shall have his neck wrung off, or be turned to the dunghill to
crow among hens. Secondly I answer in particular: to the first, ad 1.
it is but a foolish brag, to be contemned. To the second, ad 2.
it is reported Protest. apol. tract. 1. sect. 10. subdiuis. 4.
on Briarlies credit, who is an adversary. But allowing they said as much as is
alleged, the truth must be tried, not by the hasty speeches of a discontented
man, but by the thing it self: and I showed in the 7. Digress. how diverse
Papists have said worse of the Latin vulgar, which yet is holden infallible by
the Jesuit. Mariana Tract. de vulg edit. page 103.
says, Diverse learned men of France, Italy and Germany, in their writings
accuse the corruption of the vulgar edition, and the negligence of the
interpreter: and that it contains many lies in things of smaller moment. His
third reason is, ad 3.
if our Translations were not erroneous, what need were there, after so many
varieties of translations, to coin a new translation of the Bible, different
from all that have been before? the which also when it comes, will be of
infallible authority no more then the former, etc. Praef. before the new
translated Bible.
The Translators have answered this themselves, so religiously and learnedly,
that it will content any godly mind: only our Jesuits, of Momus race, will
carpe at any thing. Lucian. Hermotim. page 113 Graec. Aldi. and de vera hist.
l. 2. sub init. Natal. Com.
They write of Momus, that none of the gods could do any thing, but he had a
quarrel at it. When Neptune had made a bull, Vulcan a man, and Minerua a
house; he quarrelled at the bull, because the horns stood on his head; the
man, because he had not a window in his breast; the house, because it stood not
on wheels, to remove it when it stood not well. And Philocran ep. ad vxor.
when Venus walked by, smiling at his conceit, he told her she was not well
made neither: (...). page 384.
and her shoe made too much creaking as she went. My adversary has a spice of
Momus in him. His humor affirms four things: first, that the translation is
coined. This we deny: for coining signifies translating otherwise then the
original languages intend; which they have not done, for any thing the Jesuit
knows: for he had not seen it when he wrote this; and whenever he sees it,
he has not so much learning as to compare it with Greek and Hebrew: and the
Reader may judge the better of it by this, that it agrees, throughout, with the
translations of the learned in the Church of Rome, Pagnine, Vatablus, Munster,
Erasmus, Arias, better then the vulgar does; of which translation, many Romish
Catholic Doctors report, Refert Azor. part. 1. sum. mor l. 8. c. 3. page 639.
Quarto.
that there be some corruptions in it, and that things might have been
translated more clearly, significantly, properly, truly, and better: and things
naughtily translated, yea in a contrary sense, and nothing to the purpose. He
that is bound to such a translation, with an ill grace, tells us of coining.
Secondly, he affirms our new translation to be different from all that have
been before: this is stale, and I vouchsafe it only this answer: How can he
tell that saw it not before he writ this, it not being then come forth? Thirdly
he says, that with much cost, care and scandal to our cause, it is set forth.
For the care and cost, he has nothing to do: his Highness, and the State, and
learned of our Church, he now begins to see, will spare neither care nor cost
to advance Gods truth, and impart the sacred Scripture to his people; which the
Pope and his Clergy, with so much care and cost have labored to destroy. The
scandal concerns him nearer: but that he is a Pharisee, and so can receive no
formal scandal from us. Or if he will assume to himself so tender a
conscience, as to be afraid of scandal; let him speak out, and trifle not:
what scandal is it now, when learning and means increase, to make a new
translation; over it was in the primitive Church, when Lucian, Ierom, and
others made their new translations, the Church having many translations in it
before? What scandal is it, more then was See Cassand. praef. ord. Romans
Gregory's altering of the Liturgies, when even with general contradiction,
increasing to mutiny, he abolished the old, to make room for his new? or more
then is the infinite variety of Liturgies, Breuiaries, and Missals in the
Church of Rome at this day? the variety whereof, is almost reached in the
different editions of their translations: in so much that THE TRENT COUNCEL
HAVING AVTHORISED AND PREFERRED THE LATIN-VVLGAR, YET NO PAPIST LIVING CAN TELL
WHICH IS CERTAINLY IT: whether the edition of the Goths, or Complute, or
Louane, or Clement, or Sixtus, or any other. For as there be these and diverse
other editions of the vulgar, set for^h and allowed in the Church of Rome by
the Pope, so do they never a one of them agree with other: which fully returns
the scandal into my adversaries own bosom, and for ever debarres his
sectaries from obiecting to us the variety of our translations; wherein if
there be any force, it will pinch them as much as us.

3 Fourthly he affirms our new translation to be of infallible authority no
more then the former were, that our Church used. This shall be granted him in
respect of the matter and doctrine contained; which in all translations, that
vary but in character of speech, is alike certain. But how shall the
unlearned, which can neither understand the original, nor compare
translations, nor so much as read, nor will admit infallible authority in the
Church to assure them, be infallibly certain the translation contains no
substantial error even in the matter? this he would feign know. My answer My
answer was not touing the unlearned alone, but of the unlearned and learned
together, per commodam distributionem.
was, that we know this by the same means whereby we know other truths, and
discern other articles of Christian faith, namely, by the light of the
doctrine translated, the testimony of the Spirit, the ministry of the word,
the rules of art, and such like. My adversary replies, this is but a flourish
of words; and bids me answer directly to the point: and thus he reasons; If
these be the means whereby we are assured our translations contain no
substantial error, the light of the doctrine translated, the testimony of the
Spirit, the ministry of the word, the rules of art, the knowledge of tongues,
and such like; then they are so either jointly altogether, or every one
severally by it self, or only some of them: But neither are all of them
jointly, nor every one severally, nor only some of them: Ergo these be not the
means: ergo some other means must be assigned, and that is the authority of
the Church. I will answer directly to the point, granting the first
proposition, and distinguishing the second, which has three members: first,
that all of them jointly together are not necessary; which he proves, because
so the unlearned that want tongues and art, could not have this assurance: I
answer, they are all of them jointly together necessary, by concurring all of
them in the Church, some in the learned, some in the unlearned, to the working
of this assurance in the learned and unlearned: for they are not jointly the
means, so that they need all of them immediately touch every one that shall be
assured; but it is sufficient, that art and tongues, joined with Gods Spirit,
be in the learned; and the ministry of the Spirit, and the Church, and the
light of the doctrine translated, be in the unlearned, all concurring to
produce Viz. this clear assurance that the translation co^tains at least
nothing contrary to the analogy and rule of faith.
one effect in both, though not all alike existing in them both. The second
member is, that every one of these severally is not sufficient: and this I
grant: for no other means is sufficient, if Gods Spirit be wanting to give
effect to it. The third member is, that only some of these are not a
sufficient means to breed this assurance: this is false: for the light of the
doctrine translated, and the testimony of Gods Spirit, are sufficient to assure
the unlearned, that what is translated to them is true, at least touching the
doctrine, in the same manner that Gods Spirit and the light of the truth assure
us, that the things taught by word of mouth in preaching, are the truth; which
light, and testimony of the Spirit, never go with translations or preaching
which contain false doctrine. His D. Stapleton Triplic. in admonit.
says it over, that by the internal persuasion of the Spirit of God alone, any
matter of faith may be believed though the Church say nothing at all: but the
Jesuits reason to the contrary, is, then it would follow, that an unlearned man
having that Spirit of God, by the only light of the doctrine shining in it,
without any other help, should understand Greek and Hebrew, because the
Scriptures are written in them: but this follows never a whit: for though I
grant the doctrine shines in the Scripture, and God by his Spirit gives a full
assurance, yet he does not this to the unlearned but by translations: which
assurance I understand according to the state and condition of him that is to
be assured; the learned seeing the heavenly doctrine in the learned tongues,
and translated both; the unlearned vulgar people in the translation only, and
not in the original, as a man sees light by the opening of a window, because
that is the means to let it in. I do not say, the light of the doctrine and
the testimony of Gods Spirit give the unlearned assurance in the Scripture it
self every way, but in the Scripture truly translated into the language they
understand: neither does the contrary follow of my words, We know the divine
doctrine to be one and the same in all translations immediately in the
original, and more obscurely in the translations; and God directs the
children of light by the holy Ghost, who opens their hearts that they know
his voice from all others, and that the light of his truth may shine unto them:
for this light shines, and this testimony of the holy Ghost works, first,
not immediately, but by means: secondly, not by the same means in all, but
diversely, whiles to such as have the light of the holy Ghost, being learned, it
shines in the original tongues, but being unlearned, only in translations: as
the words that are printed in a book, are plain and legible of themselves
without any other means to him that has light and a perfect eye; but if a man
be dim sighted, then to him they are only legible through his spectacles: and
as it is necessary, though the light be clear of it self, yet to open the
window, in case a man be shut up in a house; so my saying, the doctrine is one
and the same in all translations, and God directs the children of the light to
discern it, and makes the light of it shine unto them, hinders not, but I may
well say also, the window or translation must be opened to let in this light,
when men are shut up in ignorance of the tongues; and so still some of the
means I named alone, are sufficient, where all cannot concur.

4 My adversary in the knitting up, replies against this, that if the holy
Ghost does not sufficiently assure us without other means, then the light of
the doctrine, and the testimony of the Spirit, are not the only necessary,
nor alone sufficient means to assure us, that the translation we use, is not
corrupted. By which reason he may say also, that when the opening of a window
is a necessary means to show the light, this light is not the only necessary,
nor alone sufficient means to enlighten me: for there is sufficient in the
Scripture to assure me, but still the help of Church-ministery and industry
are necessary to work it in me, or else my adversary must prove that the
subordination of the means where by causes are applied to their effects, take
away the sufficiency and perfection of the said causes, that is to say, the
Grammar contains not all things necessary and sufficient for the understanding
of Latin, because it is not sufficient unless the learner go to school, and
hear his master teach him. And though it be granted, that the ministry of
men, and rules of art, and knowledge of tongues, be all subject to error, yet
does it not follow, that by them we cannot attain infallible assurance of our
translations, as I have showed in THE WAY,. 6. n. 3.
my answer to this argument, where it was first propounded: whither I refer
my adversary, that, if he would have dealt really, should not have here
repeated his old argument, but have ingenuously replied what he had to say to
it, but that had been labor.

CHAP. XXIX.
1. Touching the obscurity of the Scripture. 2. The necessity of means to be
used for the understanding of the Scriptures, proves not their obscurity. 3.
Traditions debarred. A Council is above the Pope. 4. 5. The Scripture, of it
self, easy to all that use it as they should. 6. 7. The certain sense of the
Scripture, and the assurance thereof, is not by Tradition.

Page 183.
A. D.. 2. That Scripture alone is obscure. -- Concerning the second reason,
about the obscurity of Scripture; it is to be understood, that I do not speak
of the obscurity of Scripture, as though I meant, that it could not by any
means be understood, Wotto^, page 74.
(as M. Wotton seems willing to mis-vnderstand me) neither do I charge the
Scripture it self with any fault or imperfection, when I say it is obscure:
but do acknowledge rather, that it is the perfection of Scripture, the
highness and majesty of the matter, and the strangeness of the style, on the
one side: and the weakness, and ignorance, and sometimes perverseness of men's
wits on the other side, which makes it obscure. But whence soever the cause of
obscurity proceeds (which is impertinent to my purpose) the only thing
which I am to prove, is, that de facto, it is obscure: or at least not so
easy, as the rule and means (that should ordinarily breed infallible faith in
all sorts) ought to be. And this my second reason conuinceth; it being most
evident, that Scripture alone is not so easy, neither to unlearned nor learned
men The which, White, page 25. 39. 36.
M. White seems to grant, when he requires so many other, even outward
means and helps, besides the inward spirit, to the understanding of the
Scripture. Among which outward means and helps, I enquire for one, which is
on the one side infallible, and sufficient to breed infallible assurance: and
on the other side, so easy to be determinately known, and understood of all
sorts, as that all men may (grace supposed) ordinarily direct themselves in
matters of faith, only by diligent attending, and yielding assent unto it. For
such is that, which for the present I call the rule of faith; or the rule and
means, by which all sorts may without other means (ne detur processus in
infinitum) be sufficiently instructed in all matters of faith. If M. Wotton and
M White, impertinently to this our purpose, will needs strive to have the
Scripture called (in some other sense) the rule of faith; I will not strive
with them, but do freely grant, it may be so called: as good written laws are
or may be called the rule of manners, in a commonwealth. But as besides good
written laws in a commonwealth, there are required ordinarily both good
unwritten customs, and a good living Magistrate (having authority to propound
and interpret both written laws and unwritten customs) without which the
written laws alone were not a sufficient rule and means to preserve good
manners in a commonwealth, in regard the laws cannot be so plain, but that
(considering the weakness, ignorance, and peruersitie of men) they may and
would be misunderstood, and wrested to a wrong sense; which inconvenience is
remedied, partly by unwritten customs, which do best interpret the written
laws, partly by the authority of the living magistrate, who may by authority
declare which is the right sense, and may compel men to execute written laws,
according to that sense: Even so in the Church, besides the divine infallible
written Scriptures, there must be admitted some divine infallible unwritten
traditions, and some always living magistrate (having infallible authority to
propound and expound the Scriptures) without which the written Scriptures alone
were not a sufficient rule and means to preserve infallible faith in the
Church, because the Scriptures are not so plain, but that (considering the
weakness, ignorance, and perverseness of men) they may be, and (as experience
ordinarily teaches) are misunderstood, and wrested to a wrong sense: which
inconvenience without miracle, cannot be remedied, unless we admit unwritten
traditions, which are the best ordinary interpreters of Scripture, and some
living magistrate (having infallible authority) who may (when controversies
arise) infallibly declare which is the right sense, and who by that authority,
may compel men to take them in that sense. M. Wotton, and M. White, both grant
the obscurity of Scriptures, in some places; but they both affirm, that in
some other places, the Scripture is perspicuous and plain, Wotton, pa 70.
White, page 33. 36.
in so much that M Wotton says, Many places of Scripture are so evident, that
a child cannot mistake the meaning of them. And M. White says (citing S.
Chrysostom.) every man of himself by reading may understand. To this I reply,
first, that although some places of Scripture be more plain then others, and
are, and may be called absolutely plain; partly for that they be set down in
proper, and not figurative speech: partly in that to them who have once learned
the true interpretation of the Church, they seem so plain, as they need
nothing but reading or hearing, to make them plain: partly for that some
places are so plain, as they need nothing to make them plainly understood of a
very child, but this general rule, told us by the Church, that the words in
such places are to be plainly understood as they sound, yet this
notwithstanding it does not follow that the Scripture alone (even in those most
plain places) is the rule and means which should instruct men in faith:
because since some places (seeming proper and plain) are not to be taken as the
words sound, but are oftentimes to be understood by a figure: what man without
some infallible means besides seeming plainness of the words, can be
infalliby assured even in most plain places, that he understands the right
sense? especially when the most plain places that are, may be, and ordinarily
are (either by weakness, ignorance or perverseness of men) wrested to a wrong
sense, as we see that most plain place, where our Savior pronounces, This is
my body, to be (by Caluinists) wrested to a figurative sense. Besides
therefore the bare letter of Scripture, though never so plain, to have
infallible assurance of the sense, there is required some other infallible rule
and means to assure us when and where the words seeming plain, are to be
understood properly as they sound: and when they are to be taken in a
figurative or improper sense. This, say I, is not to be learned sufficiently in
the bare letter of Scripture alone, but is to be learned of the Church,
according to that worthy saying of Vincentius Lyrinensis: Vincent. Lyr. cont.
haeres. c. 2.
Because all men do not take the holy Scripture for the height of it, in one
and the same sense; but diverse men interpret the sayings of it diversely; in so
much that almost so many different senses may seem possible to be drawn from
it, as there are diverse men, etc. Therefore it is very necessary, that the
line of Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation, be directed according to
the rule of Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. True it is, that by other
probable means, viz. rules of art, knowledge of tongues, observation of
circumstances, conference of places, etc. one (but not every layman, woman,
and child, even of M Wotton and M. Whites own parish) may probably find out,
when the words are, and when they are not to be understood properly: but
infallibly in such sort, as to build thereupon infallible assent of faith, one
cannot, without infallible interpretation, had either immediately by revelation
of the Spirit (which is not ordinarily to be expected) or by infallible
authority of the Church. True it is also, that ordinarily Divines hold it for
a certain rule, that words of Scripture are to be understood properly as they
sound, unless to avoid some absurdity, we be compelled to interpret by a
figure. But when such an absurdity occurreth, that ought to compel us to
interpret plain words of Scripture by a figure, and when not; although reason
it self may probably know (which probable knowledge may suffice for direction
of manners) yet infallibly in such sort as is required to the assent of faith,
reason alone not assisted by Church authority, cannot (at the least always)
tell; since many things may seem absurd to our private sense and reason, which
in truth are not absurd; as in the mystery of the blessed Trinity may plainly
appear: and contrariwise, many things may seem in reason not absurd, which in
true Divinity are absurd and most false.
1 HIs second reason against the Scriptures being the rule of faith, was their
obscurity: because they fail in the second condition of the rule, being of
themselves alone so obscure and unknown, both to the unlearned and learned,
that no man can thereby alone be sufficiently directed. This reason was handled
7, and 8. where I answered the argument whereby he prosecuted it: and every
word also that he replies here, which makes me to wonder with what conscience
he follows his cause, when, that he says here being answered, he shrinks from
replying, and only repeates his old argument again, and yet intitles his
book a Reply, when he replies nothing, but conceales all from his Reader that
I answered: nevertheless, that he says, I will answer again.

2 First he tells in what sense he holds the Scripture to be obscure, and how
far forth. Not that it cannot by any means be understood; or that it is any
imperfection in the Scripture to be obscure, but the perfection rather: the
only thing he goes about to prove, being, that de facto it is obscure, or at
the least not so easy as the ordinary rule of faith ought to be: which is
denied, and confuted: not denying some parts to be obscure, as many prophecies
and mysteries therein; nor affirming any of it to be so effectual to our
understanding, that without the motion of Gods Spirit, and use of the means,
every man can effectually use it to his salvation: for I never denied the
requisite condition of Gods grace, and the Churches teaching, and our own
endeavor, to open our understanding, even in the plainest Scripture that is,
but I only affirm, all things concerning faith and good life, needful to be
known, to be so plainly set down therein, that the vnlearnedst man alive,
using the means (which is not the Church-authoritie intended by my adversary)
and being enlightened with Gods Spirit, may sufficiently understand them to his
salvation; which is enough to make it a rule perfect, entire, and as easy as
is possible for a rule to be, for the finding out and deciding whatsoever
matter belongs to faith. For howsoever some things in the Scripture, the
knowledge whereof is not simply necessary to salvation, be very obscure and
doubtful; yet the whole rule of our faith, needful to all men, is set down
so plainly, that it may be understood of all men, allowing them some elevation,
and only supposing them to have the light of grace, and to take that pains in
searching, that is ordinarily required in the use of any rule, and in the
execution of any means whatsoever. It seems my adversary would conclude from
hence, that therefore I grant Scripture alone not to be so easy as the rule of
faith ought to be: because I require so many, even outward means and helps
for the understanding thereof, beside the help of Gods Spirit within us. But
he is deceived, and deceiues his Reader: for I expounded my self, that it is
not necessary the rule be so easy and effectual, that no help shall be
needful for the applying it to our conscience: but the perfection and
easiness of it stands in this, that a man using diligence, and elevated by
grace from his natural ignorance, shall find therein absolutely and plainly,
all things whatsoever he is bound to know and believe, and needs not that the
Church by her authority and traditions should add any thing to it, that is
not contained in it. And that this condition of using means and outward
helps, takes not away the reason of a rule, he must confess by his own
principles: for let his Church-teaching and authority, his own Helena, be the
rule; yet before any man can determinately know it, or understand and yield to
it, he must, I hope, have the grace of the Spirit, and seek it out, and
diligently attend what it teaches him: which is as much as we require for the
understanding of the Scriptures. This therefore is a vaste partiality in my
Jesuit, that he will conclude a thing cannot be a sufficient rule or means,
that requires the help of grace and a man's own industry in the applying it,
when themselves holding their Church to be the rule, yet confess, that no man
can hear the voice thereof, not understand nor yield assent to it, without the
very same means that we require for the understanding of the Scriptures. What
voice, what complaint, what querimonie shall we utter against this
perverseness, against this spirit of contradiction? But my adversary says,
that among these outward means and helps, which M. White requires to the
understanding of the Scripture, besides the Spirit of God, there must be one
(an outward means) which is There is no such outward infalible means in this
life. HOC NOBIS SIT SATIS INDVBIVM APVD LITERATOS HABERI, NVLLVM ESSE IN TERRIS
IVDICIVM QVOD ERRARE LABI, DECIPI, NON POSSIT. Pic. Mirand. apolog. pro
Sauanarol. l. 1. c. 1.
infallible, and sufficient to breed infallible assurance, and so easy to be
known and understood of all sorts, that all may ordinarily direct themselves
thereby only by diligent attending and assenting to it, and this is the rule
of faith that in this place he means: wherein if he mean good earnest, this
question is at an end, and the Scripture is granted to be the rule: for he will
allow that to be the rule, which by the help of grace supposed, is sufficient
to direct all sorts, only by diligent attending and yielding assent to it: now
such is the Scripture alone, that the grace of God supposed, only by diligent
attendance and assent unto it, it is sufficient; and therefore also you see the
necessity and requisite condition of using diligence, by my adversaries own
words, hinders not the Scriptures from being the rule of faith, even in his
own sense, and as himself understands the rule of faith: for such as is both
infallible and sufficient to breed infallible assurance in us, and so easy to
be known and understood, that all sorts of men may direct themselves in all
points of faith, only by diligent attending and assenting to it: because only
diligent attention and assenting being added on our behalf to the help of
Gods grace, it may thereby be determinately understood of all sorts, in all
things needful to be known.

3 But he says, that as in a common wealth, besides the written laws, there
are unwritten customs, which interpret the written law, and living
magistrates that have authority to interpret both written and unwritten
laws, and to compel men to his sense, without which the written laws were
not a sufficient rule and means to preserve good order in the state, because
through the perverseness of men, they would be misunderstood; so in the Church,
beside the written Scriptures, there must be admitted some unwritten traditions
to interpret the Scriptures, and some living magistrate (the Pope) to propound
and expound the Scriptures, and to compel men to take the sense that he gives,
because the Scriptures are not so plain, but they may be misunderstood, etc.
This comparison, and the conclusion of it, I deny: for albeit means must be
joined with the Scripture, yet this Church-authoritie, and these unwritten
traditions, are none of the means, but only that which I have named: for
there needs no means to supply any matter of faith that is wanting in the
Scripture, but only to open our eyes that we may see what is therein; whereas
these traditions, and this Church-magistracie, are supposed to be necessary
for the adding of innumerable things to be believed, that are not contained in
the Scripture, as I have Chapter 27. n. 3.
showed. My adversary therefore plainly shows the difference that is between
us, and discouers what he means, when he pretends the Church and her
authority; for this rule of faith, he expounds transparently to be the Pope
with his traditions, and to him gives that which is denied in the Scriptures,
plenarie power, partly out of the Scripture, partly out of his Decretals, to
propound to all men the matter of their faith, and compel them to take his
sense, be it true or false. This is the Antichristian bondage, whereinto the
man of Rome will bring all the world; and the hellish pride, wherein he
aduanceth himself, to sit as God in the Church, exalting his own will and
laws above the will and laws of the eternal God; and subiecting Gods blessed
word to his cursed will, which his base Co^ceruau^runt sibi magistros ad
desideria sua, non v^ ab eu discerent quod facere deberent, sed vt eorum studio
and calliditate i^^^niret^r ratio qua licere^ id quod liberes. Spoken of the
Popes clawbacks by Council. delect. Card. sub init.
Parasites for their backs and bellies, so much strive for; which we execrate
as hell, and leave to the Devil, from whence it first appeared unto the world;
civil states, and the commonwealths of this world, may have such unwritten
customs, and allow this authority to magistrates; but God has left no such
traditions to his Church, nor set any such head over it, thus to expound the
Scriptures, or to determinate the sense thereof, but all his whole will is
written, and out of the Scripture it self, is to be revealed, and imparted to
particular men, when any doubt arises, by the ministry of the Church, either in
ordinary preaching, or in the Councels of godly, and orthodoxall Bishops; That
a Council is the highest tribunal upon earth, and above the Pope affirmed by
Justinian in praetermiss. per Anto. Cont. p. 11. Phot. Nomocan. tit. 9 c 1 and
6. The Councels of Pisa. Constable. and Basil. and the University of Paris to this
day. See to this purpose Card Florent. tract. de Scism. Anto. de Rosell.
monarch. tract. de council and Mich. Cezen. lit. ad imperat. part. 12. sub sin.
Ioh. Fran. Pic. Mirand. apol. pro Sauanaro. l. 1. c. 1.
to the which the Pope, and his rabble, if they will know the truth, and be
saved, ought to subject themselves, as well as the poorest Christian that
lives: and the written word is so absolute, and sufficient, to direct them
herein, and his spirit so infallibly ready to guide them, if they will use the
means, that there is no more to be required, for the full manifestation of any
thing needful, for any man whatsoever: and Certu^ est quod possit errare,
etiam in ijs quae tangum fidem, haeresim per suam determinationem aut
decretalem asserendo. Hadrian 4. de sacra. consit. p. 26. see below.
this authority of the Pope it self, when all is done, is feign to be rejected.

4 Thirdly, whereas I said out of Chrysostom, that howsoever some part of the
Scripture be obscure, yet some places are so plain, and easy to understand,
that every man by reading may know the meaning, which speech I extend to so
many places, as are sufficient to teach us all things needful to salvation, in
this sense, that the whole rule of faith is set down, in plain places of
Scripture, which any man of himself by reading, may understand, (requiring
still the grace of God, and diligence in searching) he replies three things.
The which before I answer, the Reader must note that the words he opposes are
Chrysostomes, and what I said, I proved by many arguments, the last whereof,
was the testimony of the ancient Fathers, who say in express words, as much
as I. The which arguments he answers not a word to, and therefore replying upon
my conclusion, he opposes, through me, the plain Scripture, the ancient
Church, and his own writers, by all which I confirmed that I said.

5 First, he says that albeit some places are plain, yet it does not follow,
that the Scripture ALONE, (even in those plain places) is the rule, because no
man without some other means, besides the plainness of the words, can be
infallibly assured, that he understands them right: the which he proves, first,
because some places seeming plain, are understood otherwise then they seem.
Secondly, because the plainest places that are, may be wrested to a wrong
sense, as that plain place, This is my body, is wrested by the Caluinists, to
a figurative sense. I answer, his reason why Scripture alone could not be the
rule of faith, was because it is not plain; the which obscurity I denied to be
in that which is necessary to be known, affirming the Scripture, in such
places, to be plain; now he replies, that though such places be plain, yet
still it cannot be the rule. Thus first he denies the Scripture to be the rule,
because it is not plain; and then allowing it again, to be plain, yet still
he denies it to be the rule. What will this man stand to I marvel? But they be
not plain enough, because without some other infallible means, besides the
seeming plainenes of the words, no man can be infallibly assured, that he
understands aright, even those plain places This absurd cavil, I have
answered twenty times: first, that the means whereby this is done, are the
help of Gods Spirit, our own diligence, the Church-teaching, the light of
nature: and these means are infallible; And these means I admit, either
coniunctim, or diuisim, to be necessary, as a condition and medium for the full
assurance of understanding these places: but this condition takes not away the
true motion, and reasons of plainness from them; for, as I answered in my
book to this argument, that is not obscure, which by ordinary, and easy
means may be understood, but which, either has no means at all to open it,
or only such as are not ordinary: to his confirmation, THE WAY p. 36. n. 2.
I answered likewise. But to his instances, of the Caluinists, wresting a
plain place, This is my body, to a figurative sense, I reply, first it is
plain, and evident, that it is a figure, by the circumstances of the place,
when he that said the words, This is my body, that is given for you, at the
same instant, held nothing but bread in his hand, and lived, and was neither
yet glorified, nor crucified, and spoke of a sacrament, wherein it is ordinary
to speak figuratively. Secondly, the Papists do the same in the next words,
This cup is the new Testament, and yet they hold them to be plain words; if my
adversary will be smattering, about the exposition of these words, let him give
a real answer to the place of my book, Digr. 49. n. 8.
where they are handled of purpose for him.

6 Next he says, though the letter of the Scripture, be never so plain, yet
to have infallible assurance of the sense, there is required some other rule,
and means, the which rule is not in the bare letter of the Scripture, but is
to be learned of the Church, as Vincentius says. The which being the same he
said before, without difference, or augmentation, let it briefly receive the
same answer, That the requisite condition of using ordinary, and easy means,
whereof the ministry of the Church, truly expounded, is one, I never denied, but
this proves not the Scriptures to be obscure, nor remoues infallible assurance
from the Scripture to the Church, but only shows, that the Scripture
infallibly, out of it self gives us this assurance by this means; and
Vince^tius his words affirm no more: for by the rule of Ecclesiastical, and
Catholic sense, according to the which he requires the line of prophetical,
and apostolical interpretation to be directed, he means no unwritten
Church-tradition, or doctrine that is wanting in the Scripture, (for he holds
the Scripture it self to be sufficient for every thing) but only that that
which is in the Scripture be so understood, as agrees with the rule of faith,
which the true Church has always holden: now that which the Church has
always holden, is contained in the Scripture alone; that the Reader may see
the Jesuits treachery in alleging Vincentius against the sufficiency of the
Scripture, who in that very place, (which belike he never saw with his own
eyes) begins thus: Here possible one may demand, when the rule of the Scripture
is perfect, and in it self more then enough sufficient unto all things; (Note
here whether he thinks, as the Jesuit does, that many substantial points of
doctrine, needful to salvation, are not contained in them, and that it is but
a part of the rule) what need is there to join unto it, the authority of the
Churches sense? and he answers as the Jesuit has alleged, that this is
because all men do not take it in one sense, therefore it is necessary that the
line of interpretation, be directed according to the rule of Ecclesiastical,
and Catholic sense. In which manner he speaks also in Diximus in
superioribus, hanc suisse semper and esse hodie Catholicorum consuetudinem, vt
fidem veram duo^us his modis approbent: Primum diuini canonis authoritate:
Deinde ^cclesiae catholicae traditione. Non quia canon solus non sibi ad
vniuersa sufficiat, sed quia verba diuina, pro suo plerique arburatis,
interpetantur. cap. 41.
another place, not supposing any thing to be wanting in the Scripture, so much
as to give infallible assurance of it own sense, much less any articles of
faith needful to salvation, but only supposing that some heretics would not
yield to that it gave, or possible through their own default, did not see it;
and thereupon aduises to oppose against them, the rule, and practice of the
Church, as a man by witnesses would convince him, that denies the truth: the
which practice, as it hinders not the Scriptures to contain the perfect rule
of faith, so we will allow it, and require no sense, or exposition of the
Scripture, nor no point of religion, to be received, unless it be thus directed.

7 It is therefore untrue, that he concludes with; one cannot infallibly be
assured, when the words of the Scripture are to be understood properly, and
when not, without the authority of the Church, unless it be by revelation: I
say this is false upon two points, first, because this assurance may be had, as
from the external means, by the Scripture it self, though the Church say
nothing; Next because this Church authority, he understands to be the external
testimony of the Church revealing, if not making the said sense out of
tradition, which is not written, and not out of the Scripture it self: so that
the understanding which I have of the sense, and my persuasion, that it is the
true sense, shall not be founded on the Scripture, but on the authority of the
Church of Rome, that says it; which THE WAY.. 8. n. 7. and digr. 11.
I confuted, affirming that this assurance, and the assurance of all other
things believed, is wrought and bred, in the heart, by the Spirit of God
principally, and then by the alone words of the Scripture joined therewith, as
by the formal beginning of that my assurance, and by the ministry of the Church
only as Gods ordinance appointed to help me, to attain, and recouet that
sense, and assurance, that, by means of this help, arises in me, from the
Scripture it self, though many times, and very ordinarily this is done without
all motion of the Church whatsoever, by only reading, as I have often said, in
case when men are either converted from Athisme, or confirmed in the truth,
without hearing or knowing of the Church, by only reading.

CHAP. XXX.
Touching the Al-sufficiency of the Scripture to the matter of faith. 2. It
shows it self to be Gods word. Luthers denying Saint James his Epistle. 3.
How the Papists expound the light of the Scripture. 4. What they, and what we
hold about the authority of the Church. 6. How express Scripture is required.

A. D.. 3. Page 187.
The Scripture contains not all points of faith -- concerning my third
reason, I wish the reader to observe, that I do not attribute any imperfection
to the Scripture, when I prove, that it contains not all points of faith. For
want of perfection in a thing, is not to be accounted an imperfection: unless
it can be showed: that the perfection which wants, does necessarily pertain
to the nature of the thing, or at least is due, and ought to be in it; as my
adversaries will never be able to show, that to contain all points of faith,
does necessarily pertain to the nature of Scripture: or is due, or ought to be
in it. This being noted, I need say little in confirmation of this argument, as
having urged it sufficiently against M. Wootton, and M. White, in the
introduction, in such sort as they will never be able, sufficiently to answer
it. Only here I will ask one question of M. White, White p. 48.
who tells us, that the Scripture manifests it self to be divine, in
regard the virtue, and power that shows it self, in every line, and leaf of
the Bible, proclaims it to be the word of the eternal God: and the sheep of
Christ discern the voice, and light thereof, as men discern light from
darkness, etc. If this be so; how chances it, that his illuminated Luther
(whom doubtless M. White will account one of the sheep of Christ) could not
see, that S. James his Epistle was divine Scripture, by the virtue, and power,
that shows it self in every line, and leaf of it, no less then in other
places of Scripture? shall he be accounted illuminated, or rather stark
blind, that could not discern light from darkness? And shall not M. White
also be accounted not so much blind, as brainesicke, that fancieth to himself
such a light to shine in every leaf, and line, of the Bible, that every one
that is the sheep of Christ, discerns it no otherwise, then he that has
corporal eyesight, discerns outward light from darkness? True it is,
there is the virtue, and power of God in the Scripture; there is purity, and
perfection of matter, majesty of speech, power over the conscience, certainty
of Prophecies, etc. but these do not shine like light to our understanding,
till it be illuminated with the light of faith (as every one even of the elect,
is not at all times endued with faith) nor then neither, unless those things
be propounded duly, mediate, or immediate, by the authority of the Church;
upon which (being like a candlestick) the light of the Scripture must be set,
or else it will not (according to the ordinary course of Gods providence)
sufficiently shine, and appear unto us, in such sort, as to give infallible
assurance, Wootton p. 89. White page 46.
that it is the word of God. It troubles M. wootton, and M. White both, that I
say there be diverse substantial points, which are not expressly set nowne,
and determined in Scripture, which they, being convinced with evidence of the
matter, cannot deny to be so; but say they, this is not the question. But by
their leaves, this was first the question, when their Grandfather Luther was so
hoate to have express Scripture, See Gretz in defens. Bellar. tom. 1 in li. 4.
de verbo Dei non scripto: cap. 3. See introduct. q. 2.
as that he would have all expressed, even in words. Afterward indeed, when
his fury cooled a little, he thought it sufficient, if all were expressed,
though not in so many sillables, yet in sense. And now of late our new
Ministers (seeing that this also cannot be defended) have made the question,
whether all be contained in Scripture; that is either expressly, or so as
(without Church authority, or Traditions) al necessary points of doctrine, may
be necessarily, evidently, or by good consequence, deduced out of that, which
is expressed in Scripture. In which sense also, they will be never able to
show, that all points, and namely those which I mentioned in my third argument,
Wootton p. 93.
are contained in only Scripture: but must be forced to run to tradition, and
Church authority, if they will have sufficient assurance of them.
1 THe third thing objected against the Scripture, was Imperfection; that it
contains not the whole matter of faith, but many things else, are needful to
be known, and believed, that are not written therein. For though he spoke
somewhat reseruedly, There be diverse questions of faith, which are not EXPRESSLY
set down: yet his meaning is, There be diverse particular points to be
believed, which are contained therein, neither expressly, nor anyway at all,
but received upon sole Tradition, and Church authority, as I have Chapter 27. n. 2.
showed; and his Introduction here mentioned, affirms: which being a gross,
and blasphemous assertion, therefore: to cover the odiousness of it: here in
the first place, he says, that by affirming the Scripture, not to contain all
points of faith, he does not attribute any imperfection to it. And how I
marvel, will he persuade us this, when it is impossible it should be perfect,
that leaves us imperfect in the faith, and reueals but a portion of that, which
yet of necessity, must be known to salvation? his reason is: because his
adversaries, will never be able to show that, to contain all points of faith,
does belong to the nature, and perfection of Scripture. But I answer, it
pertaines to the perfection of the Scripture, and is due to the nature thereof,
to contain all things: because it self says so, and there can be no other
infallible, or convenient revelation. And Propounded in the WAY Digr. 3. and.
13.
many testimonies, and arguments euince it: which my adversary not being able
to answer, has well, and wisely passed by with silence. And therefore denying
this, they attribute imperfection to it. For to deny that, which the Scripture
is, is to make it imperfect. Athanasius Orat. cont. Gent. sub. init.
says, The holy Scriptures are (...).
sufficient by themselves to show the truth. Isiodore Pelusiota, L. 2. Epist.
369.
The sacred volumes having the testimony of the divine Scriptures, are the
stayres whereby we ascend to God. All therefore brought out of them in the
Church of God receive, as proved gold, tried in the fire of the Spirit of Gods
truth: (...):
and whatsoever things, without these volumes, are carried about, though they
have show of probability, leave to those, that plot the fables of heresies. S.
Basil: (...) de fid. page 394. edit. Basil. an. 1551.
It is manifest presumption, and apostasy from the faith, either to abrogate
any of the things, that are written, or bring in any thing that is not written.
And Vincent. Lirin. Monito. c. 2. and. 41.
The rule of the Scripture is perfect, and in it self sufficient, and more
then sufficient unto all things. And 3. d. 25. qu. vnic. a.
Gab. Biell, his own Schoolman, All things necessary to be believed are
contained in the Canonical Scripture: it belonges therefore to the perfection
of the Scripture to contain all things.

2. Against this he objected, the stale, and threadbare argument: it is not
contained in the Scripture, that it self is the word of God. My answer was,
that the virtue, and power that shows it self in every line, and leaf of the
Bible, proclaims it to be the word of God, and the sheep of Christ discern
the voice, and light of it, as men discern sweet from sour, light from
darkness: Now he demandes in this Reply, How then it chances, that our
illuminated Luther could not see the Epistle of S. James to be divine
Scripture? I answer readily to the point: if the Scripture be so easily, and
infallibly known to be Gods word by the authority of the Church: how chances
it, that his illuminated Caietan Catharin. cont. Nov. dog. Caiet. S xt. Senens.
Biblio. l. 6. annot. 337.
denied the same Epistle of S. James to be divine Scripture? how chances Noted
before
so many Papists deny, the Apocrypha to be Canonical, as well as we? how comes
it about that Genebrard Genebrard. chronol. p. 181. Posseuin. appar. verb.
Gilb. Genebrard.
affirms the third and fourth Books of Esdras to be Canonical Scripture,
which the Chuch denies? Thus my Jesuit is fallen unawares, into the same pit,
he made for me. Secondly, my adversary Verum est, doctorem quidem Lutheru^,
and quosdam alios, exemplum veteris Ecclesiae imitatos, de libris modo dictis
non ita praeclare sensisse: sed tamen jide^, postea re diligentius perpensa,
priorem sententiam mutare non dubitarunt. Eckhard. fascic page 21.
cannot prove that. M. Luther perseuered to the end in the denial of this
Epistle. The judgment of Nonnul. i antiquitus de epistolae huius authoritate
dubitarunt. Passeuin. appar. v. Jacob. Apost. see Eusebius. hist. Eccle l. 3 c.
25. and Ieron. and Doroth de viris illust v. Iacobus.
so many in the Primitive Church, refusing it, dazeled Luthers eyes, and made
him to doubt for a time: but that he never saw and believed it to be Scripture
to the end, my adversary will scarce be able to show. Thirdly, Luthers not
seeing this light, proves not that there is no such light, or voice in the
Scripture; for all faith thereof is not in an instant, but successively, and by
degrees: and all men, at all times, have not eyes, and disposition alike to see
it: as the Apostles, at the first, saw not Christ to be that he was, though he
were the light, that came into the world. Saint Austine Tract. 35. Ioh.
says, The Scriptures are lighted up to be our Candle in this world, that we
walk not in darkness. Therefore they are seen by their own light. For the
same Saint Austine n says, will you light a Candle to see a burning Candle?
for a burning Candle is able both to make manifest other things, that are
hidden in darkness, and to show it self to thy eyes. The Scripture therefore
by it own light shows it self, as I said, to be the word of God, and if any
see not this light, the defect is in themselves, and is removed by no other
light added, but by the same light, at such time, as pleases God to open the
eyes. Theophilus Antiochenus Orat. 1. ad Antolych.
says, we must not say there is no light because the blind see it not, but let
them, that see it not accuse their own eyes. For as in all other matters of
faith, it falls out among the children of God, that 1. Cor. 13.9. (...).
Chrysostom. ibi. hom. 34. (...) Scol. graec. ibi.
some see, and know more, and some understand, and believe less, then
othersome: yet the matters of faith themselves are one, and the same; and the
believers are enlightened with Gods Spirit, though not all in the same measure:
so may it fall out about this object: that some particular men may not at the
first, or always perfitly see the light of every part of Scripture, or perfitly
hear the voice of Christ founding therein: for here in this life we know, but
in part, and prophecy but in part, though the light of the Scripture shine
fully forth unto all.

3 This light of the Scripture my adversary grants, but yet, to bring in his
traditions, and Church Authority, mark how he replies. What light soever there
be in the Scripture yet it shines not to our understanding till it be
illuminated with faith, which the elect themselves, at all times, are not: the
which I grant, and thereupon infer, that this light was nevertheless in the
Scripture, though Luther saw it not, in one place thereof: and the reason why
he saw it not, was, because every one of the elect is not at all times endued
with all faith: but my Jesuit adds, that this light, whereby the Scriptures
show themselves to be the word of God, shines not to the understanding
illuminated with faith, neither, unless it be propounded by the authority of
the Church: upon which as upon a Candlestick the light of the Scripture must
be set, or else it will not sufficiently shine unto us, to give us, of it
self, infallible assurance that it is the word of God. Concedimus igitur
sacras liteteras, quae diuinae doctrinae continent lumen, tanquam lucernam
esse, per seipsam splendidissimam atque fulgentissimam: sed nobis tamen non in
se lucidam -- sed quatenus est diuinitus in Ecclesiae Catholicae authoritate,
tanquam in candelabro, positum, vt luceat omnibus qui in domo sunt -- Errant
igitur aduersarij cum scripturam esse lucernam, ac illuminare nos, idem esse
existimant, quod, eam non egere Ecclesiae infallibili authoritate, vt nos
certos faciat. Grego. de Valent. tom 3. page 117. c. Verus Scripturae sensus
inest Scripturae sicut signatum signo; sed media certa, explorata,
infallibilia, quibus sensus iste eruitur, non est ipsa Scriptura; sed traditio
Ecclesiastica, vox and definitio Ecclesiae, seu eius qui Ecclesiae, vice
Christi, praesidet. Grets. defens. Bellar. tom. 1. p. 1970. c.
This is the final evasion that the Jesuits use against this argument in
defense of their traditions, and Popes authority, against the sufficiency of
the Scripture: that the Scriptures have in them a shining light, and are, as
the Protestants say, able to prove themselves to be the word of God, and
contain their true sense in themselves: but this light we see not, and this
true sense we know not; and this assurance, that they are Gods word, or that
this is the true sense, we cannot have in the Scripture it self: but by the
means of Traditions, and the Popes authority showing, and propounding these
things to us. As a candle though having light in it self, yet shows light to
none, when it is hid under a bushel, but when it is set upon a Candlestick. I
answer 2. things. First, as I have often said, this authority, and teaching of
the Church, is not always, nor simply, necessary to show all men the light of
the Scripture, or so much as to point to it: for either by the immediate light
of Gods Spirit, or by the light of nature, it may be known to be Gods word, as
by the light of nature it is known that God is: whereupon it follows
plainly, that the Scripture alone, as the Rule, has this light in it self,
and from it self shows it, else it could not, in this manner, without Church
proposition, shine to any. Secondly I grant, that ordinarily, for the seeing,
and discerning of the evidence, perfection, purity, power, sense, and all this
light that is in the Scripture; the proposition of the Church is necessary, as
a candlestick to hold it forth, but then this proposition may be expounded two
ways: one way to signify such authority, as by, and from it self, induces me
to believe before I see any authority in the Scripture, and together with the
authority of the Scripture: the twofold authority of the Church, and Scripture
concurring to the moving of my understanding, as when two men concur, as one
formal beginning; to the carrying, and moving of a block. This Church
proposition thus expounded, I utterly deny to be either needful, or possible.
Secondly it may be expounded for the Ministry of the Church, by her Pastors,
and people, revealing the Scriptures to them that know them not, and teaching
the nature, sense, and meaning thereof. But this ministry is but a bare
condition adding no light, sense, authority, or matter to the Scripture, but
only leading us to see it. Of which Ministry there is no question between
us: for all Protestants grant, The authority, or ministry of the Church,
supposes no want of light in the Scripture.
and use it: but the question is, whether all the articles, and whole nature of
faith, be contained in Scripture alone, excluding unwritten traditions, though
the Ministry of the Church be needful, as an instrument to show, teach, and
expound the Scripture, as a candlestick is needful to show the candle? For
the use of this Ministry, and requisite condition of all other means, that are
to be used, supposes no want, or defect in the object, whereabout they are
applied, but only produces it to his operation: as the setting of a candle
upon the socket, adds no light to it that was wanting in it self, but only
remoues some impediments that hinder the standers by from seeing, and the
opening of a window to let in light makes not the Sun imperfect, or but a
partial light. And if our adversaries intended no more but this, there were an
end of the controversy, for no Protestant ever denied the necessity of Church
ministry in this sense, but freely confess it, although the authority See it
expounded Chap. 35. n. 1. and inde. and here immediately after, in nu. 4.
mentioned we renounce.

4 For the better explication of this my answer, and that the Reader may see
how impertinent it is, that my Adversary says: Note FIRST, that The quest.
between us and the Papists about the Churches authority.
the question is not whether some means be ordinarily required to the
understanding of the Scripture, and the producing of faith in such, as read,
and use it: nor whether the Scripture work infallible assurance immediately, in
all men (for in some it does) without the operation, and coming between of the
Church ministry. For we hold it does not. But the point is, whether this
authority of the Church, supply any article of faith, or matter needful to
salvation, that is wanting in the Scripture, so that it may be said, as my
Adversary always speaks, the Scripture alone, is but a part of the rule of
faith, which God has left to instruct men, what is to be holden for faith: and
there be many substantial points, belonging to faith, which are contained in
Scripture alone, nether expressly, nor thence to be deduced by consequence, but
to be supplied by tradition, and Church authority: and so the question is not
about the expediency, or condition of the means, but about the perfection, and
sufficiency of the thing it self. Note SECONDLY, that my adversary from the
necessity of the means, concludes the insufficiency of the thing, thus: The
light of the Scripture, shines not to us: the true sense of the Scripture is
not infallibly assured unto us without the means of the Church: The Scripture
therefore is insufficient, not containing all things needful: not instructing
us, WHAT is to be holden for matter of faith: as if a man should say, the light
of the candle appears not to us, but when it is set on a candlestick:
therefore there is much light that is wanting in the candle, and is supplied by
the candlestick. Note THIRDLY what the things properly are, which our
adversaries attribute to the Church, in comparing it with the Scripture. They
are there: first, to be a means to reveal and expound the Scripture to us;
and to breed the faith thereof in our consciences. Secondly, to be the
Foundation of our faith, in this sense; that we do believe this to be
Scripture; and this to be the true sense of the Scripture, and this to be the
matter of faith, only because the Church expounds the Scripture so. Thirdly,
to supply unto us many articles of faith, absolutely needful to salvation,
that are wanting in the Scripture, out of tradition, and by the said tradition
to expound the Scripture. These two latter points they infer on of the first,
which is the incroching consequence that I except against, in that the
authority, wherein God has placed his Church, is not in respect of the
Scripture, but in respect of us, being a bare Minister to the Scripture. D.
Stapleton Relect. p. 462.
says, The Church is the ground, and pillar of truth in a higher kind, then
the Scripture, namely in the kind of the efficient cause. And Page 494. in
explicat. qu.
the authority of the Church may be understood to be greater then the authority
of the Scripture, because it is not simply subject, or bound to it, but may by
it authority teach, and decerne, something which the Scripture has neither
determined, nor taught. -- The things which the Church teaches do as much bind
the faithful, as those things which the Scripture teaches, -- we Catholics
affirm that the Church is to be heard more certainly then the Scriptures,
because the doctrine thereof, is more manifest, and evident, then the doctrine
of the Scriptures, or at the least, equally with the Scriptures, because the
authority thereof is no less irrefragable, and infallible. -- The Scripture is
the book of the Church, the testimony of truth, which the Church testifies,
the law of God, which the Church has published, the rule of faith which the
Church has delivered. We had wont to marvel at the blasphemies Illyric. clau.
script. p. 541. Hos de express. verb. Dei.
of Cusanus, Verratus, Hosius: That the Church has authority above the
Scripture. The Scripture as it is produced by heretics, is the word of the
Devil. A Council is the highest tribunal, and has the same power to
determine any thing, that the Council of the Apostles, and Disciples had. --
The things written in the Gospel, have no soundness, but through the
determination of the Church: etc. But now you see, the same renewed in that
Church to this day, and the Jesuits, in the midst of their learned subtilties,
to be as gross, as the grossest Friars, preferring their Church authority
far above the Scriptures, or any use that a Candlestick can have in showing
the candle. Note FOURTHLY what it is that the Protestants say, touching the
authority of the Scripture, and the Church, so much as belongs to the present
occasion. First, that the Scriptures have in them a light, and an authority of
their own, sufficient to prove themselves to be the word of God, and to give
infallible assurance, to all men of the true sense: and this light, and
authority is not added, increased, or multiplied, by the Ministry of the
Church, or any thing that it does about the Scripture. Secondly, this light,
and authority of the Scripture, shines in us, and takes effect in us, then
only, when the Spirit of God opens our hearts to see it. The defect of which
heavenly illumination is the reason, why some never, and the elect themselves,
at all times do not see it, but it argues no defect of light in the Scriptures.
Thirdly, the means whereby God opens our eyes, and hearts to see this light,
and authority in the Scripture, is the Ministry of the Church; I expound my
self, it is the ordinary, and public means whereto he referres men. And this
Ministry is by preaching, and expounding the Scripture, out of it self, and
persuading, and conuincing the consciences of men: yet privately, and
extraordinarily, when, and wheresoever this Ministry fails, or ceasses; the
light, and sense of the Scripture is obtained by the Scripture alone, without
this Church Ministry: and the Scripture alone in this sort immediately, at
sundry times, by it self, gives full assurance, and works all other effects
in our consciences, that it does when the Church propounds it. Fourthly, the
Scripture is so sufficient of it self, both to reveal whatsoever is needful
to be known, and to establish and assure our heart in the infallible faith of
that it reueales, that the Church has nether authority to add, so much as one
article, more then is contained therein; nor power to give this assurance from
any thing, but from the Scripture it self. So far forth, that THE WHOLE
TEACHING, AND DOCTRINE, AND AVTHORITIE OF THE CHVRCH IS TO BE ADMITTED, AND
YIELDED TO, OR REFVSED, ACCORDING AS IT CONSENTS, OR DISAGREES WITH THE
SCRIPTVRE, the fountain of truth, the rule of faith. Note FIFTHLY, what our
adversaries mean by the Church, and the means, whereby the Church executes
her authority; what the things are, which by her authority she may do: and what
the proper effect is, that this authority works in us. First, by this Church
This is showed c. 35. nu. 1. etc. 36. nu. 1.
they understand the Church of Rome, for the present time being: and therein
the Pope, in whom they say, the whole power, and virtue of the Church abides.
Secondly, the means, whereby it executes her authority, is unwritten
Tradition; out of the which it supplies all things pretended to be needful for
the exposition of the Scripture, or the defining of matters, that must be
believed. Thirdly, the things, that she may do, by her authority, are all
things, that appertain to the questions of religion. Cus. epi. 2. 3. 7.
to expound the Scripture after her own judgment: Conc. Trid. sess. 24. can.
3.
to dispense against the Scripture: Stapl. princip. l. 9. c. 14. and relect.
page 514.
to canonize new Scripture, that before was none: Stapl. ibi. and relect. p.
494. and inde.
to give authority to the Scripture. August. de Ancon. qu. 59. art. 1. and. 2.
to make new articles of faith. Gl. de transl. episc. Quanto.. very.
to make that to be the sense of the Scripture, that is not: Lastly, the effect
of this power is the same, that the Scripture breeds, and more: Grets. defens.
Bell. tom. 1. page 1218. c.
obedience in all that will be saved, so that the world is bound, as much to
the Popes definitive sentence, as to the Scripture, or the voice of God
himself. The speech of all the canonists.
for Christ, and the Pope make but one tribunal: Capistran. de author. Pap. page
130.
. He is above al, like him, that came down from heaven. Capist. ibi.
For with God, and the Pope his will is sufficient reason, and that which
pleases him, has the vigor of a law. Palaeot. de consist. part. 5. q 9.
after his sentence pronounced no man must doubt or delay to yield: Petrisedes
in Romano sol^o collocata, liberate plena, in suis agendis per omnia poteri
debet, nec vlli subesse homini. Gl. ibid. vbi sup.
yea all the Councils, and Doctors, and Churches in the world must stoop to his
determination.

5 These five things thus observed, it is easy to se, that our adversaries
attribute more to the Church, then to be only a means for the communicating
of that, which is in the Scripture to us; expounding the authority thereof,
that it exceedes the latitude of a Candlestick, and is turned into the Candle
it self. And so to return to my adversaries answer, and to conclude, I thus
reason: The Ministry, and authority of the Church is required either only as
a condition to instruct us, and lead us to the knowledge, and assurance of
that which is contained in the Scripture it self; or else as a means to
reveal unto us some thing, that is not conceived in the Scripture; But not of
the latter: for all articles of faith are in the Scripture. Therefore the
former; Therefore the Scripture alone is the rule of faith.

6 My adversary says it troubles us, that he says, there be dives questions
of faith, which are not expressly set down, nor determined in the Scripture.
Whereto I answered, that this was not the question, for if by expressly he
meant, written word for word, in so many syllables, then the rule is not bound
to contain all things thus expressly; it being sufficient, if all things
needful were contained therein in respect of the sense, so that it might be
gathered from thence by consequence: the question not being, in what manner,
but whether any way at all, the whole, and entire object of our faith be
revealed in the Scripture, though some part thereof be gathered but by
Consequence from that which is written expressly in so many syllables. To this
my adversary replies, that it troubles us sore to be thus convinced with the
evidence of the matter, that we cannot deny it: but are driven to confess
diverse sustantiall points not to be expressly set down. But he is deceived;
it troubles us not a whit: would this hateful guise of bragging, and talking
of Conuincing, when nothing is granted, but that which belongs not to the
question, troubled us no more. For no Protestant affirms all things to be
written expressly, but only that All things belonging to faith are written:
in such sort, that we have, in the Canonical books, either express words,
as plain, as any man can speak, or infallible sense, which any man, by using
the means may understand, for every article of faith whatsoever. Neither did
D. M. Luther, or any of the learned Divines of our Church, whom my adversary in
his canting language, calls his new Masters, ever hold otherwise. He says, by
our leaves this was the question, first, when our Grandfather Luther was so
hoate to have express Scripture, that he would have all expressed, even in
words, etc. And biddes me see Gretser in his defense of Bellarmine. But by his
leave, Gretser and he both, speak untruly, and he absurdly. For he so quotes
Gretser, that a man would think Gretser had showed out of Luthers writings
some places, wherein Luther required express Scripture, even in words: which
he does not, nor Bellarmine, who^ he defends, could do: but be reports in
English, what Gretser lied in Latin, and then biddes see Gretser, when there
is as little in Gretser to this purpose, as in himself. If M. Luther, and the
Divines of our Church, confess many things not to be written verbatim in
express syllables: as it is not thus written, that infants must be baptized:
or that Christ is consubstantiall with his Father: do they therefore confess,
they are not written at all? or will himself conclude the Scripture wants
that, which is not written in so many words? Is the true sense, and meaning of
the words nothing? are they not as well conclusions of Scripture, which are
deduced by true discourse, as which are expressed, verbatim? does not Picus
Theorem 5. sub sin.
say, such are most properly conclusions of faith, which are drawn out of the
old, and new Testament, or by good connection depend on those, that are drawn?
does not the Cardinal of Cambrey 1. q. 1. art 3. p. 50 h.
say, They are conclusions of divinity not only which formally are contained
in Scripture, but also which necessarily follow of that, which is so contained?
And before him Prolog. sent. qu. 1. art. 2 page 10. f. Romans edit.
Aureolus, another Cardinal: In the second manner of proceeding, when we go
forward from one proposition believed, and another necessary: or from both
believed to inquire of any one, that is doubtful: no other habit is obtained,
but the habit of faith: the contrary whereof are heresies? in which words we
see, he affirms a going forward from that, which is certainly believed
(because it is expressly written) to that which is gathered by discourse, and
makes this latter also to belong to faith. I know few of the schoolmen deny
this: whereupon it follows manifestly, that it is reputed to be within the
contents of the Scripture, not only which is expressed in words, but also
which is so in sense, and good consequence: In which manner, I have proved
unanswerably, that all the whole object of faith is expressed.

CHAP. XXXI.
Wherein the place of 2. Tim. 3.15. alleged to prove the fulness and
sufficiency of the Scripture alone, is expounded and urged against the
Jesuits cauills.

A. D. To my answer of the Protestant objection, whereas I say, Page 190.
the Apostle affirming the Scripture to be profitable, does not avouch the
alone sufficiency of it: Whereas also secondly I say, it is rather profitable,
in that it commends the authority of the Church, which is sufficient: M.
White replieth against the first part of this my answer; White. page 55.
that when the Apostle says, the Scripture is profitable, etc. he means,
that it is so profitable, that a man by using it, may be made perfect to every
work; and thereupon thus he reasons, We do not say Scripture is profitable,
Ergo sufficient: but it is profitable to every thing, Ergo sufficient, I answer
that this consequence is not good: Piety is by S. Paul said to be profitatable
to every thing; does it therefore follow, that it is sufficient in such sort,
that there need no other help, or means to be joined with it, to attain
whatsoever thing? M. Wootton, and M. White seem to reason more strongly, yet
weakly enough to this effect. That is sufficient which is able to make a man
wise to salvation, and which is profitable (taking the word profitable, as
expounded by the word able) to make one absolute, and perfect, etc. But the
Apostle affirms Scripture to be able, and profitable to the foresaid
purposes. Ergo. To this I answer, that if they had put into the argument, the
word alone (of which all the question is) it would more plainly appear, how it
proves nothing. Secondly I might say that the Apostle speaks of the old
Testament, Wootton. p. 97
as M. Wootton grants, yea of every parcel thereof, as the word Omnis
signifies: yet I hope, that neither M. Wootton, nor M. White will say, that
now the old Testament, without the new, and much less every parcel of the
old, is, of it self alone, sufficient for all the foresaid purposes. For if
so, what need were there of the new Testament, or of the other parts, besides
any one parcel of the old? Thirdly I say, that the word profitable, is not to
be expounded by the word able: and if it were, the word able does not signify,
that the Scripture is so able, as to work that effect, without any other
means, or helps concurring with it; but at the most, does import a great
degree of profitablenesse. Or if it import sufficiency, it is not meant, that
alone sufficiency, of which our question is, but at the most sufficiency, in
suo genere, in a certain limited kind, to wit, of written Scripture. Against
the second part of my answer, first M. White either had a corrupt copy of my
treatise: or else himself, his writer, or printer, corrupts even my words,
and sense. For I do not say (as he makes me) the Scripture is sufficient,
because etc. But I say only, that it is profitable, the rather because it
commends the authority of the Church. By which corruption, he makes himself
matter to work upon: but very idly, most of his objections being
overthrown, only by reading my words aright, as I set them down. His chief
objection is this. The Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect; that
is, the Pastors, the Pope, Council, and all: but it cannot send these to the
Church; because these be the Church. I answer, that it sends even these also
to the Church. First in that it sends them to the interpretation of Councels,
and Fathers of the ancient Church. Secondly it sends them, as they are
private men, needing instruction, to themselves, as authorized Pastors, who by
the assistance of Gods Spirit, shall be enabled, as need shall require, for
their own, and other men's instruction, to define rightly, which is the right
doctrine of faith in any point, wherein Controversy shall arise. The answer of
his other objections may without difficulty be gathered out of that, which here
I have said already, and which I am after to say, when I do show how Church
authority is proved out of Scripture. Whence follows not, that other places
of Scripture, either are superfluous, or not to be accounted part of the rule;
or that Church doctrine is to be opposed to Scripture, or to be accounted
humane traditions, or doctrine of men. The sentences of Fathers, and others
which M. White brings to prove alone sufficiency of Scripture, either prove
nothing against me, to wit, being explicated, that the Scriptures, with other
means provided by God, (namely the authority of the Church) are able to
instruct us: or else they prove against him, and his fellow M. Wootton, as well
as against me, if the Fathers words be taken without limitation, that the
Scriptures alone, without any means joined to the^, are able to instruct us in
all things. And it is marvel that these men have so little judgment, to
allege such authorities, which make no more again Church Authority, required
by me, then against Church-ministery, which is required by themselves, as the
ordinary means to instruct men in faith.
1 The Apostle 2. Tim. 3.15. has these words. The holy Scriptures are ABLE to
make thee wise TO SALVATION through THE FAITH, WHICH IS IN CHRIST JESUS. For
the whole Scripture is inspired of God, and is profitable to TEACH, to IMPROVE,
to CORRECT, to INSTRVCT IN ALL RIGHTEOUSNESS: That the man of God may be
ABSOLVTE, and made PERFECT, UNTO ALL GOOD WORKS. This text we allege to prove
the sufficiency of the Scripture, whereto my Adversary in his discourse In the
WAY.. 11.
answered two things. First, that the Apostle does not say in these words, that
the Scripture is sufficient to instruct a man to perfection, but that it is
profitable, but I showed that he affirms it to be SVFFICIENT by three reasons:
the first, because the Apostle says, They are able to make us PERFECT, and
that to EVERY good work: now that which does this, is sufficient, inasmuch as
God requires no more at any man's hand, but perfection to every good work. My
Adversary in this his co^fused Reply (wherein he durst not deal openly, and
distinctly, that I might perfectly discern, which part of my argument, his
words properly concern) seems to deny the consequence, because S. Paul says
also, that Piety is profitable to every thing; and yet it is not sufficient in
such sort, that there needs no other help, or means to be joined with it, to
attain whatsoever thing. Whereto I reply again. First, that even this Piety,
being the total, and whole effect, that the study of the Scripture works in
me^, is sufficient, without the joining of any thing else to it, that is not
Piety; for it follows in the next words; that this Piety has the promises of
this life, and of the life to come: that is to say, whatsoever is promised us
in this world or in the next, is obtained by Piety. Therefore Piety is
sufficient. Therefore any thing in this example notwithstanding, the Scriptures
being affirmed to be profitable to every thing, are affirmed also to be
sufficient. Secondly, we do not maintain the Scripture to be sufficient in
that sense, that without all help, and means to learn them, they will
suffice; for who ever denied the ministry of the Church, the illumination of
Gods Spirit, and a man's own sincere endeavor to be also requisite? But when we
say they are sufficient, we do it against the assertion, that says, they
contain not the substance of al things needful to be known; but besides the
means to understand, and learn them, we need Church authority, and unwritten
tradition, to supply diverse articles of faith, that they reveal not. Thirdly,
my Adversary may possibly find some forms of speech, where a thing is called
profitable to all things; yet other things are as necessary as it; for the
profitablenes of one thing, excludes not the necessity of another thing. But
wheresoever it is said, that any thing is profitable (not simply to this, or
that purpose) but to make persect to every thing in the same kind, there the
sufficiency thereof is absolutely concluded: and thus the Apostle speaks of
the Scripture, that it is profitable to make PERFECT to EVERY good work. The
said perfection being an effect of their profitablenesse: for that profitable
thing is sufficient of it self, that makes, and produces the effect perfect.

2 My second reason, whereby I showed the sufficiency of the Scripture was
this: All that we need to salvation is either to be taught, or reproved, or
instructed, or corrected: but the Scripture alone does all this. Ergo they are
sufficient: to this he answers nothing.

3 Thirdly I reasoned thus, That is sufficient, and contains all things
needful to be known, which is able to make a man wise to salvation; but the
Scripture is able to do this: Ergo it is sufficient: this argument he has
tumultuously repeated, as he has all the rest, and answered I know not how.
First, he says, if the word alone had been put in, it would more plainly
appear, how it proves nothing, let the world therefore be put in: That which
alone is able to make a man wise to salvation is sufficient, but such is the
Scripture, that alone it is able to make a man wise to salvation, Therefore it
is sufficient. How does it now appear so plainly that it proves nothing? the
first proposition is manifest of it self, the second is as manifest; for all
that the Apostle affirms, is of the Scripture alone, and of nothing else; for
of Scripture alone, he says, it is able to make wise to salvation, it is
profitable to teach, to reprove, to instruct, to correct, that the man of God
may be perfect, the conclusion therefore must needs be true. Secondly he says,
the Apostle speaks of the old Testament yea of every parcel of Scripture, yet
M. White will not say, that, now specially, the old Testament, without the New,
or every parcel of the old it self, is alone sufficient for all the said
purposes, whereto M. White answers, that he neither speaks of the old
Testament alone, nor of any one parcel, either of old, or new separated from
the rest, but of the whole, in this sense all the whole Scripture taken
together is able, etc. And if the Jesuits, and D. Stapleton, whom this man
traces, had not renounced all truth, they would not say it, when that which the
Apostle auouches of the Scripture, cannot agree to every parcel alone, but to
all together, for what one parcel performs all these effects, to make wise to
salvation, to teach, to reprove to instruct, to correct, to make perfect? the
Scripture is so understood, as that all these things may truly be affirmed of
it, but these things cannot truly be affirmed of the parcels alone: Ergo.

4 Thirdly he says the word PROFITABLE must not expound the word ABLE, or if
it be, the word ABLE does not signify, that the Scripture is so able, as to
work that effect without any other means, or helps, concurring with it, but
at the most it imports a great degree of profitablenesse. This is no answer to
this argument. But to another that he has not expressed. I said therefore
thirdly, though very briefly, By the word able, the other word profitable must
be expounded. Which I thus put into form: that which is PROFITABLE, by being
ABLE, is sufficient: the Scripture is so PROFITABLE, that it is ABLE to make us
wise to salvation: Ergo it is sufficient. He first denies the Minor, and says,
the word profitable, is not to be expounded by the word Able: but he seems to
be dazeled. For: that which is able to make wise to salvation, must needs be
able to make absolute, and perfect, because perfection consists in being wife
to salvation: but the Scripture alone is able to make wise to salvation: Ergo.
Next he says, that supposing the word PROFITABLE be expounded by the word
ABLE: thus, Scripture is able to make one absolute, and perfect: yet the
meaning is not that it is able without other helps, and means concurring with
it, but at the most, that it is very profitable: and if it be sufficient, yet
this sufficiency is not that whereof our question is, but in a certain limited
kind, to wit, of written Scripture. That is to say: if by able to make us wise
to salvation, be meant that the Scriptures are sufficient, yet it is not meant,
that, alone they are sufficient, as the Protestants hold; but with a
limitation, so far as Scripture can be sufficient. In which his answer he
plainly discouers himself to be foundred, and spent. For our question is not,
whether the Scripture alone, without using the Ministry of the Church, or our
own industry, or such means, as God has appointed for the finding our, and
understanding of that which is contained in it, be sufficient: for Bread, and
Drink, and all manner of food, is not sufficient to sustain man's life, if he
take no pains to get it, or if he be not able to swallow, and digest it: and
my adversaries own Church, and traditions, with all their royalties, are not
sufficient, unless men take pains to find them, and be so mad as to believe
them, and so blind as to let them down: but the question is of their
latitude, and extent, viz. whether the written Scripture contain, in express
words, or sense, the whole, and entire doctrine of faith, and good life, so
that the Church by her authority, and traditions, may add no point of faith,
that is wanting in the Scripture. This appears to be the question by my
adversaries own words: and the words of the Divines in his Church. Now the
Apostle saying, the Scripture is able to make one wise to salvation, affirms
the sufficiency of it alone, without any other help, or means, to supply any
doctrine or matter of faith, not contained therein, because there is no more
needful but to be wise to salvation, and that wisdom the Scripture is able to
instruct us in. Which ability is not limited to certain points, but extended
to all the whole object of faith, by the word. For thus I reason: He speaks of
the Scripture alone, and nothing else, therefore the Scripture alone is able to
make wise to salvation: therefore it is so profitable, and in such sort, to
make absolute, and perfect to every good work that it can do it. For it is
able. Therefore it alone is sufficient. Therefore this sufficiency is so
limited to written Scripture, that it is perfectly, and wholly contained in it.

5 The second part of my adversaries answer, in his discourse, to the text
alleged, was, that the Scripture is said to be profitable, because it
commendes to us the authority of the Church. This his answer I opposed with 7.
arguments. But when I repeated it, I put in the word sufficient, thus: He says
they be profitable, and SVFFICIENT because they commend unto us the Churches
authority, the addition of which word, you see, he distasts, and makes a
vantage of, thereby to put off the answer to six of my arguments. That the
Proverb might be true, its an ill wind, but blows some men profit: for
under that pretense, he takes occasion to cavil, and put off that he could not
answer. For first, the word might well be put in without any prejudice to his
sense. For if their profitablenesse lie in commending to us the Church
authority, then their sufficiency lies there too: and so I might well make him
say, they be profitable, and sufficient, because they commend unto us the
Churches authority. Secondly, it is idle that he says my objections are
ouerthrown, Only by reading his words aright, leaving out the word sufficient.
For let him look upon them again, and he shall find, they ourthrow his
exposition of profitable, as well as if he had expounded, sufficient, in the
same manner. But my adversary will take a small occasion to shun an argument.

6 Only to the sixth he replies: for whereas I said the meaning cannot be,
that they are profitable, because they commend unto us the Churches authority,
because the Apostle says, they are able to make the man of God perfect, that
is, the Pastor himself, the Pope, the Council, and all: and it were absurd to
say, that the Scriptures make the Church perfect by commending it to it self;
for the^ the Apostles should speak thus by my adversaries exposition, the
Scriptures are profitable to make the Church perfect, by commending to it the
authority of the Church: and yet he defendes it. First, because it sendes them,
Pastors, Pope, Council, and all, to the interpretations of Councels, and
Fathers, of the ancient Church. But then I demand, how did they make perfect
the ancient Church it self, the first Councels, and Fathers, of whom the
Apostle speaks, as well as of the latter? for they had none to retire to, but
the Scripture only. Secondly because the Pastors of the Church sustain two
persons, one as public Pastors authorized to teach: another as private men,
needing instruction themselves, and so the Apostle says, the Scripture sends
them, as private men to themselves, considered as public men, enabled as need
shall require to define the truth in any point; the which is an irksome
answer, to any that shall consider it; for although a Pastor be considered
these 2. ways, yet it is false that is assumed, that he which as a private man
erres, and is ignorant, yet as a public person, is able to direct himself,
and others, and define the truth, this I say is a trick to mock an ape with,
though it be all the shift they have to defend the Pope, from being a formal
heretic; and yet admitting it to be true, that the Pastors of the Church,
considered as private men, are sent to themselves considered as public men,
yet it cannot be true, that the Scripture makes the^ perfect this way by
sending and commending them to themselves, because the perfection avouched is
the effect of that teaching, that reproving, that correcting, that instructing
which is contained in the Scripture it self, and not in the authority of man,
whither the Scripture is imagined to send us. For all that the Apostle, in this
text, affirms, is of the Scripture alone, as appears,

7 Besides my argument, I alleged some testimonies of Chrysostom, and
certain Papists, to justify my exposition, wherein they affirm as much out
of the text, as I do; whereto he replies, that the said testimonies must
either be explicated to mean that the Scriptures are able to instruct us with
the means of Church authority, or else be taken without limitation; if they be
thus explicated, they prove nothing against him, if they be taken without
limitation, they prove as much against us, as against him. I answer to the
first, the testimonies are to be seen, and the words thereof are so full, that
they cannot be thus explicated: as for example, Chrysostom in his words,
expounds S. Paul to distinguish the Scripture against his own ministry. Thou
have the Scripture to teach thee in steed of me, if thou desire to know
anything, there thou may learn it, that which can teach us in steed of the
Church Pastors, can teach us without their authority, and if God as Antonin
says, has spoken but once, and that in the Scriptures, and that so fully, that
he speaks no more, how can the meaning be, that other authority should be
joined with them? for so God should speak twice: once in the Scriptures,
another time in the Church, and in the Scripture so far from fully, that he
needs speak again in the Church. The like may be said to the other
testimonies, but I refer the judgment to the conscience of the Reader. To the
second, if these words be taken without limitation, that alone without any
means joined to the^ they are able to instruct us, they prove as much against
me, as against him, that its marvel, I should have so little judgment, I
demand, and why so I pray? because then they will make as much against our
Church ministry, as against his Church authority: which had been spoken to the
point, if we by Church ministry, had meant either the same, or as much, as he
does by Church authority; but when his Church authority intends a supply of
that which is wanting, in the Scripture by traditions, and our Church ministry
no more but a simple condition of using the means, to make us see, that which
is contained in the^: which ministry also we do not hold to be always, and unto
all persons, necessary, he may let our judgments alone, and take a new
reckoning of his own, that is so simple, as to make alike things that are so
far unlike, his Church authority, and our Church ministry.

CHAP. XXXII.
Touching private spirits that expound against the Church. 1. Such private
expositions refused by the Protestants. 2. And yet the Papists have no other.
All teaching is to be examined, even by private men. 5. Certain propositions
showing how the Church teaching may be, or may not be, examined and refused.

Page 196. Wootton p. 110 White page 62.
A.D. Concerning the ninth Chapter -- M. Wootton, and M. White both seem to
disclaim from immediate teaching of private spirits, and consequently seem to
grant the substance of the conclusion of this Chapter in such sense, as it was
principally intended by me; yet wheresoever they be urged to tell, how they
infallibly know, that there is any Scripture at all, and that these, and no
other books, be Canonical Scripture, and that this, or that, is the true
interpretation, and sense of this, or that text of holy Scripture, (upon which
questions well resolved the whole frame of their faith does depend,) after
alleging other reasons, drawn from rules of art, and knowledge of tongues,
etc. which they know to be infallible, they must be forced finally to fly, for
infallible assurance, either to the immediate teaching of their private spirit,
or else to run the round betwixt Scripture, and private spirit, in such sort as
I have showed in the Introduction: Introd. q. 6.
and hence it seems to proceed that they both thought fit to make answer to
my reasons, which they needed not to have done, if the conclusion of this
Chapter had no ways been contrary to their doctrine. White. page 59. 60.
M. White before he begin to answer my reasons, distinguishes a double meaning
of the word private which I put in my conclusion, and says, that if I meant
it, as it is opposed (o strange opposition!) to divine, and spiritual, I said
well: but using it as we Catholics do, as it is opposed to common, he says
that a private man may so be assisted with the Holy Ghost, that he may
interpret Scripture truly, and infallibly, against a company, as big as the
Roman Church.
1 HIs third conclusion, touching the rule of faith, was, that no private man
who persuades himself, to be specially instructed by the spirit, can be this
rule of faith: specially so far forth, as he teaches, or believes, contrary to
the received doctrine of the Catholic Church: the which I granted to be true,
but admonished the Reader withal, that he had a further reach therein, then
yet he made show of. For his intent was to condemn all particular men, and
Churches that should either refuse, or examine the public faith of the Church
of Rome, which he means by the Catholic Church, as Wickliffe, Hus, Luther,
and the Churches of England, Scotland, and Germany have done: the which his
intent, the rather because the Divines of his Church, are so Proh nefa^dum
hominem: Caluinus, poeta and Cynadus stigmaticus, errare non potest; Ecclesia
tamen, Christi sponsa, errori est obnoxia. Vna Geneua, euibrato e sole radio,
coruscat: Ecclesia autem in tenebris squalet and conticescit. West. de tripl.
offic. l. 3. page 337.
violent therein, I confuted by answering all his arguments, which marching
against private spirits, I easily perceived to be meant, against the Protestant
Churches, casting off the papacy. Now let us see what heresies, first he says,
that I seem to disclaim from immediate teaching of private spirits, and to
grant the substance of his conclusion, in that sense wherein it was principally
intended. He affirms two things of me. First, that I seem to disclaim the
immediate teaching of private spirits. This I grant: and wish that himself,
and his sectaries, by our example, would likewise disclaim the private spirit
of the Pope, Sicut coelum generat and corrumpit ista inferiora; alterat and
variat ipsa; nihil tamen istorum inferiorum insurgit contra coelu^, vel
appellat contra ipsum, sed patienter tolerat quicquid coelum operatur in e^s,
sieve per generationem, sieve corruptionem, sieve alterationem: sic potest as
Papalis, tanquam celestis, ita potest omnes inferiores potestates, tam
Clericorum quam Laicorum, generare, cerrumpere, and alterare; quia nulli licet
insurgere vel appellare contra ipsum. August. Triumph. sum. de eccl. pot. q 6.
^^t 5. Sententia Papae est praeferenda sententiae omnium aliorum. Ioh de
Turrecrem. sum. de eccle^. l. 3. c. 64. concl. 1. Sententiae Papae standu^ est
quando contradicit sententiae totius Concilii. Ioh. Andrae. quem refert
Syluest. sum. v. Council. n. 3. Papa, absque Concilio, reuocat gesta in Concilio
-- Si Papa and Concilium diuersas constitutiones edant, praefertur constitutio
Papae tanquam maioris authoritatis. Ioh. Capistran de author. Pap. page 105. Jn
pontifice totam esse Monarchiam spiritualem, and ipsius potestatem ab omni
regula, quae coarctet, absolutam esse. Hie^on Alban, de potest. Pap. page 125.
n. 122. Summus pontifex, tanquam agens universal, ecclesiasticas omnes
potestates, veluti agentia particularia, sua authoritate continet. -- Palaeot.
de consist. page 61. Probatione non indiget, Cardinalium, aut aliorum,
consensum in rebus consistorialibus definiendis nullatenus necessarium esse.
page 25. Ad ostendendum Papae primatum and super omnia potestatem, dicitur
corporalis in orb Deus. Dominic. Iacobat. de council. p. 653. edit. Romans per
Anto. Blad. 1538.
who determines above, beside, and against the public spirit of the whole
Church. Next, that consequently I seem to grant the substance of his
conclusion, as it was principally intended by him: this is false: for though I
allow the conclusion, yet not his principal intent, which In the WAY. 58. and
inde.
afterward he discouers to be against our Divines, and Church, that resisted
the Papacy:. 60,,and 57.
alleging this reason against them: that they were but private men, and a few
of them lately sprung up, against the universal Church. Which was the cause
why I distinguished 2 senses of the conclusion, the one seeming in the words,
the other lurking in the intent; and this latter I confuted.

2 Secondly he says, notwithstanding we seem to disclaim private spirits,
yet we are finally forced to fly to them again. No marvel; when he says it:
but say on, how are we enforced, and by what necessity? Because whenever they
be urged, How they know there be any Scripture? How they know these books to
be Scripture: How they know this, or that to be the sense of the Scripture:
they are forced finally to fly, for infallibly assurance, to the immediate
teaching of their private spirit: or else to run the round betwixt Scripture,
and private spirit. This is untrue. For we ground not our faith of these
things, or any thing, upon our own spirit, but upon the Spirit of God, bearing
witness with our spirit, and speaking unto us out of the Scripture it self,
in the midst of the Catholic Church: in this manner, that every one which
is enlightened of God (and no other can have assurance any way, but remains in
unbelief, as Gentiles, Atheists, and Heretics do) feels the holy Ghost
testifying these things to his heart, and infallibly assuring him by the
Scripture it self: which light of the Spirit of God, shining to our spirit, is
the formal reason of believing: the which spirit if my Adversary will deny, or
call a man's own private spirit, or measure whether it be Gods Spirit or not,
by the agreement thereof with the Church of Rome, and the Popes will: when
themselves are part of that, that must be tried by the Spirit of God, let him
go for an Atheist, and one that renounces the habit of infused faith, which is
not resolved into any thing, Actus sidei infusae est credere Diuinae veritati
propter se. Aquar in Capreol. p. 43. e.
but the authority of this spirit; or if he distaste that, let him look upon
two principles holden by his own Divines. Staplet. princi. doctr. fid. page
274. Triplicat. page 183.
The first, that the internal persuasion of the Holy Ghost, or the alone
habit of faith infused, is so effectual, that thereby ALONE, WITHOUT THE
TESTIMONY, AND TEACHING OF THE CHVRCH a man may believe (that is to say, be
infallibly assured) of any thing that must be believed. The second that Greg.
de Valent. tom 3. p. 32. Alexa^d. Pesant. in Thom. p. 479.
the proposition of the Church is believed to be infallible, for the revelation
of Scripture giving testimony to the Church, which revelation of the Scripture,
is believed FOR IT SELF. These principles affirming, that without any
authority of the Church, by the Spirit of God alone, a private man may be
infallibly assured: and that the Scripture, proving to us the infallible
authority of the Church, is lastly believed for it self; let him show, if he
can, so that we may understand him, that it must needs be a private spirit of a
man's own, whenever by the Scripture alone, without, and beyond the authority
of the Church, we rest contented, and assured of that we believe. For before
the Church authority, and after it, and without it, men may be infallibly
assured by Gods Spirit in their hearts, by means of the Scriptures believed,
(therefore known, and understood) in themselves. Again they hold the Pope to
be the supreme Pastor, yet think, Occh. op 90. dierum. cap. 1.
that in case of heresy, one may appeal from him to a superior judge, and Gi.
d. 19 Auast.. in concilio.
in a difficult cause, whether of faith, or right, he must call a Council,
where if the Council and he cannot agree in deciding but are contrary, Anto^ de
^^o. ^e^^. Mon ^^h. ^^ct de council. p 47. ^urt^^e^. d. 19. S^cundum E c^. n. 6.
then they of the two must be followed, which have the best reason. ^ur^ecrem
d. 40. Si ^^pa. n. 4. Sima^ch. Cathol. instit. tit. 12 n. 13.
when the faith lies in danger, the Cardinals, or a Counsel may resist the
Pope: in all which cases, how shall a private man, or a whole nation, be
infallibly assured of truth? the Pope may err: he may err definitiuely
against a Counsel: he may be an heretic: he may be resisted: the Council
also may err, the faith may be endangered: therefore men must try their
reasons: all this is confessed. Where now is this judge, that my adversary
talks of? neither the Pope, nor a Council is it; for men must follow them of
the two, that had the best reasons: who shall judge of their reasons? the
Christian people whom the cause concerns? And by what can they judge, but by
some thing distinct from both Council, and Pope, and above them both? which is
the So Occham. Gerso^. Panorm. The Divines now of Venice and Paris, in their
tractats of this matter.
Scripture, or nothing. And for so much as no man can understand the Scripture
without Gods Spirit: therefore in the case propounded, our adversaries must
allow, both Pope, and Council to be tried by private spirits, as much as we do
the teaching of the Church. Let the most zealous, and learned Papist that
lives, consider this, and he shall perceive that what we mean, when we say,
The Scripture is the supreme rule, and the true sense thereof is assured unto
us lastly, and authoratiuely by the Spirit of God, themselves are driven to
hold, as well as we. Therefore whatsoever my adversary has rabbled together in
his Introduct, it is no more a circle in us, to prove our spirit by the
Scripture; and again to be assured of the Scripture by the Spirit, then it is,
in discourse, to go too, and fro between causes, and effects. But See D. R.
Field 2. part. Append. p. 12. 5. and 6. where this point is showed effectually.
it is himself, and his own Divines, that run the round.

3 Thirdly he says, that I needed not have answered the reasons of his
conclusion: if the conclusion had not been against our doctrine; but this is
idle: for I answered the reasons, because of that which the conclusion
intended. Good words (especially with equiuocators) may have a bad purpose: in
which case the sense must be distinguished, and that which is false, confuted.

4 Fourthly he says 2. things about my distinguishing of the word private. For
the understanding whereof, note, that his conclusion being, No private man
persuading himself to be instructed by the Spirit, can be the Rule of faith: I
answered, that if he meant private (when he says so often in the process of his
argument private spirits) as it is opposed to divine, and spiritual, he said
well; but using it in another sense, as it is opposed to common, and usual,
his conclusion was untrue. To this he replies, first, o strange opposition! but
this he does only by the way, because he would not loose a Parenthesis. His
head being so full of mental reseruations, that it makes his book break out
all over into Parentheses, as if it were full of the Measels: for when
particular men, and private spirits do not err by reason of their small
number, but by holding against that, which is divine, and spiritual; what such
strange opposition is it, to oppose the private spirit, against the divine
Spirit of God: and a private man, against him that is spiritual? In this
sense, No private man's spirit can be the rule, if by private he mean not that
which is not so common, but that which is not divine, and spiritual. But this
is not worth the standing on: his second exception is against the matter of the
distinction. For I said, a private man may be so assisted by the holy Ghost,
that he may interpret Scripture truly, and infallibly, against a company as
big, as the Roman Church. To this he replies: denying my supposition, that
it is not to be thought the holy Ghost assists any, that expoundes the
Scripture contrary to the universal Catholic Church, the which I think too:
and therefore this is not the point in question; when we both agree: but the
point is, whether these private men, and spirits, being expounded to be Luther,
and such as he was, with the Churches that cast off the Papacy: and this
Catholic, and universal Christian Church, being expounded (as it is by our
adversary) to be the Papacy, or Roman Church: the^ whether the private company
may not have Gods Spirit, and the great company want it: and so consequently,
the said private company be able to have the truth against that, which A. D.
calls the Catholic, universal Church? for we affirm it. Not by saying that
Luther, or any of our side, had Gods Spirit, or saw any truth, which the true
Church did not see: but that they had, and saw the the truth in the midst of
the Church against the Papacy, which now ridiculously is styled the Catholic
universal Church. And therefore my aduersay, and all of his side, do but
trifle away time, in opposing the universal Church, against M. Luther, until
they have proved the Papacy to be it, and Luther with such as followed him, no
part of it. For he resisted not the Catholic Church, but the Papacy in the
Catholic Church.

A. D. I do not deny, but that a private man, Page 196.
supposing he were indeed assisted by the holy Ghost, might interpret
Scripture truly, and infallibly, against a company, as big as the Roman
Church, supposing this company were not so assisted. But herein consists the
chief point of the question, whether it be to be thought, that the holy Ghost
does indeed, or not, assist one, or some few private men, who presuming that
they are so assisted, do interpret the holy Scripture, in such sense, as is
contrary to the sense of the holy Catholic, or universal Christian Church
(whether it be Roman, or not, I do not now dispute, this we shall see
hereafter) which (as I shall prove) is undoubtedly known, by the promises of
Christ to have the assistance of the holy Ghost. This being the point in
question, my conclusion in this Chapter is, that no private man, pretending
never so much to be spiritual, or specially inspired, is to be thought indeed
inspired by the holy Ghost, when he interprets Scripture, (as Luther, and his
like did) in a sense contrary to the vnanime interpretation of the precedent,
and then living Pastors of the Catholic Church; and consequently it is not
to be thought that the private spirit of such a man, is to be followed in
interpretation of Scripture, or otherwise, as the rule of faith, or as a
sufficient infallible means, to lead men, and to direct them in the knowledge
of matters, which are to be believed by faith. Now this being the sense of my
conclusion, let us hear how my adversaries will answer my proofs.
5 First he grants, that a private man, assisted by the holy Ghost, may
interpret Scripture truly, and infallibly, against a company as big as the
Roman Church, supposing the said company were not so assisted: but it is not
to be thought that the holy Ghost forsakes the Catholic Church to assist any
who interpret contrary to it. Which I think too, and therefore never denied his
conclusion, nor gaine-said the arguments, whereby he confirmed it, in this
general sense. But when these private men, were expounded to be the reformed
Churches, and their Pastors: and this holy, Catholic, universal, Christian
Church understood to be the Papacy, and the Romish faction, then I affirmed
that private men might have the Spirit of God, and his truth, and the Church
want it. But that I be not mistaken, and that the Reader may understand wherein
I and my adversaries differ: Note that the name of the Church may be taken 3.
ways. First, for the whole company of such, as profess Christ, and his
Gospel, collectiuely in all ages, and places: which is most properly, and
really the Catholic universal Church. So expressly Princip. doctr. page 99.
and 101. edit. Ascens. an. 1532.
Waldensis: This is the Catholic, Apostolic Church of Christ, meant in the
Creed, the mother of believers, whose faith cannot fail -- not any special
Church. Not the African, as Donatus said: not the particular Roman Church, but
the universal Church: not assembled in a general Council, which we know,
has sometime erred, but the Catholic Church of Christ dispersed through the
whole world since the Baptism of Christ, by the Apostles and their successors
to these times, is it which contains the true faith, and holds the certain
truth, in the midst of all errors. Secondly for any part of this Catholic
Church in this, or that time, or country; as the particular Churches of Greece,
Rome, Corinth: or any assembly of Bishops, congregated in a Council, either
general, or particular. Thirdly for the Papacy or Romish Church peculiarly,
containing that faction which embraces the Romish religion, and lives under the
Popes subjection. In which sense my adversary, and all Papists, always use the
name of the Church, Est coetus hominum, eiusdem Christianae fidei professione,
and corundem Sacramentorum communione, colligatus, sub reginunt legitimorum
Pastorum, ac precipue vnius Christi in terris Vicarij Romani Pontificis --
excluduntur schismatici qui habent fidem in sacramenta, sed non subsunt
legitimo Pastori. Bell. de eccl. milit. c. 2. Est visibilis hominum c^etus, --
sub Christo apite, and ^^us in terris Vicario ^astore, ac summo Pontifice,
agens Simanch. Cath. instit. t^t. 24. n. 1.
defining it by this Romish faith with subjection to the Pope, and excluding
from it all that refuse the Papacy. The which distinction being thus laid, I
propound my answer, and that we say touching the point in the fourth
proposition. First, No man, or company of men, believing, and expounding the
Scripture contrary to that which the universal Church, in the first sense,
has always believed and expounded, can be assured they have the assistance of
Gods Spirit; but the contrary, they may assure themselves they are led by the
spirit of error. The reason is; for no truth can be revealed to any, but that
which is in this Church; for if it be not in it, so that the Church never knew
or believed it, then it cannot be the truth. For 1. Tim. 3.15.
the Church is the pillar and ground of truth: and so a private man holding it,
must needs hold an error. Secondly, A private man, and private companies of
men, may be, and many times are so assisted by the holy Ghost, that they may
believe, and expound the Scripture truly, against a particular Church or
Council of Bishops, either general or particular. The reason is: for God has
left his truth with his Church, therein to remain for ever; but not infallibly
every parcel of his truth, with every part, or assembly of the Church. But his
providence, and promises to his Church, are sufficiently vpholden, if he so
support the true faith, that it always remain in some of the Church. Therefore
a particular Church or council of Bishops, may at some time, and in some
points err: and then it cannot be denied, but others may see the truth against
them: this proposition our adversaries dare not deny, nor do not. Thirdly, a
private man, and private companies of men believing and expounding the
Scripture, only against the Papacy, may be infallibly assured they are
assisted by the holy Ghost. The reason is, because this Papacy is no part of
Gods truth, but the late inventions of men added unto it. Fourthly, Private
men, and private companies of men, believing and expounding contrary to the
Papacy, resist not the true Church of Christ, nor any part of it. The reason
is: for the Papacy being nothing else but a disease or excrement breeding in
the Church, must not be expounded to be the Church it self: as a wenne or
leprosy growing on the body, is not the body it self; and he that cuts off
the wen, or purges away the leprosy, cannot be said to resist or wrong the
body.

6 These four propositions thus laid down, it is manifest my adversary does
but cavil in this place. For if his conclusion intended no more, but that
private men must not be thought to know the truth, and the true Catholic
Church to be in error, no man would speak against him. But the sense of his
conclusion is against the three last of my propositions: That no man can be
thought inspired of God, or to have the truth, when he expounds Scripture (as
Luther and his did) contrary to the church of Rome: in which sense only I
dispute against him, and in no other. Not affirming that private men may see
the truth, and the Catholic universal Church not see it; but only that
private men believing contrary to that which my adversary means by the
Catholic universal Church, may have the truth on their side, and be
infallibly sure thereof, without holding any thing contrary to the vnamine
interpretation of the precedent or living Pastors of the sound part of the
Catholic Church.

CHAP. XXXIII.
1. How a private man is assured he understands and believes aright touching
the last and highest resolution of faith. 2. Luthers rejecting the Fathers. 3.
Occhams opinion, that no man is tied to the Pope or his Councels. 4. The
Beraeans examined the doctrine that they were taught. 5. The faith of the
believer rests upon divine infused light. 6. M. Luther sought reformation with
all humility. 7. Scripture is the ground of true assurance. 8. Who the Pastors
were of whom Luther learned his faith. 9. His conference with the Devil. 10.
By the Church, the Papists mean only the Pope.

A.D. To the reason alleged by me, and namely to that point of it, wherein I
say, Page 200.
that a private man, who presuming to be inspired by the spirit, does oppose
himself against the Church, neither can know himself, or can assure others,
that his spirit is infallible: M. White answers, denying this to be true.
For, says he, the Scripture is a light, and known by the sons of light, and
by it they may be assured. Now they that be thus assured, are infallibly sure
they be taught by the holy Ghost: for all Scripture is inspired of God, and
contains the teaching of the holy Ghost. To this I reply, asking how in
particular, Luther (for example) could by Scripture assure himself or others,
that he was taught by the Spirit of God? It seems by M. Whites answer, that
this assurance came by this or the like Syllogism: Whatsoever is taught by
Scripture, is infallibly taught by the Spirit of God. But I Luther am taught by
Scripture this and that point, viz. that I am justified by only Faith, etc.
Ergo, I (Luther) am infallibly assured, and may assure others, that in these
points of doctrine, although contrary to the doctrine of the universal visible
Church, I am taught by the Spirit of God. But who sees not the weakness of
this proof, when all the certainty thereof is finally resolved into Luthers
own private and particular judgment, in his own case? which cannot be proved
to be infallible, by saying, he was assisted in his judgment by the Spirit of
God; but by begging the question, and supposing that which is the point, that
needs most proof, to wit, that he is in those points taught by the
Scripture, or that he is assisted by the Spirit, to interpret aright. He
judged so: it is true: but his judgment is fallible, and is so much the more
to be suspected to be false, by how much he did prize and ouerweene his own
judgment in his own cause, when with intolerable pride he preferred it so
contemptuously before the judgment of a thousand Augustines and Cyprians, and
of other most worthy and learned Doctors of the Catholic Church.
1 HE that opposes himself against the true Catholic Church, holding
contrary to the universal doctrine thereof, can give no assurance, either to
himself or others, that his Spirit is infallible: this is true; but when
Luther and the rest opposed themselves against the Church of Rome, which is the
Papacy; this was no presumption, but the work of Gods Spirit in them, whereof
they might infallibly be assured themselves, and give infallible assurance to
others. My reason was this: The Scripture is a light, and known by the sons
of light, and by it they may be assured: now they that be thus assured, are
infallibly sure they are taught by the holy Ghost. For all Scripture is
inspired of God, and contains the teaching of the holy Ghost. To this he
replies, that then the assurance which they have, arises by such a Syllogism
as he has set down. Whereto I answer, granting that it does, save that in the
conclusion there is more (although contrary to the doctrine of the universal
visible Church) then he was able with all his skill to contriue into the
premises. But he replies, that Luther could have no certainty of the second
proposition, that he was in those points taught by the Scripture, when he
taught against the universal Church. The which reply grants, that a private
man may have infallible assurance he is taught by the Scripture, and assisted
by Gods Spirit, so long as the thing he holds, is not against the universal
Church. But holding this or that point against the Church, he can have no such
assurance. I answer first, that Luther and the private men whom he means,
taught nothing contrary to the universal Church: much less did they frame to
themselves in their mind, the conclusion of this Syllogism, that their
conscience should check them, as if they had taught contrary to the universal
Church, or felt themselves so taught by the Scripture, that withal they felt
the true Church to be against them. They felt no such thing, but categorically
they concluded, I am infallibly sure, that in this point of justification, for
example, I am taught by the Scripture. Secondly I answer, that Luther and every
private Protestant believing Justification by only Faith, and all the rest
that our Church holds against the Papacy, have infallible assurance, they
are taught by the Scripture: the which assurance is bred by the plain and
evident places of Scripture, and the universal teaching of the true Church
confirming the same; whereto the Spirit of God gives witness inwardly in their
conscience. But this he says is the question that should be proved: that
Luther had these things on his side: I answer, there is in this life no further
or after proof above these things: For albeit the proposition and ministry
of the Church concur as a condition, yet the authority of God himself,
speaking in the Scripture, induces us to believe: in as much as all the
authority which the Church has with a believer, is because the said believer
sees and understands by the Scripture, that it is the true Church, etc.
Jassisse Deum vt Ecclesiae credamus, non ex Ecclesiae authoritate suspendimus,
veluti propria, aut sola (ne quidem in genere causae externae) huius fidei
nostrae causa* sed partim ex Scripturis manifestissimis, (quibus ad Ecclesiae
magisterium remittimur) partim ex ipso fide^ symbolo. Stapl. Triplicat. page
279.
the final and formal resolution of faith being into the authority and light
of the Scripture, and Gods Spirit speaking therein: so far forth that our
For the Jesuits say, the proposition of the Church is believed upon the
testimony of ye Scripture, and the Scripture is believed for it self. Si quis
rogatur, quare credat -- si sermo sit de ratione formali assentiendi -- Dicat
se id credere, quia Deus reuelauit. Si rursus interrogetur, vnde cognoscat Deum
reuelasse? Respondeat se id clare non nosse, credere tamen fide infallibili --
ob infall^bilem tamen prop^sitionem Ecclesiae tanquam conditionem ad
id^redendum requisitam Quaeres, vnde cognoscatur propositione^ Ecclesiae esse
infallibilem? similiter respondeat se id credere, fide infallibili, ob
authoritatem Scripturae testimonium perhibentis Ecclesiae, cu^ authoritati and
reuelationi, ob seipsam, cr^dit Alex. Pez^nt in Tho. 22. p 479. B. and Greg. de
Val. to^. 3. p. 31. They yt hold the authority of the Church to be the hiest
reason inducing us to believe, fall into two gross absurdities: 1. because so
our faith shall not be divine, being grounded on the authority of men: 2.
because this authority of the Church is one thing it self that is believed,
and the fore to be grounded on some superior authority. Can loc l. ^.. 8. D
Weston lays the resolution of faith thus: Our faith of any mystery is resolved
into a former act whereby the Scripture, containing this mystery is believed to
be the word of God: and this also is resolved into a former act as the cause
thereof that the Church cannot err -- Which we believe for the signs and
notes which show it to be a true Church -- Thus resolving all divine faith into
humane motives. de Tripl. offic. c. 3. page 143.
adversaries themselves, as I have often showed, after all authority of
Fathers, Church, Councels, Pope and all, do rest and resolve their faith upon
the second proposition of this Syllogism: I am taught this by Scripture: our
adversaries deny not, but Fathers, Councels, Popes may err: or if they
cannot, yet the authority of these things is not the reason of our faith, (for
then faith should be humane) but the inward authority of the Scripture, and
the Spirit of God. If it be demanded, how the Protestants can give infallible
assurance to others, that they understand the Scripture aright? I answer, that
the same question is to be made to the Papists: and both they and we must
answer, that unless God illuminate their hearts, we can give no assurance,
neither they by the Church, nor we by ye Scripture: but such as have this
illumination, do see manifestly the truth of the things they have believed. But
Luther, he says, held against the universal Catholic Church. I answer, and
let all Papists well consider of it, that they must prove this, which I call
the Papacy, to be the universal Catholic Church; before they can say, Luther
was deceived. That, they cannot prove, but by the Scripture, in which trial
Luther shall retire to the Scripture, no faster then themselves; and then they
may be deceived as well as Luther, in as much (unless they will run in a
round) as all their other authority, proofs, and motives, must be tried by
the Scriptures; OVER WHICH GOD HAS SET NO VISIBLE IVDGE IN THIS WORLD, THAT
CAN INFALLIBLY CONVINCE AND PERSUADE ALL MEN. I will make this plain, by laying
down the manner how Luther, and how a Papist assures himself. Luther, and the
Protestants for their part, believe, for example, that a man is justified by
faith only, because the Scripture in plain places excluding works, and
proposing Gods free grace in Christ, and maintaining the sole merits of Christ,
applied by faith, debarres every thing from justifying, that is in our selves;
and so teaches expressly, that we are justified only by faith in Christ. The
Papists hold the contrary, alleging the Church and the Pope, whose doctrine,
they say, it is, that we are justified by our works. But being demanded, how
we know infallibly, that the Church or the Pope has not erred in holding so,
they grant they may err, and answer, that yet they are known not to err in
this point, by the Scriptures; which Scripture, and the true sense thereof, is
known and believed for it self. Here they are fallen into the same issue that
the Protestants are, I am taught this by the Scripture. Now if they reply, that
we are infallibly assured the Scripture is meant as we say, because the Church
expounds it so; who sees not that they make a circle, thus to believe the
Church first, because of the Scripture; and then again to believe the
Scripture, because of the Church? Their maine resolution therefore is the
evidence and authority of the Scripture persuading them, both that the
doctrine is true, and that the Church which teaches it, is the true Church. And
so they lie open to the same cauils that are made against ye Protestants.
Luther in understanding the Scripture, may be deceived: so may they. It is
Luthers own cause: so is this the Papists. Luthers judgment is to be suspected,
when he preferred himself before the judgment of the Church. The same say we
to them, They prefer their judgment before the Church, and all the Fathers:
in as much as we can show the Church and Fathers to be against them: and
themselves profess, that the Popes authority is above both Church and Fathers.

2 Indeed if M. Luther had had a thousand Austins and Cyprians, and other
Fathers of the Church, with one consent, and plainly against him, he had bin so
much the more to be suspected, (for this is one maine thing, that makes us
abhor the present Roman Church, because it prefers it self and the Popes
determination before all the Doctors in the world) but he never thought so, nor
said so. His words are these, in Tom. 2. Wittemb. page 344.
a book that he writ against King Henry the 8. Lastly he produces the sayings
of the Fathers for the establishing of the sacrifice of the Mass, and sees my
foolishnes, who alone will be wiser then all other. This is is it I say, that
by this, my opinion is confirmed. For this I said, that these His uncivil
speeches to the King, himself afterward retracted. Sleid. They are but a weak
argument to discredit his reformation. Lucifer Caralitanus his books against
the Emperor Constantius, are as bitter and violent. If Luther offended against
K. Harry: the Jesuits and their supplies repay it to K. James: and long since
have returned it with the interest, to good Q. Elizabeth.
Thomisticall asses, have nothing to produce but a multitude of men, and
antique use; and then to him that brings the Scriptures, to say, Thou art the
foolishest of all men that live, Art thou only wise? and then it must needs be
so. But to me, who am the foolishest of all men, it is sufficient, that the
most wise Henry can bring no Scripture against me, nor answer that which is
brought against him; besides he is constrained to grant, his Fathers have often
erred, and his antique use makes no article of faith: in which it is lawful,
but for the multitude of that Church, to trust, whereof he himself, with his
pardons, is defender. But against the saying of Fathers, men, Angels, and
devils, I oppose not ancient custom, nor a multitude of men, This is that
which ye Fathers themselves advise unto: when heresies have long continued and
prevailed in the Church, to fly to the Scriptures; because the writings of the
Fathers, after the long continuance of heresy, are in danger of corruption.
See Chrysostom. op. imperf. hom. 49. sub init.. Tu^o cum videritis abominatione^.
Vincen. Lyrin. co^monit. c. 39.
but the word, the Gospel, of one eternal majesty, which themselves are
constrained to allow, wherein the Mass is evidently taught to be the sign and
testament of God, wherein he promises, and by a sign certifies to us his
grace. For this work and word of God, is not in our power; here I set my
foot, here I sit, here I abide, here I glory, here I triumph, here I insult
over Papists, Thomists, Sophisters, and all the gates of hell, not only over
the sayings of men, though holy men, or deceitful custom: Gods word is over
all. The divine Majesty is of my side, that I care not if a thousand Austins,
a thousand Cyprians, a thousand King Harry-churches stood against me. God can
neither deceive, nor be deceived: Austin and Cyprian, as all the elect, may
err, and have erred. In all these words there is nothing spoken simply against
the Fathers, but comparatively, if a thousand Fathers were against the
Scriptures, he would rather stand to the Scripture: wherein he speaks most
godly and honestly, that Gal. 1.
if an Apostle, or an Angel from heaven (far greater then a thousand Austins
and Cyprians) should preach otherwise, let him be accursed. Neither Saint Paul,
nor Luther granted the Angels or Doctors of the Church, to preach otherwise
then they did; but if any man would pretend, and oppose their names and
preaching against the Scripture, let them be accursed: the word of God is above
all, that I care not if a thousand Austins, and a thousand Cyprians stood
against me; which is the truth; and our adversaries say as much themselves.
Baronius: An. 31. n. 213.
Though the Fathers, whom for their high learning, we worthily call the Doctors
of the Church, were endued with the grace of the holy Ghost above others, yet
in expounding the Scripture, the Catholic Church does not always, and in all
things follow them. D. Marta, De iurisdict. part. 1. page 273.
The common opinion of the Doctors is not to be regarded, when the contrary
opinion favors the power of the (Popes) keys, or a pious cause. And I have
showed THE WAY, digr. 47.
elsewhere, that this is the common practice of our adversaries. They speak
not always so zealously and plainly, as Luther does; but for substance, they say
the same that he does: Yesterday Ecchius brought against me Gregory, Ambrose,
and Chrysostom: to whom I then answered nothing. I will therefore now say what
I then forgot: opposing the rule of divine Augustine, that the savings of all
writers must be judged by the sacred Scripture, whose authority is greater
then the authority of all men Not that I condemn the judgment of the most
illustrious Fathers; but I imitate those that come nearest to the Scriptures;
and if the Scripture be plain, I embrace it before them all Tom. 1. disput.
Lips. cum Ecch. page 263. Wittemb. I mention the opinion of Austin, not to
defame or detract from that holy man, but because it is good and necessary that
these holy Fathers be sometime found, like our selves, men: that the glory of
God may stand firm, etc. J^ Genesc 21 page 255. tom. 6. Wittemb.
who thought also as reverently of the Fathers, as any man is bound to do.

3 But it was not Luthers going against the Fathers, that discontented our
adversaries; it was his resisting the Popes Canons, and the faith of the Church
of Rome; which they shrouded under the name of the Fathers: wherein, by their
own divinity, he might be guiltless. Peradventure, Dialog. tract. 2. part.
2. c. vult. page 180. col. 3. edit. Lugdun. per Ioh. ^rech. an. 1494.
says Occham, one might say, that simple men ought to believe nothing but what
the Pope and Cardinals deliver to be believed explicately, and should be
content with things common, not presuming upon their own understanding, to
believe any thing explicitly, but what the Pope and Cardinals deliver unto
them: but HE THAT SHOULD AFFIRM THESE THINGS, WERE AN INVENTOR OF NEW ERRORS.
For though simple men be not ordinarily tied to believe explicitly, but only
those things which are by the Clergy declared to be so believed; yet SIMPLE
MEN READING THE DIVINE SCRIPTVRE, BY THE SHARPNES OF REASON MAY SEE SOME THING
THAT THE POPE AND CARDINALS HAVE NOT DECLARED, EVIDENTLY TO FOLLOW OF THE
SCRIPTVRE: in which case they can, and must explicitly believe; and ARE NOT
BOUND TO CONSVLT WITH THE POPE AND CARDINALS, FORASMVCH AS THEY ARE BOUND TO
PREFER THE HOLY SCRIPTVRE BEFORE THEM ALL. If all the Papists in the world
can show Luther did any more then Occham here allows every simple man to do, I
am much deceived. And if he did no more, then by their own judgments he might
do; then away with these frivolous and empty exclamations against Luther, and
let us hear no more of them.

A. D. But, says M. White, Scripture promises, Page 201.
that every doctrine is of God, which consents to it: and this consent, a man
may know infallibly, or else in vain had the Bereans searched, etc. I answer,
that I do not deny, but a man may know doctrine to consent to Scripture: but I
ask, how he may know this by only Scripture interpreted by ones own
judgment, or private spirit? I hope I have showed the contrary: neither will M.
White be ever able to prove that the Act. 17.11.
Beraeans had infallible certainty only by the Scripture interpreted by their
own private judgment: or that Es 8.20.
the Prophet sent any for infallible certainty to the law and testimony
expounded only by private judgment: or that Luc 1, 4.
Saint Luke, or Col. 2.2.
Saint Paul whom he alleges, meant that men should have infallible assurance
by only Scripture interpreted by private judgment or spirit.
4 I never intended, that any man could have infallible assurance of that he
believes, only by Scripture interpreted by his own private judgment: all
that I affirm, is, that private men may examine any doctrine that is publicly
taught by whosoever; and by Scripture alone, as by a certain rule, they may be
assured of the truth. This is plainly euinced by the texts alleged. For the
Beraeans hearing the Apostles preach, yet searched the Scripture daily whether
those things were so, and therefore believed. In which example, the matter
examined is the things that the Apostles preached. The rule whereby this was
examined, is the Scripture alone, which, in the text, is distinguished from the
Apostles preaching, and ministry, and authority, and opposed against them:
for by it the Beraeans examined them. The persons that did this, were a private
people, subject to the Pastors of the Church, as much as any can be. The end
why they did thus examine the doctrine, was to see if it consented with the
Scripture. The event and issue of their examining, was, Therefore many of them
believed. Whereby it is clear, that a private man, by the Scripture alone, may
be able to judge of any thing that is publicly taught; and by the Scripture
alone be infallibly assured, if he hold the truth. Not the Scripture alone,
excluding the condition of the means, whereby God makes the sense thereof
known; but the Scripture alone, as the rule of faith, excluding all authority
of the Church and Pastors. Nor the Scripture interpreted by a man's own
judgment, and private spirit: but by it self truly, according to the manifest
rule of faith contained and revealed in Scripture it self.

5 The difficulty is, when I, upon the authority of the Scripture, as I
verily persuade my self, believe contrary to the Church of Rome, or any other
presumed to be the true Church: how it shall appear to my self and others,
that I expound and understand the Scriptures aright, and not according to my
own private spirit? For answer whereto: note first, that this demand lies as
well against the Beraeans, and the rest of Gods people mentioned by Luke and
Paul in the texts alleged, as against the Protestants. For they rejecting
something that they were persuaded was not in the Scripture, or receiving that
which they saw agreeable to the Scripture, might be demanded, how they were
infallibly assured they had the true sense of the Scripture? And a false
Apostle, when they should by the Scripture examine and reject his doctrine,
might cavil, as A.D. here does, and say, they expounded it after their own
private spirit. In which case, the godly believers could refer themselves to no
other rule, but only leave the truth still to be judged by the Scripture, by
all such as would examine it. Note secondly, that the same difficulty presses
our adversaries. For when they have showed and urged the authority of the
Church, and their chief Pastor therein, what they can; yet this authority they
cannot maintain to be such as they hold, but by the Scripture. Vbi sup. li^ b.
Pezantius and Vbi sup. li^. b.
Greg. of Valence, You will ask how the proposition of the Church is known to be
infallible. Let him that is thus demanded, answer, He believes it by an
infallible faith, for the authority of the Scripture, giving witness to the
Church: which authority and revelation, he believes for it self, albeit the
proposition of the Church, as a requisite condition, be needful thereunto. I
know not many of our adversaries (some Durand. 3 d 24. qu. 1. and d. 25 q. 3.
and ibi Scot. Alm. Gabr.
few Schoolmen excepted) that hold the authority of the Church to be the
formal reason of faith, or the first and last cause of believing: but the
authority of God himself revealing these things; which authority being
something distinguished from the Church, and above it, can be no where
manifested, but in the Scripture. Now when they allege Scripture, we may tell
them again, they allege it after their own spirit which objection may be
multiplied, as often as they multiply their discourses out of Scripture.
Thirdly therefore for satisfaction of the difficulty, I believe, and am
assured of that I hold, by infused faith, God, by a supernatural light
revealing and infusing the certainty of that I believe, partly by showing to
my understanding, out of the Scripture; partly by stirring up, and inclining my
will to assent unto it, and en brace it. The which knowledge and assurance of
mind, when any man challenges, as if it were but a private conceit, subject to
error; I can say no more, but that which every man says for his faith: that so
all true faith may be destroyed, in that For ye believer assents not by
discourse, to the matters of faith revealed, as by ye formal reason of
believing; but by simple cleaning and adhering to the^: faith never drawing
forth her act, by means of discourse; but if discourse be used, it is rather a
condition helping to apply faith to it object. Mat. 16.17. 2. Cor. 10.5. Heb.
11.1. Fides secundum se co^siderata, quod attinet ad causa^ efficientem,
reuocanda est in motione^ diuinae^, lumenque diuinu^, sieve in habitum fidei --.
Christiana fides, etiam vt est in nobis, reuocatur in Deu^ mouentem, diuinu^que
lumen. Lud. Carb. sum. tom. 3. c. 3. l. 1. page 6.
no man's faith ascends above this infused illumination, or can be demonstrated
to be certain by evident reasons, Tho. 1. part. q 1. art. 8 Dura^ prolog.
sent. qu. 1. page 4. h.
that shall convince all gainsayers, but only there be forcible motives to
induce unto it: though when his reasons, that thus believes, shall be examined,
and his grounds of Scripture duly weyed by true Christians in a Council, or
otherwise, all that gainsay him, may easily be confuted. And this is the thing
that we say for Luther, and Scripture, against the Papacy.

A. D. Yet (says M. White) the Papists cannot deny but there is a heavenly
light, etc. It is true, Page 201.
that Catholics grant inward testimony of the Spirit to give infallible
assurance. But what spirit is that, which they think gives this infallible
assurance? Not private spirit; but the Spirit which is common to the Church,
the Spirit which inclines men to humil^tie, order and unity, as in Qu 6.
the Introduction I have showed. To whom also do they think infallible
assurance to be given by the Spirit? Not to every one, that presuming himself
to be elect, and to have the Spirit, shall rush without reverence into the
sacred text, expounding it as he lists or as it shall be suggested by private
spirit: but to such as with order, humility, and respect of unity, read and
interpret Scripture, as they learn it to be interpreted by the infallible
authority of the Pastors of Gods Church. Those that do otherwise, though they
may seem to themselves to be infallibly sure, yet indeed they are not, as not
having any substantial ground to assure them, which may not in like manner, and
with as probable color, be alleged by others, whom (although persuading
themselves to be infallibly sure) M. White himself will grant to be deceived in
this their persuasion. M. White White. page 62. and 63.
says, that his private men be assured by Scripture. So say they, M. White
says, his men have the witness of the holy Ghost. So say they, M. White
says, his men were taught by the Pastors of the true Church. This he says
indeed, and so (if they would be impudent) they might say. But whereas M White
says, that his private men (let Luther and Calvin be examples) were taught by
the Pastors: if he mean they were taught by the Pastors, those special points
wherein they dissent from us, it is marvel that even his own black face
blusheth not to utter such a shameless untruth. Let M. White, name, if he can,
what Pastors those were, that taught Luther and Calvin these new doctrines,
unless he will allow the Devil to be a Pastor, whom Luther Luth. de miss.
angul.
confesses to have taught him his doctrine against the Mass.
6 If there be, as the Replier grants, a heavenly light in the things
themselves that are believed, and an inward testimony of the Spirit, that can
give infallible assurance to the believer; this is as much as we require: for
then this light and testimony, wheresoever and in whomsoever it be, is
sufficient, as I said, to assure the conscience of the truth of the things
believed, whosoever gainsay them: and the Papists must show, by some certain
and pregnant proof, that Luther and we that refuse the Papacy, have not this
light and testimony: which is not done by saying it is a private spirit, not
common to the Church. For all this is denied. The Spirit that gives us this
assurance, is the Spirit of God, the same which is common to the true Church.
The Spirit which inclines to humility, order, and unity. And the persons that
lay claim to this Spirit, did neither presume nor rush into the text, The
reformation that Luther began, was sought with peace, and order, and even with
tears.
nor expound it as they listed; but what they held, they learned of the Church:
not of the Romish faction, and contagion, that ouerspread the Church, but of
the true Church of God, that remained in the midst of the Papacy, and in
former ages followed the Scripture. And of this I forewarne all Papists, that
when they please to leave these empty clamours, and go roundly to the point,
enquiring what order and humility Luther used when he first dealt against the
Papacy, and what Church he followed, it will be justified against him, that
the pride, and perverseness and disorder that was, was on their own side, and
themselves were departed from the true Church. These private men, whom the
Replier means, with all humility and good order, by supplication,
disputation, mediation, both to the Pope and Christian Princes, sought the
redress of abuses: their complaints were laid open before all the Courts in
Germany, France, Spain, England, Italy, Denmark, and the Christian world:
all countries laid down their grieuances against the Church of Rome, and
openly complained of the Papacy, The Pope in his business with the States of
the Empire about the reformation of the Church, could not deny this. We know,
says Pope Adrian, that in this holy Sea of Rome, there have been of late
years, many abominable things many abuses in spiritual things, and excesses,
and all things peruersly turned vpside down. And no marvel if the disease be
gone down from the head to the members, and from the Popes to inferior
Prelates. All we, the Prelates of the church have turned aside, every one to
his own ways; and of a long time therehath not bin one yt did good, no not
one. -- We took upon us the yoke of this great dignity (to be Pope) only that
we might reform the deformed Catholic Church. Adrian. 6. instr. pro Fra.
Cheregat page 173. Fascic. rer. exp. and fug. edit. Colon. 1535. The abuses,
errors, tyranny and oppression prevailing in this Church of Rome, noted and
complained of by many in all ages as they grew. Bernard. Agobard. Occham.
Marsil de Rosate. Clemangis, Aluarus, Gerson, Alliaco. Auentine, etc. See this
point handled by D. Field, l. 3. c. 7. and in his Append. added to that chapter.
as departed from the doctrine and canons of the ancient Church. But
particularly, what order, humility, and respect of unity, was in Luther, when
he opposed himself, shall best appear by Tom. 7. Wittemb. 22. page ^.
his own words. All this time, wherein the cause of Religion has been heard
before the Emperor, and in many great assemblies, (touching that which belongs
to the Pope and his Bishops, upon desire of public peace and safety, as much
as could stand with Gods truth) we have carried our selves lowly enough, that
they might if they would, have understood long ago, that we did not aim at the
weakening of their power, to change the present state of things, or the
Ecclesiastical policy of the Church. WE PLAINLY AND EXPRESSLY PROFESSED, AS
OUR BOOKS BEAR WITNESS, THAT IF THEY WOULD NOT CONSTRAIN US TO ARTICLES
OPENLY IMPIOVS AND BLASPHEMOVS, WE WOULD DEFEND THEM IN OTHER THINGS --. But
when reverently and suppliantly, PROSTRATE at their feet, we only demanded
MOST JUST THINGS IN THE GREATEST MATTERS, and for the public good, we were
not counted worthy to obtain any thing: but wisdom is driven away from among
them, and THINGS ARE CARRIED WITH STRONG HAND. They will constrain us from the
manifest truth, against our wills, to receive their abominations. WITH WHAT
RIGHR OR WRONG THEY DEAL WITH US, THEY CARE NOT; BUT THE VPSHOT IS THIS, THEY
WOULD HAVE THE TRVTH AND US, BY ANY MEANS SVPPRESSED: THIS THOU LORD JESUS
CHRIST, THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD, WILT IVDGE. For when as like Pharaoh, they
be hardened against THE TEARS of suppliants, peradventure their end presses
upon them, etc. Thus the Pope with his Clergy, proudly contemning all things,
and deluding the world with promises of reformation; and persecuting with fire
and sword, such as complained: the first reformers by this tyranny, and
dissembling, were driven to leave the Papacy, as the seat of Antichrist, and
the neast of all heresy and abominations. The which is so true, that our
adversaries have purged and forbidden the books containing these complaints,
and rail upon us when we produce or mention them, (as this Replier does upon
me throughout his book) and most impudently deny them; and use other the
most dishonest shifts that ever were: which makes it plain, that they dare not
enter this trial, but with noise and scurrilitie, outface all things that
lead that way. I have said it often in my writings, and here I say it again:
Nec moueor clamoribus Epicureorum, aut hypocritarum, qui aut rident, aut
damnan^ manifestam veritatem: sed vere statuo consensum perpetuum esse
Catholicae Ecclesiae Dei hane ipsam doctrina vocem qua s^na^ in Ecclesiis
nostris. Philip. Melancth. praef. in 2 tom. Luth.
THE ABUSES AND CORRVPTIONS OF THE COURT AND CHVRCH OF ROME, WERE SEEN,
MISLIKED AND COMPLAINED OF BY THE BEST MEN, AND WISEST STATES THAT WERE, BOTH
BEFORE AND AFTER LVTHER OPPOSED HIMSELF: AND THE ARTICLES OF RELIGION, WHEREIN
THE REFORMED CHVRCHES STAND AGAINST THE IESVITES, ARE THE MANIFEST DOCTRINE OF
THE SCRIPTVRES AND ANCIENT FATHERS, AND WERE HELD BY DIVERSE OF THE BEST LEARNED
IN THE CHVRCH OF ROME, EVEN IN THESE LAST 700 YEARS: THE DOCTRINE LATELY
DETERMINED BY THE TRENT COUNCIL, AND NOW SO VIOLENTLY DEFENDED BY THE
IESVITES, BEING NEVER GENERALLY OR UNIFORMLY RECEIVED IN THE CHVRCH OF ROME,
BUT BROACHED AND PVT FORWARD BY THE FACTION OF SOME THEREIN AGAINST THE REST.

7 And whereas the Replier says, we have no ground to assure us, which may not
in like manner, and with as good color, be alleged by others, whom our selves
confess to be deceived: I answer, that we do not only allege the Scripture,
the Spirit of God, the Church, the Pastors therein, which any heretic may do;
but we allege them truly, Varim quide^ and diuersus, ex vno tamen fonto
haeretic^ prauttatis error emersit, cardo pessimus and origo maloru^, quae ex
se cunctarum imp^etatum occasione^ peperit, haec est^ dum celestium dictorum
virtus vitio male intelligentium temerata non secundum sui qualitate^ sensus
perpenditur, sed in alias res, pro arbitrio legentis, sic us quam very ratio
postulat, deriuatur. Vigil. l. 2. page 553. contr. ^utych. (...), etc. Clem.
Alexan. Strom. l. 7. page 322. edit. Commelin. ann. 1592.
which no heretic may do. The Papists allege the Church. So do the Greeks
theirs; the Armenians and Ethiopians theirs. The Papists allege the
successions of their Popes: so do the Greeks the succession of their Patriarks.
Chrysostom says: Op. imper^ hom. 49. page 1101.
All those things that belong to Christ in truth, heresies may have in schism,
and in show: Churches, Scriptures, Bishops, the orders of Clergy men,
Baptism, the Eucharist, and all things else. The devil also alleged
Scripture; but did he therefore give over the Scripture? No. But as Jerome
Comment. in Math. 4.
says: The false darts of the devil, which he took out of the Scripture, our
Savior breaks with the true shield of the Scripture. A Scripture ill cited,
Concord. c. 14
says Iansenius, he beats back with another Scripture truly alleged, as it
were one nail with another. The Replier must therefore prove that they which
allege the Scripture, or the Church, or the Spirit of God against us, do it in
like manner with as probable color, as we allege it for our selves. But this
cavil, I answered in the WAY, on the same page that my adversary quotes;
whereto he replies, only by repeating that I answered, and so comes to railing.

8 For having objected, that it is not Gods manner to teach men immediately by
himself, but by the means of his Church, and the Pastors therein: I answered,
that these whom he calls private men, had their knowledge by means of the
Scripture truly taught in the Church, but the Papacy was not this Church: nor
the Priests thereof those Pastors whom God had put into his Church. To this he
replies, as you see, that I am impudent; and, it is marvel his own black
face blushes not to utter such a shameless untruth. Let him name if he can,
what Pastors those were, that taught Luther and Calvin; unless he will allow
the Devil to be a Pastor, whom Luther confesses to have taught him his
doctrine against the Mass. I answer, that the Pastors which taught Luther and
Calvin their doctrine, were of four sorts: First the blessed Apostles, whose
ministry extends it self to all ages. Next, the Doctors and Pastors of the
Primitive Church, and long after, whose doctrine also in all substantial
points, and namely in that wherein they forsook the Papacy, they steadfastly
embraced, when the Papacy had cast it off. Thirdly, the learned men whom God
in many ages afterward raised up to preach against the Papacy, as it grew.
Such as were Bernard, Wickliffe, Husse, the Waldenses, and diverse others.
Fourthly many ordinary Pastors of the Church of Rome it self, who being
defiled with much of the Romish corruption, yet in many things were sound, and
taught soundly the truth: which truth, such as Luther was, might learn even
among Heretics, as S. Austin did a good exposition of Tyconius the Heretic,
and by the Scripture might be able to judge between that they taught truly,
and that they taught otherwise. Refert Gabr. lect. in can. 57. h
There were in the Church of Rome that taught pardons to be of no force to
help souls in Purgatory, Durand. 4. d. 20. qu 3. Caiet. tract. de indulg. c.
1. p 211. b.
and that their use is by no authority of the Scripture, or Fathers: diverse
taught Occh. Lyr. Hug. Dionys. Turrecrem. Picus. Caietan. whom see before.
the Apocrypha not to be Canonical. Gerson Declarat. compend. defect. eccl. n.
67.
complained of the abuse of images. The same Sermon. de Natiu. Mar. consid. 2.
Gerson, and 3. part. q. 68. art. 1. 2. 11.
Caietan, taught that Infants unbaptized might be saved. Sacramental. page 30.
Waldensis against the merit of works. 2. d. 26. per tot.
Ariminensis against the power of nature, and freewill. Lect. 4. in rom 3.
lect. 4. in Gal. 3.
Aquinas for justification by faith only. De vit. spiritual. anim. concl.
vnic. and Coroll. 1. in 3. part. operum Gers. Paris. 1606.
Gerson, that all sin is against the law of God, and none is venial of it
nature. Almain. Occh. Gers. Mayor. and others to this day famously known.
The Sorbonistes of Paris taught against the Popes Monarchy: the Greek Church
also, held many things against the Papacy, touching Priests marriage, Purgatory,
etc. There is no article of Luthers, or Caluins doctrine, but it was taught in
the Church of Rome before them. Praef. in tom. 2. operum Luther.
Melancthon says, that he often heard Luther make report, how an old man among
the Austine Friars at Erford confirmed him in that opinion, which is so much
objected to him, touching special faith: and he adds, that before he stirred,
there were many in the Church of Rome, which did invoke God aright, and held
the doctrine of the Gospel, some more, some less, such as was that old man,
who showed Luther the doctrine of faith.

9 That Luther confesses the Devil to have taught him the doctrine against the
Mass, is untrue. He only reports, how the Devil in a spiritual That it was
no more, will appear to him that reads the whole discourse especially toward
the latter end.
temptation, to bring him to despair, accused him for saying Mass, and the
more to terrify him, laid many true reasons against the Mass before him,
whereby to let him see the foulenes thereof, that so he might drive him to
desperation; as to bring any man to despair of Gods mercy, he uses ordinarily,
by true, and effectual reasons, to accuse the sin whereof he is guilty. Not
to persuade him to hate, or leave the sin, but to bring him to say with Cain,
My sin is greater then can be forgiven. An easy thing it were to object as
much to the Jesuits, touching their fellows, and Ignatius himself their
founder: but let God be judge of these things. Hasenmuller, who spent much time
among the Jesuits, and was of their religion, makes this report. Turrian, the
Jesuit, has often told me that Ignatius Loiola, both at meat, and Mass, and
in his recreations, used to be vexed with the Devil, that he should sweat as
cold as one that were ready to die. Bobadilla told him that he would oftentimes
complain that he could never be quiet, for the Devil molesting him. Turrian
said the Devil was his daily companion, even to the altar where he used to say
Mass, etc. Hasenmull. hist Jesuit. c. 11 page 427. We can give them a
bead-role of Popes that have had familiarity with the Devil, more then this
commed to.
I know how scurrilously our adversaries object this of Luther, but their
malice armed with all the wit, and skill they have, can never euince it, to be
otherwise, then I have said.

A. D. Whereas I object that sectaries and the Devil himself, does allege
words of Scripture, Page 202. White page 64.
M. White grants it, but (says he) either they allege not true Scripture,
or not truly applied: as also they allege the authority of the Church; but
either not the true Church, or the true Church, not truly. Testimonium hoc
veru^ est: This which M. White grants is the very truth, and wants nothing,
but that he apply it to his private men Luther, and Calvin, and to his own
self. Partiality will not suffer him to apply it thus, but there is no reason,
that he should be judge, it is more fit that the judgment of this matter be
left to the Catholic Church which he confesses to be taught of God. White
page 63.

10 If my answer be true, that when sectaries, or the Devil allege Scripture,
or the Church, they do it not truly, let the Repliar give over bragging, and
show really, that the Protestants have not alleged these things truly. And if
it be no reason we be judges our selves, no more is it, that the Pope and
Papacy, (which Nomine Ecclesiae intelligimus eius caput, id est, Romanum
Pontificem, Grego. de Valent page 24. tom. 3. Quod autem haec regula animata*
rationalis, sit summus Pontifex, non est hic locus proprius probandi. Fra.
Albertin. Coroll. p. 251. c. No marvel, now, though the Catholic Church were
so fast talked of.
he means by the Catholic Church) be judge: but were it at that, that we
might have a free Council assembled, and holden, as Councels were of ancient
time, where the Pope, and his faith might be tried as well as we, it would
soon appear, the Protestants have not been partial in their cause, when the
late Trent Council it self had come nearer us then it did, if it had not been
managed by Machiauellisme, more then religion, and the greatest tyranny, and
cosenage, and villainy, used in it, that ever stirred in any public business.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
1 The Papists pretending the Church, have a further meaning then the vulgar
know. 2 The Popes will is made the Churches act. 3 Base traditions expounded to
be divine truth.

A. D. Concerning the tenth Chapter -- both my Adversaries make maine
opposition, against the conclusion of this Chapter, Page 202.
one reason whereof is, that they do not, or will not rightly understand what I
meant, when here I say the doctrine of the Church is the rule of faith: note
therefore first whereas the name Church, may be taken several ways, Intro. q.
3.
according to that which I noted in the Introduction, whereas also in every one
of these senses it may be taken, either as it is generally in all ages, or as
it is particularly in this, or that determinate age, my Adversaries, omitting
all other senses, principally understand me to mean, by the name Church, the
Pope, or Pastors of this present age, whereas in this Chapter, I do not, at
least ex professo, or primarily intend to speak of the Church in this sense:
but rather do speak of the Church in a more general, indefinite, and
indeterminate sense, as it signifies one, or other company of men living,
either in all ages, or in one, or other, age, who in one or other sense may be
called the Church; the doctrine whereof, say I, is the rule, and means
ordained by God to instruct all sorts of men in all matters of faith. Note
secondly that by the doctrine of the Church, I do not understand, any Friars
dreams, White page 3
as M. White dreameth, nor humane traditions, especially opposite to Scripture,
but divine doctrine: including therein both the written divine Scripture, and
the unwritten divine traditions, and the true divine interpretation of them
both, as by word, writing, signs, or otherwise it is, or may be propounded,
and delivered to us, by the authority of the Church: all which (although it may
worthily be called divine doctrine, as being first revealed by God) here I call
Church-doctrine, because as it was first revealed, and committed to the keeping
of Prophets, and Apostles, who in their time, were chief, and principal
members of the militant Church, so by Gods ordinance, it was to be propounded,
and delivered to other men, by the same Prophets, Apostles, and others their
successors, as they are Doctors, and Pastors of the same Church. Note thirdly,
that by the rule of faith, I mean such a rule, as is also a sufficient outward
means, ordained, and set apart by God, to instruct all sorts of men, in all
points of faith; which consequently must have those three conditions, or
properties of the rule, set down, and declared in the sixth Chapter, viz that
it must be infallible, easy to be understood of all sorts, and universal, or
such as may sufficiently resolve one in all points of faith. Note fourthly,
that when I say, the doctrine of the Church is the rule of faith, I do not
understand, that the doctrine, as severed from the Church, or the Church, as
divided from the doctrine, is the rule of says, but that the doctrine as
delivered by the Church, or the Church as delivering doctrine is that rule, and
means which God has ordained to instruct men in faith; Note fifthly, that to
prove the doctrine of the Church to be the rule of faith, in such sort as now I
have said, it might suffice for this Chapter, that it be showed, that at least
once, or in one age, there were one, or other company of living men, in one or
other sense, called the Church, who were ordained by God, and set apart to
instruct all sorts of men in all points of faith, being for that purpose in
their doctrine, and teaching, furnished with these three conditions, which are
requisite in the rule of faith; for this being showed in this Chapter, I shall
easily show in the next, that the same is to be said of some, or other company,
continuing in all ages. In this Chapter therefore I chiefly undertake to prove,
that once, or in one age, there was a company of living men, who in one sense
may be called the Church, whom God specially appointed, as a means sufficient
(quantu^ ex se) to instruct all men, in all matters of faith, being for that
purpose, furnished with the three conditions, or properties of the rule of
faith.
1 THe conclusion of this Chapter was, that the infallible rule, which we ought
obediently to follow in all points of faith, is the doctrine, and teaching
faith, and belief of the true Church: his meaning wherein, he says, I would
not, or did not rightly understand. Let us therefore see, how I understood it.
My answer was, that we would freely grant this conclusion, if the meaning were
no more, but that the doctrine and faith of the universal Church, is the rule
of faith, but there is a higher matter meant. First that the Churches word, and
authority, without grounding the same on the Scripture, is the rule. Next that
the Church of Rome, is this universal Church. Thirdly that all the authority,
and efficacy of the Church, is in the Pope alone. And this to be the meaning, I
showed in the 16. Digression, whereto the Repiar has wisely holden his tongue.
For it is the truth I said, though he deny it, for the odiousness, and
abomination thereof. For the question being, What is the rule, whereby all
men, at all times, may be resolved in matters of faith; he answers that the
Church is it: ask him again, what and which Church; and he will answer, The
Roman Church in all ages past, present, and to come. For The WAY page 68.
I showed out of the Rhemists, Bristo, Posseuin, and Baron. that they admit no
Catholic Church, but the Roman only: then ask him finally, how a man may
know, which is the doctrine, and teaching, faith, and belief of the Church,
and he will say again (as I showed fully) that WHAT THE POPE IVDICIALLY
DETERMINES, AND PROPOVNDS TO THE CHVRCH, is it. Did I therefore mistake, when
he said, that by the Church, he meant only the Pope: or was not himself
rather unable to defend the matter; and therefore would avoid the very point of
the question? Did I not allege 9. Papists, that all say, the whole power, and
faculty of the Church, is in the Pope? Are not Gregory of Valenzaes Page 24.
tom. 3. edit. Venet. per Zal er. an. 1598
words plain? In this question, by the Church, we meant the Roman Bishops. In
whom resides the full authority of the Church, when heple ases to determine
matters of faith, whether he do it with a Council, er without. Albertine, a
Jesuit says it expressly, and in Terminis term^nantibus. I say that, besides
the first verity, there is an infallible rule, living, and endued with reason,
such as is the Church: and this rule, living, and endued with reason, is the
chief Bishop of Rome; this is no place to prove, but you may see Valence,
Bell. and Medina -- I say thirdly all the articles of our faith are lastly
resolved into this rule, tanquamin formalem rationem, qua, in proponendo.
Coral. p. 251. edit. Lugdun. an. 1610. apud Horat. Cardon. Desiniendo arctat.
nos ad credendum, prout ipse definiuerit. Coquae. exam. p. 305. edit. Friburg.
1610.
I say therefore again, that the Repliars Conclusion has no other meaning
then this: The infallible rule, which we ought obediently to follow, is the
doctrine, and faith of THE POPE ALONE. So himself writ in his In the WAY. 36.
Treatise: All Catholic men must necessarily submit their judgments, and
opinions, either in expounding the Scripture, or otherwise, to the censure of
the Apostolic seat: and God has bound his Church, to hear the chief
Pastors in all things. And all the places of Scripture, that are used for the
authority of the Church, they apply, and expound of the Pope: To thee I will
give the keys; on this rock I will build, Feed my sheep, etc. Let us see
therefore, in his next Reply, how he will relieve himself. That is meant by
the Church, whereto the chief promises made to the Church, belong: wherein the
whole power of the Church resides; whereby the Church it self is directed;
where the Church determinations begin: But the Pope is he, whereto the chief,
etc. Ergo the Pope is meant by the Church.

2 Nevertheless, not answering these things, when I objected them, he notes
five things for the understanding of his conclusion. Which I answer in order.
To the first I grant our adversaries distinguish the name of the Church, into
diverse senses, (by that distinguishing to gull the world) but, in this
question, when they say the teaching of the Church is the Rule; they always
mean it of the Pope. And the Repliar speaks untruly, that in his conclusion,
be means not the Pope, but a company of men. For either the company must first
be taught by the Pope: or else the Pope must be the mouth of that company.
Besides Page 75.
in his Introduction, whither he referres himself, having said, that the name
Church may be taken 4 ways: either for the whole company of Christian
professors, consisting of sheep, and Pastors; or for the more principal part,
to wit, the whole company of Pastors, either gathered together in a Council,
or dispersed through the world: or for Christ's Vicar, the Pope, as he has most
ample authority, either alone, or with a Council, to propound the doctrine of
faith: or for every particular Pastor, as he is authorized under the Pope, to
feed the flock committed to him: he concludes, that when he says, Church
proposition is necessary, it is not needful for him to distinguish, which of
these ways, he takes it, because we the Protestants, deny any such infallible
authority to be in the Church at all, in which sense soever he take it: whereby
it is plain, that he was ashamed to name in which sense, he takes the Church.
For albeit we deny that which he calls the infallible authority of his Church
(all supreme, and unerring authority, being in the Scripture alone) yet the
constant, and certain doctrine of the Church taken in the two first senses, we
allow to be the rule of faith, because it is only the contents of the
Scripture, as The WAY 13. n. 1.
I answered to his conclusion: but that he means the Church in the third sense
alone appears by this also, that it is a principle among the Jesuits, that the
Church, in the first, second, and fourth sense may err, and if at any time, it
do not, it is through the guiding of the Pope, who is the Church in the third
sense. Gregory of Valenza In Tho. 22. tom 3. p. 247. d
says: we must not distinguish between the Roman Church, and the Roman
Bishop so, as if the judgment of the Roman Church, were infallible, but not
the judgment of the Roman Bishop, but rather these two are one, and the same.
For THEREFORE THE APOSTOLIC, OR ROMAN CHVRCH IS SAID TO BE INFALLIBLE,
BECAUSE HE IS OVER IT, WHO BY HIMSELF, HAS INFALLIBLE AVTHORITY. Canus says,
Loc l. 6. c. 8. sub. init.
when we come to the Apostolic Sea, to enquire the oracles of faith, we do
not enquire of all the faithful in the Roman Church, nor yet of the same
Church assembled in a Council, (see here the Church rejected, in the first,
second, and fourth senses) but the Popes judgment, and sentence is it we
exspect. This is that I said, that by the Church they mean, THE POPE: then he
adds a reason (which according to their former principles conuinces this) that
the firmness, and certainety of truth must be avouched in Peter, and his
successors, and then after in the Church, whose head, and foundation Peter is
-- and therefore the more do I reprehend those, which (as the Repliar here) by
distinguishing the Apostolic seat from the Pope, think to end the
controversy. My adversary therefore maintaining the doctrine of the Church to
be the rule of faith; Suarez the Jesuit shames not to tell the king of England,
in his late writing against him, that The authority of the Trent Council
(which all the world knows was moved by the Pope in the same manner that
Puppet motions are moved by such as show them) is the authority of the
universal Catholic Church. Defens. fid. Cathol. adu. Angl. sect. lib. 1. c.
9. nu. 7.
means nothing by the Church but THE POPE HIMSELF: and they that yield
themselves to be led by the Roman Church, must depend solely upon his will and
word.

3 To the second* this divine doctrine of the Church, which the Repliar says
is the rule of our faith, is, by himself expounded to include, not only the
written Scripture, but unwritten traditions also, and such decrees, and
interpretations, both of Scripture, and tradition, as the Pope shall reveal,
and propound: hence it follows, that any Friars dream, may be thrust upon us,
as an article of faith necessary to salvation: because these traditions and
interpretations, and this authority of the Pope, contain many such dreams;
that is to say, the Pope, and his Church, under pretense, that they are divine
traditions, and all power to propose matters of faith, belongs to him, may, and
does require us to believe lies, and errors: and albeit the Jesuit affirm
these traditions, and interpretations of his Church to be revealed by God, to
the Apostles, and their successors, the Doctors, and Pastors of the Church, as
part of that divine, and Church doctrine, which he would have received, Pari
pietatis affectu, ac reuerentia, suscipit and veneratur. Conc. Trid. sess. 4.
with the same obedience, and affection, wherewith we receive the Scripture:
yet this is false. For the whole object of our faith is contained in the
Scripture alone, as I showed in the third Digression; and because he denies,
that any such dreams can be contained in the doctrine of his Church, thus I
reason: For, whatsoever the Pope, shall definitiuely propound to be believed,
that is the doctrine of the Church: But he may definitiuely propound the very
dreams of a Friar; this I prove. The books of Baro. an. 159. n 4. ind.
expurg* Hispa. p. 149. d. 15. Sanct. Romana.
Hermes, and Phot. Biblioth. p. 156. edit. Graec. Haschel Bal^am. respon. p.
363 in Iure Graeco Romans tom. 1. Z^onar. in Apost. can. vlt. Perer. Ioh. 13.
disp. 30.
Clemens Constitutions, are Apochryphall, counterfeit, and unsound writings: but
D. Stapleton Hos, and similes libros, in canone^ sacrae Scripturae, si praesens
Ecclesia referret, nulla ratio obstat quin eos, pro Canonicis admittere
debeamus, Relect. page 514.
says, he may put these books into the Canon of the Bible, and so bind men
to believe them by divine faith: therefore he may define, and make to be matter
of faith, that which is unsound, and no better, then a dream. Again Canus,
and Caietan Refert Fra. Suar. tom. 2. p. 30. a.
affirm the opinion of the virgin Mary's conception without sin, to be
godly, and probable in show; but false, and uncertain indeed. Yet Suar. ibi.
Vas. qu. in 3. part. Tho. to. 2. p. 45.
the Jesuits say, the Pope may define it, when he will. Thirdly Grego. Val.
analys. fid. page 325.
they hold the authority of the Church in defining, to be in the Pope, who may
determine the things of faith, whether he use care, and diligence therein, or
not: but he that defines without any care taking, or diligence used, may
chance, specially if he be a Friar, To the number of 52. Azor institut. moral.
tom. 2. l. 5. c 44.
as many Popes are, to thrust his Friars dreams upon the Church. Fourthly, the
Canon law Gl and Marg. c quanto de translatione.
says: He may make something of nothing, and make that a sentence, which is
none. Lastly Suar vbi sup.
the Jesuits hold, that a supernatural truth may be so implicitly contained
in tradition, or Scripture, that Canisius reports that in Paris, and in the
Universities of Spain, and elsewhere, no man is admitted to any degree in
divinity, unless he swear that he will hold the Immaculate conception of the
virgin. Marial. lib. 1. c. 7. Such tricks as this will make this consent
swell and increase as fast as the mountain.
the common consent of the Church increasing, whereby oftentimes the Holy Ghost
expounds traditions, and Scriptures, the Church may at last, bring in her
definition, which shall have the force of a revelation. The two doors of
sleep, (...). Hom. Odiss. t.
mentioned so much in the Poets, let not in more dreams, then this doctrine
does lies, and heresies into the world; for whenever the Church of Rome, will
bring in a new doctrine, the implicit traditions, and the increase of the
Churches consent, may be pretended.

4 Ad. 3.
To the third: he notes no more. But what he said in his treatise, and I
granted in such sense, as I laid down in my answer. And this noting it again
is needles, and impertinent to the matter in hand: which is not touching the
quality, but the quiddity of the rule.

5 Ad. 4.
To the fourth: we know well enough, that the Church, and the doctrine go
together: but it is false, that the Church, as delivering doctrine, is the
rule. For the doctrine is the rule, and the Church, that which teaches both us,
and it self, according to it, as the Judge, expounding, and executing the law,
is not the rule together with the law, but the law is the rule it self, and
the judge is the kings officer to apply it, but having no authority over, or
beside it. And yet allowing the contrary, and all that the Repliar says, still
in his conceit the Pope with his definitions, shall be this Church, and this
doctrine, which he thus conioynes to be the rule.

6 To the fifth to prove the doctrine of the Church to be the rule of says, in
such sort, as the Repliar has said, Ad. 5.
it is not sufficient to show that at least once, or in some one age, there
has been a company of men, called the Church, in one sense, or other, ordained
by God, and furnished with conditions, to teach men the faith: for the Repliar
has said, that the doctrine of the Church is the rule of faith, in such sort,
as it includes, not only the written Scriptures, but unwritten traditions, and
the interpretation of them both by Church authority. Where two things are
affirmed, first, that unwritten traditions, are part of the doctrine, that is
the rule. Secondly, that our faith is built Non quid dicatur, sed quis dicat,
attendendum. Staplet. Princ. page 364. Relect. p. 429.
on the authority of the Church. Neither of these is proved by showing that
which is here mentioned. For though there be a Church, in any sense that a true
Church can be meant, ordained to teach us, yet it follows not, that it has
any such authority, or any authority at all to propound unwritten traditions:
and there may be a Church, and yet the judgment thereof not be the authority,
whereon our faith is grounded; and the same Church may be ordained to teach us,
and yet not allowed to teach these unwritten verities. For God has propounded
all doctrine of faith in the Scriptures, and appointed his Church to reveal,
and expound it to his people: the which doctrine, thus expounded, inlightens
the mind, begets faith, and is the rule of all men's judgment, through the
work of the Holy Ghost, that confirms it in the mind. Granting therefore,
that which the Repliar so much desires, that all his meaning is, that once, or
in one age, there was a company of men, who in one sense, or other, may be
called the Church, whom God has appointed, and furnished, to teach all men the
things of faith: yet it helps not his conclusion, nor makes it true, in that
sense wherein he means it.

CHAP. XXXV.
1 The Papists, pretending the Church, mean only the Pope. 2. How, and in
what sense they understand the doctrine of the Apostles to be the rule of
faith. 3 They hold that the Pope may make new articles of faith. 4 And that the
Scripture receives authority and credit from him. 6 Unlearned men may see the
truth when the Pope and his crew sees it not. 7. And they may judge of that
they teach. 8 The Jesuits dare not answer directly.

Page 204. White. page 67.
A. D. This being proved, my Adversaries may see, how much they mistake, when
they think me to mean in this Chapter, by the name Church, only the Pope, or
only the present Pastors of the Church; when as rather I meant to include
these only secondarily, meaning here by the name Church principally the
Apostles themselves, who for the time they lived on earth, were principal
Doctors, and Pastors of the Church, being by me therefore termed the Church,
which I said, is the rule of faith; not taking the verb (is) so strictly, as
only limited to this present time, but ^^ther indefinitely, abstracting from
all time: or per ampliationem, as it may extend it self to the bypast, as
well as to the present time. This to be my meaning, my Adversaries might have
perceived, by the texts of Scripture, which I bring, for the proof of my
conclusion. For those texts, are by me here applied, as they were by our
Savior spoken, and meant, to wit, principally to the Apostles, being the
primitive Pastors, and principal members of the Church: and are only
secondarily, or by consequence applied to other Pastors, succeeding in their
places. Now taking my conclusion in this chiefly intended sense, it cannot be
denied to be true, neither can the reason, by which I prove it, with any reason
be denied to be good.
1 IT is easy to see that he knownes not, in what sense he should take his
conclusion, that it might be defended. For if by the Church he meant no more,
but the Apostles, and primitive Pastors; and by the doctrine of the Church, no
more but that which is the doctrine indeed, contained in the Scripture, no man
would deny the doctrine, and teaching, faith, and belief of the Apostles,
contained in the written word, to be the rule of faith: but he meant, and still
means, otherwise: that this Church, which all men ought to follow, is the B.
of Rome alone, for the time being, wherein See Chap. 34. nu. 1.
I mistook him not. For he means that which, in all ages, for the time being,
is the supreme judge, and has subiectiuely, in it, all the Church authority.
But such is the Pope alone; according to the principles of Papists. Therefore
he means the Pope alone: again, he means that Church, whereof he expounds
the texts of Scripture alleged in that Chapter, to prove the doctrine of the
Church to be the rule, but all those texts he expounds of the Pope alone, for
the time being: Ergo. Thirdly, I suppose the Repliar to be a Papist, and in
this place, a maintainer of the Popish doctrine touching the rule of faith: but
that doctrine means the Church, as I expound. For the order which God has
left in his Church, for the judging, and deciding of matters of faith,
according to the Jesuits doctrine, Staplet. Princ. doctrine. fid. l. 6. praef.
1 Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 1. 2 Staplet. Princ. doctr. l. 5. c. 1. 3 c. 2.
4 c. 5. 5 l. 6. c. 1.
is this. 1. That not the Scripture, but the Church is this supreme iudg^ of
all controversies, and things of faith. 2 Yet this Church, as it is taken for
the whole body, judges not. 3. Nor lay private men therein. 4. But the power of
judging belongs to the Bishops, and Priests alone. 5. And, among them, the B.
of Rome alone, as the successor of S. Peter, is so the head of the whole Church
-- and the primary, and highest subject of this Church judgment -- that he
has power, alone, above all others, whether Pastors, or sheep, to pronounce,
6 Grets. def. Bellar. tom. 1 p. 1218. c.
and determine, touching the matters of faith. 6. So that besides the Doctors,
and Pastors, there must be in the Church some other supreme judge -- and he is
the B. of Rome, either alone, or with a Council. Here it is plain, that
howsoever the name of the Church be pretended, yet the whole power is limited,
and restrained to the Pope alone. For they hold the government, and power of
the Church, not to be Aristocraticall, placed in Councels, or Bishops: but
Monarchical, where all the government, power, and infalliblenesse is in the
Pope alone: Councels, Bishops, Priests, and all other parts of the Church, are
but ciphers: the power is eminently, and infallibly, and authoratiuely, in the
Pope alone, either with them, or without them: Bellar. De Romans Pont l. 1. c.
9.. sed nec.
says plainly, Neither the Scripture, nor secular princes, nor private men,
are judges of controversies, but Ecclesiastical Prelates -- and Councels may
judge of the controversies of religion, but that judgment is not firm, or
ratified, till the Pope have confirmed it, and therefore the last judgment
belongs to him -- for either there must be no judge among men at all, or else
he must be the judge, that is above the rest. I have alleged the words of
Gregory of Valence diverse times. Tom. 3. in 22. page 24.
When we say the Proposition of the Church is a condition necessary to the
assent of faith: by the name of Church, we mean the head thereof, that is to
say, the B. of Rome, either alone by himself, or with a Council. Syluester
Prierias, In Luth. tom. 1. page 159. fundam. 1.
The universal Church essentially is the convocation of all that believe in
Christ, but virtually it is the Church of Rome, and the Pope; the Church of
Rome, representatiuely is the College of Cardinals, but virtually the Pope,
who is the head of the Church. Pelaeottus, De consist. part. 1. qu. 3. page 19.
The Pope alone may do not only that, which is granted to all, and singular
Prelates in the Church, but also more then they all. -- Respons. moral. p. 44.
n 4.
Comitol, The power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, is not in the universality
of the Church, as in the true subject, but in the Prelates thereof, and in the
Bishops of Rome, as in the fountain, whence it flows, unto all other
Ministers of the new Testament. Albertine Coroll. page 251.
says, The Bishop of Rome is the rule of faith, into which Rule all the
articles of our faith are lastly resolved, as into the formal reason whereby
they are propounded to us. Gretser Defens. Bell. to. 1. p. 1450. B.
says, when we affirm the Church to be the judge of all controversies of
faith, by the Church we understand the Bishop of Rome, who for the time being,
gouernes the ship of the militant Church, and by lively voice does clearly and
expressly expound his judgment to them that seek to him. Zumel Disput. var.
tom. 3. p. 49 D.
says: I believe that the chief Priest and Bishop of the Church, the Pope,
who is the master of our faith, cannot but attain the truth of faith, nor can
be deceived or err, if as chief Bishop and master of the faith, he set down
his determination -- so that, unless a man be afraid of the truth, there is no
cause why he should fear the Popes determination. It is idle therefore, and
sordid, that the Repliar says, by the Church he meant the Pope but
secondarily; as it is ridiculous to say the Church is the rule indefinitely,
and abstracting from all time, or per ampliationem; which are terms devised
only to besot the ignorant, that they should not smell his heresy: for if his
Church be the rule, he must needs mean such a Church, as he thinks in all
ages and times successively, to have been invested with that authority, and
that Church is the Pope alone, that miserable judge, of whom their own men
say, Do. Bann. to. 3. p. 106. b.
It is no Catholic faith, but an opinion very probable, that he is S. Peter's
successor; and the most judicious confess Alph. l. 1. c. 4. Hadrian. page 26.
ad 2.
he may err, August. Anconit. sum. qu. 5. art. 1 Iacobat de conc. l. 4. art.
1. Occh Dialog. 1. part. l. 6. 2. part. c. 69. and inde. Cusan. de concord.
cath. l. 2. c. 17. Panorm. de elect. C. signif. not. 7. Zabarell. tract. de
schismat. Gerson. de auferibil. Pap. consid. 10. and inde.
and be deposed for heresy.

A.D.. 1. Page 205.
That the doctrine of the Apostles was for their life time the rule, and means
-- First I say that my conclusion being understood as in this Chapter I
principally meant, cannot be denied to be true, for it cannot be denied, but
that the doctrine, as delivered by the Apostles themselves, being for the time
they lived, the Church in such sense, as here I take the name Church, was such
a rule, and means, as here we seek for. For first it is known to be
infallible -- Secondly it was easy to be understood, etc. -- Thirdly, it was
universal, etc. -- Since therefore these 3. conditions, requisite in the rule
of faith, are found in the doctrine, and teaching of the Apostles, it cannot be
denied, but that the divine doctrine, as delivered by them, in their life time,
either by word or writing, was the rule, and means which God ordained to
instruct men in faith -- Taking therefore my conclusion in the chiefly intended
sense, I suppose, that my adversaries, will neither deny it to be true, nor the
reason by which I prove it, to be good.
2 This discourse needed not: for no Protestant denies, the doctrine of the
Apostles to be the rule, either for their time, or the time succeeding to the
world end: I grant therefore the Repliar his assertion: and infer
thereupon, that his Popes determinations, and the doctrine of his Romish Church
is not the rule of faith, because they agree not with that, which he here
confesses was the rule in the Apostles time: unless he will maintain, when he
replies again, that the rule is not one, and the same at all times: as Cusan.
ep. 2.7.
his Cardinal writes, that the Scripture is fitted to the time, and variably
understood: so that at one time it is expounded according to the fashion of the
Church, and when that fashion is changed, the sense of the Scripture is also
changed. Again Magalian, a Jesuit, I think yet living, Magal. op. Hierarch.
in tit. p. 61. n. 6.
says, Though it were granted, that the words of Paul (Tit. 1.6.) contain a
precept to marry, yet seeing Paul gave it by his own authority, it were no
divine, but an Ecclesiastical precept, which the Church may change, yea
abrogate, and much more dispense with. Mark what tricks heretics have, to
change the Apostles doctrine: when it fits not their Church, then the Apostles
gave it by their own authority; which I note, that the Reader may perceive,
there is no sincerity in the Repliars words. For albeit he grants here, the
Apostles doctrine be the rule, yet he means it to be the rule but for their
own time: because the Pope may, under colorable pretenses, expound it; that
is in plain English, change it, when he will, as his Cardinal, and Jesuit
here affirm.

A D.. 2. That the doctrine of the succeeding Pastors of the Church, Page 207.
is the rule, and means -- The chief controversy is about my conclusion, as,
in a secondary sense, it may be meant, of the succeeding Pastors of the Church.
In which sense I affirm, that like as the divine doctrine (not as contained in
only Scripture, or as gathered thence by natural wit, or private spirit, but
as delivered by the Apostles, or the Apostles, as delivering this doctrine) was
the rule, and means ordained by God to instruct all men living in their days,
in all matters of faith: So the same doctrine (not as contained in only
Scripture, nor as gathered thence by natural wit, or private spirit, but as
delivered by Pastors of the succeeding Church, or those Pastors, as delivering
this doctrine) is the rule, and means ordained by God, to instruct all men
living in succeding ages, in all points of faith.
3 This assertion I will grant, as I did the former; namely that the doctrine
of the Pastors of the true Church, such as succeed the Apostles, is the rule,
and means of faith: but the reader shall note two tricks, that the Jesuit
puts upon him in the Proposition hereof. First, that affirming the doctrine of
the succeeding Pastors of the Church to be the rule, he says not whether this
doctrine, of these succeeding Pastors, shall need to be the same, that the
doctrine of the Apostles was: but only affirms, that as the Apostles doctrine
for the time they lived, was the rule: so the doctrine of the succeeding
Pastors is the rule: leaving room enough for this doctrine, of these
succeeding Pastors, to vary from the doctrine of the Apostles; that when we
show the present abuses in the Church of Rome, and decrees of their latter
Popes, for these last 800. years, to have swarued from the Apostles doctrine,
and practice; they may plead the authority, of their succeding Pastors. And
indeed it is true, that the Church of Rome holds, that it is not necessary the
doctrine, and teaching of the present, and succeeding Pastors be the same in
all things, that it was in the Apostolic, and Primitive Church: but the Pope
has power to make a NEW CREED, and NEW ARTICLES of faith: For Iacobatius De
Council. p. 310. A.
says, The Pope alone may make new articles of faith according to one
acceptance of the word Article, that is, for such as must be believed, which
before needed not be believed; and Zenzelin, a Popish doctor, Gl. extr. Ioh.
22. cum inter. doclaramus.
says, The Vicar of Christ, may make an Article of faith; taking an article
not properly, but in a large sense, for that which must be believed, when
before by the precept of the Church, it was not necessary to be believed.
Augustinus Triumphus writes, August. Anconit. sum. de eccle. potest. q. ^9.
art. 1.
that it belongs to the Pope alone, to make a new Creed. For in a Creed those
things are put, that universally belong to Christian faith: he therefore has
authority, to make such a Creed, who is the head of Christian faith, and in
whom, as in the head, all the members of the Church are united, and by whose
authority all things, pertaining to faith, are confirmed and strengthened. And
Art. 2.
again. That the Pope may dispense in adding articles, may be understood 3.
ways First, in respect of the multiplication of the articles themselves.
Secondly, in respect of expounding the things contained in the articles:
Thirdly, in respect of the augmentation of such things, as may be reduced to
the articles. ALL THESE WAYS, the Pope may dispense, in adding articles;
because as he may make a new Creed, so he may MVLTIPY NEW ARTICLES OVER AND
ABOVE THE OTHER. Secondly he may by more articles, explicate the articles
already placed in the Creed. Thirdly, because peradventure all things believed
in the Creed, may be reduced after the aforesaid articles, and by such
reduction, may be increased; so that under each article MORE THINGS NECESSARY
TO BE BELIEVED MAY BE PVT, THEN ARE YET PVT. The which being done, mark what
they say touching their authority: Roder. Dosm. de auth. script. l. 3. c. 12.
The Popes assertions ascend to the height of divine testimony, as the
assertions of the Apostles did, and of such, as made the holy Scripture; and
there be who contend that they belong to the sacred Scripture it self, which
is contained in the books of the Bible. This doctrine, whereof all our
adversaries books are full, shows plainly, that they intend not that this
their Church teaching, so much magnified to be the rule, should always be one,
and the same, but such as shall follow the Popes lust, and be altered with the
time, that so this Antichrist of Rome, might abolish the whole Testament of
Christ: this is the first thing to be noted, that the reader may see what he
means by his Church doctrine, that is the rule.

4 The next thing is his distinction about this doctrine of the Church: that it
was the rule in the Apostles days, and is the rule in succeeding ages, but not
as contained in only Scripture, but as delivered by these Pastors. Which
speech contains 2. things: a Negative, and an affirmative: the negative is,
that the doctrine of the Church, is not the rule, as it is contained in only
Scripture. Meaning as Chapter 27. n. 3.
I have showed, that all divine doctrine, belonging to the rule, is not
contained in the Scripture: but much, or the most of it, in tradition
unwritten: and that which is contained is not the rule by virtue of writing,
but by virtue of the Church, that makes it authentical. Panormitan Panorm.
tom. 2. de praesumptione. c. Sicut noxius.
says, The words of the text of Scripture, are not the Popes words, but the
words of Solomon in the Proverbs, but because this text is made Canonical, it
is to be believed, and induces necessity so to do, as if the Pope had set it
forth himself; Because we make all those things to be ours, whereto we might
impart our authority, -- But whether without Canonization, the sayings of
Solomon be approved in the Church, seeing they are in the body of the Bible?
say, as the gloss says, and Ierom holds -- who seems to conclude, that
they are Apocrypha, which is to be noted, and that because of this, as also
because Solomon had no power to make Canons. This also must be observed, that
the Reader may know the meaning of his conclusion; and what it is, that we deny
therein. For NO DOCTRINE, EITHER OF THE APOSTELS IN THEIR TIME, OR OF THE
SVCCEEDING PASTORS OF THE CHVRCH, IN ANY TIME; IS THE RVLE OF FAITH, BUT ONLY
THAT, WHICH IS CONTAINED IN THE SCRIPTVRE: As I have In the WAY digr. 3.
showed. His affirmative is, that the doctrine of the Church is the rule, as it
is delivered by the Pastors; or the Pastors delivering this doctrine, are the
rule: which is the same that he said a little before; the doctrine as delivered
by the Church: or the Church, as delivering doctrine, is the rule. Pars obiecti
formalis (fidei) est vox Ecclesiae. D. Stapler. relect. p. 484. Saltem aequalis
est Ecclesiae and Scripturae authoritas. ibi. page 494.
His meaning is, that the Churches testimony, and authority mingles it self
with the authority of the doctrine, and is jointly with it, or above it, the
rule of faith: as when diverse simples have their ingredience into one compound:
and two men equally carry between them, one burden. Their doctrine this way
is known well enough, how the Scriptures in regard of us, have all their
authority from the Church; the sense of the Scripture is to be fetched from the
Church: whatsoever the Church of Rome shall teach, is the word of God, etc. The
which things being couched in the Jesuits conclusion, as he understands it, we
detest, and spit upon, when he shall thus debar the Scripture from being the
rule, to set upon the bench his Papal Antichristian authority. If the shame
either of God, or men, or any respect of truth were with them; they durst not
thus presumptuously, and basely steal the authority to themselves, whereby
both themselves, and we, and all the world should be judged.

Page 210.
A. D. Thus therefore we see, that those texts, which I allege, do not only
pertain to the Apostles, and men living in that age, as my Adversaries
ignorantly, White. page 72. 73 74.
and absurdly make answer to some of the texts: but that they pertain also to
men, living in other ages; and consequently, as my reason, drawn out of them,
proves infallibility and other conditions requisite in the rule and means to
be in the Apostles doctrine: so it proves also infallibility, and the said
other conditions, in the doctrine of succeeding Pastors.
5 The texts alleged were these; Math. 28 20. Ioh. 14.16. and the 16.13. Math.
28.19 Luc. 10.16. The thing he would prove by them, was, that the doctrine of
the Church is infallible: which conclusion in a good sense,. 13. n. 1. and. 14
n. 2. in the WAY.
by me set down, I granted. But when he meant it otherwise, ( Ecclesia docere
potest aliquid extra and praeter verbum scriptum D. Staplet relect. p. 431 Eius
doctrina quoque est infallibilis. page 463.
according to the doctrine of Rome) that the Church can err in nothing it
teaches, albeit it teach that which is not in the Scripture, I answered the
texts he brought out of the Scripture: and to these four I said, that they
belonged, either only, or properly to the Apostles. I answered them
sufficiently otherwise (all which the Repliar here conceals) if they were
applied to the whole Church: but that also was one part of my answer. Therefore
here he replies, that ignorantly, and absurdly I make answer: because they
belong to the Church Pastors in all ages, as he has showed. Yet The same
word* may be applied in the Apostle^, and to the succeeding Pastors, so far
forth as to prove the substance of the thing signified to agree to both,
although in circumstance of measure, manner, or degree, there be great
difference. A. D. Reply, p. 208. and 217.
his own confession is, that this is only secondarily, or by consequence; but
primarily and principally they pertain to the Apostles, which is as much, as I
said. For I do not so restrain them to the Apostles, but that I allow part of
the sense therein contained to concern the Church, and therefore I answered
them also otherwise; whereto the Repliar replies never a word. And if they had
proved the infallibility of his Church so pregnantly, let him give over his
confidence, and tell us, how then comes it to pass, that so many in his own
Church hold, some that Occh. dial. part. 1. l 5. c. 25. Turtecrem. sum. de
eccl. l. 3. c. 58. concl. 2. Caiet. apol. part 2. c. 21.
Councels, some that Mic. Cezen. lit. ad Imperat. c. vlt. Hadrian. 4. p. 26.
Alphons. l. 1 c. 4 Onus eccl. c. 15. n. 34.
the Pope himself may err? and let him not talk of erring definitiuely, and
e Cathedra: for that distinction is in none of the texts alleged. The
privilege of not erring is by no words thereof, tied to the chair, but that
which is promised is tied to the persons. So that the persons of these Pastors
not being made infallible by these texts, it follows that no such
infallibility at all, as the Repliar dreams of, is given them therein.

A. D. As by the promise of Christ, we be assured, that the Apostles, Page 214.
and consequently in some sense the Pastors of the Church are taught all truth
by the Holy Ghost: so by the commission, warrant, commandment, and threat
jointly considered (as here I consider them) we are assured that the same Holy
Ghost does so assist them, as not to permit either the Apostles, or the
Pastors, universally to teach authoratiuely, false doctrine, or their own
devices; in regard otherwise men should be bound sometimes to believe false
doctrine, which inconvenience cannot be avoided, by saying, as M. White says,
White page 75.
that the band has a limitation, that we hear them, so far as they teach
agreeable to Scripture, and no further, and by those Scriptures, we may relieve
our selves, if they chance to teach falsely. Because first that conditional
limitation is no where expressed, nor in M. Whites sense, to be necessarily
gathered out of any place of Scripture: Secondly, I ask, how those should
relieve themselves, who cannot read, much less understand Scripture?
6 The limitation whereof I spoke, that we hear the Pastors of the Church NO
FVRTHER THEN THEY TEACH AGREEABLE TO THE SCRIPTVRE, is expressed, and
necessarily gathered out of Scripture, even in M. Whites sense. For the
Scripture bids 1. Th. 5.21.
try all things, and hold that which is good. And 1 Ioh. 4.1.
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God. And
that we may know the Scripture alone is the rule, whereby this trial must be
made; it says again, 2. Pet. 1.19.
We have a more sure word of the Prophets, whereto we do well to take heed, as
to a light, that shines in the dark: till the day dawne, and the day star rise
in our hearts. Ioh. 5.39.
And search the Scriptures, for in them we think to have eternal life, and
they be they that testify of Christ. And the me^ of Beraea Act. 17.11.
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things, which the Apostles
preached, were so. There were nothing more harsh then these speeches of the
Holy Ghost, if the Scripture were not allowed, and appointed, as a sufficient,
and the last outward means, to preserve the faithful from false teaching.
And, as I have often heretofore affirmed, the Papists themselves cannot avoid
this limitation. For the Pope, and Councels, and particular Pastors may all
err, and teach false. Adrian, that himself was a Pope, and therefore best
knew what belongs to Popes, Vbi sup.
says; It is certain the Pope may err, even in such things, as touch the
faith, auouching heresy by his determination, or decree. Touching Councels not
confirmed by the Pope, Azorius the Jesuit, Azo. instit. moral. tom. 2. l. 5.
c. 12.
says: All Catholics are agreed that they may err; touching particular
Pastors, and Bishops, Waldensis Doctrinal. fid. l. 2. c. 19.
says, we know that all these, (both Clergy, and Prelates of the Church) have
often erred: If all these may err, then it follows, that their teaching must
be examined, and accepted with this limitation, if it consent with the
Scripture. Gerson De exam. doctr. part. 1. confid. 5. tom. 1.
says, Every man, sufficiently learned in the Scriptures, is an examiner of
doctrines -- put case there be a simple man not authorized, excellently seen
in holy writ, then in the point of doctrine, his assertion is more to be
believed, then the Popes declaration. For it is plain, the Gospel is more to
be believed then the Pope, if therefore such a learned man teach any verity to
be contained in the Gospel, where the Pope is ignorant, or erres: it is
manifest whose judgment is to be preferred, and in this case such a learned
man, if he were present at a general Council, should oppose himself against
it, if he perceived the mayor part through malice, or ignorance, to go against
the Gospel. Occham Occh. Dial. p 180.
affirms, that THE POPE, AND CARDINALS ARE NOT THE RVLE OF OUR FAITH: because
though a Catholic Pope, and Catholic Cardinals, ought to be the teachers of
faith, so that the faithful should firmly believe, whatsoever they teach, and
define according to the rule of faith; yet if they presume to teach, or d^fine
any thing contrary to the rule of faith, which the holy Scripture teaches; then
Catholics, are not to follow but reprove them. These men affirm all things
that I say. First, that the Scripture is the rule of faith. Secondly, that the
Pope, with his Councels, and Cardinals, may err. Thirdly, that they may err
in faith, and teach erroniously. Fourthly, that their teaching may be examined.
Fifthly, that even by private men. Sixthly, the Scripture being the rule
whereby. Seventhly, upon which examination their teaching may be refused. This
is the limitation that I mentioned. Let the Repliar, and all of his mind, open
their eyes, and confess we hold nothing, but that which the learned in his
own Church allow, and teach. His second exception, How shall they relieve
themselves, who cannot read, nor understand the Scripture,. 7. page 30.
I answered in the WAY: whereto my adversary having nothing to reply, according
to his Method, only repeates his cavil again, but it does him no good. For
such as cannot read, yet may hear them read, or preached, and propounded by
others; it being sufficient that they have the knowledge of the Scriptures any
way: which are so plain, and easy, in all things belonging to the substance
of faith, that as I have showed, Gregory the B. of Rome speaking of an
unlearned man, says Nequaquam literas nouerat, sed Scripturae sacrae sibi met
codices emerat, and religioso; quosque in hospitalitatem suscipiens, hos, cora^
se, studiose legere faciebat Factum est vt, iuxta modum suum, plene sacram
Scripturum disceret; cum si^ut dixi, literas funditus ignoraret. Dial. l. 4. c.
14. ibi Graec. Zachar. (...) --
the simplest that are, having the assistance of Gods Spirit to enlighten them
(which assistance is not tied to the presense of the Church, as my adversary
cauilles) may understand them. And to omit the words of the Scripture it self,
which the Repliar, and his accomplices despise, and revile, let him say directly
whether the Ancient Church taught not thus. S. Austine, Epist. 3.
The Scripture like a familiar friend, speaks those plain things which it
contains, to the heart of learned, and unlearned. Chrysostom, Hom. 1 in Matthew.
The Scriptures are easy to understand and exposed to the capacity of every
servant, Plowman, widow, boy, and him that is most unwise. Cyrill. Alexand.
Contr. Julian. page 160.
The Scripture, that it might be known to all men, as well small, as great,
are profitably commended to us in a familiar speech, so that they exceed the
capacity of no man. -- Isidore Pelusiota. l 2. ep. 5.
Forasmuch as God gave laws to weak men, and such as need plain words,
therefore he tempered his heavenly doctrine (...)
with rude words fit for the simple. That every woman, and child, and the
vnlearnedst among mortal men, by THE VERY HEARING IT SELF, might get some
good. -- Sixth. Senens. Biblioth l 6. annot. 152.. quod autem. Grego. Valent.
22. page 118.. iam quae.
Diverse of the learned of our adversaries grant this to be true, in that part
of the Scripture, which contains the principles of faith, and the things that
all men generally are bound to believe, which is sufficient to uphold that I
say, for I will easily allow great obscurity to be in much of the rest:
according to that, which Act. 8.31. 2. Pet. 3.16.
the Scripture, and Basil. de fid. p. 394. Iren. l. 2. c. 47. August. ep. 3.
the Fathers oftentimes observe, but the rule of faith, contained in evident
places, will preserve the unlearned from erring therein perniciously.

A.D. By which explication is answered that which M. White says is
unanswerable; Page 220. White p 76.
to wit, If we must not accept every doctrine taught by Pastors, then there
must be another rule, by which we must be directed in hearing. For it is not
necessary to admit another rule, distinct from the doctrine of Pastors, but it
suffices that we can distinguish in this rule, two distinct manners of
teaching, the one private, and without authority, which we are not bound to
accept; the other public, and with authority, which we may not reject in any
point.
7 To the text of Matthew 23.2. The Scribes, and Pharisees sit in Moses chair,
etc. I answered, The WAY page 75.
that our Savior binds us not to hear the Pastors of the Church, further
then they teach according to the truth. This exposition I confirmed by the
testimonies of Fer. in Matthew. l. 3 c. 23. Can. Loc. l. 5. c. 4 Iansen. concord.
c. 120. Em. Sa. notat. Mat. 23.
4. Papists: to whom here I add a fifth: Pope Adrian: Hadria. quodl. 6. art. 2.
p. 38.
we are tied to obey them in such things, as they teach according to Moses
chair. Hence I said, it follows unanswerably that there is another rule,
whereby I may be directed in hearing. For else how should a man be able to
distinguish those points, wherein he must follow his teachers, from those
wherein he must not? And indeed this reason is unanswerable. For if our Savior
has bound me to hear them, that sit in Moses chair, no further then they
teach true doctrine, according to the chair, it must necessarily be said, that
there is some rule, distinct from their teaching, whereby I may infallibly
discern, if they teach falsely against the chair. But the Reply says this
needs not; it being sufficient, that we can distinguish two manners of
teaching: the one Private, and without authority, which we are not bound to
accept: the other public, and with authority, which we may not reject in any
point. But for the making of this distinction, it needs that there be a rule:
for though it be sufficient thus to distinguish, that is to say, by discerning,
and judging, between that which is taught by public, and that which is
taught by private authority, a man may sufficiently guide himself in
following his Pastors: yet how shall I distinguish this? which way shall I know
the public teaching from the private without A RVLE? Say plainly what is the
RVLE to discern that doctrine, which is taught without authority, from that
which is taught with authority? and if there be such a rule, say again,
whether it be not something distinct from the teaching, and authority, of the
teachers? for so much as that whereby the teaching, and authority is discerned,
and tried, cannot be confounded with the teaching: and if there be such a
distinct rule, what can it be, but the Scripture, which only is the thing,
that all Church teaching must agree with? Thus therefore I reason ad hominem.
In the doctrine taught by the Pastors of the Church it suffices, that I can
distinguish the private from the public; that which is taught with authority,
from that, which is without authority. Therefore I MAY, yea must thus
distinguish. I may DISTINGVISH, therefore I may EXAMINE: for by examining
things, we distinguish them. We may examine, therefore we must have a RVLE,
whereby we do it: we must have a rule, therefore it must either be the
Scripture: or the teaching it self of the Church, that is examined: for a
third cannot be given. But it cannot be the teaching of the Church: for that is
the thing it self examined. It must of necessity therefore be the SCRIPTVRE
ALONE. And for so much as it belongs to every private man thus to distinguish,
therefore it is true also that I said, Every private man enlightened with Gods
grace (which must always be supposed, and our adversaries necessarily require
it) may be able to guide himself; and to discern of the Church teaching by
the SCRIPTVRE.

Page 223. 1 Timothy 3. v 15. Wootton page 154. White p. 80.
A. D. Wherefore it is not without cause, that S. Paul called the Church, the
pillar, and ground of truth, not only as my adversaries expound, that truth is
found in it, or fastened to it, as a paper is fastened to Pasquin in Rome
(which is M. Whites gross similitude) but also in that it self is free from
all error in faith, and Religion, and is to us a sure, although a secondary,
foundation of faith; in that it does truly, yea infallibly propound to us,
what is, and what is not to be believed by faith; it being therefore unto us a
pillar, and stay, to lean unto in all doubts of doctrine; and an assured
ground, or establishment of verity, whereupon we may securely stand, against
all heresies, and errors. It is not also without cause, that S. Augustine said,
whosoever is afraid to be deceived with the obscurity of this question, let
him require the judgment of the Church: signifying, that to require the
judgment of the Church, is a good means to preserve one from being deceived,
not only (as M. Wootton expounds) in that particular question, which there
S. Augustine mentions, and such like of lesser moment: and much less does he
mean (as M. White minceth the matter, to wit) in that particular question at
this time, but also, (and that a fortiori) in other questions of greatest
weight, and most concerning salvation, and at other times, etc.
8 I find 2. faults in this place with the Repliar: 1. that he does not report
the whole expositions that I gave to these places, but only part of them, and
yet tells me of mincing. Next, that having confirmed my exposition of the words
of the Apostle by four reasons: and my exposition of Saint Austine by as many,
and having confuted his sense that here he repeates by manifest arguments, he
stands dumb to all and only repeates the places again, no otherwise, then
when I answered them. I need not therefore trouble my self with confuting him
here, but refer THE WAY. 15.
me to that I writ, much accusing my self for meddling with so base a trifler,
that has neither heart, nor strength to go forward in the argument, nor wit
nor grace to hold his tongue: this one passage is the lively image, not only
of all this his Reply, but of all his fellows writings, now in request, to
bring in authority of Scripture, and Fathers, as a Bride is led into the
Church, with state, and ceremony, and some gravity, and furniture of words; but
when they should reply to that we answer, and maintain their expositions, then
to tergiuerfate, and only repeat that which is confuted.

CHAP. XXXVI.
An entrance into the question touching the visibility of the Protestant Church
in the former ages. Wherein it is briefly showed where and in whom it was.

A. D. Concerning the eleventh Chapter -- Having proved in the precedent
Chapter, that the doctrine of the Church is the rule, Page 227.
and means to instruct all men in faith; in this Chapter, I undertake to show,
that the Church, whose doctrine is the rule and means, White page 86. Wootton
p. 104 White page 86.
continues in all ages. Both my Adversaries grant, that the Church continues
in all ages: M. White says, We confess the Church never coased to be, but
continues always, without interruption, to the worlds end. M. Wootton says,
the truth of your assertion needs no proof, and finds great fault with me,
for making such a question, as though Protestants did deny the Church to
continue. As concerning this their granting the continuance of the Church, I
gratefully accept it; especially with M. Whites addition, who yields, that if
we can prove, that the very faith, which Protestants now confess, has not If
Protestants faith so far as they differ from us continued always, I ask
whether in the air, or in some faithful men? if in men, who be those men?
successively continued in all ages since Christ, or that it was interrupted,
so much as one year, month, or day, it is sufficient to prove them no part of
Gods Church, For which he cites in the Margent, Dan. 7. ver. 27. Psalm. 102. v.
26. Mat. 16.18. Luke 1, v. 33.
1 AS no Protestant denies the doctrine of the Church to be the rule, taking
the Church for So Waldens. doctrinal. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 19. Haec est Ecclesia
Symbolica, Ecclesia Christi Catholica and Apostolica, matter credentiu^ per
totum mundum dispersae, a Baptismo Christi per Apostolos and ceteros
successores eorum ad haec tempora deuoluta: quae vtique veram fidem continent,
etc. page 99.
the whole company of believers, which have been from Christ to this day; so
neither do they deny, this Church to continue in all ages: the which because I
granted the Repliar in my answer to his book, you see how he joys in
himself, as if he had won the cause touching his visiblenesse of the Church.
But, as I noted to him, the question is not, whether the Church continue in all
ages to the worlds end, for that we grant, but whether the outward state
thereof free from all corruption, be always so visible as the Papists say? I
showed the Negative, and in the 17. Digression made it plain, that our
Adversaries themselves cannot deny it: the Repliar therefore in this place, was
to quit his own D. D. whom I alleged, and not to stand gratefully accepting,
that which no man denies. The marginall question is answered, Digression 48.
yet here I answer again, that the Protestant faith so far as it differs from
that which the Church of Rome holds against us, continued always, not in the
air, but in men, and those men were such as lived in the Church of Rome it
self constantly holding the foundation of Christian Religion, though the same
men were corrupted also, some more, some less, with those errors that we
refuse. The rest of this Chapter meddles with nothing I writ, but is spent in
proving that the Church, whose doctrine is the rule, continues in all ages unto
the worlds end: not only the true Church abides for ever unto the end, but
that Church does so, whose doctrine is the rule to teach us; as if there were a
true Church of Christ, whose doctrine were not the rule, in such sense as I
have expounded the doctrine of the Church to be the rule? This is partly to be
saying somewhat, when he could not reply to that I said, and partly to persuade
his people that we hold the contrary: I detest his rudeness, and lament their
bondage, and slavery.

A. D. M. White grants, Page 233. White p. 63.
that those Scriptures which I allege in the treatise, prove well Christ's
abiding always with the Church; whereupon is inferred the continuance of the
Church in all ages: therefore he will not, or ought not deny, but that they
prove also, that there is teaching of true doctrine of faith, in the Church,
not only for the Apostles time, or for six, or eight hundred years after,
but absolutely for all ages.
I grant all this, and if he beg hard, I will give him more, that the doctrine
of the Church thus taught, in all ages, is the rule of faith, that all men
ought to follow. But he is so far bankrupt, and behind hand, that no reasonable
thing will help him. For still this Church supposes not his Pope, nor his
Papacy: and this doctrine means not his traditions, nor any thing taught in
the Church besides the Scripture, nor does this being the rule, intend any such
authority, or sovereignty of the Church above the Scripture, as he pleads for;
but only the Ministry of the Church, under Christ, and his Scriptures, in
propounding the faith to particular believers, and confirming the same to their
hearts, and consciences by the sole authority of the Scriptures themselves, as
I have often touched.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Not the Church, but the Scripture, is the rule. 2. The question touching the
visiblenesse of the Church proceeds of the Militant Church. 3. 4. 5. In what
sense we say the Militant Church is sometime invisible. 5. The Papists think
the Church shall be invisible in the time of Antichrist. Their contradictions
touching Antichrist breefly noted.

A. D. Concerning the twelfth Chapter -- By that which has been said in the
two precedent Chapters, it is apparent enough, Page 234.
that there is in all ages, a certain company called the Church, whose
doctrine is the ordinary rule, and means ordained by God to instruct all men,
in all matters of faith: and that by the said doctrine, and teaching of the
true Church, every one is to learn, what is, and what is not to be holden for
the true faith, not doubting, but that the doctrine of faith, which is
commended, and caught us by the said true Catholic Church, is the right
faith. The which being so, every one may see, how necessary it is to seek,
find, and follow the judgment of the true Church, as being a most necessary
means, without which none can expect to attain that one, infallible, entire
faith, which is necessary to salvation. This seems in a sort to be granted by
M. White. For although, he plead hard to have Scripture alone to be the White
p. 13. 14. 15.
rule, holding the letter it self to be the Page 12.
vessel which presents thu rule, which he Page 31.
co^pareth to the Carpenters square, to the precepts of art, to the law of the
Land; yet as he cannot deny, that a child cannot do any thing with the
Carpenters square, nor an unlearned man with a book, wherein is contained
precepts of art, or with a lawbooke; but the square must be applied by a
cunning Carpenter, the precepts of art must be expounded by a learned master,
the law must be declared by a skillful Lawier, or propounded by an authorized
Judge: Even so he must grant, that the Scripture it self, although it be a
good rule, yet if it were (as he would have it) the only rule, must be
applied, expounded, declared, and propounded, not by every man, woman, and
child, but by the authority (as we say) or by the Ministry (as my Adversaries
say) of the Church: White p. 110. Page 93.
and that so necessarily, that even as M. White affirms, except in some
extraordinary cases, no man can of himself, attain to the knowledge of faith,
but as the Church teaches him, in regard (as otherwhere he confesses) the
Church is a subordinate means, for the bringing of men to salvation; in that
God teaches his elect, by the ministry thereof. Neither (says he) can any man
be the child of God, except first he be conceived in the womb of the Church.
So we see even in M. Whites opinion, how necessary it is for every one to
seek, find, and follow the teaching of the true Church.
1 THat which he says I granted in a sort, I grant again; and yet will still
plead and prove the Scripture alone to be the rule, and nothing else. For
though a child can do nothing with a square, nor an unlettered man with a
book; yet still the square, and contents of the book are the rule, and not
the Carpenter, and the Judge: they are only Ministers to apply the rule, and
subordinate conditions requisite for the due use of the rule; and to be ruled
by it themselves, if at any time (as sometime they may) they err in working.
So is it in few words, with the Church, and Scriptures. And albeit I affirmed,
as he says, and it be my opinion, that it is necessary to find, and follow the
teaching of the Church: yet is it not my opinion, that the universal Church
teaches any doctrine, that is not written in Scripture; or God by the Church
teaches those unwritten traditions, or that the Church exceeds the condition of
a bare Minister under the Scriptures. Which Ministry being acknowledged, M.
White will allow it any authority, and power to teach, inform, persuade,
correct, repress particular men, that my Adversaries will demand: but they
require Church authority above the Scripture, and make unwritten traditions,
and the Popes Decretals equal with the Scripture, and place all the power, and
faculty of the Church in the Pope; and when they have done, allow no particular
man, or Church, to call any of these things in question. This is it the
Repliars teeth water at, and which by M. Whites concessions he would recover,
but he shall never get it, nor all the Papists in the world ever prove it: yet
without it the ^rott above ground, 2. Sa. 13.
as Amnon would die, if he lay not with his sister Thamar.

A. D. That we may therefore be encouraged to seek in such sort, Page 235.
as we may find, that finding we may duly follow the teaching of the true
Church; in this Chapter I inquire in general, whether the Church, whose
teaching we ought to follow, in all matters of faith, be always visible, that
is, such as may be seen, or by seeking found: or sometimes invisible, that is,
such as cannot be seen, nor by seeking found. Before I proceed to relate my
adversaries answer, I must clear the state of the question. M. Wootton first
would make the question to be, whether the Church spoken of in the Creed be
visible, or invisible? M. White says, that this is not the question in this
place: but (says he) the question of the Church militant, which contains, as
part of it, even evil men, and hypocrites. The truth is, that to speak
precisely, I make not the question either of these ways. For although it be
true that the same Church, which I speak of, be the Church, or part of the
Church spoken of in the Creed: although also it be the Church militant, or part
of the Church militant, containing as part of it, all professors, good, and
bad: in regard I hold (as all good Christians should) that there is but one
Church: yet that I may cut off occasions of cavil, I will not now dispute,
what is meant by the word Church, as it is in the Creed, or whether the Church
militant be that Church, which I say is visible: I only ask, whether the
Church of which I spoke in the two precedent Chapters, whose doctrine is there
proved, by diverse places of Scriptures, to be in all ages the Rule, and means,
ordained by God to instruct all men, in all matters of faith: whether (I say)
this Church be in all ages visible, or sometimes invisible? Now taking the
Church in this sense, yet my adversary M. White, White p. 86. Page 9.
peruerteth the state of my question: for he will needs have me mean by a
visible Church, a company always so illustrious, as it (not only may be, but)
actually is known to all men, living at all times. But so I did not here make
my question: for I know well enough, that the Church has not always,
especially in time of persecutions, such outward worldly prosperous estate. I
know also that sometimes the Church is obscured (as S. Augustine says) with
multitude of scandals: and therefore it is not always alike famous, and
illustrious: especially so, as to shine actually through the whole world. My
question therefore only is, whether the true Church, WHOSE DOCTRINE IS THE
RVLE, and means ordained by God, to instruct men of all ages in faith, be
sometimes quite invisible, in such sort that no member thereof, can be seen,
nor assigned: or that it is always visible, that is to say, such as contains
in it always (even in the times of greatest obscurity) at least some eminent
professors, who either are actually known, or may in particular be assigned to
all such, as (...) to know the^, that they may learn of them the true doctrine
of faith, as (grace sufficient being presupposed) all men in potentia proxima,
vel remota, may, and ought to learn.
2 For the better understanding of that which insues, from this place forward
to the end, touching the visiblenesse of the Church, the Reader must note,
that my adversary having in his Treatise concluded, that not the Scripture, but
the teaching of the Church is the rule of faith: now proceeded to enquire which
this Church is, and where it is to be found? And first he answered
categorically, that it is visible, and may be found: then afterward he showed
where, and how, and by what marks, it may be found. In the 17.. he began to
entreat of the visiblenesse of the Church, affirming that it must needs
always be from Christ's time to the end of the world, and being, it must
needs be always visible, urging such reasons, as he had to prove it: and
among the rest this was his last.. 22. in the WAY.
The only reason, and ground by which heretics hold the Church to be
invisible, is because they imagine the Church to consist only of the elect; or
at least of the good: but this is a false ground, for it is evident, that the
Church militant consists of good and bad, etc. Whereto Ibi.
I answered, that this was not our reason, nor indeed could be, for that in
this question we speak not of the universal Church, comprehending none but
the elect of all times, and ages, but of the Church for the time being wherein
the true faith is remaining, which Church contains hypocrites also, and evil
men, as well as good. Wherein I spoke effectually: for his own words are, that
the question is of the militant Church. And when our doctrine is, that the
militant Church consists of wicked reprobates, as well as elect, how can we
make it a ground to prove it invisible sometime, because it consists only of
the elect? Nevertheless in this place, you see he complains of my perverting
the state of the question, and denies that he meant it, as I took it: Let us
therefore see, what he requires, and if his meaning be mistaken, good reason he
explain himself, and the difference between us be agreed upon.

3 First he says, that he enquires, in general, not whether the Church
mentioned in the Creed, or whether the militant Church be visible, but whether
that Church whose teaching we ought to follow, be always visible: that is,
such, as may be seen, or by seeking found? And I also said, In what sense the
militant Church is by the Protestant Divines, said to be sometime invisible.
the question is only of the outward state of the Church, whether it be always
visible to the world, or not; that in every age those congregations may
evidently be discerned, and pointed too, which are the true Church. Not
affirming the true outward militant Church at any time hitherto to have bin
invisible: for the visible Churches of Greece, Ethiope, Armenia, and Rome, with
the nations contained therein, have in them the true Church of God, wherein men
may be saved: but only intending that there is not always, in this Church a
visible company, and state of people, divided from the rest that profess the
true faith, and exercize Church government, in all things free from the
corruptions, and abuses of such, as have defiled the Church. And thus I never
denied the Church of Rome to be the visible Church of God, wherein our
Ancestors possessed the true faith, and were saved: but I constantly deny the
PAPACY to be it: or the ARTICLES wherein we refuse the Church of Rome, to be
the faith thereof: and affirm the same to be a Leprosy breeding in the Church
so universally that there was no visible company of people appearing to the
world free from it: and whether any company at all, known, or unknown were
free from it wholly, or not, I neither determine, nor greatly care. All that I
hold touching the invisible Church, being, that the true Church being
ouergrowne with heresy, and corruption, there has not at all times been
therein a distinct company, to be seen, which in all points were free from the
corruption: though there may be showed a company that held all the substantial
points, simply necessary to salvation. Had the Jesuit understood my words in
this sense, which I often declared, all over my Book, he would never have
trifled away time in proving the Church, whose doctrine is the rule, to be
visible, which I deny not; but he would have gone roundly to work, in showing
the visible Church to be never so corrupted, but there is some one or more
special companies therein, visibly to be seen by all, and separated from the
rest, that is not defiled with the corruption. For the Church is visible to be
seen at all time, more, or less, whose teaching, in the sound part thereof,
is to be followed to the worlds end. Nevertheless first he excepts, that I
say, the question is of the Church militant, containing as part of it, evil
men, and hypocrites: whereas to speak precisely, he makes not the Question,
that way; but to cut off occasions of cavil, he says he desputes, whether the
Church, whereof he spoke in the precedent Chapters, whose doctrine in all ages
is the rule of faith; whether, I say, this Church be in all ages visible, or
sometimes invisible? as if the Church whose doctrine is the rule in all ages,
were any other then the militant? His conclusions, whereby he taught his
friend, how to resolve himself in religion, were these: That there is a rule
left by God, whereby all men may be instructed. This rule is not the Scripture,
but the doctrine of the true Church, which Church is always visible: that all
men, at all times, may see it; wherein, he affirms, as I do, the militant
Church to be visible, because that only is it, that mortal men can hear, and
have access to, and this I show distinctly to be the question. For first, his
own express words are: In THE WAY page 99.
It is evident, that the Church militant consists of good and bad; but this
Church consisting of good and bad, is the same that before in his conclusion he
affirmed to be visible, confuting our (supposed) ground whereupon we held it
invisible. Secondly, in this very passage he says, it is true, that the same
Church he speaks of, is the Church militant, or part of it. Thirdly, he
expounds himself to mean that Church, whose doctrine is the rule to teach us.
But the doctrine of no Church teaches us, but that of the Militant living here
upon earth, where they that live are taught. Fourthly, he means that Church
whereto every one may have access, and repair for instruction; whereto also
they may join themselves, and wherein they may admonish their brethren: and
therefore precisely he speaks of the Militant church upon earth: and his
words, that to speak precisely, he makes not the question this way, but only
asks whether the Church, whose doctrine is the rule, be visible, are so
precise, that a man would think his head-peece were not well seasoned; when
either he must grant this his visible Church to be militant, or confess it to
be none of Gods Church: for so much as all the Church of God, whose doctrine is
the rule of faith, is, for the time being, militant here on earth, and part of
that which is mentioned in the Creed, where we say, credo Ecclesiam. Therefore
the question between us is, whether the company of those that profess and
teach the true faith of Christ, without mixture of corruption, among whom
possible many hypocrites and wicked men live, which company is called the
Militant-church, be at all times visible? The Reply says it is, and must no
more deny his assertion to be meant even precisely of this company.

4 His second exception is about the words visible and invisible, where he
says five things. First, that by a visible Church, I make him to mean a
company always so illustrious, that it may be known to all men, living at all
times. Secondly, that I make him to mean this company also to be so
illustrious, that actually it is thus known. Thirdly, that he means not the
word visible in this second sense. Fouthly, that he knows the Church is
sometime obscured, and shines not actually through the whole world. Fifthly,
that the Church is always visible in this sense, that always, even in the
greatest obscurity, it has some eminent professors, which either are actually
known, or may in particular be assigned. The first is true, for he says it
expressly in the last. And I suppose he will not deny it, when so many of his
own Divines hold it. Dom. Bannes Tom. 3. page 103.
says, the Church is so visible, that it is palpable. Bellarmine: De Eccl. l.
3. c. 13.
God has at all times a Church, consisting not of a few people, but of a great
multitude, as conspicuous as any earthly kingdom. Greg. of Valence: Tom. 3 p.
143.
Our assertion is, that in all ages there may evidently be seen and discerned,
and as it were pointed out with the finger, a company of men, whereof every
one may believe, that it is the true Church. The second is false. For though it
follow manifestly upon his words, and that which the Divines of his church
teach of the vis^^^lenesse of their church; yet I charged him not so far: but
contented my self with confuting that which is contained in his first and last
assertion. Nevertheless it is true, that he and all Papists must by their own
principles, hold the Church to be even actually visible to all men. For he
says, Repl. p. 170.
God has given sufficient means to all men for their salvation: In THE WAY.
13.
and the teaching of this his church, is the means. But no means is
sufficient, that is not actually revealed: as Chapter 25. n. 15.16.
I have showed heretofore out of the Repliers own authors. Therefore if
sufficient means be only that which is actually revealed, and the Church be
the means, it follows, the Church must be actually visible: or else let us
see how the Replier will quit himself. The third is also false, as I have
said: but yet allowing it to be true, I have not perverted the question;
because I affirm, and dispute against the visiblenesse of the Church in that
since which he holds in the first and last assertion. The fourth I accept as
the truth, and have showed in Digr. 17.
THE WAY, that as his own Divines expound it, it utterly destroys his first
and last assertions, and yields as much as we say, that the Church free from
gross and foul corruptions, is not always to be seen where or in whom it is.
Whereto if you add that which Epist. de pacif. Venet. ad Reg. Franc. 1607.
April. 5.
Cardinal Perone lately writ to the French King, that it is uncertain whether
God will suffer the Catholic religion to be oppressed in Italy and driven
out of all Europe, into another Hemisphere, the case will be clearer. For if
the Pope and his drudgerie may be expulsed Italy, and twenty Geneuahs planted
there, as the Cardinal speaks: believe me, that would bring the Roman faith
to as low a size as ever the Protestants was; and our adversaries would be as
invisible as their fellows. The last, is enough to show, that I pervert not
the question. For I deny, and showed in my answers to all his arguments, that
howsoever the Church consists of men that may be seen, and these men know one
another where they live; yet there is no such eminency in any of them, that
the world can tell who or where they be that in the Church hold the true faith
without corruption; but they may be so hidden by persecutions and heresies
increasing in the church, that no man shall discern them, and that they can
have no open or uncorrupted exercise of religion: wherein I have showed, our
adversaries themselves, driven by the necessity of the truth, to come home to
us. Digress. 17.

A. D. Now taking the question in this sense, Page 236.
my conclusion of this chapter was, that the Church is never quite invisible,
but always visible. This I proved by diverse reasons, which stand still in
force against my adversaries, supposing the state of the question be rightly
understood, as first I meant it, and as now I have declared it. The truth of
which my conclusion, I further confirm by the authority of Saint Augustine,
who Ep. 48.
having said as even now I cited, that the Church is sometimes obscured with
multitude of scandals: he adds, but even then she is eminent in her most
firm members. Secondly I confirm the same by experience of ancient and
present times; because even in times of greatest persecution under the heathen
Emperors, even when the Church has seemed to be overwhelmed with heresies:
even when it was said, that the world did marvel to see it self become Arian:
even when it seemed to be rent in pieces with schisms: even when it has been
most blemished with ill lives of the true professors themselves: even in the
most obscure and ignorant ages, wherein there was least number of teachers and
writers: there was always a company of true professing Christians, so
visible, as that at least some in all ages (whom God stirred up to be eminent
men, opposing themselves by word or example, or both, as a wall for the house
of God) were actually apparent, even to the world: or at least being known to
Christians themselves (as my adversaries seem to grant that the true
Professors always are) they or some of them might and may be assigned by
Christians, to such as desire to know them, as after I shall show: which
suffices to prove the Church visible, in such sense as I here make the
question.
In what sense the Church militant is said to be sometime invisible.
5 The question is not of the visiblenesse of the church, taking the word
Church, for the Militant church of God, wherein the true faith is preserved,
and whose sound doctrine is the rule of all faith: for we deny it not: but
only as it signifies such therein as are free from the general apostacy and
corruptions, which now and then prevail in, and all over the church. For in
the first sense we say the Church is visible, because the companies of those
which profess and hold the substance of faith (howsoever many errors besides
may be added thereto) are always manifest: but in the second sense, we say it
may be invisible, inasmuch as at some times, yea for a long time together, no
part thereof, nor any company therein, can be discerned to be free from the
corruption prevailing: but a time may come, when things are so reformed, and
the doctrine of the Church so reduced to the first Apostolic verity, by
putting away the apostacy and innouations, that for some ages before, there
has not been known in all the Church, any company enjoying or practicing the
said doctrine thus purged and reformed. This being all that I hold touching the
inuisiblenesse of the Church, his reason concludes nothing against me, as will
appear by viewing In THE WAY,. 18. and inde.
my answers. To the place of Saint Austine, I answer, that it makes for me, in
the first words expressly, The Church is sometimes obscured with multitudes of
scandals; and in the latter words, the firm members wherein the Church is
eminent, are not such as are totally free from all abuses and corruptions
belonging to apostacy; but such as in the midst of corruption still retain
the principal points of Christian faith; and among many errors, yet eminently
hold the substance of saving doctrine: and such we grant always were in the
midst of the Papacy, which is OUR VISIBLE CHVRCH, THAT WAS BEFORE LVTHERS
TIME. To his other reason of experience of ancient and present times, I have
answered also in my book; and here answer again, that it is false; meaning by
those true professing Christians stirred up of God, and eminent men opposing
themselves, such as opposed themselves against all error. For there never
wanted, in any persecution, schism, or heresy, those which professed the true
faith, even visibly, in that which substantially belonged to the faith, and was
sufficient to salvation: but there have not always been visibly to be seen,
those that eminently opposed or refused every corruption, or were preserved
from such error, as was afterward lawfully reformed and done away. For the
church of Rome being made the seat of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2 6. Apoc. 17.
Valde verisimile est. Irenae. l. 5. c 30.
as the holy Ghost foretold, it was impossible there should be any visible
company so eminent or perfect, that the general contagion should not (though
not mortally) in some measure touch them, as Act. 1.6.
the Iudaisme of the times wherein Christ lived, generally corrupted all the
Apostles; who yet for all that, remained eminent members of the Church. And if
my adversary think his Pope not to be Antichrist, or the persecution of
Antichrist, whosoever he be, not able thus far to prevail against the Church:
let him descend when he will into that question, and he will find himself as
weak there as here: the rather because I know no learned man of his side, but
confesses the same inuisiblenesse of the Church in Antichrists time, that I
maintain. Telesphorus the Hermit Lib. de magn. tribul page 32. edit. Venet.
per Soard an 1516.
says, The sacrifice and oblation shall fail, the Ecclesiastical Orders
shall be destroyed, that there shall not be any in all the multitude of the
people, that dares freely invoke God. Vbertine Vbertin. de Casal. lib. de 7.
Stat. de eccl c. 8 edit. Venet. per Soard an. 1516. and refert Oaus Eccl. page
31. nu. 19.
says, That, concerning the binding of the Devil for a thousand years, is to
be understood, from the time of the first state of the Church to the time that
the Roman Empire was translated to the Almaines, when Gregory the fifth made a
new decree concerning the choosing of the Emperor, whose successor Syluester the
second by simonie and nigromancy got the Popedom; for then the little Church
which believed in Christ, began to fall into scandals. This touching the Popes
being Antichrist, R. Iaco. praef. monit. page 56. and inde. D. Whit ^k. ad
demonst Sander. and controu de Pont. Romans q. 5. c. 3. Sohn. tract de
Antichrist. D. Abb. demonstrat. D. Down. of Antichr. D. Fulk in 2. Th. 2. and
Apoc. 13. etc.
our writings have sufficienly demonstrated: and all stories make it plain,
that the most violent persecutions, and the greatest heresies, schisms and
scandals, that ever were, have been under the Pope, and by his working, since
he came to his greatness, which makes him relish so strong of Antichrist, that
the Jesuit, with all his fellows to help him, cannot sweeten him. And I can
tell him a thing in his ear, that will discourage him for ever undertaking
that matter. For as learned men as ever were in the Church of Rome, have De
Antichristo dicit idem Joachim, quod tam natus est in ciuitate Romana, and in
sede Apostolica sublimabitur. Rog. Houed. annal page 681. Seeds Bestiae id est,
Ecclesiae peruersae, est in Curia Romana. Onus Eccl. c 19. n. 6. See the
oration of Euerardus Abusin. in Auent page 546. And Chaucers plow man's tale.
mistrusted it: and The Turk holden to be the great Antichrist by Clicton.
commen. in Damasc. de sid. orth. l. 4. page 391. Prateol. Elench. v. Mahom. page
302. Henten. indic. de Apoc. page 182. Genebr chronol. an. 590. page 477.
Feuardent. in Irenae. l. 5. c. 30. n. 10. who says, other most learned men are
of the same opinion.
they that will not confess it, have yet, to turn it off him, made him
Antichrist, that cannot so be by The common opinion holden by the Jesuits, is,
that Antichrist shall be one singular person, a Jew, of the tribe of Dan, etc.
See Acost. de temp. nouiss. l. 2. c. 5. Bellar. de Pont. Romans l. 3. c. 2.10.
and inde. Suar. tom. 2. disp. 54. Henriq. de fin. hom. c. 23.
the doctrine now maintained among the Jesuits.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
1. The Papists cannot prove the Church to be always visible, in that sense
wherein we deny it. 2. The diverse considerations of the Church distinguished.
3. His quarrels made to our doctrine touching the Churches several states,
answered. 6. The faithful only are the true members of the Church. 7. Upon
what occasion the question touching the visiblenesse of the Church, first began.

A.D. This my conclusion thus declared and proved, Page 237.
does fore pinch my adversaries, and puts them to pitiful straits, as after
we shall see. For on the one side, to deny the Church, in such sense as here I
have declared, to be at all times visible, without impudency they cannot, my
proofs (at least some of them) are so apparent and plain: on the other side
to grant it to be in this sense always visible, they will not, for fear that
people do thereby plainly see, that Protestants (who cannot assign a
continual visible Church, or a company of professors of their faith, nor so
much as one professing Protestant in every several age since Christ) cannot be
the true Church, of which only, as of the ordinary rule and means, all men
must learn, what is, and what is not to be holden for the true saving faith.
My adversaries therefore not daring (as it may seem) to make direct answer,
White, p. 100. Wotton, p. 210.
and yet being willing at least to make show of an answer, do distinguish two
several Churches, that when they are hunted out of one, they may run into
the other, and that being pursued thither, they may for refuge fly into the
former: they call one Church the true Catholic Church, spoken of in the
Creed, which they affirm to contain only the elect; to whom (as they say)
belong the promises of the Spirit, which in Scripture were made to the Church.
This Church, both my adversaries do account simply invisible. And truly since
no man can tell who be Gods elect, if they could as well prove, as they boldly
affirm, that the Church (spoken of in the Creed, or in those places of
Scripture, where the promises of the Spirit are made to the Church) does
contain none but the elect; it could not be denied, that it were invisible.
But this they will never be able sufficiently to prove. The other Church which
they distinguish from the Catholic Church, M. White calls the Church
militant, White, p. 100. Wotton. p. 210.
containing as part of it, all professors of the true faith, whether good or
bad, believers or hypocrites, elect or reprobate. The necessity which drives
them to admit such a Church, is (as I guess) because if no company of men did
in any sort pertain to the Church, but only the elect, whom none can know; it
would follow, that since (as has been proved) no man can ordinarily attain
true faith, but by instruction received from the true Church; every man
ordinarily might despair of attaining true faith, and consequently of
attaining salvation, which is not had without true faith, in regard he could
never know the company or Church to whom he must repair for instruction in
faith. Besides therefore the company of the elect, my adversaries hold, that
there is another Church, White, page 87.
the which (as M. White says) is always upon the earth, holding the whole
faith without change, and containing a certain number that constantly profess
it. This Church which other Protestants commonly call the visible Church, M.
White will needs defend to be sometimes invisible.
1 FIrst he says, his conclusion pinches us; but he is deceived: we feel no
pain, nor utter any voice that tastes of pain. Because whatsoever he says
and declares, yet he proves nothing; and nothing pinches that is not proved:
nay he is so far from pinching, that he and his fellows make us smile, and
yield us good pastime, to talk thus of the visiblenesse of the Church; and yet
when things come to scanning, to doubt of it themselves as much as we. I
alleged the confessions of diverse Papists, in the 17. Digr. why has he not
answered thereto, and showed what or how they say less then we? Next he shows
what the strait is, we are put to. For on the one side, he says, it is
impudency to deny his conclusion, so apparently proved: on the other side, we
dare not grant it for fear of the people. Here is never a true word. First his
conclusion is not proved. For the arguments which he propounded to demonstrate
it, he has not followed, nor vpholden; but leaving them in the field behind
him, he runs away, without so much as looking behind him, and in all his Reply
rescues not one of them. Secondly, his conclusion is justly denied, and without
impudency: for it is no impudency to deny that which cannot be proved; but
it is impudency to require men to believe that which has no proof. He
speaks of his proofs, as he does of his Church, all is eminent, illustrous,
apparent, plain, visible to all, when yet no man sees them. Thirdly, the
reason why we grant not the Church to be in his sense visible, is not for fear
of the people, nor because we cannot give the Professors of our faith in every
age; but because it is the truth, which with all his boasting he cannot remove:
for albeit the Church never fails, but abides perpetually visible in some
degree to the end; yet is there not always therein a visible company, by
profession and government, distinct from the rest, that is free from the
general corruption that preuailes in the Church of which company only the
question is. He maintaining that the Church cannot err, nor be subject to any
such corruption, but has always in it eminent professors, and special
congregations, that are never infected with any part of the corruption, nor
need reformation: which persons and congregations appear as visibly and
distinctly to all men, as worldly kingdoms are distinctly seen and known:
and we holding the Church to be perpetual, only because there are always in
the world which hold the true worship of God; and to be visible in regard it
may at all times be seen, though heresy may so prevail, and persecution so
arise, that a visible company shall not appear, which is not in some measure
touched with the common errors; or needs not repentance and reformation. All
which is so true, that I challenge the Replier, and provoke the zealousest of
my adversaries to say ingenuously, if the learned Papists alleged Digress. 17.
say not, in effect, as much themselves.

2 Our answer therefore is direct and plain, both to the conclusion and the
reasons; and so direct, that the Jesuit has no stomach to reply: but
exceeding grossly and falsely, expounds and affixes a meaning to us, that we
never meant. First he says, we distinguish two several Churches, whereof we
call the one the Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, containing only the
elect: the other the Militant Church, containing as part of the Catholic, the
professors of the true faith, whether good or bad, believers or hypocrites,
elect or reprobate. Next he says, the reason why we thus distinguish two
several Churches, is, that when we are hunted out of the one, we may run
into the other. This he expounds something more plainly: That which, as I
guess (for he has no certainty of what he says) drives them to admit such a
Church militant, distinguished from the Catholic, is, least if none should be
said to pertain to the Church, but only the elect, it would follow, that men
might despair of attaining true faith, (which is not had but by the teaching
of the Church) for as much as they could never know who are elected. Thirdly he
says, this Militant Church, which other Protestants commonly call the visible
Church, M. White will needs defend to be sometimes invisible. That these things
may the better be understood, and answered: note FIRST, that by the word Church
taken in his full latitude, The Church.
we mean the whole company of all those whom God calls to the knowledge and
profession of his truth, and so to salvation. Of which calling and separation
from the rest of the world, living in Atheism and idolatry, without the
knowledge or acceptance of those supernatural verities that lead to God, it
has the denomination, and is called the Church; as if you should say, a
company called or gathered forth of the rest of the world. But one church
Note SECONDLY, that the Church absolutely and simply considered in this
latitude, is but One, as the state and company of the kingdom of Great
Britain is but one; in as much as all and every one called to this grace, of
how different state, qualities, or condition soever, belong, one way or other,
to this company: for the faith being but one, and the manner of calling by
revealing the same but one: the companies that receive and profess it, how
many soever respectively, yet absolutely, and abstracting from particular
conditions of times and persons, can be but one. Note THIRDLY, that in the
Church, being absolutely but one, there are sundry differences and respects;
that is to say, the persons called to the faith of Christ, are of diverse sorts:
as the kingdom of Great Britain, being but one, yet is diverse ways
considered. For some part of the Church being reduced from the state of this
mortal life, reigns with God in heaven, and is glorified with that glory,
whereto it was called when it was here on earth. The triumphant Church.
This we call the Triumphant Church, because as triumphers they enjoy the
reward due to conquerers. The other part of the Church, is that which
successively in all ages, lives here in this world, professing that it desires
to follow the Triumphant, The militant Church.
and enjoy eternal life: this we call the Church Militant, because it lies as
it were in the camp, fighting against the world, the devil, and the flesh,
under the banner of Christ, waiting for the victory. But among these again
there are two sorts of people: the first, all such as are called effectually:
The Church of the elect.
these are the elect only, whom God not only calls, but inspires also
effectually to obey his calling, and to live holy and unblameable, in such
sort, that they shall infallibly be saved in the life to come. The invisible
Church.
This company we call the invisible Church, because God only sees who are his;
we can see the men, and by their fruits hope they are Gods elect; but to speak
precisely, no mortal eye can discern them to be Gods elect, but God alone: by
reason hypocrites and the reprobate, do many times resemble them in show and
profession. The second sort of the Militant Church, are hypocrites and unsound
members, that are not called effectually, but disobey the truth, whereof they
make profession, such are heretics, schismatickes, and all the wicked that
will not obey the truth, whom we call the false and malignant church. The
malignant Church.
Note FOURTHLY, that howsoever the elect living here upon earth, and
effectually called, be invisible in the sense delivered; yet when we say the
Church militant is sometimes invisible, we mean it of the Church Militant that
lives in the world, and outwardly professes the faith of Christ, whether they
therein that do it, be the elect or others: for we only speak of the place
and company, where the truth is professed, and may be found, which may well
be, where the wicked and the elect are mingled together. Note FIFTHLY, that the
Church is called Catholic or universal in two senses: first, the Church taken
in his full latitude, Catholic Church.
for the whole company of all that are called both in heaven and in earth,
visible and invisible, elect and hypocrites, is called the Catholic Church,
in as much as it comprehends all that have been called to the profession of the
Catholic faith: then again, for so much as any part may synecdochically be
termed after the name of the whole, it sometimes falls out, that the Militant
Church, or any part of it, i^ called the Catholic, as well as the Militant and
Triumphant together. But when the elect alone most perfectly have the
Catholic faith, and not only use the faith, ministry, and Sacraments
revealed, but also enjoy the effect^ and benefits thereof, which the false
Church never does; hence it comes, that they principally, and as the universal
members thereof, are called the Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed: Alias
omnes homines, etiam infideles, and etia^ damnati. dicerentur pertinere ad
corpus Ecclesiae tanquam eius me^bra: quod est absurdum. Turrecrem sum. l. 4.
part. 2. c. 20. ad 6. idem l. 1. c. 57.
the rest, in very deed and truth, not being of the Church at all: for
Bellarmine De Eccl. l. 3. c. 10. page 13^. d
says, The Church chiefly, and in her intention, gathers together only the
faithful: but when dissemblers and such as believe not truly, are mingled,
that falls out besides the intention of the Church: for if she could know them,
she would never admit them; or being admitted, she would presently exclude
them. Again: Ibi. page 141. a
Heretics faining themselves to be Catholics, are not of the Church indeed,
but only in reputation, and outward appearance.

3 This being the manner how we distinguish and hold touching the Church, and
the manner thereof: now I answer that which the Rplier has reported. Ad. 1.
To the first, it is false and malicious, that we make two Churches: for the
Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, and the Militant, make but one
Church, which in one sense is called Catholic, and Militant in another. For
the multiplication of diverse states, degrees and relations belonging to a
thing, multiplies not the essence of the things: as he that deuides the world
into parts, or distinguishes the climates, or shows the diversity of the
inhabitants, does not distinguish several worlds, but affirms diverse states
and conditions in one and the same world. I am ashamed when I read See
Staplet. relect. page 36.
our adversaries, that (should have learning and shamefac'dnesse, or at least
ordinary wit) thus wrangling with us, as if we made two Churches. Ad 2.
To the second, it is likewise false, and fitter for a parasite, that sets
himself only to boast and reproach, then for a divine. For our answer is
plain and direct, that the Church considered in such state as it is ordained,
and fit to teach men the true faith, and as mortal men can have access to it,
(which belongs only to the Militant state) is sometimes so overwhelmed with
persecutions and heresies, that a true Church, entirely teaching the faith of
Christ, without errors, and freely using the word, Sacraments, and
Ecclesiastical discipline, apart from the rest of the Church, cannot be seen
in all the world. And our adversaries arguments being applied to this, neither
hunt nor pursue us so, but we can answer them without flying into the Church of
the elect: for we do not say, that the elect alone are thus obscured, but even
all, whether elect or reprobate, that openly hold the state mentioned, in this
sense, that not only the elect are invisible, not to be discerned with mortal
eye; (for they are always so in this world) but the whole Church Militant,
containing both elect and others, is at some times so defaced and obscured,
that the world cannot see where the substance of faith is holden without errors
mingled. And so it is merely untrue, that the Replier says, touching our
flying to the Church of the elect. For, as I answered in Page 100.
THE WAY, though we hold the Catholic Church mentioned in ye Creed, every
member whereof is saved, to be invisible, because God alone sees who are
elected, yet the Church thus considered, is not it that we speak of in this
question, but the Militant; whereof we say, it IS ALWAYS manifest to the world,
but a company therein, that needs not reformation, is NOT ALWAYS manifest. And
whereas he says, we will never be able sufficiently to prove, the Church
spoken of in the Creed and in the Scripture, where the promises of the Spirit
are made to the Church, to contain none but the elect, he is deceived. For
though this be not material to the point in hand, and (without any
disadvantage to our cause) might be granted, yet the best learned of his own
side, say as we do, that none are simply, absolutely, and univocally of the
Church, but the elect alone, as I have showed immediately before. For Ephesians. 5.23.
Col. 1.18.
the Church being nothing else but the body of Christ, and Christ being the
Savior of his body; how shall hypocrites and other evil men, whom he never
saues, be truly said to be his Church? And when Jtaque neque pro illu (qui non
saluantur) obtulis suam passionem, qui nunquam participauerunt ipsius merita:
neque pro eis qui iustificati non sunt Patrem orauit (Christus.) Non pro mundo,
inquit, rogo, sed pro eis quos dedisti mihi. Dicitur autem, mortuus esse pro
omnibus, quia mors illius sufficiens fuit ad satisfaciendum pro omnibus Omnium
delictis, and pro innumerabilibus alijs, si essent; and ad perducendum omnes
homines, ad, Dei gratiam. And. Vega. pro council. l. 4 c. 10. page 49.
the effects and power of Gods calling, and the benefits of his grace, and the
redemption of Christ reach no further then to the elect alone, never touching
the wicked that l ue among them; how can the wicked either perfectly or
properly be long to the Church? But, as I said, this is not material to the
point in hand, and therefore I will not divert into it, our assertion being,
that not the elect alone are always invisible, but sometimes also all the
congregations of the world wherein they live and profess Christ, are so
corrupted or oppressed, that albeit the substance of saving faith, contained in
the Creed and rule of faith, be retained in them, yet there is no congregation
visible, that has not diverse corruptions needing reformation, hanging on them.
And albeit we thus distinguish the Militant from the Catholic invisible Church
of the elect, part whereof is always in the Militant church; and one cause among
many, be the same that the Replier has assigned, lest if none should pertain
to the Church but the elect, men should despair of attaining the truth,
(forasmuch as it is not found but in the Church) because they should not be
able to tell who are elect; yet that we say, is a direct answer to them, that
bid us assign a continual visible Church professing the Protestant religion:
for we assign and name, not the invisible Church of the elect, as the Replier
absurdly reports, but the Militant Church of Rome, that all men have seen many
ages together. But when they reply, that the Church of Rome differs from the
Protestants in many points, then comes in that we say of the invisible state of
the Church, that the true Church of God, wherein salvation is to be found, may
yet for some space and distance of time, be so overwhelmed with heresy and
persecution, that no company can be seen to believe and profess in all
things aright, according to the Apostles teaching, by reason of errors, either
greater or lesser, added to their Apostolic faith; the which errors, when God
gives liberty to remove, that the rule of faith may be holden without them,
then it may truly and directly be said, the reformed Church that has removed
these corruptions, for some space in former times was invisible. What untruth
now, or what flying out of one Church into another is here? or what strait is
this? Let the Jesuit say resolutely and directly, without cauilling.

Ad 3.
4 To the third: that this Church which other Protestants commonly call the
visible Church, M. White will needs defend to be sometime invisible: I answer,
other Protestants, and M. White with them, call the Militant Church visible,
and hold it to be always so: because it is such as may be seen, and at all
times is to be seen; and yet again M. White, and all other Protestants with
him, will deny it to be always visible in that sense which the Jesuits use to
deliver: this is no contradiction, when the Church is called visible in one
state, and yet invisible in another. As the Sun is affirmed to be visible
when it is in our Horizon; and then affirmed again to be invisible, when it is
gone down, or obscured by eclipse.

A. D. To overthrow this absurd answer of my adversaries, Page 238.
I will in this place show, first that this distinction of two Churches, is
false. Secondly, that if it were true, at least in this place, it is frivolous.
Thirdly, that the Church Militant, containing all professors of the faith,
cannot be, as M. White would have it, invisible.
5 The first of these is needless. For no man holds two Churches: but only
two or more respects of one Church, as I noted: the which respects, Catech. Rom
page 112.
our adversaries all of them distinguish as well as we. The next is (with his
own word) frivolous. For to what end should he stand proving that frivolous,
which his adversary says not? How absurd therefore soever he think my
answer, yet this is no good way to infringe it, by reporting that to be my
answer which is not: and disputing against that I say not, never meaning to
deal with that which is my true answer indeed. The third tends well enough to
the proving his conclusion, being understood of such an inuisiblenesse as I
have declared: yet when all he will say, was propounded in his first book, and
directly answered, and much more then his Reply contains; why did he not reply
upon that, but multiply new reasons, before he has defended the old?
Nevertheless, omitting his two first points, (wherein he touches not my book)
I will answer that which he says concerning me, in the third.

A. D.. 3. Concerning the third point, Page 241. Wotton, p. 107. White, p. 87.
and 100.
that the company of Professors cannot be invisible. M. White and M. Wotton
both seem to defend, that not only the true Church, consisting in their
opinion only of the elect, is altogether invisible: but the other Church,
which they grant to consist of all Professors of the faith, may sometimes be
invisible: this assertion they maintain, as it seems of purpose, that when
after I shall urge them, to assign a continual professing Protestant
company, as we can show a continual company of professors of the Roman
faith, they may by this starting hole, of the inuisibilitie or secretnesse of
the Church, escape away, without answering my demand, which can never be
directly and sufficiently answered. To defend this paradoxe of invisible
professors of the faith: first they pervert the state of the question, as in
the beginning I noted. Secondly, M. White notes two things: White, page 87.
the first is, that the Church militant may consist of a small number, as it
did in the beginning, to wit, at the time of the passion of Christ, and as it
shall do in the end of the reign of Antichrist: the second is, that although
it always profess the faith, yet this may be secretly, that the world shall
not perceive. By which two blind shifts, he would gladly bleare the eyes, and
bewitch the understanding of his Reader, so far as to persuade, that in all
ages there was at least some few professing Protestants, although for many
hundred years before Luther, they were so secret and invisible, that the world
(nor God I ween) could not, but the faithful Protestants themselves
(forsooth) could see and know them.
6 First it is true that M. White affirms, the true Church of God to consist
only of the elect; the rest being neither perfectly, nor truly, nor properly
members of the Church, but only improperly and aequiuocally, or as Canus
Membra videlicet, aliquando, non ex vita, quam sua sponte and natura vendicant;
sed ex situ quem sortita in corpore sunt, per Metaphoram transferri solent. --
Proprie ac vere membrum corporis Ecclesiae non sunt. Can. loc. page 321. Ad
vnionem corporis mystici, sieve Ecclisiae, nunquam pertinent existentes in
peccato mortali. Alexand. quem refert Ioh. Turrecrem. sum. de eccl l 1. c. 57.
speaks, metaphorically, by reason of the place they occupy in the church:
and I alone say not this, but as learned Papists as any are, say it with me,
howsoever Solent haretici dicere esse Sanctos and Electos esse proprie membra
Ecclesiae; alios improprie: sed falluntur. Staplet. relect. page 8. Yet the
learned of his own side say it as well as we: as appears.
he, whom my adversary follows, relate this opinion, as if none but
Protestants held it. Next I affirm again, and the Replier yields it, that No
man can tell who be Gods elect. A. D. Repl. page 238. None can know who are
elect. or where in particular, the elect be. page 240.
the Church thus considered, is altogether invisible: but the question is not
touching this Church; and therefore against his conclusion, I have also affirmed
thirdly, that the Church, consisting of professors, sometime is invisible: that
is to say, the whole number of true believers, and professors living in the
world, which we call the Church Militant, sometime loose the outward
conspicuousnes of Apostolic doctrine, and government free from abuses, which
the Papists say they always hold. Touching this assertion he notes two things:

7 First the reason why we maintain it? That when he, forsooth, shall
afterward urge us to assign a continual professing Protestant company, as he
can show a continual company of Professors, of the Roman faith: we may by this
starting hole, escape without answer. This is but wind, and ostentation; he
can show no continual company successively, or visibly, professing the Roman
faith, with all the articles thereof, as now it is holden: he may set down a
catalogue of Bishops, Doctors, Councels, and Professors, that in all ages have
been in the world, but that they believed as himself, and the Jesuits, and
his Romish Church now do, otherwise then in the substantial articles of faith,
wherein we agree with them: or that there were none among them that misliking
the corruptions of the Papacy, as they grew, held in the substance of the
Protestants religion, he can never show, as will appear. The true cause, why
we maintain the Church to be sometime invisible is this, that I shall lay
down. The manner how the question touching the visibility of the Church first
began: and in what sense
For when Luther, and the first Reformers, some hundred years ago, withdrew
themselves from the subjection of the Pope, and put away these innumerable
errors out of their Churches, which our Adversaries now maintain against us:
as the doctrine of image worship, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, the Mass,
Transubstantiation, and the rest wherein our Adversaries, and we dissent:
altering nothing of that, which belongs to the substance of true faith, or
which the Church of Rome had received from the Apostles, and Primitive Church;
but only contrary to the customs of some ages before, professing the same,
without the mixture of the aforesaid errors: the Pope, with his crew, cried out
they were Heretics, persecuting them with fire, and sword, and charging them
to have forsaken the Church of Christ, wherein they should be saved: and among
other arguments, his Champions required them to show, the succession of their
doctrine, and Pastors, boasting that unless they could do it, and show their
Church to have visibly been in all ages, they would conclude they had forsaken
the Church, and were the first authors of the Protestant Religion. The
Reformers to this answered, that THE CHVRCH OF ROME IT SELF, was their visible
Church, wherein they were bred, and whence they proceeded: but therein was two
kinds of Articles of Religion. The one, which was Apostolic, and had been
from the beginning: the other that, which at several times, by the faction,
and conueiance of Heretics had been brought in, and mingled with the truth:
this latter they had renounced, but not the former; making it more then
manifest, that in the substance of the truth, and rule of faith, taught by the
Apostles, and certainly holden by the ancient Church, they had altered
nothing, but only separated themselves from intolerable corruptions, and from
the Popes tyranny, that maintained, and urged them: who by his tyranny, and
perverting all things, had declared himself to be Antichrist sitting in the
Church of God. And when the Papists still cried, SHOW US A VISIBLE CHVRCH IN
ALL THE WORLD, PROFSSING IN ALL THINGS, AS YOU DO; they replied it was not
necessary so to do. THE CHVRCH OF ROME IT SELF, was the visible Church,
professing as they did in all things substantial. But if they required such a
Church as had put away those errors, and held the substance without
corruptions, and heresies mingled among the Professors; then such a Church, was
sometime invisible: that is to say, it may sometime fall out, that in all the
world, no part of the Church shall be outwardly seen to hold the succession of
all the true faith without corruption, and the purest Professors may be
oppressed, that their memory shall be taken away; and that which is the worst
part of the Church shall be strongest, and generally reputed most Catholic.
This is the true, and original reason of this question: whereby it is easy to
see, that we never imagined the Church to be simply invisible at any time, but
this inuisibility has been affirmed only of the outward state thereof, at
some times, when reformation has not been so pure, as now it is. No otherwise
then I would say the body was invisible, when a Leprosy had ouergrowne it; or
the kingdom of France were invisible, when tyranny, and new customs should
mingle themselves therewith, and the ancient laws be expounded by a faction of
Rebels.

8 By this his second exception, that to defend a paradoxe, I have perverted
the state of the question, is answered. For it is clear hereby, that the
question is of the militant Church, and so D. Stapleton Relect. p. 2.
says expressly, In this controversy the appellation of the Church,
principally belongs to the militant company. And the two things mentioned
touching it: that it may consist of a small number, and that it professes
sometime in secret, being taken in the sense delivered, are so far from being
blind shifts, that they cannot be disproued, by bragging: and if there be any
metal, or truth in my Adversary, here I spur him, and let him answer freely:
That which I noted, is the clear confession of many In THE WAY Digr. 17. n. 3.
learned Papists themselves. Alexand. Durand: Turrecremata, Parnormitan,
Pererius, Ouandus, Acosta, the Rhemists. Dom: Scoto, Gregory Valence: But these
being principal men in the Church of Rome must not be said to teach blind
shifts, but the truth: that therefore which I noted is the truth. If it be the
truth that the Church militant, in respect of the best part thereof, may
sometime consist of a small number: and may secretly, that the world cannot see
it, profess the faith: how can the truth bleare the Readers eye, or bewitch
his understanding? when that which befalls the Church at one time, may befall it
again, though not at any, yet at some time: and whether the years were more,
or less, wherein we say it was obscured, yet they were the years of the
persecution of Antichrist, and in Antichrists time, Ioh. Parisiens. tract. de
Antich. p. 45. edit. Venet apud Laz. Soarol. an. 1516.
When the Church is turned into Armageddon the mount of thieves, no Papist will
deny, but it may be invisible in the sense that we hold, as I showed in the 17.
Digression, and himself confesses in that which immediately follows.

CHAP. XXXIX.
1 The Papists are enforced to yield the same that we say touching the
inuisiblenesse of the Church. 2 Their doctrine touching the time of Antichrists
reign. 3 And the state of the Militant Church at some times. 4 Arguments for
the perpetual visiblenesse of the Church answered 5 In whom the true Church
consisted before Luthers times.

Page 242.
A. D. For declaration of the truth: Note first, that although the Church of
Christ, at the beginning, and infancy of it, were little, like a mustard seed:
Matthew 13. verse. 31. Apoc. 20.1.4. Apoc. 20.1.4. August. l. de ciuit. cap. 11.
and about the very end, for the short reign of Antichrist, shall be much
decayed, both in the number of professors, and the visiblenesse of the outward
state of it; as all things commonly are little in their beginning, and do decay
toward their end: yet for all ages betwixt these two times, as it did at first
grow, and increase, and spread it self over the world, notwithstanding the
wonderful opposition made against it, by persecutions, heresies, schisms, and
sinful lives of Christians; so it is described in Scripture, to be still a
great multitude spread over the world: August. de unit. eccl.
as S. Augustine proves at large against the Donatistes, the which proofs of
S. Augustine, were naught worth, if it might be answered, as the Donatistes
were forced to answer, that the Church after a time did perish out of all
nations: White p. 87.
or as M. White seems ready to answer, that it came to be in all nations a
small number. For which imaginary smalnesse of the number, betwixt the first
beginning, and the latter ending, (especially for so long time, as Protestants
are forced to plead inuisibility of their Church) M. White will never be able
to show any Prophecy of Scripture, sufficient to oppose against S. Austines
proofs, more then the Donatistes could, for the Church her perishing out of
all nations.
1 HE grants the Church, at the beginning, and toward the end thereof, may be
like a little mustard seed, and much decayed both in the number of Professors,
and in the visiblenesse of the outward state of it. Hence it follows, that it
is true we say: the Church sometimes is obscured, and not always so frequent,
and illustrious: for when the external state thereof, consisting in the
public administration of the word, Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical
discipline, and in the profession of the faith, begins to be corrupted, in any
high degree, and the most, and the greatest, become the corruptest; then it
must also be said, that it is obscured, and hidden from the world. Hence it
follows secondly, that these assertions of our adversaries: the visible Church
never fails: and this: God has at all times a Church consisting not of a few
people, but a great multitude, as conspicuous, as any earthly kingdom; and
this, the Church is visible, and such as may be clearly seen, and cannot be
hidden: are all false, if they be meant of the purest part of the Church. For
to be decayed in such sense as the Repliar If he will confess that which is
granted by Saplet. relect. p. 41.. Ecclesia quoad been esse. and Grego. Valent.
tom. 3. p. 145.. Animaduerti debet non sic accipiendum, quod dicimus.
must confess (howsoever here to conceal the truth he speak reseruedly) and
to consist of a great multitude, as conspicuous as any earthly kingdom, cannot
stand together, for so much as the one is the corruption of the other. Whence it
follows thirdly, that the true teaching, and ministry of the Church is not
alwaie so open, and easy to be discerned, as the Repliar says all over his
Book: for this teaching follows the state of the Church, which being
conspicuous, the teaching also is conspicuous, but the state of the Church
being poisoned, and ouer-whelmed with heresy, the teaching must needs be hard
to discern, and less conspicuous then the Scriptures.

2 Secondly he notes that howsoever the Church may at the beginning be little,
and toward the end, for That the reign of Antichrist is so short: he has no
assurance among his own writers: diverse whereof say the contrary.
the short reign of Antichrist, be much decayed, both in the number of
Professors, and visiblenesse of the outward state: yet for all ages, betwixt
the beginning, and the end, it shall be a great multitude: as S. Austine
proves. Whereto I answer, granting that many times, the Church is, and has
been as large, and visible, as S. Austine says; and that we do not imagine it
to be so small, and obscured, at all times, between the beginning, and the
end, but only at some times: as for example in the 13. and 14. hundred
years: neither is there a word in all S. Austine, whereby it may appear his
judgment is against us. That which the Jesuit thought good to allege, I. 23.
n 3.
answered in THE WAY, whereto it seems he has nothing to reply. And granting
that it may be as obscure, as we say, in the time of Antichrist, he were as
good yield up his cause: for, if his own D.D. be not deceived, the time of
Antichrist is not so short as he dreams: our Jesuits, though very waueringly,
indeed allow him but 3. years, and a half. But what says Indic. de Apocal.
and Antichr. sub fin. being a Preface before his translation of Arethas upon
the Apocal. in Oecumen. O hers also allow Antichrist a longer time then 3.
years and a half Quantum vero temporis, in augenda stabiliendaque Monarchia,
ponere debeat, non mihi constat: quia neque ex praedictis locis satis
colligitur; neque videtur admodum verisimile, breui tempore trium annorum cum
dimidio, haec omnia esse perfecturum. Fra. Suar. tom. 2. p. 641. and defens.
fid Cathol. l. 5. c 9. Quam diu simpliciter regnaturus sit Antichristus, a
nullo, quod ego sciam, traditur: and nulli opinor mortalium fuisse compertum.
Perer. in Dan. l. 15. in c. 12. p 730. and so others who think the height of
his reign shall contain only 3. years and a half, but the rest of his time
much more.
Hentenius? Others otherwise expound A TIME, AND TIMES, AND HALF A TIME. For
it is not possible, that in so small a time, he should possess so many
kingdoms, and provinces. If therefore M. White affirm the Church, in regard
of the sincerest faith, at sometimes, comes to be but a small number, he
affirms nothing, but what the Jesuit himself is enforced to yield, at least,
in the times of Antichrist. Here then is an issue between us. The Church may
be invisible, as the Protestants hold, in the time of the reign of Antichrist.
But the time of the Popes being, for example, in the 13. and 14. age, was a
part of the time of the reign of Antichrist. The Church therefore might be
invisible for the time of the Popes being in the 13. and 14. age. If my
adversary mislike the conclusion, he must deny the minor: (for the mayor is
his own doctrine, and the doctrine of all the Divines on his side) and then he
is debarred from denying the Church to be invisible, till he have preserved the
Pope from being Antichrist; which he can never do; and if he fall out to be
Antichrist, then I hope he will confess the sayings of Saint Augustine
concerning the Church against the Donatists, prove no perpetual, and
continual visibility of the state thereof.

Page 243. Stapleton in relect. contr. 4. q. 3. art. 1. Greg. de Val. tom. 3.
dis. 1. q. 1
A. D. Note Secondly, that although it be true, which my adversaries
impertinently object, that the Church is not actually seen at all times by all
men; yet it is visible, that is to say, such as at least in potentia remota,
may be seen, or known by all, if the impediments be not on our parts, who
should see it. Although also it be not alike visible, and perspicuous (as our
Divines well declare) at all times, yet it is always so visible, and
perspicuous, that with prudent, and diligent inquiry, it may be found, and
discerned: in regard, even in times of greatest obscurities, there were always
some eminent, and known members of it, by reason of which, even men of the
world may discern, and distinguish it from other men, which were not of the
true Church. Moreover although it have not always an outward illustrious, and
worldly estate, especially in times, and places, where persecution rages: nor
cannot always practice publicly the rites, and ceremonies of divine worship,
but is forced sometimes to do this in private (as Christians did in the first
ten persecutions, under the heathen Emperors: and as Catholics in England are
forced to do now adays) yet the Church never did, does, or shall want an
inward estate, subordination, and government of Pastors, this being a thing
appointed by God himself, Acts the 20. v. 28. Ehpes. 4. v. 12.
to be always in the Church: nor ever did, does, or shall, want altogether the
practice of rites, pertaining to Sacraments, and other duties necessary
pertaining to divine worship, and profession of the Christian faith: neither
was, or shall this inward estate, or practice of the Church universally, in any
age, be so secret, but that some notice, at least in general was, and may be
had of it, even by infidels, and enemies: in so much, that for the time to
come, S. Augustine affirms, Aug. l. 20. De ciuit. c. 8.
that even in Antichrists time the Church shall be conspicuous, in some sort:
and for times past, there are records, at this day extant in Histories,
written, either by friends, enemies, or both, by which it is to us, and will be
to posterity, apparent enough, that there were such a company of Christian
professors, using such practice in all ages And although the names of all
professors nor all particular points pertaining to to their profession be not
set down: yet diverse both men, and matters are so set down in stories, as it
is no great difficulty, to assign a catalogue of some true Christian
professors continually in all ages The which records of Histories was
doubtless first made, and afterward preserved by divine providence, as a
necessary means to certify us of the fulfilling of the divine Prophesies, and
promises made in Scripture, about the continuance of the Church. For if it be
true which M. White says, to wit, White page 338.
that things past cannot be showed by no other means, then by histories: if we
had not Histories to show, and assure us, that Christians had been in all ages,
we could not know, whether the divine Prophesies, and promises made in
Scripture, about the continuance of the Church, had been fulfilled, or no; and
so we could not take that solid comfort and confirmation of our faith and
hope, by these Prophesies, and promises, for which they were ordained.
3 He affirms five things. FIRST, that howsoever the Church be not actually
seen, at all times by all men, yet it is such, as may be seen, and known by
all, if the impediment be not on their part, that should see it: this is true.
But it is not true that his adversaries object this to him impertinently. For
The WAY. 17. n. 3.
I objected it to let him see how, and in what sense, we hold the inuisibility
of the Church, not simply, but respectively, in regard of those that see not
the corruptions hiding, and defacing it. Now I never knew before, that it was
impertinent to expound the sense of the question in controversy. NEXT he
grants, it is not alike visible, and perspicuous at all times, as his Divines
well declare. The which possible, he would never have bin known of, if Digr. 17.
I had not put him in mind. But being granted, Bell. de eccl. l. 3. c. 13.
the Cardinal, and all that speak as he does, must bate an ace of his
assertion: God has at all times a Church, consisting not of a few people, but
a great multitude, as conspicuous, as an earthly kingdom. For if it be not
always alike perspicuous, but sometime, Staplet and Grego. Valent. vbi sup.
as Stapleton, and Gregory declare, in the places quoted (if they had been
quoted truly) it may be so tossed with errors, and scismes, and persecutions,
that to such as are unskillful, and do not discreetely weigh things, and times,
it shall be very hard to be discerned: then it falls a great deal short of a
great multitude as conspicuous, as any earthly kingdom. THIRDLY he says, that
although it be not alike visible, at all times, yet it is alwaie so visible,
that with prudent, and diligent inquiry, it may be discerned. Which we deny
not: but the reason hereof is not, in regard there are always some eminent
members of it, wholly free from all the corruption prevailing, because, those
eminent members the Jesuit understands to be the Pope, and some part, at least
of his hierarchy, the visibilitie of the Church Simanch institut. Cathol. tit.
24. n. 1. Azor. instit. tom. 2 l. 5. c. 21. quinto.
being defined by the perpetual subjection thereof to a visible Pope: but
because even then, when it is most invisible, and kept down with persecution,
and heresy, the substance, and rule of faith is preserved, and such as are
enlightened by the Spirit of God, by diligent inquiry, may perceive the
soundest part of the Church to be, not in the multitude, as the world thinks,
which has innouated the ancient faith; but among those few, mean oppressed
ones, that this glorious and conspicuous multitude condemns, and persecutes;
not the eminency of Sat, but the eminency of truth and doctrine being the
sign whereby to know them. FOURTHLY he confesses the Church cannot always
practice publicly the rites of Gods worship, but is forced sometimes to do it
in private: this is also true: for albeit the public worship shall never
fail to be openly exercised, yet sometime this open exercise may be more
corrupt, and defiled with the inventions of men, then the private retained by
those, that cannot, or dare not reform the abuses. But then why does he
censure me, all over his book, for holding this, and scoff at that I said,
the faithful may sometime profess only in secret among themselves? And but
that he will not let his stomach come down, he should have added, According
to the doctrine of his Divines. Telelpho. de Casent. l. de magn. Tribul. page
32. Ouand. 4. d. 18. prop. 3. Viega in Apoc. p 763. n. 12. Bozi de. sig. eccl.
l. 24. c. 10. Aquipontan. de Antich cont. Sohn. p. 23.
that the Sacrifice of the Mass also shall be abolished in the time of
Antichrist, and then his Church will be as invisible, as ours. When it shall
not only be said in secret, as Seminaries in England now adays do it (but by
their leave THEY DO NOT THAT ALONE IN SECRET) but it shall not be said at all
(which these Catholics would repine at now adays in England.) FIFTHLY, he
says that howsoever the Church be not always illustrious, nor cannot always
practice the rites of Gods worship publicly: yet it shall never want Pastors
to govern; nor altogether the use of the Sacrament, and other duties
pertaining to divine worship, and the profession of faith: at least in an
INWARD estate. The which is true, and the Protestants say it, as well, as he;
expounding those Pastors to have been many of the ordinary Pastors living in
the communion of the Church of Rome, for certain ages past: and those
Sacraments, and rites pertaining to divine worship, to have been part of that,
which was exercised; and this profession of Christian faith to have been the
testimony that many in the said ages, have given against the corruptions of the
Papacy: partly by holding the substance of truth with their errors, and partly
by suffering persecution for misliking the Papacy. And we confess also, that
which he adds; that this inward state and practice of the Church, shall never
be universally so secret, but that some notice shall be had of it, ever by
enemies: and (omitting his conceit of Antichrist to come, which S. Austin in
the place quoted, affirms not) we show for the time past, sufficient records
thereof: both friends, and foes testifying, in their writings, the resistance,
that in all ages, was made against the Papacy, as it grew on; and the
succession of our faith, and religion in the midst of the Roman Church it
self, appearing in the books of the Schoolmen, and Friars themselves: which
records (and what would the Repliar have more) by divine providence are
preserved in the writings of all that lived in those ages, even such as
embraced the Papacy, (though now By a practice of purging books: mentioned
before.
the Church of Rome do what it can to abolish them) and certify us that the
Protestant Religion has continued in the Church in all ages since Christ.
Which Records, if we wanted, then might we, as the Repliar speaks, justly
misdoubt our case, whether the divine promises made to Gods Church have been
fulfilled in us. And though it be true that M. White said, Things past cannot
be showed but by stories, and many things belonging to the Church, and
religion, no doubt, for want of histories be forgotten, the said histories
being either suppressed, or adulterated: yet he adds, that there is NO ARTICLE
OF THE PROTESTANT RELIGION, BUT WE CAN SHOW IT EMBRACED; AND NO ARTICLE OF THE
PAPACY, BUT WE CAN SHOW IT RESISTED, EVEN IN THE WRITINGS, AND RECORDS OF THE
CHVRCH OF ROME IT SELF: and by these records we can show, that whatsoever we
mislike in our Adversaries, was not at the beginning, but crept in, and mingled
it self with the truth, through the faction, and conueiance, of private
persons in the Church; and so the fulfilling of Gods promises touching the
perpetual continuance of the Church, is known sufficiently, and our hope
confirmed, as the Jesuit requires. Though the Romish practice in razing, and
forging histories, and antiquity, be discovered to be such, that were there no
records in the world, the testimony of the Scripture alone, whereto our faith
agrees, should suffice for our comfort, and to confirm our faith, and hope,
and persuade us, that the divine promises have been fulfilled.

A. D. Note thirdly that not only the Church, de facto, Page 244.
has not been hitherto so visible, as I have said, but also (which chiefly is
to be pondered) the nature of the Church, consisting of Professors of Christian
faith, is such, that according to the ordinary course of Gods providence, it
cannot be altogether secret from the world, at least for a long time,
especially for so long a time, as Protestants, are forced to plead for an
invisible Church. The reason of which is because the Church is bound to an
outward actual profession of faith: White p. 96. Wootton page 190. 29. 1.
first as my Adversaries admit among the faithful themselves, in practicing
the rites, and ceremonies of Service, and Sacraments: which may indeed be done,
in secret, although hardly so secret, (as at least in continuance of time) some
kind of general notice is not given of it to others by one chance, or other,
as experience has of this present, and former ages teaches. Secondly, the
Church is bound to another kind of actual profession, to wit, before men of
the world, according to that of our Savior, Let your light so shine before
men, Matthew. 5. v. 16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven, and according to the example of the primitive Christians, who did not
only shine among themselves, but were Mat. 5. v. 14.
the lights of the world. 1 Cor. 4. v. 9.
being made a spectacle to the world Philip. 2. v. 15 D. Thom. 2. 2. q. 3. art.
2.
as lights in the world. And although all the members in the Church are not
bound, at all times actually to shine in this manner, yet so often, as the
notable glory of God, and the good of souls necessarily requires, every one
is bound thus, by words, or works to make profession of his faith in the
sight of the world. Now although Gods glory and the good of souls, do not
necessarily require, that this, or that private man should profess his faith
at all times, yet that some, or other should profess, is always necessary,
both for the glory of God, and the good of souls: for if, for any notable
time, Isay 54. v. 1. 2. Malac. 1. v 11. Aug. orat. aduers. Iudaeos de vnitate
Ecclesiae. cap. 7. ep. 48.
there were no professing true Christians eminently known, at least in
general in the world; first it were a notable dishonor to God, in that it
should show, that all his servants loved, or feared the world, more then him,
and that they had less regard to publish his honor in the world, then the
Devils instruments ordinarily have, to publish the profession of other
religions which tend to Gods dishonor. And that whereas it was prophesied of the
Church, that it should be more ample, and glorious then the Synagogue of the
Jews was, in the most flourishing estate, it should be so far from being more
ample, and glorious, that it were sometime more narrow, or less conspicuous,
then the Synagogue of the Jews ever was, or now is in her ruinate estate.
Moreuer it were a notable hinderance to the good of innumerable Because the
knowledge of the Church is necessary for all those, which will be saved:
therefore our Savior said, that she could not be hidden. Aug. ep. 170.
souls, which by teaching, and conversation of the faithful, might most
easily be converted to the faith, who otherwise for want of hearing or
possibility to hear that there were any such religion, should through
ignorance perish: Thirdly, the Church is bound by the negative precept, of
profession of faith, never to deny Christ, or the truth of his religion, nor to
profess outwardly the rites, and ceremonies of any contrary religion: by which
abstaining from Service, and ceremonies of other Religions, the Church could
not especially for any long time live so secret, but it should be noted, and
known, as we see Catholics to be at this day, detected by their refusal to
come to Protestant service, and sermons, and as Protestants in Queen Mary's
days were notified by abstaining from Catholic service and Sacraments.
4 This which he notes thirdly, contains three arguments to show the nature of
the Church to be such, that it cannot be secret from the world, at least so
long a time, as the Protestants plead for an invisible Church. First, because
it is bound to actual, and outward profession. Next, it should be less
conspicuous then the Synagogue of the Jews, which were against the Prophecyes.
Thirdly, innumerable souls should perish for want of Church teaching, when
they could not see the Church. Ad. 3.
The last of these reasons I answered in the WAY, Ad. 2.
whereto because he replies nothing, I refer both him, and his Reader. To the
second I answer, that the glory, and praeminence of the Church above the
Synagogue, prophesied, stands not in the perpetual visiblenes thereof, as our
adversaries define visiblenes, 1. Esa. 60. 11. Act 10.11.
but in four other things: First, the compass, and limits: which was no
longer to be confined within Iudaea, 2. Ioh. 4.23.
but enlarged to all nations. Secondly, the manner of worship, which should not
be any longer carnal, and typical, 3. Heb. 8.6.
but spiritual. Thirdly, the dignity of the Gospel, and the promises annexed
thereunto, above the law, and the promises thereof, wherein the Jews were
trained up. Fourthly, 4. Heb. 12.28. cum 27.
in the continuance thereof, which was to be, not till a certain time, as the
Synagogue was, but for ever to the worlds end. Thus it was promised, that the
Church should exceed the Synagogue, which promise may well stand with that
which we say: for the apostasy that prevailed 2. Th. 2.3. Apoc. 9.2. and.
12.6. and 13.14. and 17.2.
was also prophesied: which being at the highest, yet the Church lost not these
prerogatives, but her faith continued still to be Catholic, in those that
vpheld the substantial articles thereof all over the world, howsoever the
apostasy brought in many, and dangerous heresies, that were holden besides in
the Church: as the Synagogue also sometimes was overwhelmed with the like
corruptions.

5 His first reason is, Ad. 1.
because the Church is bound by a negative precept, never to deny Christ, or
his religion, or to abstain from the service and ceremonies thereof: but
outwardly to profess the faith. To this I answered in. 19.
my Book, that the Church neither fails to profess outwardly the faith,
which in heart it believes, nor yet is made visible, and known to all, by this
profession. The reason is, because the members of the Church professing the
substance of faith (as 1. Reg. 19.18.
the 7000. in Israel did, that bowed not the knee to Baal, whom Elias saw not)
when persecution, and prevailing error will not suffer them to do it in the
purest manner in all points; yet this is outward profession, and satisfies the
commandment, which requires no more but 2. things, first, that we profess
openly to the world, as long as the same will suffer us; and be ready to seal
the faith, thus professed, with our blood, when by necessary circumstances of
time, and place, we shall be called thereunto: secondly, that when persecution,
or invincible ignorance, or any other impediment hinders that this cannot be
done, yet we profess one to another, and maintain the faith wheresoever, or
how few soever, so far as we have means to understand. To this my adversary
replies, that indeed the rites, and ceremonies of service, and sacraments,
(whereby he means the profession mentioned, in as much, as by the exercize of
these things Christ is professed) may, though hardly, be done in secret: but
the Church is bound to another kind of actual profession, before the world. I
answer 2. things. First, himself knew this absolutely taken, to be false: and
therefore he recalles himself, and yeeldes again, that all the members of the
Church are not bound at all times, actually to shine in this manner, but then,
when Gods glory, and the good of souls, requires. This he borrowed of his
Thomas, whose words shall be this part of my answer. For the Church and the
several members thereof, are never so hidden, or overwhelmed with error, but
in time, and place necessarily requiring the same, they profess the substance
even outwardly, and suffer sometime for the same: and thus did many profess
the Protestants faith in all ages: and therefore the Jesuit trifles away the
time, when he stands to prove it necessary, that even always some or other
should profess outwardly: for we grant it, and that there are some eminent
Christians (if not in state, yet in faith, and truth) at all times: and these
love God, fear not the world, but regard his honor, and desire to publish his
truth: and what ye will: and yet still these men may be oppressed with some
corruptions, and hindered by persecution, that few can mark, or discern them,
and so contemptible in the world, that the most will not believe them; by
reason the external greatness, and opinion of their persecutors, whereto, by
all subtlety, and tyranny, they have aspired, shall dazell the eyes of men
that they cannot discern the truth. Where the Protestants Church was before
Luthers days.
Secondly, I answer, that even the members of the Church of Rome it self, as
the Bishops of France, and England with their congregations, for example,
professed thus outwardly to all the world the Christian faith: for albeit they
were, some of them more, and some less, corrupted with the Apostasy
universally spread over the Church: and had entertained the abuses, that
Luther, and the Reformers put away: yet the foundation remained, and the
Scripture was preserved: and the whole rule of faith: and in the agonies, and
conflicts of their conscience, they defended the truth of these things, and by
repentance cast away their damnable errors: and all such, even in the midst
of the Papacy, were outward professors, and members of our Church: yea God
stirred up among the persecutors themselves, and such as lived it communion
with them, many that gave witness to the truth by teaching, and delivering the
several articles thereof, some one, and some another, among their heresies,
and corruptions. And thus we say our religion also every parcel of it, stood
in the midst of the Papacy, and when the Church was most defaced. For first,
some persons still perseuered in holding, and professing it entirely, in regard
of the substance: for though every one of them, be proved to have holden some
error withal, as possible Wickliffe, or the Waldenses did, that is no
prejudice to the Church. 2. Many ordinary Doctors, and learned men, in the
Church of Rome, at all times saw the abuses, and errors that crept in, and
speaking against them, noted, and branded them. 3. Few learned men, that lived
in the communion of the Church of Rome, but they held one point, or other of
the substance of truth: yea many things belonging to the foundation: whereupon
it is that I say so often, THERE IS NOTHING WHEREIN WE DISSENT FROM THE
PAPISTS, BUT WE CAN SHOW IT TAVGHT, AND DELIVERED, IN THE BOOKS OF ANCIENT
PAPISTS THEMSELVES: which proves unanswerably, that the things now broached by
the Trent Council, and the Jesuits, were not the certain doctrine of those
times, but were successively advanced by the policy of Satan, the faction of
his instruments always innouating, and adulterating the truth in some part, or
other, thereof.

CHAP XL.
Again touching the visiblenesse of the Church, and in what sense we say it
was invisible. Many things innouated in the Church of Rome. The complaints of
Vbertine and Jerome of Ferrara. 2. 3. All the Protestants faith was preserved
in the midst of the Church of Rome. 6. A jest of the Terynthians. 7. What
religion has bred desperation.

A.D. Note fourthly, Page 246. Math. 5. v. 15. Ibid. v. 14.
that since God has ordained his Church to be of such nature, that (like light
not hid under a bushel, but put upon a candlestick) it cannot but shine
before men, in manner aforesaid: and that (like a city built on a mountain)
it cannot be hid; and this partly for his own honor, and for the good of
souls, not only of those, which are already faithful, but (of his part) for
the general good of the whole world; hence appears, that not only the
Church in every several age, could not but be visible to men living in some
age: but also partly by Gods providence, partly by humane diligence, some
records of Histories, could not (morally speaking) but be set out, either by
friends, or by enemies, as they have been hitherto in like, and less matters:
and being set out, they could not but be still extant, in such sort as not
only it may appear to posterity, that the Church has been always: but also
that at least, some eminent members of it may be assigned in all precedent
ages. One chief use of which Historiesis, that for the confirmation of our
faith, and hope, we may plainly see those Prophecies, and promises of
Scripture, which concern the continuance of the Church, to have been hitherto
fulfilled: and that when question at any time shall be made, which company of
visible professors of the Christian faith, are the true Church: by ^^lpe of
these Histories, the question may be more easily decided, in that (a continual
line all descent being showed of one company from Christ's time hitherto, the
like whereof cannot be showed of others) one that has learned by the
Scriptures, that the true Church of Christ, was to continue always and that
visible, in such sort, as I have showed, might straightwaies conclude, that,
that only company, which by Histories is showed thus to have continued, is the
true Church: and that the other which could not by Histories show such a
visible continuance, is not the true Church.
In what sense the Protestants say the Church was sometimes invisible.
1 Still the Jesuit reasons, as if we held the Church for many ages together to
have been simply invisible, that no man could tell where it was; whereas we
only hold, that, comparatively, it is not visible at one time in such sort,
and with such purity and liberty from corruption, as it is at another. That is
to say, it does not visibly profess the whole truth without mixture of
corruption, nor retain the outward state in such purity, and liberty of
profession, and Ecclesiastical government, as needs no reformation; but is
at sometimes oppressed with persecution, and entangled with heresy breeding
among the members; that albeit the substance of truth remain, and many retain
it with effect, yet a particular company professing, and exercizing the same
faith, and goernement, entirely without corruption, in such manner as at other
sometimes it does, cannot be found: the small persecuted, and oppressed company
may also be the soundest members of the Church; and the articles of religion
most opposed, may be the truth; and the chief Pastors, and greatest multitude
that are most followed, and believed, may be the followers, and army of
Antichrist. The state of all the Church finally throughout the world, may be so
corrupted, that a pure Church, such as the primitive Church was, or such as the
Church should be, cannot be seen. This is that we mean when we hold the
Churches inuisiblenesse, whereby it is easy to see that what the Jesuit
notes, is of no force against us. For it shall be granted, that Almighty God,
partly for his own glory, and partly for the good of souls, has ordained his
Church to be a light, that cannot but shine: and a city that cannot be hid: and
therefore it must needs be visible in every age; and such as by history may be
made apparent, and some eminent members thereof in every age may be assigned:
But hence it does not follow, that it shall always be visible in one, and the
same state; or the members thereof eminently, and apparently shall profess the
faith in the same degree of perfection, and liberty: but only that all the
faith of Christ shall be visibly professed therein; for the Church is compared
to a light, not because it is perpetually visible in one state (for lights
have their Eclipses, and blind men see them nor, when they shine) but because
at some time it is exceeding visible, in the best state and at all times, it
has in it, in some degrees, or other, the light of all truth, and glory,
whereby the elect are guided to God. I love not to repeat that I have said
already, till I see it answered, and therefore if the Reader desire further
satisfaction, he may repair^ to that I writ. And whereas the Jesuit notes, that
the true Church being a light, and visible, it cannot be, but Gods providence,
and humane diligence would provide some record of histories to find it: this is
true, and shall be yielded him; and let our reformed Churches of the
Protetestants never be counted part of the Catholic Church, if all
Ecclesiastical records in the world, beginning with the new Testament, and so
descending by the writings of the ancient Fathers, till you come to the very
times of Luther, do not show the articles of their faith to have been professed
in the Church of Rome, as I have often said, its self: and that which we have
cast off, and wherein the Jesuits, and we differ this day, to be no part of
the ancient faith, but late innouations brought in by faction; that it was
lawful for us to put them away, and reduce things to the first antiquity. And
this I say, not to ground our faith on humane reports: but to testify that I
grant such providence of God for the confirming our faith: though if such
Histories were wanting (as they are not) it should not move us, so long as we
have the Scriptures to justify our doctrine: wherewith whatsoever consents, is
the truth, whether Histories (which are but a humane testimony, and unable to
authorize or support faith) mention the succession thereof, or not. But when my
adversary will needs have it, that one chief use of History is, to show the
continuance of the Church, that seeing, thereby, this continuance, we might
know it to be the Church of God, and not finding it, we might know thereby,
that it is not the Church: I will not strive with him: but acknowledge the
providence of God, and industry of man, who has left the records of History to
confirm our faith; and freely grant our religion to be false, if the
continual descent thereof, from Christ, cannot, by such record, be showed.
Wherein we are so resolute, that next the evidence of the sacred Scripture,
this is our greatest motive against the Trentisme, and Iesuitisme of the now
Church of Rome, that by all histories, and writings of record, we find it to be
an innovation against the ancient religion, and a rabble of heresies from time
to time added, and brought in to that, which in the beginning was professed in
the Church of God: and if any man be so inamoured of Rome, as to imagine that
part of the religion thereof, which we have forsaken, as the Supremacy,
Transubstantiation, Traditions, Latin service, and the rest, to be come in a
continual lineall descent from Christ down, through all ages, to these times,
he will find himself deceived, when he makes the trial: or if he be so
unlearned, that he cannot make this trial, or so besotted with the conceit of
Papistry, that he will not, or so oppressed with the craft of such, as this
Repliar is, that he cares not; yet it satisfies me, and gives my soul
contentment against the day of my death, that reading all manner of ancient
records, Councels, Fathers, Church Histories, Greek, and Latin, though I have
not read all, I find Papistry to be none of the ancient religion uniformly
embraced in the Church, but an heresy brought in by the packing, and ambitious
policy of some: growing as a Leprosy successively, one piece after another, to
it. And reading the later Divines, and Schoolmen, that writ since the 11 age,
I find, as in the former, the whole substance of the Protestants says
delivered: but touching the rest, wherein the Church of Rome, and we dissent,
and which we have put away: as the Mass, Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Images, Freewill, Merits, Supremacy, etc: I find no unity, or certainety
among them, but all things inuolued with contradictions, and uncertainty, that
it is easy to discern the said points to be no parcel of the ancient
Catholic, and Apostolic faith. It is an ancient complaint of Vbertin de
Casal. tract. de 7. stat. eccl. c. 3. p. 65. The same thing, touching the
Schoolmen and Divines of the Church of Rome, is reported, and complained of, by
Sauanarola, a Friar living sometime in Florence. Multi hodiernis temporibus,
qui volunt videri legis Doctores, ac defensores, conuersi sunt in vaniloqutum,
and obsenratum est insipiens cor eorum. Dicentes enim se esse sapientes stulti
facti sunt; quia, relicta sacrarum literarum simplicitate, ad Gentilitatem se
penitus conuerterunt, and adulterantes verbum Dei, impleuerunt chartas
superbissimis obscuritatibus, vanissimisque verborum ornatibus, ac stulta, apud
Deum, sapientia, pompaque rhethoricorum verborum Deo odiosa, nec non infinitis
quaestionibus, inexplicabilibus ac inutilibus, quae mergunt homines in
interitum, audientesque subuertunt, and in vestimentis ouium volentes videri
fidei defensores, fact sunt populo Dei lupi rapaces. Dicunt enim se
philosophiae operam dare vt melius sacras scripturas, quas nunquam legere
volunt, intelligant, meliusque veritatem Dei fidemque defendant; Sed reuera
quaerunt quae sua sunt, non quae Jesu Christi; semper addiscentes (vt dicit
Apostolus) and nunquam ad veritatis scientiam p^ruenientes. Qui dixerunt (ait
Propheta) linguam nostram magnificabimus: labia nostra a nobis sunt. Quis
noster dominus est? Et tantum hic morbus increuit, vt Ecclesiae Praelatos,
Presbyteros, clericos, Religiosos, ac Seculares totumque populum Christianum
tabefecerit. Adeo autem inueteratus est, vt non solum glorientur Christiani,
and tumenti animo de Gentilium literisextollant semtipsos; sed, quod peius est,
Paganorum scientias, qui in vanitate sensus sui ambulantes, nihil putabant
verum nisi esset inflaium verborum compositione ornatorum, non verentur
praepouere scientiae Dei, a quo est omnium scientia, and quilinguas mutorum
aperit, facitque disertas, Et multi hodie in tantam v^s^^iam blasphemiamque
prorumpunt, vt sacras Scripturas, rugato naso, subsannantes, ita despiciant and
irrideant, vt earum sectatores putent pro nihilo habendos. Adeo enim Princeps
huius seculi excaecauit eos vt, tanquam mente capti, nihil seiant, se omnium
rerum sapientiam apprehendisse arbitrentur. Taceo de muliis qui cultum Dei,
fidemque, abnegarunt. Hicron. Sauanarol. de ord. scient. l. 3. subsiti. page 13
edit. Venet. apud. Aurel, Pincium. an. 1534.
Vbertin, a Carthusian, touching the Friars, and Schoolmen: that by mingling
Paganish errors with the principles of faith, they had blown away the truth of
the Gospel: and he says, The falling star, that had the key given him to open
the bottomless pit: was certain, eminent, learned, and later religious men
falling into earthly desires, and the curious sciences of Pagans, and into
diverse sects. They had great wits to open, and extol the doctrine of
Aristotle, and Auerroes, and studying in a manner nothing else, they devised
deep and gulfelicke opinions that obscured the Evangelical light: yea by this
practice of mingling Aristotle with their treatises of Divinity, they had
corrupted, and rejected all the articles of faith, beside the unity of the
Deity. And touching their vehemence, and industry, in following their opinions,
he says, that which is worth the noting: The voice of their wings, that is to
say, of their opinions, which they presume to be high, and lofty; in wonderful
contentions, outcries, and raging, is like the voice of wheels, or a
tumultuous army running in war; this was a Friars report long ago, and my own
knowledge of these things gives me assurance, and resolution, whatsoever any
man says to the contrary; whose ignorance, and perverseness, I will never
suffer, to prejudice my certain, and familiar knowledge.

Page 247.
A. D. By this which now I have noted, appears that the true militant Church,
or company of the true professors of the Gospel, which (as M. White, White p.
87. 337. 338. Wootton page 164.
and M Wootton grant) must continue always, cannot at any time be altogether
invisible, especially in such sort, and for so long a time, as they would have
the Protestant professors (which were only two called Nullus, and Nemo, that
is to say in truth not one at all) before Martin Luther to have (inuisibly)
continued, professing the whole faith, without change in all Countries, or at
least in one, or other corner, they cannot (for want of Histories forsooth)
tell where the truth is, no where in the world. And consequently by this
appears, that this idle conceit of an invisible company of professing
Protestants, continuing in all ages, is a plain Platonicall Idaea, or
poetical Chymaera, in plain English a mere imaginary fiction, invented by
Protestants, to serve as a shift to bleare the eye of the simple and to make a
show of saying something to the argument, grounded upon the authority of a
continual visible Church, which presses them so much, when indeed they can
say nothing to it: Durum telum necessitas, ignoscite. Need has no law, you
must pardon them.
2 By that which he has noted, he says, it appears that the Militant Church,
or company of true Professors, cannot at any time, be altogether invisible:
specially in such sort, or so long a time, as they say the Protestant
Professors were. The things he noted may be reduced to eight propositions in
all. First, that the Church in the infancy, or beginning thereof was very
small, like a grain of Mustardseed: and toward the end also, in Antichrists,
time, shall be much decayed, both in the number of professors, and in the
visiblenesse of the outward state. Secondly, that this notwithstanding, yet in
all ages, betwixt the beginning, and the end, it is a great multitude spread
over the world. Thirdly, that the Church is not actually seen, at all times,
by all men. Fourthly, that yet it is visible, that is, such as may be seen,
and known by all, if the impediments be not on their part, that should see it:
and by prudent, and diligent inquiry may be discerned at all times. And in the
greatest obscurity, the world may see, and distinguish some eminent members
therein. Fifthly, that it cannot alwaie practice the rites of divine worship,
publicly; but is forced sometime to do it in private. Sixthly, that yet it
never wants ordinary Pastors, nor the practice of rites appertaining to the
Sacraments, and divine worship. Seventhly, which practice, and inward state
of the Church shall never be so secret, but notice shall be had of it, even by
Infidels, and enemies: and the records thereof shall remain in Histories.
Eighthly, that it is the nature of the Church to be, in this manner, visible,
for diverse considerations. These propositions contain the substance of that he
noted; whereupon he inferres 2. things. First that the militant Church cannot,
at any time, be altogether invisible. Next, that it cannot be invisible in such
sort, or so long a time, as M. White says, the professors of the Protestant
religion were. The first I grant him to be true, and he need not so often
have inferred it, when it is not our assertion, that the Church at any time, is
simply, absolutely, or altogether, invisible, but only secundum quid, and
respectively in comparison of the reformed state thereof. The second is false,
that it cannot be invisible in such sort, or so long as we say: for we say it
was invisible in this sort, that at some times, there was no congregation of
people in the world visibly professing the faith, and visibly administering the
Sacraments, and Church discipline without much superstition, and corruption, or
heresy practiced therewith; I say visibly, in my adversaries sense; that is,
so as this congregation was a great multitude spread over the world, whose
faith, and administration, thus incorrupted, infidels, and enemies, had
knowledge of, and Histories recorded, and wherein some eminent men, might be
discerned even by the world: for the contrary is true, that all public
assemblies thus entirely without superstition, professing, or holding the faith
and Ecclesiastical government, may be oppressed, and extinguished. And thus I
grant the true Churches (whose sound, and necessary faith we hold) failed
throughout the world: nor do I here intend, or affirm, that there were no
particular eminent persons that held, or professed the faith entirely for
substance (all errors not being mortal) or no singular professions of men that
were of our religion, and refused the Papacy: for there were many such in all
ages, though Nullus, and Nemo be left out; but our assertion proceeds of such
congregations, as we call particular Churches: and this is enough to excuse the
quality, and condition of our Church in former times, and to refell the vain
bragges of our adversaries, touching the external succession of the Church of
Rome. For if this proposition be true (which it must be, until the Repliar,
can refell it) The Church militant here on earth, may be so oppressed with
persecution, and infected with heresy, that at sometimes there can no
particular congregation thereof be seen in all the world, either publicly, or
privately, professing the true faith entirely without heresy, and exercizing
the preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments, and
discipline without corruption: hence it will follow that the Protestants
granting this of their Churches; disadvantage not their religion: and our
adversaries boasting of their multitude and glorious succession, may be the
Ministers of Antichrist.

3 But the Jesuit saying that we conceit an invisible company of professing
Protestants, is mistaken. For I noted to him, that we do not hold a definite
number of persons distinct from the members of the Church of Rome, and living
apart in another society by themselves, in secret, as it were Of whom Ioh.
Paris. tract. de Antich. p. 46.
the 7. sleepers lying hid in a mountain: but we affirm this company lived in
the midst of the Church of Rome it self, and were the visible professors
thereof. First, some that kept themselves from the damnable doctrines thereof,
albeit they were corrupted with some lesser errors whereof they repented at
their death. Secondly, some openly refused those damnable doctrines, and
suffered for the same. Thirdly, some resisted the Papacy, as it grew on, and
noted the abuses thereof, and never ceased to complain, and call for
reformation. Fourthly, many that were ordinary Pastors, and Bishops in the
Church of Rome, though poisoned with damnable heresies, yet still professed the
substance of faith, and repented them in diverse things, and maintained the
Scripture to be the word of God. The which things do sufficiently uphold the
succession of our doctrine: though Lombard, and Thomas, and Gerson, and Occham,
and such as they were, be said to be some of the persons, in whom it succeeded:
by reason the rest, which they held against us, appears by the Scriptures, and
writings of the Apostolic Church, to have been their own inventions. This
plainly shows who were the Nullus, and Nemoes, that held the Protestants
religion; when they did all this, some in a higher, and some in a lower degree,
according to the measure of their knowledge, and means that they had, whom the
Pope, and his Clergy persecuted, and condemned for heretics, though they were
the best, and soundest part of the Church: in regard of which persecution,
restraining them that the truth might not be suffered openly in the
congregations (which were all surprised by Antichrist) we call them the
invisible Church that was not seen to enjoy religion, and discipline in the
liberty, purity, and perspicuitie, that we now do, and whom the wicked
unbelievers of the world could not discern, or observe; by reason their eyes
were blinded, that they should not behold the truth. I admonish the Replyar
hereafter to take notice of this, and not to reply upon an opinion of his own
making, least forging that which no man holds, and then, so Paedant like,
squirting at it, his own head prove a hiue for Platoes Ideas, and the cave
where Chymaera nestles himself.

Page 247.
A. D. If they could make solid answer to this argument, they would never
seek for such shifts, but being not able soundly to answer it, nor yet willing
to acknowledge themselves to be convinced by it, desperate obstinacy, and
obstinate desperation has driven them to this bad, miserable, ridiculous, and
desperate shift, the which if it were not a bad shift, Aug. contra G^udentium
l. 3. c. 1.
S. Augustine could not well have urged the Donatists, as he did, saying, If
yours be the Catholic Church show it to stretch out the boughs of it, which
abundance of plentiful increase, over the whole earth. For by this shift they
might easily have answered, that it did not follow, that their Church, was not
the true Church, because they could not show it to extend it self over the
earth: because it might be invisible. If this were not a miserable shift, the
same S. Augustine could not well have assigned it, as a note proper to
heretics, as he did, saying, A clear, and manifest authority of the Church
being appointed over the whole orb of the earth (Christ our Savior) does
consequently admonish his Disciples, and all the faithful, who will believe in
him, that they believe not scismaticks, or heretics, for every scisme, and
heresy, either has his particular place, holding some place, and corner of
the earth, or else deceives the curiosity of men in obscure, and secret
conuenticles, if any say unto you, behold here is Christ, and there, which
signifies some parts of the earth, or provinces thereof, or in secret places,
or in the desert, which signifies the obscure, and secret (invisible)
conuenticles of heretics, etc. If it were not also a ridiculous shift, men of
our time would not have been moved at the hearing of it, to say, as one did,
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici, and much less would S. Augustine
(only imagining that some should say, Siquis dixerit forte sunt aliquae oues
Dei, nescio vbi, quas curat Deus, and illas non noui, absurdus est nimis humano
sensui, qui talia cogitat. Aug. l. de ouibus cap. 16.
conformably to it, God has perhaps other sheep of whom himself takes care,
but I know not where they be, nor who they be) have said of it, as he did, he
(to wit) that says or shall say thus, is too too absurd to humane sense.
Lastly, if it were not also a desperate shift, the consideration of the
falsehood, and folly of it, could never have driven, as it seems it has
done, diverse learned Protestants, obstinately bent against the Catholic
profession, either to doubt, or deny, or utterly to cast off, the truth of
Christian profession, neither could it be so apt, to drive all other obstinate
Protestants to the like desperate resolution, as doubtless it is, when on the
one side, they open their eyes to consider the plain Prophesies of Scripture,
foretelling the amplitude, splendour, glory, and continuance of true Christian
professors; and, on the other side, may plainly see such predictions, not to
have been fulfilled in their invisible, imaginary congregation of Protestant
professions. For whilst these 2. considerations are joined with the obstinate
hatred, of the Catholic Roman profession, which will not let them consider,
that in it, and only in it these prophecies have been fulfilled, it is most
easy for them, through desperation, either with Castalion to fall into doubts
in faith, or with David George flatly to deny the truth of Christian faith, or
with Bernardine Ochine to fall into the foul heresy of denying the Divinity
of our Savior Christ, which is one of the most principal articles of our
faith, or with Neuserus to turn Turk, or with Alemanus to become Jews, or
with many in our own miserable country to be made absolute Atheistes, neither
caring for God, Christ, nor any other thing which we believe by true Christian
faith.
4 In good time, now I see land, and my penance draws toward an end: I have
but this one blast more to endure. He says, If the Protestants could make
solid answer to this argument, they would never seek for such shifts: but
being not able soundly to answer it; nor yet willing to acknowledge themselves
to be convinced by it, desperate obstinacy, and obstinate desperation have
driven them to this bad, miserable, ridiculous, and desperate shift. This goes
reasonable roundly: for the spirit of boasting, and vein of insulting, must
now, and then sally, or our Adversaries should forfit their Charter. But what
is the question, and what is the argument? and what is the answer so desperate?
The question is about the visibility of the Militant Church, the Repliar
defending, that it is always visible in one state of purity, as he has
expounded. The argument he uses to prove it, is, because the Church must be a
light set upon a Candlestick: and the means which God has appointed for the
revealing of his truth, and a City built upon a mount, whereto God has made
his promises. Our answer is, we deny not our Church to be visible, but think
it to have been the same, that in all ages communicated with the Church of Rome
in the truth, and substance of the ancient faith: and we call it sometime
invisible, only in that sense, which I have so often declared: against which
that which is here propounded concludes nothing.

5 For S. Austin says no more in the first place, but that the Catholic
Church stretches the boughs and increases abundantly over the whole earth:
which we confess it does two ways. First, in that howsoever the growth
thereof be sometime hindered, yet it cannot at all time be so oppressed, but
that it has some time and many a long time, liberty enough to dilate it self,
all over the world: as winter corn, that in hard weather is not seen to
flourish, yet has season enough beside to grow all over the field. Secondly,
in as much, as it grows also, and increases when it is most obscure, as the
Sun retains and exercises his light, when it is most ecclipsed. The Jesuits
continual error is, that to be obscure, and to be utterly taken away, is all
one; and that the suppressing of the outward liberty, state, and perfection,
supposes the extinguishing of the essence, and being of the Church. That which
S. Austin says, in the second place alleged, I also grant, answering that it
may well stand with our assertion. A clear, and manifest authority of the
Church it appointed over the whole world; and yet this authority may be
resisted, and called in question, and abused, and usurped by Heretics, and
persecutors; and then though it be clear, and manifest, in it self, that the
Church has this authority, yet the exercise thereof may be corrupted in such
sort that sometime it shall need reformation. Schismatickes, and Heretics are
not to be believed: but let the Repliar prove all these in whom our Church was,
to be such. Schism and Heresy have their particular places, and obscure, and
secret corners, but not always: for in the Church of Israel, when 1. Reg.
19.14.
the children of Israel forsook the covenant of God, Threw down his altars,
slew his Prophets, and none but Elias alone was left: and when 2. Cro. 15.3.
for along season, Israel was without the true God, and without a teaching
Priest, and without the law: and 2. Cro. 28.24.
when Ahaz the king of Judah, did cut in pieces the vessels, and shut up the
doors of the house of God, and made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem;
and high places in every several city of Judah; to burn incense to other
Gods: It was not so: Nor at such time as Ierom Comment in Psalm. 33.. Qui
statis. tom. 8.
said, The Church is where the faith is: for 20 years since Heretics
possessed all these Churches: nor when Hilary Page 316. d.
writ: One thing I forewarne ye of, beware of Antichrist: ill does the love of
walls affect you: ill do ye reverence the Church of God, in houses, and
buildings: is there any doubt but Antichrist sits in them? to me the
mountains, and the woods, and lakes of water, and prisons, and boggs, are
safer. And if for the most part they have, does it follow thereupon, that all
religion practiced particular places, and secret corners, is Heresy? what then
shall become of Gods truth in such times, as these are? But it is absurd to say
God has possible other sheep, I know not where, nor who they be, that
himself looks to: and so say I: for he speaks of such as hold, there may be
some of the faithful out of the Church: or at the least so hidden in the
Church, that none can see them. Neither of which is our doctrine; but only
that sometimes they may be so oppressed, that no man can see any congregation
of them openly professing, and exercising the worship of God purely, and
without corruption: but the right faith, and government, shall be every where
persecuted, and kept under: though many of these sheep thus corrupted, belong
to the sheepfold of Christ, by reason of the foundation of faith, which they
hold, and their repentance of their errors. S. Austin therefore proves not our
assertion to be a shift. Go we forward, and let us see the rest.

6 If it were not a ridiculous shift, men of our time would not have been
moved, at the hearing of it, to say, as one did, Spectatum admissi. That Camp.
rat. 3.
one belike, was one of Penelopees -- (...). odyss. ^.
wooers, or of Valor. Maxim. l. 9. c. 12.
Philemons kind that was choked with laughing at his own foolish conceit,
with a jest of his own making, and therefore I will quit them with a story in
Eustath. in Hom. odyss. p. 659. 22.
Eustathius, that they may laugh better. The Terynthians were a nation
generally flowted of their neighbors, for their fleering, and light
countenance: they could do, nor see, nor hear any thing, but they would laugh
at it. Therefore they inquired of Apollo, how they might be delivered from that
Passion? who answered, IF THEY COVLD SACRIFICE A BVLL TO NEPTVNE, AND THROW HIM
INTO THE SEA WITHOUT LAVGHING: whereupon, in a special consultation, they
agreed to go forward with the sacrifice, but no boys should be among them,
least they should laugh at any thing they did; but it fortuned, that, as they
were sacrifising, a little Boy, came in among them, and seeing, contrary to the
custom, every man's countenance so gravely set, he also counterfaited an
austeere looks, and carved a face suitable to them, which affectation, they
perceiving, burst all out into laughter, and lost their labor, and so remained
a laughing nation for ever after. Their error was to laugh at that in the
child, which themselves did: and with laughing to loose their Bull. It seems
my Repliar, and the men that cannot refrain laughter, and the man he mentions,
are of their posterity, (...). Eustath.
Iouiall companions, that will laugh at that in others, that they do
themselves, and will exchange their sacrifice for a jest: let them go to the
sea again with the Bull, and try if they can have, any better luck then the
Terinthians. Barbaricum faciem Romanam sumere vultuni miror. Ennod.
Pity Roman heads, should have so grave tongues, and so light countenances.

7 In the last place he objects, that our doctrine, touching the invisible
Church, has made diverse learned Protestants, obstinately bent, against
Papistry, desperate: for when they have seen the Prophecies of the Scripture,
foretelling the amplitude, splendour, glory, and continuance of true Christian
Professors, never to have been fullfilled in their invisible congregation of
Protestant Professors: they have either doubted, ordenied, or utterly cast off
the truth of all Christian Profession: the reason is, their obstinacy not
suffering them to consider, that in the Roman Profession only these Prophecies
have been fulfilled. And have the Prophecies of Scripture, touching the
amplitude, glory, and continuance of the true faith, been accomplished in the
Roman profession only: that I mean, which we have rejected? whose amplitude,
to this day, never extended it self beyong these neighbor parts of the West,
See Magin. geograph. 166.
the most spacious Churches of Greece, Armenia, Aethiopia, and diverse other
nations, never since the Apostasy acknowledging the same, but abhorring it, as
much ever any Protestant did? whose continuance, in some articles, is not yet a
100 years? whose religion by peece-meale, crept in successively, now one
piece, now another, the Christian world complaining of it? Is not this the most
desperate impudency, that ever was, to affirm, Purgatory, Image Worship, the
sacrifice of the Mass, half Communion, Latin Service, and the Lateran, and
Trent doctrine, touching the Popes primacy, Councels, Transubstantiation, the
single life of votaries, Freewill, Merits, Justification, good works, the
Scriptures, (wherein the best part of the Roman profession stands;) to have
continued in all ages in that glory, splendor, and amplitude, that is
mentioned in the Prophecies? when not only the ancient Church, knew them not,
but the Divines themselves in the Church of Rome, within these 400. years,
have had no unity, or certain assurance of them? Away ye Josh. 9.
Gibeonites, with your conterfeit antiquity: be packing with your old shoes,
and moldy bread, and musty bottels, out of the Lords camp.

8 And have so may learned Protestants turned Atheists, and doubted, and cast
off religion, because they have not seen the amplitude, and glory, and
continuance mentioned, in our Church? It seems this conceit is thoroughly
grafted in our Roman Catholics: hearken therefore, and refrain a while: the
Protestants have seen the continuance of true religion in all ages, in the
Churches of Greece, and Rome its self, and other Churches: and albeit the
amplitude, and glory, thereof have been oppressed by the tyranny or Antichrist,
and his damnable heresies, continually multiplying themselves, in the Church of
Rome, yet this experience, and the consideration of this oppression, which
religion sustained in the ages past, at the hands of those Roman professors, in
whom only, the Reply says, the Prophecies of the Scripture have been
fulfilled; is so far from making Protestants doubt of truth of Christian
faith, that nothing confirms them in it more: by reason the Prophecies of
Scripture, which promise such amplitude, glory, and continuance, to the true
Church, foretell aagaine the decay of the outward state thereof, under
Antichrist, for certain seasons; and the glory which that false Church of his
shall rise to, through the delusions of Satan. By which oppression, we know it
to be the true Church of Christ; and by the continuance of the true faith
therein, men then, when it was most oppressed, we know it to be the same that
the Prophecies mentioned in the Scripture point to, and against which, the
gates of hell shall never prevail: and by this very glory, amplitude,
splendour, and pomp, that the Replyar boastes, is to be seen in his Roman
profession alone, we know assuredly, it is the Church of Antichrist, the seat
of the Beast, that palace of the whore of Babylon, Apo. 13.4.8.12. and 18.3.9.
Telesphorus and Vbertin Friars, and Ioachim Abbas, in their writings of
Antichrist, note many things very remarkable, touching the seducing of the
world by apostaticall Popes and Clergy men; whom they affirm to have been the
instruments of Antichrist. Telesphorus also settes these things down in
pictures. It is certainly reported, that when the Abbey of S. Edm. Bury, in
Suffolk, was standing, before the overthrow thereof, there was, of ancient
time, in a certain glas-window of the Abbey, the story of Antichrist, pictured
like the Pope, attended by Monks, Friars, Priests, and Cardinals: stopping
their cares against the Preaching of Enoch and Elias, and persecuting them that
harkened to their preaching: and diverse other things resembling Antichrist and
his crew in the habit of the Pope and his Clergy. I have seen the transsumpt
of this picture in a Table, drawn by the thing it self, at Sir John Croftes
his house at Saxham, nere to Bury.
whom the kings, and merchants, and multitudes of the earth must follow. This
is the effect that the consideration of the Prophecies works in us. And if the
apostasy, or relapse of some particular persons, falling into despair,
atheism, or heresy, be received as a sufficient argument against us, what
Church shall be free? or how shall the Church of God be justified? and what
will the Papists answer for their own religion, wherein so many have
miscarried? The true Church of Christ, has in it hypocrites, and reprobates,
who stumbling sometime at the doctrine, sometime at the state, in the day of
temptation fall away. Thus many of Christ's own Disciples went back, Ioh. 6.66.
and walked no more with him. Thus 2. Tim. 4.10.
Demas forsook Paul, and S. John 1. Ioh 2.19.
complains of diverse that, in his time, went back from the true Church.
Tertullian Baro. an 201. n 13.
seduced by a woman, or Pamel vit. Tertul. an. 211. Baro. an. 201. n. 9.
vexed with discontent, fell into Montanisme. Prateol. Elench. haeret. v
Nouatiani.
Nouatus into such horrible errors that he was called the prince of heresy.
Lucifer Calaritanus Lucif. Caralit. l. de non conueniend. cum haeret.
tells of the desperate revolt of many famous Bishops to Arianisme. Ambros. de
obit. Satyr. Theodor. hist. l. 3. c. 5. Ruff. hist. l. 1. c. 30.
Who himself also, being one of the most zealous Catholics in the world,
afterward fell into a most pestilent scisme, and separating himself from the
rest of the Church, became the author of Luciferian heretics. Our adversaries
themselves also have found in their own Church the same things, wherewith the
Jesuit vpbraids us. The case of Fra. Spira is well known: See the story in
Sleid. an. 1548.
he was a lawier near to Padua, and renouncing the Protestants religion which
he had most zealously embraced and professed, and falling to Papistry through
the persuasion of the Popes Legate: fell into the most desperate desperation,
that we have lightly heard of; and refusing all comfort, so miserably ended his
days. Anto. Panorm. de dict. and fact. Alphons. l. 2. n. 9 edir. Basil. per
Heruag. an. 1538.
Anthony Picent, a famous Hermit; who having filled all Italy, Spain, and
Sicily with the opinion of his sanctity, reported to fast 40. days and 40.
nights together, and, when he eat, to be fed by Angels, and generally reputed
for the rarest man alive; yet at his death cast forth horrible reproaches and
blasphemies against our blessed Savior and his blessed mother the virgin
Marie. It is as easy to say, that desperate obstinacy, and obstinate
desperation, bred in these men by their cleaving to the Romish religion,
brought them to this miserable end, as it is to affirm that the hatred of the
Romish faith brought Castalion, or Nenser, or Aleman, to that which they did.
The like is reported by Hasenmull. hist. Jesuit c. 11.
Hasenmuller, one that lived among the Jesuits, and Historia^ hanc, quam bona
fide recitani, sicuti eam and audiui and vidi, dum rebus Iesuitarum interfui.
saw the things that he reports, of diverse Jesuits falling into the like
terrible desperation: among whom one despairing, like Spira, because he had
renounced the truth to become a Papist, complained that he was damned for the
same, calling upon them them that stood by to kill him, because he felt nothing
in himself but hell and the torture of devils tormenting him for putting
confidence in Masses, images, crosses, beads, suffrages, the merits of Saints;
and such like. The dotage of Postellus, who sometime was so famous among our
adversaries, and his impiety about the Messiah, is inferior to none of these.
But because Acosta the Jesuit has written a memorable example of one living
in Peru, I will translate the History, and so let the Repliar himself say if
his own religion breed not Iudaisme, Turcisme, doubtings, and desperation, as
gross as ever Ochin or any other fell into.

CHAP XLI.
A Narration of a Popish Doctor and professor of divinity in the Church of
Rome; translated out of Acosta de Temp. nouiss. l. 2. c. 11. and Maiol. dies
canicul. tom. 2. page 89. and inserted for answer to that wherewith the Jesuit
reproaches our Church in the last words of his precedent Reply.

THere was in the kingdom of Peru a man, at that time, greatly esteemed: a
learned Divine and a professor of divinity, who, a long time together was
accounted Catholic and godly, and almost the oracle of all this part of the
world. This man was so linked in familiarity with a certain woman who boasted
of herself that she was taught great mysteries by an Angel; and like another
Philumena or Maximilla whom Montanus followed, was rapt out of her self, or at
least seemed so to be: that he often used to consult with her about the
greatest questions in divinity. In all things he esteemed her as an Oracle,
reporting her to be full of great revelations and to be dearly beloved of God;
who otherwise was but a base creature, and of small sense, unless it were to
devise lies. Whether therefore she were possessed by the Devil, which is most
likely: or whether she counterfetted the matter when she fell into her ecstasy,
as many wise men thought: this Divine hearing great and strange things, that in
her exstasies she would speak of him, and conceauing that far greater would
afterward be spoken, addicted himself thereupon to be her disciple, whose
ghostly father indeed himself was. The man at length was so transported that
he would assay to work miracles, and persuaded himself that he did work
them, when no sign of any miracle appeared: for which cause, as also for
receiving from this woman certain propositions contrary to the sense of the
Catholic Church, he was apprehended by the judges of the most holy
Inquisition: where by the space of five years he was heard and examined, and
at last detected to be the proudest and maddest man that lived. He would avouch
that he had an Angel sent from God, of whom he learned whatsoever he pleased:
and that he had immediate conference and familiarity with God: and fell into
those toys that no man in his right wits would utter: yet all this while his
understanding as concerning his brains was so sound, that my own is no
sounder. He would therefore say he should be a King, and, in very good earnest
tell how he should be Pope, and that the Apostolic Sea should be translated
into these kingdoms: that God had given him holiness above the Angels, and
beyond all the Apostles: yea offered him the Hypostaticall union, but he would
not receive it. That he was given to be the redeemer of the world, in regard of
the efficacy, whereas Christ was the redeemer but in regard of sufficiency.
That all Ecclesiastical states should be abrogated; and he would give new
laws that should be plain and easy, whereby the single life of the Clergy
should be taken away, and many wives allowed; and the necessity of shrift be
abrogated. These and many such like things he affirmed, with such confidence
and earnestnes, that we were amazed to see a man imagining these things, yet
not to be out of his wits. At the last, when we had a long time considered his
doings, and condemned above 120 propositions of his that were heretical, and
dissonant from the doctrine of the Church; we were commanded to dispute with
him, to see if we could bring him back to a right mind and the true faith. To
which purpose the Judges and the Bishop of Quita, with others of us, met
together; where the man being brought in before us, he maintained his cause
with that liberty and eloquence of tongue, that I my self to this day am
astonished to think that ever a man's mind should be filled with that pride. He
professed his doctrine to be such, that it could not be demonstrated but by the
Scriptures and miracles; being far beyond all humane reason: and that, by the
testimonies of the Scripture, he had proved his matter far more manifestly and
effectually, then S. Paul had proved Christ to be the true Messiah: and that he
had wrought such and so many miracles, that the resurrection of Christ was no
greater miracle: for he said, that he had bin dead, and was risen again, and by
evident testimony had showed the same. And whereas he had no book, but had his
very Breuiarie taken from him, yet he would rehearse the Scriptures without
book, such and so long places, out of the Prophets, the Revelation, the
Psalms, and other parts, that his memory was admirable: but then he so
applied or allegorized them to his conceit, that it would have made any, either
to have laughed or wept. Finally, if we would handle the matter by miracles, he
would presently, he said, show them. These things he spoke so, as if he had
taken us for mad men, or had bin mad himself. He told us that it was revealed
unto him, how Don John of Austrich was overcome in a fight at sea, by the Turk:
and that K. Philip had almost lost his kingdom of Spain:. and that they were
in hand at Rome, with a Council for the deposing of the present Pope, and the
creating of a new. Which things, he said he would tell us; that we knowing them
by certain intelligence, might perceive they came to him by divine revelation.
The which things being most false, yet he avouched them as matters that we had
certainly known. At the last, when in two days conference with him, we could
do no good, according to the manner of Spain, we brought him with others to the
public spectacle of the people: where, looking up to heaven, and expecting
fire that from thence should fall on the Inquisitors, as the devil had
promised him; we felt no fire touch us; but himself was soon burnt and
consumed to ashes.

TO THE READER.
HItherto my adversary has prosecuted the defense of the twelve first
Chapters of his Treatise, where he gives over, and proceeds no further. Now
follows the SECOND PART of his Book, Page 251.
which he entitles AN APPENDIX TO THIS FIRST PART OF REPLY, wherein an issue or
trial is made, whereby may be seen whether Catholics or Protestants be the
true VISIBLE CHVRCH: wherein he first sets down, as he entitles it, A
CATALOGVE OF THE NAMES OF SOME CATHOLIC PROFESSORS, to show that the Roman
Church has bin (as the true Church must be) continually visible in all ages
since Christ. And then, after the Catalogue, A CHALLENGE TO PROTESTANTS, Page
265.
requiring them to make a like Catalogue of the Professors of their faith in
all ages since Christ; as he has it down a catalogue of his Church. His
Catalogue is nothing else but a chronologicall Table, containing and
representing the names of all the POPES, and the most DOCTORS and ancient
Fathers, and some GENERAL COVNCELS, and many PROFESSORS, as he calls them, of
the Roman faith, which in every age have bin in the Church to this day;
distinguishing the ages by centuries of years, and under every centurie
placing the Popes, Fathers, Councels and Professors that lived and were
therein. In the first centurie he names our blessed Savior Christ, with his
Apostles and Evangelists; and the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, with the
rest of the Apostolic Churches. In the second, and so forward, be sets down
the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, with the Martyrs, Councels, holy
men and nations converted, that were in every age successively till he come to
the year 1600. The folly and error of this his Table, stands in five things:
first, that he assumes these persons, Councels and nations, to himself, as
professing his Popish faith; who were indeed eminent members of the Church in
their times, but never either professed or saw that part of his Roman faith
which we have cast off. For how ridiculous is it to say, that our Savior and
his Apostles, and the rest that follow for a thousand years, believed and
professed as the Jesuits now do, or as the Trent Council has decreed in the
Canons and new Creed thereof? The second is, that the persons named in the
first ages, till 800 or a 1000 years after Christ, not only professed not the
Papacy, but believed and professed that which directly destroys it. They held
that which the Church of Rome holds according to the Scriptures, and wherein
the Papists and we consent; but the things in time, and by peece-meale added to
the truth, wherein we differ from them; they held not, but the contrary. Let
the Jesuit therefore show a catalogue of such as in those times professed and
believed, not only what the Church of Rome believes aright, but what it holds
against us, in the several articles of our difference. The third is that
diverse Councels, especially latterward, which resisted the Papacy coming on,
are omitted; as those of Constantinople, Frankford, Pisa, Constance, Basil,
etc. and many famous and eminent Doctors omitted, that professed directly
against diverse articles of the now Church of Rome. The fourth is, that many
false and fabulous Saints are named, and things. set down out of Legends, that
can never be proved: as the tale of the Jews of Berytum converted by a
bleeding Crucifixe, and such like. The last is, that diverse Popes, for many
years together (namely in the ninth age) succeeded not, but entered violently
and disorderly: and very many, especially in the latter ages, are excepted
against, upon diverse points, purposely let down in Digr. 53.
my former writing. His Catalogue therefore is to no purpose, as shall fully
appear in that which follower: for even we our selves lay claim to so much of
it as is true: and if he will give us leave to add the names of some others
that lived after the 800 years; we will exhibit this very Catalogue our
selves, and no other; save that the Legend Saints, and the Friars and
apostaticall Popes and Jesuits, with such traitors as Allen was, we need not.
Next after the Catalogue, ensues the CHALLENGE TO PROTESTANTS, that they show
the like Catalogue. But this is idle. For we show the same, if he will permit
us to supply some wants in the latter ages: professing the Church of Rome it
self, in all ages to have bin the visible Church of God; as I have showed in
From chapter 36. forward.
that which goes before, though the Papacy therein were not the Church.

After his challenge, containing only one leaf, (the whole matter whereof is
the same that I have answered in the six last chapters) he propounds certain
objections, which he thought might be made against his Catalogue; thereby to
give color to the succession of his Popery. The which objections, with his
answers to them, I will set down and handle, as I have done the rest of his
Reply; and so proceed.

CHAP. XLII.
An objection against the Repliers Catalogue. Diverse Articles condemned by the
Fathers, mentioned in the Catalogue, that the Church of Rome now uses. What
consent there is between Antiquity and Papistrie.

A. D. My adversaries will object, Page 267.
that all there which I set down in my Catalogue, especially those of the
Primitive age, were not professors of our religion, in regard as they will say,
there be diverse points held by us now adays, whereof no mention is made in the
writings of the Fathers of that age. To this I answer, first retorting more
strongly the argument against Protestants, who falsely and absurdly challenge
(as M. Jewel did) the Fathers of the first six hundred years: or as M. White
does) the whole Christian Church of the first eight hundred years, to be
Protestants. And I say, that Protestants do hold diverse points now adays,
whereof either no mention is made in the writings of the Fathers of those ages;
or if any mention be made, it is expressly contrary to Protestants, and for us,
and this sometimes with vnanime consent: whereas Protestants are never able to
show for themselves, and against us, in any point, such an vnanime consent of
those Fathers.
BEfore he retort the objection, or be too busy with B. Jewels 600 years, and
M. Whites 800, I would have him to be better advised what they object. For
touching the Fathers of those times, three things will be granted him. First,
that diverse maine articles of the now Romish faith, which we reject, are
mentioned most amply and frequently in their writings. For example, the Popes
PRIMACIE, and being universal Bishop above all other Bishops, is mentioned by
Gregory himself a Pope in the first age, and Per elationem pompatici sermonis
Christ^ sibi studet membra subiugare. lib. 4. ep. 36. Quis, rogo, in hoc tam
peruerso vocabulo, nisi ille ad imitandum proponitur qui, despectis Angelorum
legionibus secum socialiter constitutis, vt solus omnibus praeesse videretur.
Ep. 38. Ego fidenter dico, quia quisquis so vniuersalem Sacerdotem vocat vel
vocare desiderat, in ela^ione sua Antichristum praecurrit. l. 6. ep. 30.
called a proud, pompaticall, profane, sacrilegious, Antichristian and
devilish title; and the man that should assume it, a follower of the devil,
and the forerunner of Antichrist. (...). Eusebius. l. 5. c. 17. spoken of Montanus.
FASTING by distinction of meats and days: Sectae Simonis ^uisse videtur
so^ta quaedam M^rcellina quae colebat imagines Jesus and Pauli, and Homeri,
adorado incensumque ponendo. August de haer Irenae. l. 1. c 24. Epiph. haer.
27. Theodor. haer. fab. l. 1. Jnueni ibi vel^m habe^s imaginem quasi Christ's,
vel Sancti cuiusdam -- contra authoritatem Scripti^rarum. Epiph. ep. ^d Ioh.
Hicrosol.
Images: Cathari. propter munditiem, gl riantes de suis meritis. Isido. Orig.
l. 8. c. 5.
Perfection of our works without sin, and ability to keep the law: (...).
Clem. Romans constit. page 57.
Women's baptizing: Conc. Laod. can. 35 Oecum page 697. Veron graec.
the worship of Angels: Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus Ar^ob.
the worshipping of the Cross: V^rgo erat, sed non ad adorationem nobis data.
Epiph. page 344.
the worshipping of the virgin Marie: Nec exhorrescunt beatae Trinitatis
imaginem facere. Euthym. Panopl. page 690.
the Images of the Trinity: Haeretic^, cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, in
accusationem ipsarum conuertuntur, quasi non recte habeant, nec sint ex
authoritate, and quia varte sunt dicta, and qu^a non possit, ex his inueniri
veritas abhis qui nesciunt Traditionem Irenae l. 3. c 2.
the obscurity and insufficiency of the Scripture: Auditores, apud eos
(Manichaeos) si v^luerint, vxores habent; quorum nihil faciunt qui vocantur
electi. August. ep. 74.
the necessity of single life in the Clergy: and many other points defended
by our adversaries, are mentioned and named in the Fathers: but it is to show
that they were holden by heretics, and to confute them. This first grant, I
return my adversary for a favor, because he has replied without railing in
this Chapter: and I do it in the name of all Protestants, that hereafter he may
not say, but they are tractable, and will yield much of his Romish religion to
be, if not defended, yet mentioned in the writings of the Fathers. Secondly,
that some ceremonies and doctrines also holden at this day by the Church of
Rome, which we refuse, were held by some particular ancient Fathers, and
practiced in the Church of those times, though It is the rule of Vincentius
Lirinensis, that what the Fathers thus hold, is not the Catholic faith, but
what they hold resolutely, and with general consent Monitor. c. 39.
doubtfully, uncertainly, and without universality and uniformity, and (which
is chiefly to be observed by him that will see the truth) otherwise and to other
intents, then the Church of Rome now holds the^; the reason whereof is
manifest. For the Apostle 2 Thessalonians 2.7.
says, the mystery of iniquity began to work in his time. And Niceph. l. 4.
c 7. Eusebius. hist. l 3 c. 32.
Hegesippus, that lived immediately after the Apostles, The Church continued a
virgin undefiled as long as the Apostles lived, but when that generation was
passed, the conspiracy of wicked heresy, through the seducement of those which
taught otherwise, took beginning. And (...). Isid. Pelus. l. 3 ep. 408. page
668.
Isidorus Pelusiota, that lived in the fourth age: The Church is like a woman
fallen from her ancient state, and having nothing but the signs of it;
bereaved of her goods through their naughtiness that held the administration.
Thus some particular ceremonies and doctrines began to be used, and got
increase with using: as Prayer for the dead, Purgatory, Necessity of Baptism
for the salvation of infants; and not many more doctrines agreeing with the
Church of Rome; which yet were used and holden, as I said, uncertainly, and to
other purposes then now they are: for it cannot be showed, that they were the
resolved doctrine of the Church universally embraced. The most that our
adversaries can show in the writings of antiquity, being some part of their
ceremonies, as Tapers, Crosses, Vigils, Oil, Spittle, Commemorations of the
dead, and such like: wherein also they have altered, or forsaken many things as
well as we: as they have with us abandoned some points of their doctrine also,
which yet It is confessed that all the Fathers held the B. Virgin to have bin
conceived in original sin, by Turrecrem. de consecr. d. 4. Firmissime. nu.
11. and Dom. Ban. part. 1 q 1 art. 8. dub. 5. And most of the Fathers, that the
souls of the just see not God till the day of judgment. Sixth Senens. bibl. l.
6 an. 345. Barthol. Medin in 12. page 56. and others, whom see below, c. 57. n.
3. In which two points, the now Church of Rome has forsaken them:
by their own confession, they held as well as they did, that which the Church
of Rome still retains: which proves unanswerably, that it is no disadvantage
to our side, if some few particular doctrines, thus insufficiently held, be
found in the Fathers, which we refuse. Thirdly we grant that we hold many
negatiues against our adversaries in the Church of Rome, which are not expressly
controlled or condemned by the Fathers, in that manner that we condemn them,
that is to say, directly, purposely, and namely, but only by discourse and
consequence from those truths which they maintain, and those errors which they
condemn in the heretics of their times. The reason is, because in the Fathers
days, such errors, now denied and refused by us, were not broached, but came
up since: and the Fathers could not deny or speak against that, which was not
then in rerum natura. This is the true reason why we deny sundry things, that
the Fathers in their time denied not.

2 These three things being granted; that which we object against the Repliers
Catalogue, is, that the ancient Fathers in their writings, neither defend nor
acknowledge the substantial articles of Papistry, wherein we really differ.
There is You may see it in the Pref. before B. Jewels works of the last
impression. And in the Pref. of THE WAY, n. 15. And in the Council of Trent, at
the end.
a new Creed made by the Council of Trent, and imposed upon all men to
believe: the articles whereof, are particularly expounded in the decrees and
catechism of the said Council, and in the writings of the modern Schoolmen
and Jesuits; LET THEM SHOW IF THEY CAN, THAT THE DOCTRINE CONTAINED IN THAT
CREED, AND IN THE WRITINGS OF THESE MEN, (TOUCHING THE SCRIPTVRES, SACRAMENTS,
CHVRCH, POPE, COVNCELS, TRANSVBSTANTIATION, IMAGES, INVOCATION OF SAINTS,
JUSTIFICATION, GOOD WORKS, etc.) WAS THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHVRCH, AND PROFESSED
BY THE BISHOPS OF ROME, FATHERS AND COVNCELS, EXPRESSED IN THE FIRST 800 YEARS
OF THIS CATALOGVE: this is our objection: whereto the Replier answers, that he
can retort it more strongly against the Protestants, etc. But this is but wind,
and so let it pass: and come we forward to the substance of his answer.

CHAP. XLIII.
1. Whatsoever the Fathers of the Primitive Church believed, is expressed in
their books. 2. The Replier is driven to say, they held much of his religion
only implicitly. What implicit faith is, according to the Papists. The death
of Zeuxis. The Fathers write that which cannot stand with Papistrie.

Page ^67.
A. D. Secondly I answer, that to say there be diverse points held by us,
whereof no mention is made in those ancient Fathers, is no good argument to
prove that which we hold, was not holden by them. For this is Argumentum ab
authoritate negatiua: which argument is of no force to prove this point, unless
it be first proved that those Fathers held nothing explicit or implicit, which
is not expressly to be found in their writings. But this my adversaries will
never be able to prove. Now on the contrary side, we can show good reasons, or
at least probable presumptions, sufficient to prove, first, that they held more
then is expressed in their writings. Secondly that they held explicit or
implicit the same in all points of doctrine, which we hold. First I say, we
have reason to think that they held more then is expressed in their writings:
because (since ordinarily the writings of these Fathers were not by them set
out of purpose, to express in particular every thing that they held implicit
or explicit concerning all matters of faith, but rather were written upon some
special occasion) it is to be thought, that their writings contain only some
parts of the doctrine, to wit, so much of it as was that requisite to be
written upon that special occasion. The which is confirmed even by experience
of these our times, in which although learned men do ordinarily set down more
expressly in Catechismes, books of controversies, etc what the Catholic faith
is in diverse points then formerly it has bin set down as they have more
occasion, by reason of more heresies daily arising, then learned men of former
ages when those heresies were not, have had. Yet no learned man now adays
writes every thing which explicit or implicit he believes to be the
Catholic faith. For every Catholic man believes explicit or implicit all
that is contained in Scriptures and traditions in that he believes whatsoever
was revealed by God to the Apostles, and delivered by them in word or writing
to the Catholic Church: and which the Church in Scriptures and unwritten
traditions propounds and delivers to us; diverse particulars whereof are not
necessary to be expressly known to, or written by any particular learned man of
any age. but are always preserved at least in the implicit or infolded faith
of the Church: the which infolded faith of the Church, may and shall be
unfolded (the holy Ghost still assisting and suggesting all the aforesaid
revealed truth) as necessity shall require, that the truth should be in any
point expressly declared, which necessity chiefly is when some new heresy
arises, oppugning particularly the truth of that point.
1 HEre he says, the Fathers, named in his Catalogue, might hold what the
church of Rome holds, though there be no mention thereof in their writings,
because they might hold that which is not expressly in their writings. We had
thought, until now, that this had bin a plain demonstration: The ancient
Fathers in all their writings, make no mention of diverse points of the Popish
religion: Ergo they held them not. Or thus: What religion the Fathers held,
that they mention in their writings: But the Popish religion they mention not
in their writings: Ergo they held not the Popish religion. But he having good
experience, that the second proposition is true, denies the first; and will
show, either by good reasons, or probable presumptions, that they held more
then they mention and express in their books. Wherein at once he has
destroyed his Catalogue, and laid his religion open to the scorn of women and
children. For if the Fathers in all their writings handled nothing but the
cause of religion, teaching, expounding and defending it, against Jews,
Gentiles, heretics, schismatickes, whereby they could not but mention what
they held; and yet never mentioned diverse points of Popery; it is plain they
never held them. But the Jesuit says, this is Argumentum ab authoritate
negatiua: which is not good; they might hold either explicit or implicit that
which they have not expressed. Wherein you must mark his tergiuersation. For
to show a visible Church in all ages, professing openly his Roman faith, that
all men may see it, he tenders this catalogue. But when we bid him prove that
the Fathers of the first 600 or 800 years believed and professed that part of
his Roman faith which the Church of England reiects, that it may appear so to
us, and we may see it; he says, he can show good reasons and presumptions,
that they believed more then is expressed in their writings: whereas he should
show, by their WRITINGS, that they held and believed as the Romish Church now
does, because it is impossible to show what they held, but by their writings:
and himself says in another place, We cannot have any certainty of things
past, but by the writings of those times. And if he will have his Church to be
so visible in the Fathers time, and those Fathers, to be so eminent members
thereof; good reason men see it: yet see it they cannot by presumptions, but by
their writings.

2 But he says, We have reason to think that they held more then expressed in
their writings, for so much as no man writes every thing which explicit or
implicit he believes: I answer, though it be granted, that both they and we in
all our writings may omit some things not belonging to faith or religion, yet
many articles of faith (such as our adversaries say, theirs are, the denial
whereof they call schism and damnable herersie, and persecute with fire,
sword, and gunpowder) cannot but be expressed: for so much as such articles
are simply needful unto salvation, and are the grounds and conclusions of all
theological writing and discourse. Secondly, it is impertinent to the
objection; which denies the Fathers of the first 600 years to have done that
which the Catalogue says they did: professed VISIBLY as the Roman Church now
does: which objection is not satisfied by saying they might explicit or
implicit profess that they never writ, because no man writes all he believes;
but by showing in their writings this VISIBLE profession of the Romish faith;
for so much as nothing is VISIBLE that cannot be showed in their writings.
Thirdly, this answer debarres our adversaries for ever from alleging the
Fathers for their Romish faith: which I show thus. First, the Jesuits promise
is, that he will assign a continual visible Church professing his now Roman
faith; for that is the thing undertaken, to name in all ages the names of such
as successively professed the religion now maintained by the Church of Rome.
Secondly, to effect this, he sets down his catalogue containing the Bishops,
Doctors, and Councels that were in the first 600 years. Thirdly, we ob^ect
that these Bishops, Doctors and Councels, in diverse things (that is to say, in
all the substantial points wherein the Church of Rome and we dissent) believed
not as the now Church of Rome does, because such points are not mentioned in
their writings. To this he answers, that they held more, either explicit or
implicit then is expressly to be found in their writings. This answer supposes
one of these three things: either that they both held and writ expressly those
diverse things which we deny: or that they writ them not, but held them
explicit: or that they writ them not, nor held them explicit, but held them
only implicit. The first he grants they did not, but answers, that they
believed diverse things they writ not. Neither is the second: for what they held
explicit, they writ. But the third, that they held diverse points of Papistrie
only implicit, is the answer. Now this is it that lays all those points of
Papistrie on Gods cold earth, and shows them not to have been known to the
Fathers. For Rosel. v. Fides n. 2 Altisiod. l 3 tract. 3. c. 1. q. 5, Dionys.
3. d. 25. qu. vnic.
to believe implicit, is to believe as the Church believes; as when a man is
demanded, whether Christ be borne of the virgin Marie, or whether there be one
God and three persons: he answers, that he cannot tell, but believes touching
these things as the Church holds. And as the Repliar himself here expounds
it, To believe whatsoever was revealed by God in word or writing to the Church;
diverse particulars whereof are not necessary to be known or written expressly
at all times: but this unfolded faith shall be unfolded, as necessity shall
require, that is, when some heresy arises oppugning the truth of the point,
which is thus implicitly believed. Hence it follows that he confesses these
Fathers, Doctors, and Bishops, mentioned in the first 600 years of this
catalogue, knew not, professed not, defended not, taught not, diverse points of
the now Roman faith: because in their times they were not points of faith, but
made so since; and therefore by his own confession, they held them only in
this sense, that they believed and taught whatsoever the Church should, after
their time, unfold: by which device they may also be said to have believed, and
visibly professed that the Moon is made of a green cheese, or any thing that
the Church of Rome shall hereafter devise whatsoever it be: for they
implicitly believed all the faith of the Church, and this coining of new
doctrines shall be but unfolding some part of the Churches faith that was
infolded before: and so the Fathers shall be justified to have believed any
thing, and the Roman Church to have bin visibly succeeding in them that never
understood her doctrine. Is this then the meaning of the catalogue that so
gloriously he displaies? and are all those brags; show us a visible Church in
all ages as we do you; our faith is no other but what the ancient Doctors held:
what they held, I hold; what they taught, I teach; what they believed, I
believe: resolved into this poor shift, They believed as we do, at least
implicitly? Is this the antiquity of our Romish Church? and can her age be
painted no better then thus? Were so many diverse points of her faith believed,
by the ancient Church only infoldly and upon condition, If this Roman Church,
after 600 or 1000 years, should unfold them? where then is the visibilitie of
these things in the Church of the Fathers? and the light thereof, that shined
so clearly in their days? Zeuxis the painter, Zuing Theat page 1201.
they say, choked him self with laughing at the picture of an old woman that
he had drawn in a table. His own conceit, with beholding the wrinkles, and
shadows, and looks, he had set upon her face, so affected him, that he which
had but a little before drawn the beauty and youth of Helena to the
admiration of others, with a foolish counterfeit of old age, killed himself.
And I am persuaded that our adversaries, (this Replier and his fellows) when
they behold the picture of this good old wife their mother the Papacy, how
ridiculously they have drawn it, making her to look elder then she is, by so
many hundred years, and hanging it forth for the counterfeit of antiquity,
cannot at the least but smile at their own device, to think how they mock
both others and themselves, if they make not others burst with laughter. But to
quit this device of the Fathers holding implicitly that which is not expressed
in their writings; let my replier consider that they not only make no mention
of the things which we deny, but they write that which by all consequence and
discourse overthrows them. Though therefore we allow them a little of the
implicit faith, which God wot they never dreamed of, (it being a device of the
latter Schoolmen to serve another purpose) yet they could not implicit
believe any thing which would be opposite to that they mention and hold
expressly: as those things are opposite which the Replier confesses to be the
diverse things they believed implicit, and their Church has now unfolded
against new heresies that are arisen. Thus I reason: the Fathers held contrary
to that which the Church of Rome now holds: ergo they believed it not
implicitly. For implicit faith holds nothing that is contrary to that which is
explicit. Again, if they only held implicitly what the Church of Rome now
holds, and not explicitly; hence it follows that the Roman faith in such
points cannot be visibly showed in the Fathers; for to be visible, and to be
only implicit, are contrary, in as much as no man can see or discern that
which is implicit: and so the Romish faith may be showed in a catalog of Turks
as well as in a catalog of the Fathers, by the Jesuits distinction.

CHAP. XLIIII.
1. The whole Christian faith delivered to the Church, has succeeded in all
ages: yet many corruptions have sometime been added. How, and in what sense the
Church may err. 2. A Catalogue assigned of those in who^ the Protestants faith
always remained. 3. What is required to the reason of succession.

Page 268.
A. D. Secondly I said, that the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church did
hold explicit or implicit all points of faith that we hold. This will appear
by these ensuing considerations. First it is certain, that the Apostles taught
the whole corpse of Christian doctrine, partly by word, partly by writing,
which as a sacred depositum was commended by S. Paul to S. Timothy, and other
succeeding Bishops and Pastors of the Church, to be maintained always in the
Church, against all profane innovation of heresies, in these words: O Timothy
keep the depositum, avoiding the profane novelties of voices and oppositions
of falsely called knowledge, which diverse promising, have erred about the faith.
The which words, Aduers. haer. c. 17.
Vincentius Lyrinensis expounds thus: Who (says he) at this day has the
place of Timothy, but either the whole Church, or especially the whole body of
Prelates, who ought themselves to have the whole knowledge of divine religion,
and also to instruct others? And a little after: What is meant by this
Depositum? it is (says he) that which is committed to thee, not that which is
invented by thee: that which thou have received, not that which thou have
devised: a thing, not of wit, but of learning: not of private usurpation, but
of public tradition: a thing brought to thee, not a thing brought forth of
thee: wherein thou must not be an author, but a keeper: not an institutor but a
secretor: not a leader but a follower Keep the Depositum, preserve the talent
of the Catholic faith pure and sincere: that which is committed to thee, let
that remain with thee, and that deliver unto the people. To the same purpose S.
Irenaeus says: l. 3. c. 14.
We must not seek the truth among others, which is easy to receive from the
Church, when the Apostles have most fully laid up all the truth in it, as in a
rich treasure house. Also the same Irenaeus says: l. 4. c. 43.
We must hear and obey those Priests who have succession from the Apostles,
who with succession of their Episcopal function, have received the Charisma of
truth. Now supposing that this sacred depositum of the whole corpse of the
revealed truth is preserved in one or other succession of Pastors, of one or
other company of Christians, called the Church; either it must be granted that
it was preserved in that succession of Pastors, which my catalogue shows: or
else I must require my adversaries to set forth another catalogue of Pastors,
unto whom this sacred depositum was committed, and from whom we may receive it
as need shall require. For to say that the divine truth committed to the
custody of the Pastors (whom God has appointed to be always in the Church of
purpose to preserve men from wavering in faith, Ephesians. 4 v. 13.14.
and from being carried about with every wind of false doctrine) did at any time
wholly or in part, by contrary error, fail in them universally, in such sort
that there should not in all ages be sound one or other company of Pastors and
Priests whom we could know still to keep the Depositum inuiolate and entire,
and whom consequently (according to Irenaeus his saying) we ought to obey, as
being men, l. 4. ^. 4.
who with succession of their Episcopal function, received also the Charisma
of truth: if, I say, this were so, that Gods truth all or in part had explicit
and implicit perished from the mouth of all known Priests and Pastors, Gods
ordinance it self, who for the general good of the Church appointed these
Pastors, had bin deficient, or had failed of the intended effect. Ephesians. 4. v.
13.14.
For how should men be preserved from wavering in faith or from being carried
about with every wind of false doctrine, by Pastors appointed to be for that
purpose unto the worlds end, if in some ages no such Pastors were, or were not
to be known, or being known to be the Pastors, yet did universally fail to
preserve the entire formerly received truth, by believing and teaching, and so
making the people believe contrary errors? If this were so, the holy Ghost had
failed to teach the Church all truth, and consequently Christ's promise had not
bin performed, which said, that the Spirit of truth shall teach all truth. Ioh.
16. v. 13.
Some Pastors therefore always are in the Church, who without spot or wrinkle
of any error in faith, shall preserve the entire truth, and by the assistance
of Christ and his holy Spirit, shall be able, as need shall require, to unfold
and deliver to the people the same truth, thereby to preserve them from falling
into error, and from wavering in faith.
1 THat the Apostles taught the whole body of Christian doctrine, and
commended the same to the succeeding Pastors of the Church, to be always
maintained without innovation; and that as Vincentius and Irenaeus speak, the
faithful people of the Church were to be taught the truth by these Pastors,
shall be granted: for what the Apostles revealed and delivered from Jesus
Christ, the same they intended should be continued for ever in the Church. But
this proves not that the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church held all
things that the Church of Rome now holds, unless my adversary can show that
every thing holden in the Church of Rome, is part of the Body of that
Christian doctrine which the Apostles commended to their successors. For over
and besides the truth revealed by the Apostles, the church of Rome successively
and by degrees, in these last 800 years especially, has brought in diverse
pernicious and damnable errors and corruptions touching Traditions,
Transubstantiation, Images, Justification, the Mass, the Popes primacie, the
worship of Saints, and innumerable other points wherein we have forsaken it: the
which corruptions not belonging to the body of Christian doctrine which the
Apostles taught, but being a disease that bred in the body of the Church, must
not be said to have bin the faith of the Fathers, who received nothing from the
Apostles but that doctrine which is contained in the canon of the Bible:
besides which doctrine, if either the Fathers or Pastors of the Church
succeeding, taught any thing, it must be rejected as no part of the Depositu^
mentioned. Thus my answer is plain, that ye Apostles delivered to their
successors, to be preserved against all innovation the whole Christian
doctrine: but the several articles of the now Romish faith which we have cast
off, are no part of that Christian doctrine. Secondly my adversary replies,
that it was the mind of the Apostles and the ordinance of God, not only that
the whole body of the truth should be preserved in some succession or other,
but also that it should be preserved so inuiolate and entire, that no contrary
error should be taught with it: which being supposed, he says it must be
granted that it has bin so preserved in that succession of Pastors which his
Catalogue shows; because the Protestants are able to show no other Pastors.
His whole discourse affirms two things: the first, that the body of Christian
doctrine committed to the Pastors of the church, does not at any time fail
either in whole or part, but is preserved inuiolate and entire from all errors
growing thereto. The second, that the Protestants can show no other succession
of Pastors, whereto this doctrine was committed then is contained in his
catalogue. Hence he concludes, that his now church of Rome holds nothing but
what the ancient Fathers held. I answer to the second, touching the Catalogue,
that for the first 600 years, we approve it, confessing the Pastors and
Christians mentioned therein, to have bin the true Church. And for the rest of
the ages to this day, we will allow the Catalogue with three limitations:
first, that the Pastors and people therein named, be confessed to have kept the
faith less purely then they of the former ages; so that the lower they
succeeded, the more they were corrupted. Secondly, that from the 800. year
specially, such Pastors and people be added, every one in their place, as
misliked and resisted the corruptions of the Church of Rome growing on, and
vpheld the purer doctrine in such manner as I briefly touched in THE WAY,
Digress. 52, Thirdly, that the legend Saints, Antichristian Pope^ lying
stories, and the Popes creatures, whose succession we need not, be wiped out,
and the ordinary Pastors living in communion with the Church of Rome, Greece,
Armenia, and such like (though we allow not every singular and special man) be
supplied. Let the Catalogue be reformed and undertaken in this manner, and the
Pastors and the people contained therein shall be yielded to be the same that
Christ and his Apostles committed the truth to: and in the mean time the
Repliar does but trouble himself, and seduce his Reader, when he bears him in
hand that we desire to show other Pastors or people besides these; all
Protestants freely affirming their faith to have succeeded even in the Church
of Rome it self: though the errors thereof were no part of their faith but the
inventions of men added thereunto.

2 But the first thing affirmed, that the Christian doctrine committed to the
Pastors of the Church cannot fail in any degree or part thereof, but is always
preserved inuiolate and entire from all error, is false. For albeit it be the
commandment of God, and were the desire of the blessed Apostles, that it
should be so: How the Church cannot err.
yet (as I have showed) the event teaches that sometime it falls out otherwise:
in the same manner that it is Gods ordinance that no man should sin, and yet
all men do sin. So that all that can be said of the Church and the Pastors
thereof by virtue of the promise, is, that neither it, nor they, shall
universally all of them at any time fail in the belief and profession of
those truths which are absolutely and simply necessary to salvation: though
many Pastors and people reputed for the best part of the Church may err, and
sometime also persist in joining mortal errors with the truth many ages
together, what time no Pastors or people at all shall appear to hold the faith
so entire, but some corruptions, not hindering salvation, shall be holden
therewith: the which assertion as it overthrows all the Jesuits discourse in
this place; so is it true that our Adversaries grant, neither the whole nor any
part of the Church to be free from error, but so far forth as it follows the
Pope: who himself by their like confession may err, and be deposed for
her^sie. Beside, if Gods ordinance, or the Apostles intendiment, did warrant
the Pastors of the Church, that they should not err at least universally, how
comes it to pass that even every Doctor in his Catalogue from Dyonisius and
Ignatius to Stapleton and Bellarmine have had their errors, all his Councels
have had theirs, and the most of his Popes have decreed one against another,
and there is not one Divine in all his Catalogue (not his dearest Thomas of
Aquin) but he will confess him to have erred? yet err he should not, if the
providence of God were to preserve the Doctors of his Church from all error in
the degree that the Reply says. The truth therefore succeeds continually in
the Church without ceasing, but first: Not always in all, nor in the highest
Pastors. Secondly: Nor always without corruption. Thirdly, Nor at all times,
entire and inuiolate from all error: but sometime a universal apostasy may so
ouerflow the Church that nothing shall remain free from error, but only the
necessary and fundamental points of faith: the which points do not therefore
lose their succession, because many corruptions are received and taught with
the^: much less do those corruptions succeed with the truth from the Apostles;
but the Pastors and people thus corrupted show themselves not to have kept his
covenant; who will save them that have perseuered in the foundation, and be
merciful to them that have erred of invincible ignorance, and forgive them that
have repented of their errors; and damme them, whether Pastors or people, that
with tyranny and contumacy have maintained the corruptions.

3 The Jesuits reasons to prove that the Pastors of the Church cannot err,
and that the true faith cannot be corrupted, are answered already, in THE WAY.
14.

A.D. Wherefore if my Adversaries will deny the catalogue of Pastors, Page 270.
which I have set down, to be of such as have always preserved the foresaid
sacred Depositum of the truth entire and inuiolate, I require first that they
will assign another Catalogue of such as did continually preserve it whole and
without change. Also I require that they assign the first Pastor of my
Catalogue which failed in preserving the truth, setting down shall the point
of doctrine wherein he erred, and naming other Past^^^s, who resisted, and
continued to resist. Lastly I require that they assign not (as their manner
is, White digr. 51. and 52.
and as M. White does) such particulars as they may see ordinarily answered and
refuted by Catholic Authors, but some plain instances which never were yet,
nor cannot be answered or refuted. Which my demands if they cannot satisfy (as
I am sure they cannot) every discreet man careful of his soul will see that
it is not safe to forsake this reverend rank, and orderly succession of known
Pastors to follow such a fantastical Platonicall Idaea of an invisible
company of professing Protestants, White p. 338.
which M. White imagines to have always been (as every other Heretic might
imagine the professors of his sect to have been) or to run after such a rabble
of ragged heretics as the same M. White assigns for emine^t members of the
Protestant Church: White ib. page 394.
the which neither have interrupted succession or continuance in time or place,
nor uniformity in doctrine with the ancient Church, or one with another, or
with the Protestants of his age. This foresaid consideration may suffice to let
any indifferent man see that the same doctrine of faith, which the ancient
Fathers held, is holden at this day by Pastors of our Church, or at least may
stay him from thinking that the same faith is not holden.
If all that view his foresaid considerations prove indifferent either to the
cause, or of indifferent judgment, that which is holden this day by the
Pastors of the Repliars Church, will not be deemed the same doctrine, which the
ancient Fathers held. I say, upon his foresaid considerations it cannoy be
deemed so: he may have new considerations or something else in store to stay
men (and, if I meet it, it shall be answered) but this foresaid is too absurd:
for first I deny not the Catalogue of Pastors (for the first 600 years,
whereof the question in this place is) to be of such as preserved the truth
inuiolate, but affirm those very persons to have bin the true Pastors of the
true Church, and would my self give them up for a catalogue of such, and
assign no other; but I require the Repliar to make it manifest against the
objection, that they held as their judgment, and professed as their faith,
those special points of Popery that we renounce. And let him not reply that
they held and professed them, at least implicit, but say ingenuously whether
they be to be found in their books? for example, Transubstantiation, the
sacrifice of the Mass, the worship of images, the Popes primacy and Monarchy
over the world. The which point not being showed in his foresaid
considerations, but directly avoided by a conceit of their believing at least
implicit, how may an indifferent man see, or by staying never so long, hope to
see the Papacy in the Fathers?

4 Again, he says if his adversaries will deny the Catalogue of Pastors which
he has set down, to be of such as have preserved the truth: he must require
them to assign another of their own. And Secondly, to note the first Pastor
in his Catalogue that failed in preserving the truth: And Thirdly, in assigning
our Catalogue, not to assign such as are ordinarily answered by Catholic
authors, but some plain instances: which his demand if it cannot be answered,
as he is sure it cannot, then the Repliar concludes, every discreet man may, if
he will, drive out his own wit to make room for no doctrine wants lineall
succession that accords with the Scripture; nevertheless for the first 600
years we assign the Church wherein the Fathers lived; and for the rest to
this day we will assign no other Catalogue the^ the Church of Rome it self,
wherein many of those whom the Repliar has couched in his Catalogue, professed
the foundation of the truth that we rabble of ragged heretics, were Gods
dear children, and better professors of the truth then the reverend rank of
his Popes and Friars, who were, and yet are, nothing else but the great
Antichrist that was prophesied should fit in the Church of God: among whom
these men and many ordinary Pastors and people of the Church of Rome living and
holding the foundation of faith, and in the agony of their conscience,
renouncing the damnable heresies of the Papacy: it cannot be denied but the
Church of Rome it self affoords us a Catalogue sufficient. For the Repliar is
too simple and deceaues himself, if he think we place the Church only in
Berengarius, Wickliffe, Husse, Jerome, the Waldenses, and the rest of that
sort: But we name them as some particular eminent members in the Church of Rome
(for so we term all these western parts by reason of the Patriarchie) less
corrupted then were many others; and unto them we add all others in the said
Church that held the articles of faith either in solid or in part, though it
were Occham, Gerson, Armachanus, Cesenas, Ardeus, Potho, Sauanarola, or any
such: for albeit they held many errors, yet the truth among their errors was,
preserved; and I affirm that it is sufficient for the succession of the
Church, and being of the faith, if the parts thereof, and all the several
particulars belonging to salvation, can be showed to have been held in any
Church, albeit no one man in the same, or in the world, can be showed to have
holden them all entirely himself. That Prot. Apolog. tract. 2. c. 2. sect.
3.4.5.6 7.
our adversaries may see they do but trifle away the time, when they labor so
contentiously to show that Wicklife, or Husse, or the Albingenses differed in
some things from us, no member of the Church in the world being at all times
free from every spot and wrinkle of error.

CHAP. XLV.
1. The Fathers are not against the Protestants, but with them. 2. Touching the
Centuries rejecting of the Fathers. The cause of some errors in the Fathers. 3.
Gregory's Faith, and converting England. 4. The Papists have been formal
innouators. 5. How they excuse the matter.

A. D. In which point if he desire to be more fully satisfied, Page 271.
let him read Iodocus Coccius his Book, entitled Catholicus thesaurus
controuersiarum, in which he shall see particularly set down, point by point,
the ancient Fathers, with vnanime consent, testifying for us against
Protestants. The which to be so in many points, the Magdeburgians, being
themselves famous Protestants, do likewise testify, who having taken great
pains in seeking ancient histories and monuments of the Fathers writings (to
see if they could find any testimony of authority to countenance their cause)
are forced at last to acknowledge the ancient Fathers to testify in many
things against them and for us; all which their testimonies they think to wipe
away with saying, that these were the errors, or blemishes of these Fathers;
which is as good a jest, as if a guilty person, being desirous to clear
himself, at the bar, by the witness of honest men, and having diligently
sought and finding that all honest men will bear witness against him, yet to
make a show will needs bring in a number of honest and substantial men bidding
them to give their verdit, of purpose that when they all have delivered the
truth, See the Protestants Apology, where these points are handled largely.
Tract. 1 sect. 1. and deinceps.
he may forsooth, say they all lie or are deceived. This also to be so, is
showed in the Protestants Apology, where particularly is proved, out of
diverse learned Protestant writers: first, that the faith we profess is the
same that Saint Gregory professed; and, by Saint Austine the Monk, taught us
English men, at our first conversion. Secondly, that the same faith was
universally professed for sundry ages before, and namely that it agreed in
substance with the first faith to which the Brittans were converted in the
Apostles days. Thirdly, that diverse particular points of our doctrine are
acknowledged by learned Protestants to have been taught by the ancient Fathers,
namely Vows, Real presence, etc. For all which the said Protestant Apology
cites the names, and books, and oftentimes the very words of the learned
Protestants, as may be seen, and I wish the Reader for his more satisfaction
to see. Lastly, that our Church holds the very same and no other faith in
substance, then that which was held by the ancient Church, may appear by the
very nature, as I may say, of our Church; whose property and condition is not
to invent of new, or to alter any doctrine, in any matter of faith; but to
receive humbly and obediently, at the hands of our present Pastors, what they
in like manner learned of their predecessors; and still to hate, and resist all
innovation in any matter of faith no less then a deadly poison, as knowing
that the least infection of any new invented heresy or alteration in matter of
faith does corrupt and adulterate the whole faith, and takes away infallible
authority and credit from the Church. Wherefore our Pastors have been, like
men appointed to watch, very vigilant in noting, reprehending, resisting and
condemning all innovation in faith and sometimes casting incorrigible members
out of the Church, even for a word or two profanely innouated contrary to the
custom and faith of the Church. The which course being duly observed (as
chiefly by Gods providence and partly by humane diligence it has been and
shall be still observed) it is not possible that there should be such
alteration in religion, or difference betwixt the faith and doctrine of the
ancient and present Pastors of the Church, as our adversaries ignorantly or
maliciously object. For as Vincencius Lyrinensis says, Vincent. Lyr. l.
aduersus haereses

Vincentius Lyr. contra haereses c. 32.


the Church of Christ is a careful keeper of religion committed to her charge;
she never changes or alters in any thing, she diminishes nothing, nothing
she adds, to wit, as a doctrine of faith True it is that, by reason of
heresies arising, the Pastors and doctors of the Church in latter ages have had
occasion to write more largely and expressly about diverse points, then was
done in former times when no such heresies were, and that for confutatio^ of
those heresies, and more explication of the formerly received faith these
Pastors and Doctors have used some kind of more significant words then
formerly were used: in which sort, the term of (...) was brought in against
those who denied Christ our Savior to be true God, and (...), against those
who denied our blessed Lady to be the mother of God: and transubstantiation
against those who denied the conversion of the substance of bread into the
substance of the body of our Lord. The which terms (although they may seem
to smell of novelty) yet indeed are not of that profane sort of nouelty of
voices, or words, which the Apostle wishes to be avoided: because the sense
of these words is not different from the faith; and phrase used formerly by
the Church, but do only explicate more plainly or signify more fully and
clearly that which was formerly believed and taught by the Church: which kind
of explication of the ancient faith to be lawful and allowable, Vincent.
Lyrin. cont. haer. c. 2.
we may learn out of Vincentius Lyrinensis, who, although a most true lover of
antiquity, allows such new explication of the faith as we may see in his
golden Treatise, where having declared excellently by that saying of the
Apostle, Cap. 28.29 30.
O Timothy keep the Depositum, etc. that nothing is to be innouated in faith,
he shows how this notwithstanding, Cap. 32.
the ancient faith may in process of time be more explained, and that, for
more easy understanding of it, to an old article of faith we may give a new
name.
1 HEre are four reasons to prove that the ancient Fathers held the same
doctrine of faith that is now professed in the Church of Rome: and one
objection answered that he thinks will be made against him. His first reason
is the testimony of Coccius Cum ab ineunte aetate incidisset in praeceptores
Lutheranos, and adhuc inuenis in eiusmodi haereticorum Academijs versatus. etc.
Posseuin. ap. v. Iod. Cocc.
an apostata, who in his Thesaurus settes down the Fathers point by point with
vnanime consent testifying against the Protestants. Wherein he much forgets
himself: for if Coccius set down the Fathers point by point, what needed the
Repliar have granted Chapter 44.
a little before, that there be diverse points held by his side now adays
whereof there is no mention in the writings of the Fathers, yet they held them
because either explicitly or implicitly, they held many points that they have
not expressly mentioned: let these two be reconciled; They held some things
only implicitly, by an infolded faith, not mentioning them expressly: and
yet Coccius sets them down point by point testifying against the Protestants.
For those points, which they held only infoldedly, Coccius cannot set down in
their own words point by point. I answer therefore, that Coccius with his
Spatio 24. annoru^. Posseu.
twenty four years study has not done this that my Repliar reports: he has
collected together the words of the Fathers, and such places as his side uses,
for the confirmation of their heretical opinions, but the vnanime and certain
consent in the now current Roman faith he has not shown; and the Reader
shall know it by this, that in the controversies between us they many times
deny the authority of the Fathers, and Ind. expurg. Belg page 12.
profess so to do: yea to excuse and extenuate their errors by devising
shifts, and to fainesome fit sense (for their own purpose) unto them, when
they are opposed against them by us in our disputations. And why have they thus
purged and corrupted their writings, and why do they allow nothing to be the
sense of their words but what the Pope and his Clergy allows to be the sense?
Is it not palpable hypocrisy to do all this; and yet to brag of their
vnanime consent against us? Coccius therefore out of the Fathers, whom they
have CORRVPTED, PVRGED, COVNTERFETTED, and COINED, may bring places, which,
being fraudulently expounded and shuffled, may give color to Papistrie; but by
the true writings of the true Fathers, truly expounded, as themselves meant,
the present faith of Rome in the articles which they hold against us, and as
they expound them, cannot be confirmed, no not in one point: and let no man
hope the contrary, as may appear by these examples following. Of the
sufficiency of the Scripture without traditions Saint Basil De Fid. p. 394.
graec. Basil.
says, It is a manifest falling from the faith, and an argument of arrogance,
either to abrogate any of those things that are written in the Scriptures, or
to bring in any thing that is not written. Of images Epiphanius Ep. ad Ioh.
Ierosol.
says, It is against the authority of the Scripture that the image of a man
should hang in the Church. And (...).
the making of statues resembling the images of the dead, he calls an
idolatrous and a devilish practice. And speaking of worshipping the image of
the blessed Virgin (which now is so commonly seen painted, and attired
Pingitur cincinnis exculta, vestibus ornatissimis, and pompa adeo inani
structa, vt illi etiam unions ab auribus pendeant: quod nemo possit sine
stomacho aspicere. Paleot. de imag. page 253.
in the fashion like a Lady, yea Vestientes dominam nostram, and Magdalenam,
and alias sanctas, ornamentis profanis and vanis, ac meretricijs; quibus etiam
pudicae matronae sese vestire vererentur. Nauar manual. c. 11. n. 23.
like a Curtisan, and keeps such a court at Lauretto, in the same place where
Leand. Albert descript. Ital. in Picen. page 428.
sometime Juno kept hers) he adds that thereby men are drawn a whoring from
God, the body of Mary being holy but not God; and she an honorable Virgin but
not given to be adored, but her self adoring him that she bare in her womb.
Of the Supremacy, which now the Pope uses over all other Bishops, Gregory (who
in his third argument the Repliar says professed his religion) Lib 6. ep. 30.
says, he will confidently avouch him to be the forerunner of Antichrist
whosoever he be that desires to be called universal Bishop, proudly preferring
himself before others. Of images of the Trinity Gregory the second (...)
Epist. ad Leo. Isaur. Imp.
says they may not be made. Of Purgatory it is clear that the Greek Church
never believed it. So says Nilus: (...). Nil. de purgat. p. 118. l. 1.
Our Fathers never taught us Purgatory: neither did the Eastern Church ever
believe it. Roffensis. Artic. 18.
No man now doubts of Purgatory, and yet among the ancient there is little or
no mention made of it; yea the Greeks to this day believe it not: and the
Latins have not with one consent conceived the truth of this thing. For the
belief of Purgatory was not so needful for the Primitive Church as now it is.
Of the number of Sacraments which Trid. conc. sess. 7. can. 1.
our Adversaries will needs have to be seven, Cassander Consult. art. 13.. de
numero sacram.
says, we do not read the other Sacraments (confirmation, matrimony, orders,
penance, unction) by those ancient writers, to be comprehended, in any certain
number, nor shall you hastily find any before Peter Lumbard that determined any
certain or definite number of them. Of the peoples receiving the cup in the
Sacrament, (...), etc. Cle^. constable. p 145. Venet.
the constitutions of Clemens say, Let the whole Laity in order with fear and
reverence receive the cup. By which few examples the Reader may discern how
untrue it is that Coccius has particularly set down, point by point, the
ancient Fathers, with vnanime consent, against the Protestants: who has
brought nothing out of them to that purpose which is not clearly and
sufficiently answered, by Jn the most weighty controversies, he is answered by
M. Perkins, in his Problema.
our Divines in every controversy.

2 His second argument is the testimony of those that writ the Centuries: Who
being themselves famous Protestants, testify this to be so, in many points.
This argument was objected in THE WAY. 44 and Digr. 47.
his Treatise, and fully answered, and therefore should not have been repeated
again before my answer had been avoided. Yet a little I will satisfy him.
First if the Magdeburgenses acknowledge the Fathers in many points to be for
the Papists: which they no where do: yet that is not all the Fathers, with
vnanime consent, point by point, in all points. Some particular Fathers, the
Repliar knows well enough, speak that which has no vnanime consent of the
rest: and their private opinions may give color to many things, and yet will
not reach from point to point. Next, it is false that is here reported of the
Centuries. They testify no more but what they thought that Fathers held
corruptly, and themselves judged to be errors and blemishes in their writings.
There is no Romish writer at this day but he does the same. Baronius in his
Annals, purposely intended against the Centuries, has not left one Father, or
one ancient history, uncensured: but still charges it with some error and
blemish or other. But my Adversary says, the things which the Centuries say
were blemishes in the Fathers, are such points as the Church of Rome now holds:
whereby it should seem that in many things, they testify with the Church of
Rome against the Protestants. I answer, first that in some points (as the
diligentest that are may sometime ouersee) and now and then, they mistake, and
call that the opinion, or the error, of a Father, that is not. This kind of
oversight we perceive and pardon in our Adversaries themselves. Secondly diverse
things noted by them for errors in the Fathers, are not holden by the Church of
Rome, but are censured also by our Adversaries themselves, as well as by the
Centuries. Thirdly, diverse points, in particular Fathers, are taxed, which
belong to that which is now holden in the Church of Rome; but this iustifies
not the Papists: first because in such points there is no vnanime consent of
all the Fathers, or all the Church, but only the unsettled, and ambulatory
opinions of some private Doctors. Next, what these Doctors delivered touching
such points, is holden otherwise, and to other intents and purposes, now in the
Church of Rome; as their praying for the dead, which the Centuries justly note
for a blemish, was not with opinion of Purgatory, as now it is in Rome.
Thirdly, the mystery of iniquity began to work in the primitive Church:
whereby the fathers themselves (though Bishops of the Church and most holy men,
yet but men) sometime were deceived, and brought into error in some things;
thus it is written of Papias, Baron. an. 118 n. 2. and 6.
a Bishop of great authority in the Church, and famous for the holiness of his
life, that, by misunderstanding Apoc. 20.4.
a Text in the revelation, Prateol. elench. haeret. l. 3. n. 17. Hiero. de
scripto. c. 18.
he gave occasion of the millenary heresy, afterward condemned in the Church;
yet his credit, and estimation was such, that many great men followed him:
Nepos, Irenaeus, Victorinus, Tertullian, Lactantius, Apollinarius, Coracion,
and diverse others. For being a man, as (...). Eusebius. hist. eccle. l. 3. c. vlt.
Eusebius says of him, of no deep judgment, but given to believe reports,
(for he was not so careful to attend what was written by the Apostles as to
gather together the reports and traditions of such as had been conversant with
the Apostles and Apostolical men) he was deceived thereby himself, and
deceived many that followed him. That it is no marvel if some among the
Fathers, taking that course, vented, in their books that which is not so
sound; and unawares writ some things which the Church of Rome, declining into
heresy, and following Antichrist, afterward would lay hold on to maintain
their errors. Thus Origin, Tertullian, Lucifer, Lactantius, Hilary, Cyprian,
and all the Fathers, till it come to good S. Austin, the most orthodoxall of
all the Fathers, Greek or Latin, partly seduced by reports and tradition, as
was Papias, partly transported by the subtilty and learning of Philosophers and
heretics that lived every where among them, and partly (...), etc. Basil.
page 314.
ouercharged with zeal, or passion in contending against them; delivered
diverse things that were not the uniform doctrine of the Church, whereof some
perhaps may belong to the now errors of the Church of Rome: but that is not
much, and what can be showed concerns but the smaller points of Popery,
wherein there is no great moment; and even in such advantages they are unhappy
that have nothing in the Fathers to pleasure them but the parings of their
nails and excrements of their writings. And if our adversaries be impatient
hereat, the field is open, let the resolutest among them choose any point
determined against us in the new creed of the Trent Council, and show out of
his Coccius, or whence he will, this vnanime consent of the Fathers for it, and
he shall be answered in such sort that it shall evidently appear there in no
such matter.

3 His third argument is the testimony of his Protestant apology, such another
author as Coccius was, a Seminary Priest yet living, and of the same stamp the
Repliar himself is. Which brings to my mind a jest, that I read in Cyrill, of
the Emperor Julian: M^ certe sanauit saepe Aesculapius aegrotantem,
subministrans remedia; horum testis est Jupiter. cont. Iulia. l. 7. p. 1^2.
Aesculapius verily has often cured me when I have been sick, and I call
Jupiter to witness. He brings his testimony to prove the deity of Aesculapius,
who himself was no less an idol then Aesculapius; as my Repliar alleges
Coccius, and Briarly, whose writings are mistrusted no less then his own
Reply. That which he has said is answered by Protest. App. p. 1. and inde.
the D. of Winch. to whose book I refer the Repliar, as he refers me to
Briarly. That the first conversion of English men was not By Austin, I. 49.
showed in THE WAY: and whether Gregory professed the faith now holden in Rome,
the Reader may see in the D. of Winch. book. His holding of some things
superstitiously, which the Church of Rome has entertained, proves not that he
professed the same faith the Church of Rome now does: because the faith of the
said Church comprehends much more then he held: and what he held, is now
otherwise expounded and applied then by him it was. For example, in the matter
of images he was superstitious Lib, 7 ep. 54. Secundino sub sin.
and would have them used to put us in mind, and to be lay men's books: but L.
9. ep. 9.
in no wise to be worshipped. It is reported to me that, being inflamed with
inconsiderate zeal, you have broken in pieces the images of Saints, with this
excuse, that they ought not to be worshipped. And verily we do altogether
commend you in that you forbad them TO BE WORSHIPPED, but we reprove you for
breaking them -- for it is one thing to ADORE a picture, and another thing by
the history of a picture, TO LEARN what is to be adored. For what writing
performs to them that can read, the same does a picture to idiots beholding
it. -- now that which was placed in Churches, NOT TO BE ADORED, but ONLY to
instruct the ignorant, should not have been broken. Now Tho. 3. part. q. 25.
art. 3 Capre ol. 3. d. 9. q. vnic. ad 1. concl. 2. imagines porto Christi,
Deiparae virginis, and aliorum sanctorum, in templis retinendas, eisque debitum
honorem and venerationem impertiendam -- per imagines quas oscul ^mur, and
coram quibus caput a perimus, and procumbimus, Christum adoramus: and sanctos,
quorum illae similitudinem gerunt, veneramur. conc. Trid. sess. vlt. vbi verbum
Adoramus Latriam; verbum autem Veneramur, duli^m significare videtur. Suar.
tom. 1. d. 54. ^. 4. imagines Christi and sanctoru^ venerandae sunt, non solum
per accidents vel improprie, ita vt ipsae termine^t v^nerationem, vt in se
considerantu^, and non sulum vt vicem gerunt exemplaris. Bell. de imag. c. 21.
the faith professed by our adversaries is, that they are to be worshipped and
adored with divine honor, and properly, which Gregory condemned. So likewise
Moral. l. 4. c. 42. l. 18. c. 24. l. 25. c. 1.
his words are alleged for the merit of works, yet the condignity thereof,
now maintained, and wherein merit properly consists, he never dreamt of, but
says plainly Explan. in Psalm. poemt. p. 7. v. Auditam fac mihi.
the contrary. If that happiness of the Saints (in heaven) be Gods mercy, and
not obtained by merits, where shall that be which is written: And thou shall
reward every man according to his works? If it be given according to works,
how shall mercy be esteemed? This is the objection, now mark his answer. But
it is one thing for God to render according to works, and another thing to
render for the works themselves. For in that which is said, According to works,
the quality it self, of the works, is understood; that the glorious reward
shall be his whose good works shall appear; because unto that blessed life,
wherein with God, and of God, we live, no labor can be equalized, no works
compared: specially when the Apostle says, The sufferings of this life time
are not condignely worthy of future glory which shall be revealed in us. -- it
is certain therefore that to whom he mercifully gives to work well in this
life, to them he more mercifully gives that; to them, in eternal blessedness,
an hundredfold fruit shall be rewarded. This profession of Gregory is far
from that which Before. where M. Baius his doctrine is laid down.
I have showed the Church of Rome now professes touching the merit of our
works. Secondly, whereas, our of Briarly, he says, the Faith professed by
Gregory, and taught the English men by Austine, at our first conversion,
agreed, for substance, with the first faith whereto the Brittans were converted
in the Apostles days, and was the same which universally was professed: We
must distinguish: for Gregory, and Austine no doubt taught many points that
were true, and wherein we consent with them, yea the substance of saving faith:
but some things they innouated, (wherein the Church of Rome now follows them)
adding to the words of wholesome doctrine their own corrupt opinions: the
first, we grant was professed before, and was the faith of the Brittans at
their first conversion: but not the latter. And herein appears the cunning and
fraud of our adversaries, that by the testimonies of such as affirm Gregoryes
faith, in things of the first kind, to be Apostolik, go about to prove it to be
such also in things of the latter kind. The Repliar therefore has to prove,
that (not the truths which they taught, but) the additions which they brought
in (wherein the Protestants refuse them) were the substance of their faith, and
that whereto our nation was converted in the Apostles time. Which they can
never do. Thirdly, that diverse particular points, of the Papists doctrine, are
acknowledged, by learned Protestants, to have been taught by the ancient
Fathers: as Vows, Real presence, etc. is answered before, in the second
objection, touching the Centuries. And by the D. of Winchester in his book
against Briarly, Prot. App. l. 2. c. 1. and inde.
where the particular instances are examined. And if the Repliar and his Author
will make good their assertion, they must prove that the Fathers, with one
consent taught these things: and withal so meant and expounded them as they
are now meant and expounded in the Papacy. Let this be done, in those points
that we refuse, and good reason the game be theirs. But if these learned
Protestants do no more but note the particular corruptions that crept into
particular writings and Churches, whereby our adversaries have taken occasion
to increase them; they must not be said to acknowledge either that these things
were the Catholic doctrine of the whole Church, or that they were intended
and believed as the Roman Church now believes them,

4 His fourth and last argument is, because (forsooth) it is not the condition
of the Roman Church, to invent, or alter, any doctrine; but humbly and
obediently to maintain what they have received from their predecessors; to
hate innovation; to note, reprehend, resist all innovation in faith: that it
cannot be possible there should be any difference between the faith of the
Fathers, and the doctrine of the Church of Rome: as the Protestants ignorantly
and maliciously object. And indeed if that part of the Church of Rome which we
have refused (I mean the Papacy) were the true universal Church, he said
well; for it is against the property of that Church to dissent from any part of
the ancient faith: as he has well observed out of his Gregory, and Vincentius:
but how will he prove that side, and faction in the Church of Rome, which is
charged with innouating and dissenting, to be the true Church? how shall the
reader be assured that these herds of Popes, Cardinals, Prelates, Monks,
Friars, Jesuits, are those faithful Pastors whose nature is not to innouate,
when all the world has discovered them and their doctrine to be nothing else
but weeds and excrements arising in the Church? Is there not an assertion,
Greg. Val. p. 96. tom. 3.
in the Spaniard quoted, that says, By the unfolded act of faith, the same
things have not always been believed: but diverse points, in the progress of
time, have been manifest and believed? Does not Austine of Ancona Sum. de eccl.
pot. q. 59. art. 3.
say, the Pope may make a new Creed, multiply the articles of faith, and put
more points under each article then were before? This is enough to show the
untruth of that the Replyar says: for under the pretense of the Pope and his
Church power to unfold that which the Fathers and ancient Church believed
infoldedly, and to make new articles, they have altered and innouated all
things: and their pestilent and palpable heresies are made a part of the old
Churches infolded faith; and these men being the formallest innouators that
ever were, yet must be said to dissent from the Fathers in nothing, because
whatsoever they daily invent and innouate, the Fathers held at least
implicitly. Unhappy Rome See Ph. Camerar. tom. 2. c. 10.
whose certain name was never publicly known, and whose certain doctrine to the
worlds end can never be determined, but still it may multiply and diminish.
Solin. Poly. hist. c. 1.
The Gentile Romans were persuaded, the eternity of Rome should consist in
the concealing of the true name thereof: and therefore Valerius Soranus was
executed because he told the name: and our Catholic Romans have placed all
their hope of enduring, in concealing their faith under the veil of infolded
faith. Hold ye fast to this conceit ye brave Romanists, and you may boldly
reproach them all with ignorance that deny the consent of your doctrine with the
Fathers.

5 This objection the Repliar saw coming (for his conscience told him the
present Church of Rome had increased that which the Fathers taught) and
therefore he answers, that true it is, the Doctors of his Church have written
more largely, about diverse points, then was done in former times. But this was
for the confutation of heresies rising; and for the more explication of the
formerly received faith: and they have used more significant words then
formerly were used; but yet the sense of such words differs not from the faith
and phrases formerly used, but only explicate more plainly that which was
formerly believed by the Church: which kind of explication Vincentius allows
in his golden Treatise. But all this is untrue, and is briefly answered: the
Church of Rome, and the D D. therein, since the Fathers time, have done more
then either the explicating of the ancient faith, or giving new names to old
articles. They have innouated, diminished, corrupted the substance of the
articles themselves; as I showed particularly Dig. 19. and 51
in the WAY, even in this very point of transubstantiation. And this pretense
of using more significant words, by reason of heresies rising, is but a cloak
for the treachery: the greatest heretics that arose being themselves, and the
words devised being the engines to advance their heresies: the sense whereof
has no agreement with the faith of the Fathers, which being too scant for him
that would sit, as God, in the Church of God, must be enlarged, by
dispensations, explications, determinations, new articles, fullness of power,
and what not? The contents of the Scripture were not enough; to hold themselves
to that which is expressed therein, Alphons. haer. v. eccl. 3. n^*
were to play the fool: and to destroy all Christian religion. The Pope is
like Typhaeus the giant in Nannus: (...). Dionys l. 2. page 36.
that must have a higher rooffed firmament to walk under, and bigger stars
to give him light; or else he would put down all with his hands and fight with
Jupiter: with his new terms, and larger explications he coniures the old faith
out of the Church. His golden Vincentius has another point to this purpose
that the Repliar ouersees. Monitor. c. 30
It is lawful that those ancient articles of heavenly doctrine be dressed and
filed and polished: but villainy to change them, villainy to maime and curtall
them. Let them receive, if you will, evidence, light, distinction: but withal
let them hold their fullness, integrity and propriety. This rule the Church
of Rome has not observed: but contrary thereunto it has not only expounded
the articles of the ancient faith corruptly, but also added many new articles
which in the ancient Church were never known.

CHAP. XLVI.
1 The errors broached by the later Divines of the Church of Rome. 2 Their
errors maintained by that Church. And their writings to good purpose alleged
by the Protestants. 3 How that which they speak for the Protestants is shifted
off. 5 One reason why we allege their sayings. 6 That which is said in excuse
of their disagreement, answered.

A. D. The second objection -- My Adversaries may secondly object, that all
this notwithstanding, it cannot be denied, Page 274.
but that in particular men's writings set out in these latter ages, there have
been and are found diverse errors, contrary to the former faith of the Fathers.
To justify the truth of this objection, it seems that M. White has with
great pains raked together all the riffe-raffe and odd opinions he could
find in any particular Catholic Authors, as thinking be like this way to
discredit the Catholic cause. But he is very shallow witted if he think by
this means to overthrow or shake the universal faith of the Catholic
Church. Introduct. quest. 3.
For (as I noted in the Introduction) the Catholic Church does not bind her
faith upon any private Doctors opinion: nor indeed do those private Doctors
deliver their said opinions, as any points of their own, or other men's faith,
even then when, in these their private opinions, they hold this or that matter
to pertain to faith, which other men think not to pertain to faith, but
rather submit all their opinions (as heretical Doctors, which have no faith
but private opinions, will not) to the faith, judgment and censure of the
Catholic Church, being also ready to renounce any of their opinions,
whenever by lawful definitive sentence of the present Pastors, or otherwise
they may perceive them to be contrary to the ancient faith of the Church. Hence
M. White may see, how vainly he has spent his time in seeking the sinkes, and
sweeping together so many odd sentences of some Catholic Authors, as here
and there he notes in his writings, the which have no more force against the
sincere unity of doctrine of faith maintained by the authority of our Church,
then that heap of filth and ordure of ill life of some particular men, which
he has scraped together, does prove against the sanctity of the profession of
the Catholic Church. And it is marvel that the man has so little wit, as
to labor so much either in showing the contrariety of opinions among
Catholics, which altogether is impertinent to the unity of their faith: or in
discovering the faults of some leude persons, which is altogether impertinent
to the sanctity of the profession of the Church, especially when if he did but
look into the bosom of his own Protestant congregation, and particularly
into the life and doctrine of the very primitive parents thereof, he may find
it no less, but (all circumstances considered, namely of the smalnesse of the
number of men, and the little space of time since it came into the world, etc.)
far more faulty in either kind. And so he ought to have been afraid least
when he had said all against Catholics, that his blind zeal or malice could
devise; that the shame would be returned so much the more against his
Evangelical brethren, some of which (as Luther confesses) have been for their
ill lives far worse then even themselves were when they were Papists: and (as I
may boldly say) for odd errors, absurd and impious opinions, far worse then
any Papists. Which their absurd and impious opinions who list to read, he may
find set down in Caluino-Turcismo and other Authors: See Caluino-Turcismus.
and may oppose them to these which M. White relates, with this advantage,
that whereas if by ignorance or passion, some Catholic writers hold any unfit
opinions; yet actually or virtually they submit them to the faith and censure
of the Church: and so are not to be thought obstinately to err in faith but in
private opinion, about some matter not sufficiently known to them to be
contrary to the faith of the Catholic Church. But Protestant Doctors (who
have no other faith but their own firmly settled opinion, gathered, as it
seems to them, out of Scripture, who also will not, neither actually nor
virtually submit these their opinions to the faith and censure of any Church,
ours, or their own) may (by their erroneous opinions obstinately maintained
against the Church) be convinced of so many absurd and impious obstinate errors
in faith, as they have absurd and impious opinions grounded, as it seems to
them, upon Scriptures. White p. 349.
But it seems M. White regards not what may be objected against his
brethren, so that he may say something against us: and therefore in one place
he does (in effect) urge this argument against us: If the ancient Catholic
truth did continue among us in all points, then there could not be among our
Doctors variety of opinions in any point, no more then there is in the doctrine
of the blessed Trinity or Incarnation. I answer, first, that this may better be
urged against the Protestants, who, as appears in Caluino-Turcismo, have not
only uncertainty and variety of opinions in other points, but even about the
doctrine of the blessed Trinity, and Incarnation; neither have they any such
sufficient means (as we have) to take away this variety of opinions. Secondly,
I answer that the variety of opinions which is among our Doctors, either is not
in matters pertaining to faith: or, if the matter pertain to faith, the
variety is not in the substance of the point, but in some circumstance which
may be held this or other ways without prejudice to faith: or if in some rare
case any private Doctors hold opinion against the substance, or circumstance,
so far as pertains to faith, this is in ignorance, and with readiness to put
away this opinion so soon as they understand the contrary to pertain to faith
by some evident proof of Scripture, or tradition, or by declaration of the
present Church: which is an argument, that although they err in opinion, yet
they err not in implicit belief even of the very point, wherein through
ignorance they do err in opinion. Now the reason why this ignorance, and
consequently variety of opinion may be in some points, which formerly were
held as points of faith, rather then in the doctrine of the blessed Trinity and
Incarnation, is, because these mysteries are more necessary to be expressly
known of all sorts, then some other points of faith are, and consequently men
are (as they are bound) more careful to get express knowledge of them,
according to the known sense and exposition of the Church, which Church also
has more expressly determined what is to be holden in these points then in some
others, which (although necessary to be believed explicit or implicit) are
not so necessary to be expressly known of all sorts.
1 IF it cannot be denied (as the Repliar denies it not) but that in the
writings of particular men, living in these latter ages in the Church of Rome,
and following the Papacy, there be found diverse errors contrary to the faith of
the ancient Fathers: it must be granted that all such must be wiped out of the
catalogue: because So the Reply in the former Chapter. n. 1. which is p. 269.
of his Reply.
by promise none are to stand there, but only such as kept the doctrine of the
Fathers without innovation. Which being done, the last 600 years at the least
will be blanke, and the Repliar must seek new names to furnish them: for there
is not a particular person named from an. 1000, to an. 1600, in the catalogue,
which had not diverse errors contrary to the former faith of the Fathers: which
the Reader, without more ado, shall know by this, that there is not a book
extant that they writ, but our adversaries at this day, have either purged, or
forbidden it, or else censured and rejected diverse things written in it. Which
needed not if they had been those succeeding Pastors which always maintained the
corpse of Christian doctrine, so gravely talked of, a little before. And that
which the Repliar answers, satisfies not the objection. For it is true, The
Catholic Church builds not her faith upon private Doctors opinions: but the
Roman Church, which the Repliar contends for, and whose succession he
demonstrates in his catalogue, consists in no other but such Doctors, that held
such private opinions, and such people as followed them therein: or else let
him name, if he can, any one of his Doctors that held not such private
opinions; or any other Church of his, that consisted not in these? A man may
easily see he can never wind himself out of this straight. And let it be
granted also that they were ready to renounce these opinions, thus holden
against the former faith, and to submit themselves to the Church: yet the
former difficulty returns again; for whether they were thus ready, or no, yet
they swarued from the faith of the Fathers: no matter with what mind, when the
Repliar, so confidently bills them in his catalogue for such as preserved the
whole corpse of the revealed truth without innovation. Thereby undertaking to
name such as, in all things, trod in the steps of the Fathers, without any
error that should need submission. Again where, and in whom was this Church
whereto they were so ready to submit themselves? who should reform them when
themselves were the Church? for example when Gregory the 7. that was Pope in
the 10 age: Eugenius the 3. and Boniface the 8. in the 12. Vrbanus 6. and John
22. in the 13. Gregory 12. John 23. Eugenius 4. in the 14. age; by schism,
error, and heresy, innouated the faith, where was their submission to the
Church? how could it be, when themselves were heads of the Church? and how was
it done, when contrariwise they made opposition against all such as admonished
them? But the third thing he answers, that those private D D. deliver not their
said opinions as points of faith, is false; because they are in such points as
are now controuerted between us and the Church of Rome; which the Repliar, I
presume, will allow to be no other but points of faith.

2 This I had to say touching the objection, as the Repliar has set it down,
fraudulently and maimedly: whereas if he had proposed it effectually as we
objected, all his answer were impertinent. For we say, that not only in
particular men's writings are found many things contrary to the former faith of
the Fathers: but in the doctrine of the Church it self, as it is practiced and
expounded by such as are deputed thereunto. The which I demonstrated throughout
my Book, in every controversy, by alleging the words of the chiefest and
most emine^t writers in the Church of Rome, expounding the doctrine holden in
the said Church. There being, indeed, very little of their religion, but some
or other among them so expound it, and so teach the Church-meaning therein,
that it is easy to see the ancient faith to be innouated thereby. And I care
not though my adversary begin his answer with a little confidence: It seems M.
White has, with great pains, raked together all the riffe raffe and odd
opinions: and spent his time in seeking the sinkes, and sweeping together odd
sentences of some Catholic authors, etc. For his lean and lancke cause had
need of bombast; but whosoever shall enquire what M. White alleged, shall
well perceive the Popish D D. whom he has raked together, to be the eminentest
men that were in the Church of Rome, and their doctrine and opinions cited, so
far as I have refused it, to be riffe raffe indeed and such as lies in sinkes
and sweepings; but yet such riffe raffe, as the Romish Church it self (now
turned into a sink of all filthy heresy, and pestered with the sweepings of
all the false doctrine and errors of old heretics) maintains, and offers to
the world, for sound religion, as I have showed in the beginning of this book:
where the speech of Mic. Bayus (the only instance that the Repliar thought
good to make of my charging his Church with private Doctors opinions) which he
will not deny to be part of the riffe raffe, and sweepings here mentioned, is
proved to contain no other matter then is generally holden by others; and to
be the doctrine of the Church of Rome as certainly as any other that himself
can assign to be the doctrine.

3 This therefore is it I say, that the errors objected to the Doctors and
Schoolmen, of the Church of Rome, and the manifold absurdities which I have
observed in them, alleging their words in my Book: are a sufficient
argument to prove the Church of Rome, wherein they lived, and whose Pastors
they were, to hold contrary to the Fathers, and to be departed from the
Apostolic faith. And all this furniture of words to the contrary, is but a
desperate shift to avoid the inconvenience that follows upon it. For first:
the universal faith of the Catholic Church is not discredited by the private
opinions of particular Authors. This I grant, and will yield my self to be
both vain and shallow witted, if the things I have alleged out of Popish
Authors be not the faith of the Romish Church: (at least, for any thing that
can be showed) as much as that which my adversary will defend to be the faith.
And for confirmation hereof there is very little either defined by the Pope and
his Councels, or so defined that there remains no ambiguity in the conclusion:
but some say this is the faith, and some that, expounding all things after
their own judgment: so that he which alleadges the opinion, or assertion, of
a Popish authorized Doctor, (and I allege no other) alleges the Church
opinion for any thing that can be showed to the contrary. Which if the Repliar
will deny, let him give me a certain rule, whereby I may, without error,
discern which is the Church doctrine, and which a private opinion. For if he
say, that only is the Church doctrine that is defined by the Pope: I will
produce his Doctors that expound the definition in that sense that I say,
clean against the doctrine of the ancient Fathers. If he deny, or refuse the
party, whom I allege, or bring other writers that expound otherwise; let him
deal sincerely, and demonstrate why he, and his author, should be thought to
report the true definition, rather then I and my author, being in all points
equal to the chiefest in the Church of Rome? As when I allege Thomas, for THE
WAY page 152. g.
worshipping images with divine honor. Pref. n. 1. g.
Bayus for meriting without any elevation. c Bozius for the Popes Monarchy.
Page 317 k.
Mariana for killing kings. Page 250. h.
Caietan for satisfaction: let a certain rule be given whereby it may be
known that their sayings are their own private opinions, and not the doctrine
of their Church: especially when these, and all the rest whom I allege, are
commended to the skies for the white children of the Catholic Church, whose
condition it is not to adulterate their mothers faith?

4 Next he says, the things wherein the Doctors of his Church teach otherwise,
appertain not to faith, but to some circumstance thereof, which may be held
this, or that way, without prejudice. This I answered. 35. n. 19.
in THE WAY, which my adversary dissembles; and it is false. For it is a matter
of faith and belongs to the unity thereof to believe, for example, that Gods
honor may not be given to another. For it is a conclusion revealed in Exodus 20
5.
Scripture, and taught by Idololatrae dicuntur qui simulacris eam seruitutem
exhibent, quae debetur Deo. Aug. trin. l. 1. c. 6 Si honos idem tribuitur
alijs, ipse omnino no^ colitur. Lact. de falls. relig. l. 1. c. 19
the Fathers: yet the Romish authors alleged hold that the cross of Christ,
and the Crucifixe, may be worshipped with divine honor. The ministration of the
Communion to the laity, in both kinds, Conc. Constable. sess. 13.
practiced by the ancient Church, is no circumstance, yet our Popish DD. hold
the contrary. Finally their errors, and discords from the ancient Church are in
the same things wherein they dissent from us, that if we dissent from them in
substance, and not in circumstance only, it will easily appear that they
dissent in the same manner from the ancient Church. And whereas he says, that
whether their opinion be in the substance, or in the circumstance, they submit
it to the censure of the Church: and so all is well again: this is
impertinent; for this submission is only in points which they hold with the
Protestants, against the Papacy; wherein they plainly show the Protestant
religion, to have been maintained in the Church of Rome: and in those opinions
also I have showed they submit not themselves so humbly as is pretended, but
stand out against the Popes own definitions, THE WAY digr 26.
and determinations of his Councels. And I admonish the reader that Miratus sum
vehementer, post damnationem eius, ab Anastasio Papa, pontificia authoritate in
flictam, post eiusdem reprobationem in sexta Synodo pronuntiatam: post tot
antiquorum Patru^ in id ipsum conspirantes sententias, adhuc recentiores
quosdam ausos esse pro eodem nouas edere Apologias, and authoritate totius
Catholicae Ecclesiae iudicatas saepius controuersias denuo te mere excitare:
quod visus est fecisse haud pridem Sixtus Senensis. Baro. an. 256 nu. 40.
Speaking of such in the Church of Rome as defended Origin. This point of our
adersaries refusing the Pope, and their own Churches determinations, is showed
in the WAY, Digr. 26.
no sort of professors in the world do more obstinately and cunningly contemn
the decrees of their superiors then our adversaries. But in such things as I
have showed they held against us, and where they expound and teach Popery most
grossly, I hope the Repliar will not say they needed any submission: or if
they did, let him tell us when, and to whom they submitted themselves; and how
and when the point wherein they submitted themselves was reformed. Which when
he has done, I will grant the^ to be flexibler the^ those Protestant DD. which
he reports most untruly, will submit their opinions neither actually nor
virtually to the censure of any Church. But if he cannot, let him go like an
hypocrite, thus with a tale of actually or virtually submitting themselves to
the Church, to blanch the formallest obstinacy and hypocrisy that ever was.

5 If therefore it were true, that the sentence of such Popish Authors as I
have swept together, were but the dust, and not current doctrine practiced in
their Church, I would easily grant him that it were of no more force against
his unity then the heap of filth, and ordure of ill life objected in the Digr.
31. is against his holiness. And not so much, for those heaps and ordures
(though Papists themselves were the Scauingers that raked them together, and
not M. White) do substantially show that the streets of Rome are not so clean
as is pretended, that the fair pauements thereof should so proudly be made a
note of the Church; when the muck heaps stand so thick therein that a man
cannot walk for treading over shoes. Yet, how little, or how much wit, soever
be in it, I had not discovered those faults, if my Repliars great wit and deep
conceit had not urged me to it: not for fear it would be returned again, nor
any whit dreading what our adversaries, out of Luther (whose words. 38. n. ^.
I answered sincerely) or Caluino-Turcismus, or any other, can boldly say: but
because I take no pleasure in such discourse. But when my Adversary so
insolently dogged me, 2. Sam. 2.19.
as Azahel did Abner, what could I do less then strike him? his speeches, that
drew me to it, were intolerable, and there was no way to make him see the
vnholsomenesse of his house, but by showing him Concert. eccl. cath. in Angl.
p. 146. in apolog.
the back side. In THE WAY. 38.
He said the Protestants were evidently more wicked then in old time.. 40.
And their doctrine such as could not but lead to all looseness and liberty:
all true holiness was in Rome, which was a sign it was the true Church.
Against this insolency I opposed the digression, that seems so much to offend
his stomach: against which whatsoever he oppose, it will be small advantage to
him: so long as whatsoever he shall say either against our Evangelical
brethren or our primitive parents, will prove but the reports of a Gifford, or
a Bolse^ke, or a Cochlaeus: that is to say, a Knight of the Post, one of their
one side, and our vowed enemy: whereas whatsoever we produce shall be out of
his own writers, and as famous and credible men as any they have in their
Church. And the things reported shall touch their crown, and the Top-gallant
of their Church.

6 M. White therefore grants that he regards not what can be objected against
his brethren, upon this ground, because he knows no more can be objected, then
is objected already: and has so much insight into matters, that without either
blind zeal or malice, or devising, he can vie turns, and object again to
better purpose: his knowledge in the history of Popish times, and experience
of Romish sanctity being such, that he will not exchange it hastily for twice
as much as is written in the Repliars Caluino-Turcismus and Briarly against the
Protestants. And so, to come in again with the Repliar, the conclusion shall
be the same that is said, THE WAY page 347.
in my book quoted in his margent, It had not been possible the Popish D D.
should have spoken so waueringly, and uncertainly, if that they say in the
points of their faith, had been always universal in the Church: when in things
always believed, as the Trinity and Incarnation, they speak resolutely
enough. And my adversaries discourse to the contrary is nothing to the purpose.
For first, what variety of opinions soever be among us, and whatsoever he can
urge; and how little means soever we have to take away this variety: that
answers not my argument: as THE WAY. 33. and 34.
I answered this recrimination to the full in my first writing, whither I refer
him. The second, that this variety of opinions among his D D. is not in
matters of faith; is denied, and answered a little before, N. 1. and 4,
twice over; and this is but a trick put upon the ignorant that they should
not stumble at these innouations, and to hide the same from being espied. The
third, that the things, wherein their D D. dissent, and are not so certain, as
they are in the articles of the Trinity and the Incarnation, are not so
necessary to be expressly known, nor so expressly determined by the Church,
whereupon men have not been so careful to get this knowledge of them; which is
the cause why they vary rather in them then in the matter of the Trinity or
Incarnation: confesses three things: first, that the articles of Papistry, as
Transubstantiation for example, is not so necessary to be known, as the
mystery of the Trinity or of the Incarnation. Secondly that the Church has
not so expressly determined them. Thirdly, men are not bound to be so careful
in getting the express knowledge of them. This is the same that I said: They
were not therefore so universally received in the Church. And confirms my
assertion in this place, that they are not to be visibly seen and read in the
writings of the Doctors of the primitive Church. For being neither necessary to
be known, nor expressly determined, nor such as men thought themselves bound to
learn; how should they write them? And if they writ them not, it will be but
labor lost for the Repliar to go about to prove they believed them; his
implicit believing is too short: and then if they believed them not, down
comes the catalogue, and the Church of Rome (which I believe expressly) will
prove the seat of Antichrist, and mother of heresies, thus to maintain that
which the ancient Church neither writ, nor read, nor yet believed.

CHAP. XLVII.
1 Counsels have erred and may err. 2 What manner of Counsels they be that
the Papists say cannot err. 3 It is confessed that both Councels and Pope may
err.

A.D. The third objection -- Thirdly my Adversaries may object errors, to have
been not only in private Doctors, Page 277.
but also in the decrees of Counsels. This stale objection is answered, I know
not how often, by Catholic authors. The sum of the answer is, that either
the Councels, which may be objected by my Adversaries, were not general
Councels, lawfully called, continued, and confirmed: or that which is by my
Adversaries, accounted an error, either was no error; or was not definitiuely
concluded, the error rather being in my Adversaries, or other whom they have
followed, who may, either ignorantly account that an error which is none, or
corruptly cite the words, or misinterprete the mind of the Councels, alleging
that to have been defined by this, or that Council, which is not. So that it
pertains to my adversaries, if they will obtain any thing by this objection,
not only to say this Council, and the other Council have erred: but they
must prove the Council, whose error they shall object, to have been a general
Council, lawfully called, continued, and confirmed. And that the error is an
error in faith, and that this error was concluded by the definitive sentence of
the Council, truly cited without corruption, and truly interpreted, according
to the mind of the Council.
1 THat Councels of Bishops may err is a truth, as I noted in. 15. n. 6. and
44 n. 6.
the WAY, and the Reply denies not; for Panormitan Panorm. de elect. c. Signif.
says, In things concerning faith a Council is above the Pope: and yet a
Council may err, and sometime has erred. Waldensis Doctr. sid. tom 1. l. 2.
c. 19.
says, A particular Church, though it were the particular Roman Church, is
not that Church that cannot err in faith, but the universal Church; not as it
is assembled in a general Council, which we have perceived sometimes to err,
but the Catholic Church of Christ, dispersed over all the world, from the
baptism of Christ, by the Apostles and their successors, to these days, is
it. Dominicus Iacobatius Iacobat. de council. l. 10 art. 7. ad. ^. p. 731.
says, A particular Church, yea a Council representing the universal Church,
may err. But that which we object in this place, is properly and most
especially against the latter Councels holden since the time that the Papacy
prevailed in the Church of Rome these last 800 years; though the same also be
true of many holden before. For such Councels have erred and judged
erroniously, whose doctrine our Adversaries ought to give us leave to examine,
whether it agree with the faith of the Apostolic Church, and not oppress us
with the name of their Councels. And when we show, not only particular Doctors
in the Church of Rome to have erred, but their chiefest Councels also, such as
were those of Niece, Lateran, Florence, Constance, and Trent, they are bound to
quit them, or not to deny our objection.

2 Therefore he grants that some kind of Council may err, and have erred,
but he denies that Councels which have been general, and lawfully called, and
confirmed by the Pope can err. For this is the new distinction now in fashion.
Yet the meaning is not that a Council either general, or called, or lawfully
called by the Pope himself, or holden by his Legate, is free from error,
unless the Pope ratify it: upon which ratification he thinks, all the
authority of Councels must depend. 1. Can. Loc l. 5. c. 4 concl. 1. Staple.
relect. controu. 6. q. 3. art. 4 2 Can. concl. 2. Stapl. vbi. sup.
The conclusions of his Doctors are these. 1. A general Council not assembled
nor confirmed by the Popes authority, may err in the faith. 2. A general
Council assembled by the Popes authority, may err in the faith. 3. A
general Council, 3 Can. c. 5. Azor. institut. to. 2. l. 5. c 12. Dom. Bann.
p. 135. concl. 2. 4 Can c. 4. concl. 3. Bellar. de Council. l. 2. c. 2.
duly called and celebrated by the authority of the Popes Legates, but yet not
confirmed by the Popes authority may err. 4. A general Council confirmed by
the Popes authority cannot err. My adversary answers by the last of these
conclusions, and biddes me prove the Council whose error is objected, to have
been lawfully called, continued and confirmed. But this shall not need at this
time, because the Councels, whose errors we most object, he will confess are
such as the Pope has confirmed. And though I believe neither the calling,
continuance, nor confirmation of Councels, depends on the Pope, yet will I be
so far from denying these Councels, whose errors I object, to be confirmed
by him, that I avouch their errors chiefly to have sprung from his
intermedling, and usurped authority over the Bishops therein; who had less
erred, and more maintained the truth, if he had less meddled. The Councels
therefore charged with innouating the ancient faith, are such as our
adversaries can take no exception to: but whether they were general, or
national, called, or not called, continued, or not continued by the Pope: the
Pope allows them, they being the soundest Councels that he least allows.

3 All the question will be, whether the things objected be errors; for he
thinks it can be no error that the Pope confirms. But he deceaues himself
if he think the Popes authority can free Councels from erring: Papa, in casu
haeresis, est ipso iute priuatu^ Papatu. Dom. Iacobat. de Council. l. 10. art.
7. p. 727 d.
who himself may err and be an heretic: the contrary whereof was never
taught in the Church of Rome, till of late time certain parasites to gratify
the Pope, and make their faction strong, began to teach it. For Waldensis Wald.
vbi sup
says, None of these (neither a Synod of Bishops, nor a common decree in the
Church of Rome, nor peradventure a general Council of the Fathers of the
world) is the Catholic symbolicall Church, (mentioned in the Creed) nor
challenges faith to be given unto it. Alphonsus Adu. Haer. l. 1. c. 4.
calls them impudent flatterers that ascribe to the Pope the gift of not
erring. The University of Paris always has maintained this against the Court of
Rome: whereof, it seems, the proverb grew Dici solet, articulos Parisie^ses
non transire montes, Alph. a. Ca^t. l. 1. c. 8.
that the articles of Paris go not beyond the Alps. The Cardinal of Florence
Zabar. de schism. p. 703. edit. Basil. 1566
says, the Fullness of power is in the Pope; but yet so that he erres not: for
if he err, then a Council has to do to convert him, wherein the fullness of
power is as in the foundation. Neither can the Pope by his constitution or by
any other way make resistance in this point, because so the Church should be
subverted; And whatsoever our adversaries hold, or will grant, the thing it
self is clear, that he and his Councels have erred, and of a Pastor is turned
into an heretic, the greatest that ever was: and this we prove by the
Scripture and doctrine of the Primitive Church, in all the controversies
depending between us. Next whether the things objected be errors or no, must
be tried by the word of God, and judged by the Catholic Church, and not by
the peremptory censure of such as my Replyar is: our assertion therefore is,
that the worship of images (for example) decreed by the Council of Niece, the
communion in one kind, decreed by the Council of Constance, and the several
points which we reject in the Councels of Lateran, Vienna, Constance, Trent,
Florence, Colen, Millan, and the rest of that kind, are errors and damnable
heresies, contrary to the faith of the ancient Church. Which assertion we prove
by showing the same points to be against the Scripture first, and then
repugnant to that which the ancient Fathers with vnanime consent, taught and
defended in their time. Which the Repliar must not think to outface with
saying, we ignorantly account that an error which is none, or corruptly cite
the words, or misinterpret the mind of the Council: for we both allege the
words and mind of the Councels truly, and challenge nothing in them to be
erroneous, but what is contrary to the word of God: and many learned in the
Church of Rome confess to be so as well as we: as shall appear in that which
insues touching the second Nicen Council, approved by Pope Adrian, and yet
accused and refused as erroneous, in that which Adrian approved, by all the
Churches of these Western parts, in another Council under Charles the Great
holden at Frankford.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Touching the Councels, of Niece the Second, and Frankeford. 2. How the Nicene
decreed images to be adored. 3. What kind of Council it was. 4. And what
manner of one that of Frankeford was. Frankeford condemned the Second Nicen. 5.
Touching the Book of Charles the Great, and of what credit it is.

A.D.M. White makes his fair flourish about the Second Nicen Council
condemned (as he endeavors to prove) by the Council of Frankeford, Page
278. Wh. in his Praef to the reader.
for defining that the same adoration and service ought to be given to images
of Saints, which is given to the divine Trinity. But first, the Nicene
Council, which indeed was a general Council, did not define that images were
to be worshipped with honor only due to God; which supposes that men must
account images Gods. This gross conceit, could never have entered into any
Christian man's mind, who knows the first rudiments of Christian Religion,
that there is but one only God: and therefore it may not be thought that so
many reverend and learned Bishops, as were at that Council (whom this Minister
malepertly calls unlearned, and simple persons) could ever have conceived,
and much less that they would have definitiuely concluded so gross an error
and published it to the world. Nay the Nicene Council was so far from
defining, that images were to be worshipped with latria, or divine honor, as
expressly it denies divine honor to be done to them: as appears by these
words of that Counsel. We define images to be honored, etc. that by looking
upon the painted images, all that do behold them may come to the remembrance,
and desire of the things represented by them, and may exhibit to them an
honorable salutation, and worship, not, according to our faith, true latria,
which is due only to the divine honor. Now as touching the Frankeford canon
either by hearesaie, or at, adventure, by the imagination of his own head.
1 THat which I said touching the Councels of Niece, and Frankeford, was not to
show the errors that have been in Councels, or to prove that general Councels
may err in things of faith: though it fully and vnauoideably do it; but to let
the reader see in that example, how unable our adversaries are (for all their
confident boasting) when things come to the trial, to quit themselves. And
indeed in this one example, among many, any man may perceive they are the most
shifting and preuaricating companions that ever dealt: not having any where to
abide or rest their foot, or any truth to stand upon when things are put to
the issue: which appears now the more by the Repliars intermedling, who saying
what he can to that I objected, and having had time to search what he could, is
yet fallen into those shifts and absurdities, that no man looking with the face
of a Christian, would be taken in: denying apparent truths, testified by all
Antiquity, and confessed by many of his own side, and with a desperate
conscience uttering every word falser then other. And I desire the reader to
mark attentively, if it be not true that I said, that WHATSOEVER OPINION THEIR
FAVORITES HAVE OF THEM, yet when things are brought home to their trial, these
magnified Jesuits are the emptiest and idlest disputers that ever, with so
great ostentation, set pen to paper. First he says, I endeavor to prove, that
the Council of Niece was condemned by the Council of Frankeford, for defining
that the same adoration and service, ought to be given to the images of Saints,
which is given to the divine Trinity: This is untrue; for in my discourse I
said no such thing, but only that, the second Nicene Council having brought in
the worship of images (not affirming what kind of worship, whether such as is
given the Trinity, or of a lower degree) the Emperor Charles assembled another
at Frankeford, and condemned it again, rejecting the Nicene. Indeed the
Emperors book charges the Council with decreeing that kind of worship. It
was written in the book of the Synod, that they should be cursed which did not
give the same service and adoration to the images of Saints, which is given to
the divine Trinity. But these are not my words; neither are they alleged to
that end, but to confute certain Papists that affirmed the Council of
Frankford condemned not the worship of images at all. The same book
Constantinus, Constantiae Cypri Episcopus, dixit: Suscipio and amplector
honorabiliter sanctas and venerabiles imagines secundum ser ntium adorationis
quod consubstantial^ Trinitat^ emitto: and qui sic non sentiunt, anathemati
submitto -- Constantius caeteris consentientibus. Lib. Caroli, page 382. ann.
1549. in 16.
reports, that in that Council, Constantius the Bishop of Cyprus, and the rest
of the Bishops consenting with him, said, he would give to images the same
service and adoration that he gave to the consubstantiall Trinity. And Pa^o.
an. 794. nu. 36.
our adversaries confess, the Council of Frankford thought that of Nice to be
of this mind: but whether it were or no, I affirmed not, but only that it
decreed they should be worshipped. This is his first untruth.

2 Next he says, The Nicene Council did not define that images were to be
worshipped with honor only due to God: because such a gross conceit could
never have entered into any Christian man's mind, -- etc. This reason affirms
another untruth: for Azorius a Jesuit I^stit. moral. l 9 c. 6. And the same is
said by Pes^nt. in Tho: page 837. a.
affirms it to be the constant opinion of the Divines in the Church of Rome,
that images must be adored with the same adoration that belongs to their
samplar: and he adds, that the Council of Nice insinuated so much. Both the
Council of Nice therefore, and the Divines of the Church of Rome, hold, the
Images of God, and our Savior, and the Cross, must be adored with divine
adoration: because God and Christ is adored with divine adoration: and thus
Tho. 3. p. qu. 25. r^ 3. and 4. Alexand. 3. p q. 30. m. 3. art 3. Ricar 3. d. 9
art 2. qu. 2. and 3. Capreol. art. 1. concl. 2. Ferrar. contr. gent. l. 3. c.
120. ad 2. Turrecrem. 3. p. de consecr c. crucis. n 2 etc. venerab n. 2.
Silvest. v. Latria. n 2. Waldens. de sacramental. c. 119. Caiet. in 3. p. Tho.
q. 25 art. 3. and 4. Pesant. ^isp 2. concl. 3. Valentia. tom. 3. disp. 6. qu.
11. punct 6. Bellar. imag. l. 2. c. 23. Turrian. pro C^nonic. ep. l. 1 c. 25.
Andrad. orthod explic. l. 9. Jacob de Graff. decis. p. 1. l. 2. c. 3. n. 1. and
4. Thyrrae. de apparit. page 81. n 2. Posse^^n. bibl. select. l. 8. c. 17. n.
23. ^and. de imag. c. 17. page 184.
teach the most Schoolmen and Divines that handle this matter, as will
appear by viewing their books. Which being so gross a conceit, as it is
indeed, let the Repliers censure fall upon it hardly, and let the Divines of
his Church go for such as are no Christians, being ignorant of the rudiments of
Christ's religion, and that there is but one God. And let the world beware of
such pestilent heretics as give the divine honor of the immortal God to a
dumb creature, whose image soever it be. And if Azorius Azo. vbi sup.
say true, that this doctrine of Thomas, and his Divines, was insinuated by the
Council of Nice, then my Replier is guilty of a third untruth, because he
denies it, presuming upon the words contained in the seventh act of the
Council, which yet these Jesuits expound to contain nothing against their
opinion; which exposition and report of the Jesuits, if you add to that I
cited out of the Emperors book, and join withal the words of Baronius, who
reports that the Bishops of France conceived the mind of the Nicene Council
to be, that images should be adored with latria: The Replier will have
something to do before he can quit his Nicene Council from that which he
says, I impute unto it. But if his Council of Trent also be of the same
mind, (as Suar. tom. 1. disp. 54. sect. 4. Vasq. a dorat. disp. 8. c. 14.
Azor. inst. mor. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 6.
the Jesuits resolutely affirm it is) then this gross conceit went far,
and their case is but indifferent, that hitherto have built their faith
touching this and other points of religion, upon such as by the Repliers own
verdit were no Christians, nor knew the first rudiments of religion.

3 Thirdly, he vpbraids me with malepertnesse, for calling the Bishops of the
Nicene Council simple and unlearned; but it is his destiny still to cross and
infatuate himself with his forwardness; for his own words calls them gross
conceited, and ignorant of the first rudiments of religion, that hold, the
serving and adoring of images, with the same adoration and service that is
given to the Trinity. And that they thus held and defined, the Emperors
book, and the Jesuits themselves testify: that I might well say, they were
both simple and unlearned, and something worse. Thus therefore I excuse my
self: it is no malepertnesse to call them simple or unlearned, who teach the
giving of divine honor to an image, because the Replier confesses this to be
a gross conceit of such as know not the first rudiments of religion, nor that
there is a God. But the second Nicene Council taught this. For Azorius says,
it insinuated the worshipping of images, with the same worship that is given
to the samplars, which is divine worship in the images of God and Christ.
They insinuated therefore, that images should be worshipped with divine honor,
the same that is given to God and Christ: Therefore they were a pack of simple
and unlearned heretics. But because he is so zealous for his friends, I will,
if I can, a little cool him, till he know better what and who they were.
Claudius Espencaeus, a Doctor in his own Church, Com. in 2. Tim. page 151.
Paris.
has written of them: that the Greeks in their contention about Images, on
both sides handled the matter out of fabulous and uncertain writings. They
which opposed them, with writings falsely inscribed by heretics, -- and Qui
propugnabant daemonia^ etiam spectris and muliebribus somnijs parum verecunde
abutentes.
they which defended them, did it also with delusions of devils, and with
little modesty, thereto abused women's dreams: as may be read in the Nicene
Council. This is more then I said. For I spoke as temperately as it was
possible of so fond Idolaters: but Espencaeus gives it them with open mouth: It
may be read in the second Nicene Council, how images were defended with women's
dreams, and delusions of devils; which speech, whosoever mislikes, must
consider it comes from a learned Papist, and not from me: and the acts and
process of the Council, will show it to be true. The forgeries and fables,
and trifling discourses therein contained, being such as are able to provoke
any that reads them: and our adversaries themselves are not a little entangled
in them.

4 Having thus affirmed (how truly it skilleth not to the point in question)
that the Nicene Council defined not the worship of Images with divine
honor, he passes to the Council of Frankford, wherein I said, the Nicene
was condemned, and the acts thereof concerning images abrogated. Whereto he
answers not one true word. First he says, the Council of Frankford was not
general. But I had witnesses in the margent, that it was. Ouand. 4 d. 2. prop.
8.
Ouandus: There were present three hundred Bishops, with the Popes Legates: so
that the Fathers who were present, called it a full Synod: and in truth it
cannot be cast off as a Provincial Council, or as without a head. If it were
not Provincial, and had the Pope for head, it must not be denied to be
general. Baronius An. 794. n. 1.
says, It is found to be called a plenarie Council, for the multitude of the
Bishops, and presence of the Legates of the Apostolic sea. The Bishops of
Italy, France and Germany, were there. Hincmarus says, it was a general
Council; whose words see In the letter o
below. Secondly, he shuffles with a parenthesis, as if the Popes Legates were
not there. But you see what Baronius and Ouandus say. Chr. l. 2. n. 794
Rhegino and Chro. an. 793.
the Abbot of Vrsperge testify the same. Thirdly he says, if they were there,
they confirmed not any such condemnation. The which is impertinent. For I only
intend to show, that in the judgment of the Christian world, the bringing in
of image worship was condemned. Whether the want of the Legates assent, make
the condemnation void or no, I care not: but the reader may see Pope Adrians
packing with the Greeks to set up images, was noted, and resisted by all the
Provinces of the Western Empire. Let our adversaries prove, the want of the
Legates assent makes this a nullitie. Fourthly he says, no such condemnation
is to be found in the Council of Frankford, but only in a book ascribed to
Charles: and I answer, the Council of Frankford, as it is set forth in the
tomes of the Councels, he knows well enough is imperfect, and contains not
all that was done therein. But mark what Bellarmine De imag. l. 2. c. 1^..
Primo qu^^.
says: That book of Charles contains the acts of the Council of Frankford,
and it may not be doubted, but the Council therein condemned, is indeed the
second Nicene. An. 794 n. 31.
Baronius says, that Hincmarus (the Archbishop of Rhemes) a writer of those
times, affirms the book to contain the acts of the Council of Frankford,
that we are not to doubt thereof: -- it contains many chapters against the
Nicene Council. The words of this Hincmarus are these, that my adversary may
a little blush at his rashness: Hincmar. lib. cont. landun. c. 20.
But the seventh Synod, untruly so called, which the Greeks call universal,
not long before my time was holden at Nice, and sent to Rome, which the Pope
again directed into France: whereupon, in the time of the Emperor Charles the
great, and by the appointment of the Apostolic sea, a general Council
called by the Emperor, was celebrated (at Francford) in France, which
ACCORDING TO THE TRACT OF THE SCRIPTVRE, AND TRADITION OF OUR ELDERS, DESTROYED
AND UTTERLY ABDICATED THAT FALSE SYNOD OF THE GREEKS: whereof a large book,
which in my youth I read, in the palace, by the said Emperor, was sent to
Rome by certain Bishops. Nothing can be plainer then this testimony, against
all the Replier has said. The like is written in Ado chron: an. 792. Rog.
Houed. contin. Bed. an 792. Auent. aun. Boio p g 253. Ai^noin. pa 450. Visperg.
pa. 187 Rhegin. page 30
many histories besides. And after the death of Charles, his son Lodowicke
held a Council at Paris (which is extant) about the same matter of Images,
wherein the decrees of Nice, and the book written by Adrian in defense
thereof, against the Council of Frankford, are again condemned; which shows,
that the Council of Frankford had done the same before. Hincmarus Vbi sup.
says: By the authority of this Council of Frankford, the worship of Images
was not a little suppressed: but yet Adrian and other Bishops perseuering in
their opinion, and Suarum pupparum cultum vehementius promouerunt.
promoting more vehemently the worship of their puppets, after the death of
Charles, his son Lewis in a certain book inueyed far more sharply against
the worship of Images, then Charles had done. The Council of Paris it self
Council Paris. page 19. Francfurt. an. 1596. in 8.
says, The Epistle of our Lord Adrian the Pope, which he directed to
Constantine and Irene, for the setting up of Images, we made to be read before
us; and as far as we could perceive, as he justly reprehends those which have
presumed to break and abolish the images of Saints, so himself is known to
have done indiscreetly in commanding them superstitiously to be worshipped. For
which cause also he assembled a Council, and by his authority decreed, and
that under an oath, that they should be set up and worshipped, when it is
lawful indeed to erect them, but utterly unlawful to worship them. The same
Council of Paris Page 130.
affirms, that it would have hurt neither faith, hope, nor charity, if no
image at all had been painted or made throughout the world. It is certain
therefore, that the Council of Nice was condemned by the Councels of Frankford
and Paris both.

5 But the Replier says, All that is found touching this condemnation, is but
in a forged book ascribed falsely to Charles. This is untrue twice over;
First, because, as I have now showed, many others say it as well as the Book
of Charles. Next I proved directly against Cope and the Jesuits, that the
book is not forged: and Bellarmine and Baronius, confessing it to contain the
Acts of Frankeford, and the Council condemned therein to be the second Nicene
without all doubt: testifies so much. It seems that the penman was Albinus,
our countriman, Trithem. de script in Alb. Sixth. Senen. l. 4. Hittorp. praef.
ad Lect. de divine. offic. Romans
who was very great with Charles, and his instructor in all kind of learning,
and one of the famousest men in those times. For thus writ Annal. par. 1. page
405.
Roger Houeden, and Flor. hist. page 215.
Matthew Westminster. Charles the king of France sent into England, a book of
the Council which was directed to him from Constantinople. In which book
(alas for grief) many things are found inconvenient and contrary to the
faith. But especially that it was decreed by the consent of almost all the
Eastern Doctors, no less then three hundred, or above, (this was the second
Nicene Council) that images should be adored, which the Church of God
altogether abhors; against which thing, Albinus wrote an Epistle,
maruellously confirmed with the authority of the Scripture, and in the name of
the Bishops and Nobles, brought the same with the book to the King of France.
Albinus therefore, it seems penned it, the Bishops and State approved it, and
the Emperor ratified and published it. This makes it of more authority then
if the Emperor alone had done it. But who penned it, it is impertinent, when
Bellarmine and Baronius grant, it contains the acts of the Council of
Francford, and no man may doubt but the Council therein condemned is the
second Nicene. For this is enough to prove the Nicene Council to be condemned
by the Council of Frankford, whosoever were the author of Charles his book.
That which the Replier objects touching the Constantinopolitane Council named
in stead of the Nicene, helps him not. Bellarmine De imag. l. 21 c. 14.. Neque
obstat.
answers, Constantinople is set down in stead of Nice through unskillfulness
or want of memory. And An. 794. n. 33.
Baronius: though he hold the council of Constantinople, that decreed images
should be broken, is meant there; yet he grants the council of Nice is meant
and condemned also. And it must needs be as Bellarmine says: for though
Constantinople be named, yet it is added, that there it was decreed that images
should be worshipped; which was not done in the Constantinopolitane, but in the
Nicene council. All which being put together, the testimonies I mean whereby
the book is proved to be Charles his, and the Council meant, to be the second
Nicene, it appears plainly that the book is authentical, and the author
thereof both knew well enough what the Constantinopolitane and Frankford
decreed; and set down the Canon, neither by hearsay, nor at adventure, nor
yet by the imagination of his own head, but with good advice, and upon
certain knowledge. It being the vainest point of a thousand, to imagine that
Albine and the whole Clergy of England, France, Germany, and Italy, with
the Nobility and States, should condemn a thing which they understood not:
and now, after eight hundred years, the true knowledge of all things should
come (by some revelation belike) to a few arrogant Jesuits, who yet can agree
in nothing about the same. I admonish the Repliar, by this example, wherein he
has sped so unluckily, not to think to deface the truth with boldness and
bragging, but to give way to the truth; and in seeking it, to tie himself to
no man's device, till he have better assurance of it. For there is scarce one
example of antiquity that we produce against them, but his Jesuits are
divided in their answers, and speak so contrary one to another, that it is
easy to see, they intend nothing but to be obstinate and resolute. And so the
example of the second Nicene council shows, that the Popes councels, how
general or approved soever, have erred in defining, by the judgment of the
whole Christian world: and their errors had been controlled in former ages, as
well as the Protestants now control them: so that the things wherein we refuse
the church of Rome, are nothing else but the corruptions and abuses that came
in by the faction of some, and were opposed by the sounder part of the Church
as they grew and came in.

CHAP. XLIX.
1.2. The ancient Church held the blessed Virgin to have been conceived in
sin. 3. The now Church of Rome holds the contrary.

Page 279.
A. D. The fourth objection. -- Fourthly, my adversary M. White obiecteth eight
points, wherein, as he says the Church holds contrary to that which it has
formerly held, to wit, the conception of the virgin Marie, Latin Service,
reading Scriptures, Priests marriages, Images, Supremacy, Communion in one
kind, Transubstantiation. To this I answer here only briefly and in general,
referring the Reader, for more particulars, to other Catholic authors, who ex
professo write of these points. First, concerning the conception of the blessed
virgin Marie, it never was universally held by the ancient Church as a point of
faith, that she was conceived in sin. For if it had been so held, Saint
Augustine would never have pronounced so absolutely as he does, that when
question is concerning sin, he would have no mention of the blessed Virgin.
Neither is it now held by us as a point of faith, that she was not conceived in
sin; this being one of those points, in which according to Saint Augustine,
an erring disputer is to be borne withal, in regard the question is not
diligently digested, nor confirmed by full authority of the Church
1 THe Replier in his Treatise that I answered, to prove his Roman church
Catholic, In THE WAY. 46. and 47.
used this reason: because it had still professed without change the same
faith, which has been continually since the Apostles, without denying any
point of doctrine, which in former times was universally received: and bad us
prove the contrary if we could. To this I answered first generally, and then
in the 49 Digression particularly, I objected the eight points here mentioned,
showing that the church of Rome holds therein contrary to that which formerly
was holden. Now he replies, that his answer shall be but brief and in
general, referring the Reader to other Catholic authors, that purposely have
writ of these points. But when he made his challenge, I supposed he would have
tried them with me himself, not by referring me to his Catholic authors,
whose writings the reader has no means to survey; but by bringing what he
thought good out of them, and letting the reader see what the issue would be
between us. But seeing he durst not put his cause to that kind of trial, my
answer shall be like his argument: That I also refer the Reader to other
learned men, who ex professo have answered whatsoever his authors have written
of these points. And what himself has said, I will answer; that the reader
shall well perceive my instances were sufficient to show, that the church of
Rome now holds contrary to that which formerly was holden and believed.

2 First, touching the conception of the blessed Virgin, he says, it was never
universally held by the ancient Church, as a point of faith, that she was
conceived in sin: nor is it now held in the Church of Rome, as a point of
faith, that she was not conceived in sin. Let us make short work. Both these
are false. First it was held, as a point of faith, that is to say, as a part of
the religion and profession of those times, that she was conceived and borne in
sin, as all others are. This I prove by his own authors. Paulus Cortesius in
his writing upon the Sentences directed to Pope Julius, 3. d. 4. page 65
says, that one Vincentius produces 260 witnesses, affirming her to be
conceived in sin. Cardinal Turrecremata De consecr. d. 4 Firmissime. ^. 11.
affirms, that all the Doctors in a manner hold it: and that himself had
gathered together the testimonies of three hundred to that effect, noting the
places and words wherein they affirm it. Dominicus Bannes 1 part. qu. 1. dub.
5.. Arguitur secundo. page 89. Venet.
says, It is the general consent of the holy Doctors, that she was conceived
in sin: and yet the contrary opinion is holden in the Church, to be not
only probable, but very godly. This is plain dealing. He says, that which
is contrary to the vnanime consent of all the Fathers, is now holden by the
Church as the more profitable and godly opinion. The like is confessed by
Bonan. 3. d. 3. art. 1. qu. 2. Arimin. 2. d. 30. qu. 2. art. 1. Capreol. 3. d.
3. art. 1. Caietan. opusc. de concept. Cano loc. l. 7. c. 1.
others as fully. To De not. and great. c 36.
the place alleged out of Austin: Gregorius Ariminensis Art. 3. ad 1.
answers, that he means it only of actual sin. In which doctrine, Saint
Austin is not constant neither: for he says De perfect. iustit. cont. Celest.
sub sin.
elsewhere, Whosoever he be that thinks there have been or are, any man, or
any men, excepting only the Mediator of God and men, to whom the remission of
their sin was not necessary, he goes against the Scripture, and the
Apostles, Romans 5. And the Fathers, mentioning the text of John 2.4. Woman,
what have I to do with thee? affirm in effect that she was a sinner. Saint
Austin Tulit admonitionem Filij -- expauescat Filij inuentutem. de Symb. l. 2.
c. 5.
says, Christ admonished her, and bids her fear her Son. Athanasius (...).
orat. 4. aduer. Arian. page 281.
says, he checked her. Euthymius, Corripuit eam. in Ioh 2. page 320.
he rebuked her. Chrysostom, Asperiora hac verba -- and indignatio. hom. 20.
in Ioh.
that he was angry at her. Irenaeus, Repelleni eius intempestinam
festinationem. l. 3. c. 18.
that he repelled her unseasonable hastiness. Theophylact, (...). in Ioh. 2.
that he child her not without cause. Few of the ancient Fathers (this is the
confession Comm. in Ioh. 2. nu. 11.
of Maldonat a Jesuit) but either openly say, or obscurely signify, that
there was some fault or error in her. They thought therefore she was a sinner
actually: which could not have bin, if original sin, which is the fountain
of actual, had not bin in her.

3 Next, the Church of Rome now holds the contrary: whether as a point of
faith or no, the reader shall judge presently. Below in the letters.
First it is holden expressly contrary to that which the Fathers held, that she
had no original sin. Can. and B^n. vbi sup.
Next I presume no Papist will deny it to be defended in the Church as a godly
opinion. Suar. tom. 2. d. 3 s 6. pro. 1. Vasq. 3 d. 1^7. n. 148.
Thirdly, the Church may define it when she will. Vasq. vbi sup
Fourthly, the Feast of the Conception, which imports she was without sin, is
celebrated. Vasq. vbi sup
In which regard, says Vasquez, it would seem very strange to me, if the
Church should ever define she was conceived in sin, when by her authority
she has already commanded the Feast of the Conception, in token she was not
conceived in sin: and the common consent of Catholics, both vulgar and
Divines, contending for the immaculate conception without sin. Suarez Vbi
sup. prop. 4.
says, Sixtus Quartus did much favor it, whose decree the Council of Trent
approues, and the whole Church does vehemently lean to it; that now the
contrary can have, either none at all, or no firm, or evident foundation. But
the truth is, it is fully defined in the Council of Basil: Hitherto, Sess. 36.
says the Council, a difficult question has been made, touching the
Conception of the glorious Virgin. We having diligently seen and examined the
reasons, define and declare, that the doctrine which teaches her never to have
been actually subject to sin, but always free from it, and from all actual
sin, to be consonant to the religion OF THE CHVRCH AND CATHOLIC DOCTRINE,
and that it shall be lawful for no man hereafter to teach the contrary:
moreover we renew the ordinance made for the celebrating of this holy
conception, on the 6. of the Ides of December. Whereby we see how false it is,
that it is not held as a point of faith. For building themselves upon this
decree, and upon Cum Praeexcelsa and Grave nimis. in extrau comm.
another of Sixtus Quartus, whereto the Sess. 5.. Declarat tamen.
Council of Trent manifestly gives way, by confirming the conceit; Almain.
Clictouae. Titlem. reported by Vasq. and Suar. vbi sup.
the forwarder sort of our adversaries affirm it resolutely to be a point of
faith defined by the Church. But whether it be true or no, that the faith of
their Church is nothing but what this froward generation will confess to be
defined by the Pope: by this it is plain, that touching this point, the
Pastors and Doctors, and people of the Roman church differ from antiquity.
Vasquez Communis consensus Catholicorum, non solum imperiti vulgi, sed etiam
Doctorum and Theol^gorum pro immaculata conceptione pugnat. Vasq. vbi sup.
says expressly, Not only that unskillful vulgar, but the Doctors and Divines,
and all Catholics with one consent, fight for the immaculate conception. What
immodestie is it now to deny that to be the Churches faith, which is thus
holden? and to say, it is not diligently digested that is thus concocted in the
conceits, not only of the vulgar, but of the Doctors and Divines, and all
Catholics with one consent in the Church of Rome?

CHAP. L.
1. Touching Service and Prayer in an unknown language. 2. The Text of 1. Cor.
14. expounded and defended against Bellarmine. 7. The ancient Church used
prayer in a known language.

A. D. Secondly touching Latin Service, although M. White say (as it is easy
to say) that all antiquity is against us in this point: Page 279. White, p.
343.
yet he will never be able to prove solidely, that the ancient Church did
condemn this our practice. The words of the Apostle which he alleges, prove
nothing to the purpose, as is showed by Bellarmine: and as for other authors
which he cites, they do not disallow this this our practice, Bellar. l. 2. de
verb. Del. c 16.
or account it unlawful: whereas, both by reason and authority, our authors
show it to be both lawful and laudable. See Bellarmine lib. 2. de verbo Dei,
cap. 15.
1 THe use of the Church of Rome, to have the public Service and Prayers, and
ministration of Sacraments, in an unknown tongue, is well enough known. This
I affirmed to be against antiquity, and a point wherein they have altered the
faith of the ancient Church. And first I alleged the words of Saint Paul; then
the testimony and confession of other Ecclesiastical writers: to all which he
answers nothing, but referres me to Bellarmine. In which absurd course if I
would imitate him, I might also refer him to such as have answered
Bellarmine: and the reader that expected to see the thing tried between us,
should be deluded. Nevertheless I will do my best to bring this brood of
darkness to the light; and every thing that I have said to the trial, that
the truth may appear, and the shame be theirs that turn their backs.

2 First he says, I will never be able soundly to prove, that the ancient
Church condemned this their practice. I answer, the Apostle condemns it in the
words 1. Cor. 14.7.
alleged: If an instrument of music make no distinction in the sound, how
shall it be known what is piped or harped? So likewise you, unless by the
language you utter words that have signification, how shall it be understood
what is spoken? for you shall speak in the air. I will pray and sing with the
spirit; and I will pray and sing with the understanding also. Else when thou
blessest with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou
say? I had rather in the Church to speak five words with my understanding,
that I might also instruct others, then a thousand words in a strange tongue.
No enemy that the Church of Rome has, can more fully condemn Service in an
unknown language, nor in more effectual terms speak against it. For be
requires all that which is done in the Church, be it Exhortation, Prophecy,
Singing, Expounding, or Praying, to be done in a language that the people
present understands, and rebukes the contrary. All that the Replier says
hereto, is, that Bellarmine has showed these words prove nothing. Which is his
policy to avoid the scanning of them: for he knows, all the learned of his
side be so divided in their answer to these words, that whatsoever he should
say, would fall out to be contrary to that which others affirm. For the
avoiding of which inconvenience, he referres us to Bellarmine; as if in him we
should find a just answer and full satisfaction. But he abuses the Reader, as
shall plainly appear, by propounding the sum and substance of all that
Bellarmine says to the place. First he says, It is certain the Apostle, in
a great part of this chapter, speaks not of the reading of the Scripture, nor
concerning the Service of the Church, but of certain spiritual exhortations
and conferences then used. Touching this point, how true or false soever it be,
I will not greatly stand with him: but then it is as certain, that in a great
part of this Chapter he speaks of Church-seruice, and prayers, and of reading
the Scripture, as well as of spiritual conferences and collations. So his
patron Gretser, that has lately undertaken to defend all his writings,
confesses, Grets. defens. Bellar. de verb. Dei. l. 2. c. 16. page 850. c. and
page 918. A.
If you speak of the whole Chapter, Bellarmine acknowledges the Apostle to
speak, not only of spiritual songs, and preaching, and exhortations, but of
the reading the Scripture likewise, and public Service. Hence it follows,
that the Apostle condemns the reading of the Scripture, or prayer, and
Church-seruice in a language not understood, as well as he does preaching,
collations and hymns: for verse. 26. he requires all things that he speaks of,
be done to edifying: and verse. 6. he says, If I come unto you, speaking with
tongues, (that is, in a language you understand not) what shall I profit you?
And verse. 9. Except ye utter words that can be understood, you shall speak in
the air. And verse. 11. If I know not the meaning of the voice, he that speaks
shall be a Barbarian unto me. And verse. 14. For if I pray in an unknown
tongue, my understanding is unfruitful. And verse. 16. How shall he that
occupies the room of the unlearned, say AMEN at thy giving of thanks, when he
understands not what thou say? Thou give thanks well, but the other is not
edified. Hence I thus reason: The Apostle condemns every thing in the Church,
whatsoever it be, that edifies not: But prayer, reading the Scripture, and
Service in the Church, as well as preaching and spiritual songs in a language
that the people present understand not, edify not: Ergo he condemns prayer,
reading the Scripture, and Service in the Church, in a language that the people
present understand not, as well as preaching and spiritual songs. The first
proposition is in verse. 12.19.26: the second in verse. 6.14.16.17: the
conclusion therefore is the Apostles. And indeed if our adversaries could have
showed, that the prayers mentioned ver. 15, had bin such spiritual songs, or
preaching only, as they expound: and then that the Apostle in all his
discourse had only spoke of such songs and preaching, and not of prayer,
reading the Scripture, or Service in the Church also, they had had some color
for themselves (though not enough to avoid our argument;) but when he speaks of
these things also, by their own confession, and the whole intent of his
doctrine is that ALL THE THINGS HE SPEAKS OF, be done with edification; it is
desperate perverseness to say, the text proves nothing against them.

3 In the second place therefore, when Bellarmine cannot avoid it, but it is
manifest the Apostle, at least in some part of his discourse, speaks of
singing, and prayers, and reading of the Scripture, which belong to
Church-seruice; he falls to answering, and lays down four answers, whereof he
casts off three, and betakes himself to the fourth. The first is, that by
singing and praying, mentioned verse 19. (where the Apostle says, I will pray
and sing with the spirit: and I will pray and sing with understanding also:
else how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say AMEN, when he
understands not what thou say?) is meant preaching and exhorting, not
praying: a hard exposition, when the common notion of the words is against it,
and the Apostle manifestly distinguishes the one from the other, and men use
not to say Amen to preaching: yet, most untruly and dishonestly, he fathers it
on Basil, Theodoret, and Sedulius: For Basil. reg. contract. q 278. and
Theodor. 1. Cor. 14. v. Quid ergo est? expound the place of prayer as well as
of exhortation. Sedulius only expounds it of exhortation alone, being deceived
through ignorance of the Greek word.
who neither all of them expound it so, (...). Basil qu. cont. q. 178.
nor allow prayer in an unknown tongue. His second exposition is, that the
Apostle requires not all the people to understand what is prayed and sung, but
only that he understand, who supplies the room of the people in answering,
meaning the Parish clark. Quidam ex Catholicis ita hunc locum intellexerunt.
Grets. p 971. B. But Se^ulius says, Jdiotae id est, nuper baptizati, and qui
nullam praeter propriam intelligit linguam. p. 237. Theodoret says Qui in
laicorum ordine constitutus est.
This answer is made by some Papists, and went for good, till necessity drove
the Jesuits to find a better. For it was too gross to bring the pedigree of a
Parish clarke up to the Church of Corinth in S. Paul's days. His third is, that
by him that occupies the room of the unlearned, is meant he that answers for
the people; belike some that understands the tongue, (but not a Parish clarke
by office) and takes upon him to answer for the rest that understand it not.
These three answers he casts off, and devises a fourth, whereto the Replier in
this place referres me.

4 Fourthly therefore. Vera igitur
he says, The Apostle in this place speaks neither of divine Service, nor of
the public reading of the Scriptures in the Church, but of certain
spiritual songs, which the Christians composed, for the praising of God, and
giving him thanks, and for their own, and others, comfort and edification.
This answer allows the Apostle to condemn the use of such hymns and
canticles in an unknown tongue, and the like use of preaching and collations;
but it denies the use of prayer, and Service, and the rest of the public
Liturgy, in an unknown tongue, to be condemned: because the Apostle, in these
words of the 15 and 16 verses, speaks nothing concerning them. Antid.
Apostolic. in 1. Cor. 24. v. 16.17.
D. Stapleton, and On 1. Cor 14.. It is as certain
the Rhemists also affirm it to be certain, that he means not, nor writes
any word in this place, of the Churches public Service, Prayers, or
ministration of the holy Sacrament, but only of a certain exercise of mutual
conference, wherein one did open to another, and to the assembly, miraculous
gifts and graces of the holy Ghost: and such Canticles, Psalms, secret
mysteries, sorts of languages, and other revelations, as it pleased God to give
to certain, both men and women. This answer contains two parts, an
affirmative, and a negative. The affirmative is, that he means such spiritual
songs and exercises of conference. I will not stick with the Jesuit for the
use of such exercises, in the Church at that time; it being agreed of all hands
that there was such a custom: and the Apostles own words report it in the 26
v. When you come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a doctrine,
has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. But that he so means
such hymns, and such extraordinary exercises alone, that he means not prayer
also, I utterly deny. For that which he brings out of Eusebius, Dionysius, and
Tertullian, will serve to prove that the custom of those times was to sing in
the congregation; but it proves not that S. Paul here speaks of those songs;
nor determines what kind of songs they were: whether such as they uttered by
miracle, or ordinary Psalms, ordinarily used in all assemblies without
miracle: much less does it prove that the custom was so to sing, that there
was no prayer used besides: whereas the Text is plain, I will sing and I will
pray: distinguishing two several actions, singing and praying. And because
Gretser answers, that singing is praying, therefore the saying Amen is
mentioned, which was not so properly used when they sang, but when they prayed
without singing. For who used to say AMEN at a Psalm? Besides, he wills them
to understand what they do, that understanding they may be able to say AMEN:
now that which he would have understood, is not the songs only, but the
prayers also. First, because the reason why songs should be understood, holds
in prayers also: Secondly, because Bellarmine confesses that in some part of
this Chapter the Apostle speaks of prayer and Church Service. But whatsoever
he speaks of, he requires to be understood: for the reason why he speaks of
all that he mentions, is because the Corinthians used them when the people
understood not: which abuse he reproues, admonishing them to join
understanding with their gifts. Their songs therefore, their reading Scripture,
their collations, their prayers and all, must be understood. Therefore in this
place, of the v. 15.16. not spiritual songs alone are meant but the Church
prayers and Service also; because in other places it is meant. If Bellarmine
reply, that S. Paul speaks in other parts of the Chapter, of prayer and
Church Service, but no where, in the Chapter, that they should be understood:
who sees not the falsehood, when the reason that drew him on to speak of them,
was the abuse, that they were not understood, which abuse he corrects by
willing them to use them that they may be understood? Antidot. apost. in 1. Co
p. 723. and 727. and inde.
D. Stapleton therefore answers, that the Apostle, in this place, speaks of
prayer: but not such prayer as we ordinarily use in our Church, but such as
they used by miracle, and the gift of tongues: and admits that he rebukes this,
but not that. This is folly: for give a reason why he rebukes this? It was
because the people understood them not. The same reason holds in that: For the
people understand not. If the Apostle would take this reason to condemn the
use of a miraculous gift, when understanding went not with it; of necessity he
must also condemn ordinary prayers when they offend against the same reason.
P. 724.
D. Stapleton answers, that praying by gift was ordained for the profit of
others, therefore it was meet it should be understood: but the Church Service,
he says, is not to teach the people, but to invoke God for the people, which
may sufficiently be done when they understand it not. I reply, that the
prayers, in the Church Service, are not only to invoke God for the people,
but for the people to invoke God for themselves: as appears, first, because
God has appointed not only the Priest to pray for them, but with them; and
themselves to join with him in the prayers, and, with one mind and heart, to
utter with him that which he pronounces; which cannot be when they understand
not what he says. Again, the Church prayers are conceived and pronounced, not
only, in the name of the Priest for the people, but also in the name of the
people for themselves: Hear thy people that calls upon thee: o Lord open our
lips, and our mouth shall set forth thy praise: and such like: therefore there
is the same reason why the people should understand them, that there is why the
Priest should do it. Thirdly, its false that the Church prayers are not to
teach the people. For their end is not only to entreat God, To. 8.26.
but to teach how to do it, with what affection, with what contrition, with
what faith, with what understanding, and to form in the mind the signs of
the things framed, that their being may shine in the understanding. Which is
not done when the prayer is conceived in a language they know not. They may say
AMEN with a kind of brutish devotion, Carent tamen eo fructu, quem perciperent,
si orationes eas, quas ore proferunt, etiam intelligerent: nam and speciatim
intenderent animum and mentem in Deum, and ab eo impetrarent, speciatim, ea
quae ore petunt: and magis aedificarentur ex sensu suo earum orationum quas ore
proferunt. Carent ergo hoc fructu. Contaren. Christ. Instruct. interr. vlt.
but these sighs and gronings, which ought to accompany all prayer, they feel
not: the mind meditates not the sense of the words that are uttered, nor
contemplates, nor penetrates, the things that are necessary in all prayer: by
reason of which defect Card. Caietan In 1. Cor. 14.. Sed alter non aedificatur.
p. 158.
says, that by the doctrine of Paul, It is much better for the edification of
the Church, that the public prayers, in the hearing of the people, be said in
a common language, then in Latin.

5 Gretser the Jesuit to this point Def. Bell. de verb. Dei. l. 2. c. 16.
says, that the Church prayers, in Latin, profit two ways: First, in that
the Priest prays for the people. Secondly, in that they stir up devotion and
affection in the people, though they understand them not: and he seems to
affirm that other profit then this is not needful to be sought in prayer. But
this is false: for neither do they stir up the devotion mentioned, which being
an act of the will, cannot be formally exercised without knowledge in the
understanding going before: nor is such devotion as the profit that God has
ordained prayer for: taking this profit in the true latitude thereof. For the
end and use of prayer is, not only to kindle some kind of devotion, but to
bewail, and utter our wants to him we pray, to unfold our sins with
particular feeling: to breed in our hearts remorse, compunction, repentance by
opening our miserable state. To inform our understanding by frequent
meditations. To increase our faith, etc. in which regard we are required to be
attentive and diligent in the time of prayer. The Emperor Justinians law was,
(...) (which is the same that (...). Varin) (...). Novel. Justin. page 181.
that all B B. and Priests should celebrate the Service, and prayers used in
Baptism, not with a low, but a loud voice, which the people might hear:
whereby their minds might the better be stirred up to utter the praises of God.
Therefore diligent attention, and elevation of the mind being to be brought
by all that come to Church, it is manifestly intended that they shall
understand what is said. The Repliar, I presume, Cum enim aliquis venit audire
sacrum, and poste^, raptus alijs cogitationibus, parum aut nihil aduertit,
dicitur quidem praeceptum missam audiendi implere: nec tenetur audire aliam,
dummodo non sit affectata diuagatio. Tol. sum. l. c. 6. c. 6. vide Nauarr. man.
c. 21. n. 8. and de orat. p. 431. concl. 16. n. 2.
if he hold him to the doctrine of his own side, will require no such
attention; but that must not greatly move us: when Quae autem segnitia est
alienari and capi ineptis cogitationibus and profanis, cum dominu^ deprecaris:
quasi aliud sit quod magis debeas cogitare quam quod cum Deo loqueris^ Cypr. de
orat. Dom. sub. fi^.
it were the most barbarous thing in the world for the people, in time of Gods
Service, not to join heart, and tongue, and countenance, and all with the
Minister. Secondly, that the Priests praying for the people, is that profit
which is sufficient for the people in public prayers, or any profit at all
when it is in an unknown language, is likewise false: as I have said. And
there can no reason be assigned, why then S. Paul should condemn the prayers,
used in the Church of Corinth in a strange tongue, when they also were
conceived for the people, as well as ours.

6 The negative part of Bellarmines answer is, that the Apostle speaks not of
Divine Service, nor the public reading of the Scripture. I grant he speaks
not of such Divine Service as is now used: because, I suppose, there was either
no set form of Service at all, the Church being yet vngrowne and in
persecution; or no such form as now is used. But of that form that was then
used he speaks: that is to say, whatsoever form of Service, and manner of
prayers, was used in the congregation, he commands, even in those words, be
done in a known language. The which if the Repliar deny I must put him in
mind of that I have said before out of Gretser: that in this Chapter he speaks
of reading the Scripture and the public Service. But it is certain that
whersoeuer he speaks of it, he requires they be done to edification, and
expounds the edification by understanding the language wherein they are done;
in the same manner that here he speaks of singing and praying. For therefore
he mentions them, wheresoever it be, because they were abused, and that abuse
was the using them in an unknown tongue: and this abuse he condemns, wishing
them to speak with edification, which is al one whether he speak of them in
this place or in another. But let us hear how Bellarmine proves the Apostle
not to speak of divine service, or public reading the Scripture, in this
place: it is proved, says he, by this that the Scriptures were read and the
service done, in Greek, because it was a Greek Church. But the Apostle
speaks of something that was done, not in the Greek, but in some other
unknown tongue. This auoids not our argument, for he cannot prove they had any
set form of liturgy at all. Mos Apostolorum fuit vt ad ipsam solummodo
orationem (dominicam) oblationis hostiam consecratent. Greg. l. 7. ep. 64. see
Amulat. Fortun. l. 3. Pref. Cusan. ep. 7.
All writers consenting that in those days they used to consecrate the
Sacrament by saying the Lords prayer: it is as likely they would have had a set
form for the Sacrament, as for any other part of the service. But whether they
had a set form, or no, we grant they had a form of service, at least prayer,
and reading, and Sacraments formed at the choice and liberty of the Pastors.
But how does the Jesuit prove that, de facto it was done in the Greek that
all understood? we grant, de iure it ought; but this is that we say: that when
these men, endued with the gifts of tongues, came into the congregation, they
would do it in strange tongues, and not in Greek; which is part of the abuse
that the Apostle speaks against, requiring that if such would omit the
ordinary common language, and do the Church service, such as it was, in a
strange language (as the spiritual songs mentioned were done) then let him
speak, and another interpret. Besides, the singing mentioned cannot be showed
to have been other then a part of the Church service. For whatsoever show
Bellarmine make with the names of Eusebius, Dionysius, and Tertullian, yet as I
have said, Yea Tertull. in the place cited ( apol c. 39) mentions nothing else
but the Hymns which Christians sang altogether in their asse^blies, instituted
by the Apostles, whereof we read so much in antiquity, that the Christians,
in their meetings used to sing Psalms together. Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 316 ( Epiph.
l 3, sub fin. Plin l. 10. ep. 2. Nicep. l 3 c. 17. Eusebius. hist. l. 3, c. 33.
Tert apol. c. 2. Aug. conf. l. 9. c. 6. and 7. Jgnat. Ep ad Romans sub init.
Basil. ep. 63. and Dionys (de divine. nom. c. 3. and 4. page 281.) mentions
nothing but singing of all together. and in another place (eccl. Hier. c. 3.)
reports the custom of singing Psalms by all the clergy me^ together, at the
Altar. (...): p. 132. the which to have been such spiritual songs as the
Jesuit here conceits, that were no part of the Church service, he can never
prove: but the place looked into will show the contrary, that they were part of
such Church service as they used.
they do not distinguish the singing they speak of, from that which belongs to
the liturgy, or was of the same order: and albeit it were granted, that such
as the Apostle me^tions, sang by miracle, as they prayed and prophesied by
miracle, yet why might not this singing, praying, and reading be part of the
Church service that, at such times, was used? Thirdly, let it be granted that
he speaks not of the service, but only of that which was done
extraordinarily, by miracle, then have our adversaries to show how the Apostles
argument, against preaching and singing in a strange tongue, holds not likewise
against Church service in a strange tongue. Bellarmine, and Gretser say, the
principal end of those spiritual and miraculous songs was the instruction and
consolation of the people: and therefore it was meet they should understand
them: but the principal end of Church service being to worship God, and the
Priest having in charge to teach the people what they understand not: it is not
needful the said service should be in a known tongue. But this latter (that
the Priest had in charge to teach the people what they understood not) is
untrue: for the Apostle will have both Priest and people joined together: Thou
verily give thanks well, but thy brother is not edified. Neither would I
require any better argument for my assertion then this. For if the end of
Church service be Gods worship, therefore the people must understand it, that
they may worship God. For this worship stands not in rehearsing Latin words,
but when the people by those words learn to know Gods will and their own duty:
and offer him up the requisite motions of their hearts: which in an unknown
tongue they cannot do. And if, secondly, the Priest be to expound the meaning of
that which is done in the Liturgy, then they are bound to use it in a known
language: both because they cannot give the meaning without interpreting the
language; and that interpreting, when it comes to execution and practice, will
prove far more difficult and obnoxious to danger and inconvenience, then the
simple reading in a known language.

7 Hitherto I have stood to clear the Apostles text that I alleged, from the
answers that Bellarmine has made thereto. But beside that text, I showed by a
place in Origin, Cont. Cells. l. 8
bidding every man make his prayer to God in a known language, that it was the
custom of the ancient Church to do service and pray in a known language. And
I produced the testimonies of Lyra, Thomas of Aquine, Caietan, Erasmus, and
Cassander, all of them great persons in the Church of Rome, to the same effect;
and confessing also that it were better, for the Churches edification to have
it so still. What could I do more, or what can an adversary require more, then
by so sufficient witnesses to proceed in my assertion? If I had said it upon
my own word only by way of assertion, he would have bidden me prove it: now I
prove it by pregnant and full testimony, he replies, my authors disalow not our
practice, but he has authors that show it to be both lawful and lawdable, and
referrs me again to Bellarmine. He had as good have renounced his cause: for
these Authors first show the custom in the Primitive Church to have been to
have service in the common vulgar language that was best known, whence it
follows secondly that they affirm the Church of Rome to be swerued from it,
in this point as I said: which is all I alleged them for. Nevertheless,
because the Repliar thinks to save himself by saying they account not our
practice unlawful, let him consider well with himself, why they should
mention this alteration from the Primitive Church, if they had not, in their
judgment disallowed it? How can they say as they do, Lyr. Tho. Caiet. Cassand.
Erasm. cited in TEH WAY.
In the Primitive Church it was otherwise? By Saint Paul's doctrine it were
better for the Churches edification if the public service of the Church were
in a known language; and not disallow the present practice, if they durst have
spoken all they thought, or could have told how to help it? I will add two
more testimonies and so end the point, leaving the censure of my proceeding to
the reader. Isidore: De Eccl. offic. l. 1. c. 10 page 3.
The hearers are not a little edified by reading. Therefore it behooues that
when the singing is, all sing; Oration ipsa sit pingui^r, dum men's RECENTI
LECTIONE SAGINATA. PER DIVINARVM RERVM, QVAS NVPER AVDIVIT, IMAGINES CVRRIT.
and when prayer is, all pray; and when the lesson is read, it be indifferently
heard of all -- and think not that it is a small profit that comes by hearing
the reading: for thy prayer is made fatter, when thy mind lately fed with
reading, runs through the images, or forms, of those divine things which it
has lately heard. Where are these images of the things that he has heard
read, who understands not the language? Secondly, I have lying by me diverse
ancient Liturgies entitled to Saint Peter, Saint Basil, Saint Mark, Saint
James, Saint Chrysostom, Clemens, Gregory and others: in all which it is set
down that the people shall answer the Priest at many periods: which imports
they understood the language; or else they could not answer. Balsamon the
Patriarch of Antioch, Ius Graecoru^ l. 5. Respons. 1. p. 365. interrog. 5.
to this question, Whether the orthodoxe Syrians and Armenians, and other
faithful men of other countries, may, without danger celebrate in their own
language; or must be constrained to do service in the Greek tongue, which they
understand not: answers: The Apostle says; Is God only the God of the Jews?
is he not also the God of the Gentiles? He is verily. Let them therefore, which
hold the true faith in all things, (...);
(...).
if they be ignorant of the Greek tongue, do their divine service in their own
language. By this it appears it was the custom of the Greek Church to have
service in the vulgar language, as by Isidore it is manifest the same custom
was in the Latin Church, till tyranny, and heresy removed it. Our Bell. c.
16. l. 2.
foul mouthed adversaries may call them schismatickes and heretics; but when
they have done, their testimonies will remain for sufficient records what was
done in Gods true Church for 800. years after Christ.

CHAP. LI.
1.2. The Church of Rome, against all antiquity, forbiddes the lay people the
use of the Scripture in the vulgar language. 3. The shifts used by the Papists
against reading. Spiteful speeches against it. 4. Testimonies of antiquity for
it. 5. The Repliars reason against it answered.

Page 280.
A. D. Thirdly touching forbidding the laity to read Scriptures, and to have
them in the mother tongue, there is no such general prohibition among us. 1.
Pet. 3. v. 16.
All that we say is, that the holy Scriptures should not promiscuously be
permitted to all men, at least in dangerous times, when men may, by rash
misinterpreting, fall easily into error and heresy, running thereby into
their own perdition, but that care should be had that the parties disposition
be such as is like to take benefit and not harm by them. The which our
practice is not condemned by our Savior Christ, or by the ancient Church, but
is most conformable to our Saviors saying, Mat. 7. v. 6.
Give not the holy things to DOGS: nor cast not pearls before HOGS. Now care
being had that the parties disposition be such as may take benefit by reading,
or hearing, and no harm by rash misinterpreting, we do not prohibit, but with
due order permit, and wish the Scriptures, even in the mother tongue, to be
read and heard, both by lay men and women. That sentence of our Savior, Ioh.
5. v. 39.
Search the Scriptures, which is so often urged hy Protestants, does not prove
a necessity for all men immediately to read the Scriptures. For first, these
words were not spoken to all in general, but to Pharisees and Princes of the
people. Besides they either contain no precept, as S. Cyril expounds, or no
absolute, but conditional, precept, or rather license: that since they would
not believe our Savior himself, they should, or might, search the Scriptures
which themselves did admit. Lastly, if it were an absolute precept obliging all
sorts of men; yet since it is affirmative, it is not to be thought absolutely
to obligue all in particular, especially at all times and with whatsoever
inconvenience of circumstances: but rather to be limited to such particular
persons, times, and circumstances, as may make the observation of it necessary,
or at least convenient, as happens in other particular affirmative precepts.
Which limitation if my Adversaries will not admit; I ask, how they will have
those to fulfill this precept who cannot read at all? Or who by only reading
can no more understand the Scriptures in English, then if they were in Hebrew?
How chance also that they do not obligue every man to read all the Scripture,
yea at all hours, and to do nothing else but read and search into the whole
Scripture? For White. p. 344.
if because the words seem absolute they will admit no limitation; then these
my questions must be satisfied, which proceed upon supposall that the precept
be absolute and general without all limitation.
1 THe third instance Digr. 49. n. 3.
that I gave, was the forbidding of the Laity to read, or have the Scripture,
in their mother tongue. For when the ancient Church, propounded in the first
parts of his catalogue, not only permitted the reading of the Scripture
indifferently to all; but, by providing translations, took order that all
sorts of people should freely have them in their mother tongue: what a manifest
alteration is it, in the Church of Rome, now to prohibit this, and practice
the the contrary? The Reply says, there is no such GENERAL prohibition among
us. He grants then there is a prohibition (which he cannot show to have been in
the first 600 years) but it is not GENERAL. This will we see presently. First
the law is express against it. Whereas experience shows that if the Bible be
every where, without difference, permitted in the vulgar tongue, more hurt then
good will arise thereby: in this point let the judgment of the Bishop, or
Inquisitor, be followed: that, with the advice of the parish Priest, or
confessor, they may permit the reading of the Bible, translated by Catholic
authors, in the vulgar language, to such as they shall understand can take no
hurt, by such reading, but increase in piety. The which license (of the
Bishop) let them have in writing. And if any presume without such a license
either to read or have it, unless he come in first, and give up his Bible to
his ordinary, let him not have the pardon of his sins. And the bookesellers,
without such license, selling, or any way affoording, Bibles in the vulgar
Language, shall forfeit the price of the books, and be liable to such other
punishments as the Bishop thinks meet. Index lib. prohib. Pij 4. regul. 4.
This order was set down by the Pope and the Council of Trent: wherein there
is show of liberty to read and have the Scripture, in their mother tongue, for
such as are licenced (which is the reason why the Reply says, there is no
general prohibition) but mark the issue. Ib. obseru. circa. 4.
Pope Clement 8, in his observation upon this rule, tells us: It is to be
observed, concerning this rule of Pius 4, that (by this impression and edition)
no new power is granted to Bishops or Inquisitours, or superiors, to license
the buying, reading, or keeping the Bible in the vulgar tongue: Seeing
hitherto, by the commandment and practice of the holy Roman and universal
Inquisition, the power of granting such licenses, to read or keep Bibles in
the vulgar Language, or any parts of the Scripture, as well of the new as of
the old Testament, or any sums or historical abridgements of the same, in
any vulgar Language: has been taken from them. There is therefore a general
prohibition, the same that we object: and the Reply puts but one of his
ordinary tricks upon me. For first, none may read but that is licenced:
Secondly, none may be licenced; but obstinate and froward Papists, such as are
sure for starting: for they only are meant by Eis concedere possint, quos
intellexerint, ex huiusmodi lectione, non damnum; sed fidei atque pietatis
augmentum cape^e posse. reg. 4.
those that will take no hurt nor bring any detriment, but increase to the
faith, by reading. Thirdly, which is the point to be noted, the power of
granting such licenses, also, is taken away; that whatsoever to blind the eyes
of the world, the Pope and his crew made show of, yet indeed nothing at all is
permitted.

2 Secondly, the practice of the Church of Rome, for many years past, has
been to restrain, with fire and sword, all such use of the Scripture. Neither
did it ever, till this other day that the Rhemists translated (how and for what
ends I will not now stand to say) provide, or set forth any English
translation, but forbidding heretical translations, made by Protestants,
consequently forbad all that were. And the doctrine of all Papists, handling
this matter, confirms that I say. Peresius De tradit. p. 45. b.
says: Shall no bounds be set to popular, rude, and carnal men? Shall old
men, before they have put off the filth of their mind, and young men, that yet
speak like children, be admitted, to read the Scripture? I suppose verily
(and my opinion fails me not) this ordinance, under the pretense of piety, was
invented by the Devil. Azorius the Jesuit. Instit. tom 1. l. 8 c. 26.. Tertio
quaeritur. and inde.
It is demanded whether the sacred Scriptures may be translated into the mother
tongue of every nation, that every one may the better read and understand
them? I answer, that Lutherans and Caluinists are in that heresy, that they
affirm the sacred Scripture ought to be translated into the vulgar Languages
of all nations: against whom the Council of Trent, in the fourth rule, thus
has: And so repeats the constitution as I have set it down. That constitution
therefore forbids the translation, and use of the Scripture in the vulgar
tongue, as I have said. Then he goes forward. The Gospells and Epistles, which
are read in the Church throughout the year, may not be printed alone, but with
the expositions of the Catholic authors upon them -- and all prayer books,
containing Psalms and canticles of the Scripture, in the vulgar tongue, are
likewise forbidden -- But, is it expedient and decent to have the sacred
volumes translated into the mother tongues? I answer, No. Because thereby the
unity of believers would sustain detriment: then much ignorance and folly
would ensue in the Church, besides, diverse causes of errors and heresies would
arise. Moreover the uncertainty and multitude of translations (yet there is
not more variety and uncertainty in any translations then among their own
Latin ones) would cause innumerable contentions, quarrels, and other
discommodities and evils, almost infinite. Thus, most immodestly and
heretically they make those exceptions against the Scripture, that in their
conscience they know the primitive Church never made: and raking into all the
abuses of the Scripture that they can find, men's deprauing, misexpounding,
misapplying them; using them over boldly, malepartly, not with the respect they
should; hence most dishonestly they conclude the utter suppressing of them: not
that they care how they are used (for never any used them so vilely as
themselves either PRVRITANVS.
in applying, reuiling; or corrupting them) but because they are mad at that
which discouers their heresy.

3 The Reply, to salve the matter, says, that if the parties disposition be
such that he may take benefit, and no harm, by reading, then they permit the
Scripture in the mother tongue both to lay men and women. This is not true:
for how do they permit it to such, where (as in Spain) there is permitted no
translation at all? how it is permitted when the Pope says, none may read but
such as are licenced by the Bishops: and this power of licencing, is taken from
him by the Inquisition? Again, even by making this restraint, they are gone
from the primitive Church which gave rules, and had discipline to restrain
such as abused the Scripture: but the liberty of the book it self they never
restrained, nor ever bound the rudest that was, to go to the Bishop for a
license; but by how much the more he was ignorant, or transported with pride,
or endangered with heresy; by so much the more they required him to read the
Scripture to reform himself: and if he did not, they only preached against
his abuse, and punished the man, but the translation they suppressed not. And
all the Papists in Europe, in all the writings of the first 600 years, cannot
show one period beyond this. There are in the Fathers, specially Nazianzen and
Jerome, sharp speeches against abusers of the Scripture, and such as toss and
turn the^ to their own lusts (as Papists do,) but not a word against the
translating and permitting them, to all indifferently, in the vulgar tongue to
be read. They never reproacht Gods people, that desired his law, with the name
of dogs and swine, as these (...). Eustat.
Centaurs do, nor ever imagined the permission of the sacred Scripture to be
casting of pearls before them. It is easy enough to see, that if the laity
were dogs and hogs never so much, it were impossible they should tra^ple Gods
blessed word worse then this Grillus, drencht with Cyrces cup at Rome, has, by
this his application trampled it. And whereas it may be some will believe him,
that the restraint made is only in dangerous times, and where there is peril
of falling into error: as he seems to speak; let it be remembered, that at all
times, and in all places, this restraint is made, even when and where there is
no danger of error or heresy; but only of that which they will style heresy,
when men, by the Scripture see the horrible errors of the Church of Rome. It
being the doctrine of that side, that the Scriptures should not be translated
at all. Let the words of Rainolds and Gifford in their L. 4. c. 7. page 824.
and inde.
Caluino -- Turcismus be a little pondered. I conclude therefore that it is much
more honor to the Scripture and saffe for religion, and wholesome for the
people, that this power (of the people to read the Scripture in the mother
tongue) were altogether taken away: without which they might both believe
piously, and live holily: and by so doing, much more saffely and easily attain
eternal life. P. 825.
It seems to me this profane revealing of the divine mysteries (by translating
the Scripture) is odiously contrary to the will of God, and to the nature of
the mysteries themselves. P. 830.
The Pastors of the Church are not tied (true for they have broke the bonds) to
translate the Scripture into vulgar tongues; there being no Apostolic precept
or council, or so much as any light signification of their will to have it so.
P. 831.
The manifold and great mischiefs which, by the translations of the Scripture,
have risen against the majesty of God, against the holiness of the Scripture
its self, against the tranquillity of states, against the faith and good
conversation of men, Satis magna^ vim habere de buit, ad istas translationes
penitus supprimendas, etiamsi diuina, vel Apostolica authoritate niterentur.
Thus Gods ordinance, Christ's Testament, and the Apostles doctrine must give
place to the Popes lust.
should have force enough utterly to suppress these translations; yea ALBEIT
THEY WERE SVPPORTED BY DIVINE OR APOSTOLICAL AVTHORITY. Let the reader judge,
by this, if the Church of Rome do only, as the Reply blaunches it, not
promiscuously permit vulgar translations, when they may be occasions of error
by misinterpreting; and not utterly hate and condemn them, as the causes of
their discontent, and desire the suppressing of them from all? Its easy to
discern how pretiously they affect that, which by reason only of some abuse
(which also they multiply by their art: many times a mote being in their eye
when there is none in the sky) they would have utterly taken away, though by
DIVINE AND APOSTOLIC AVTHORITIE IT WERE SVPPORTED.

4 To the testimonies alleged out of Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Moses, 2. Tim. 3.15.
S. Paul, Hom. 3. in Laz and ho. 2. in Matthae.
S. Chrysostom, Epitaph. Paul.
S. Ierom, and Cornel. Agrip. de vanit. c. 100.
the Council of Niece, whereby I showed the doctrine of the Primitive Church
to be, that lay people should read the Scripture, he answers nothing; but
contents himself (having better helps for it) with replying to the 5. of John,
Search the Scriptures; wherein I commend his discretion, that falling so foul
on this, would let the rest alone. First he says, the words were not spoken
to all in general; but to the Pharisees, and princes of the people: because if
they were spoken to the people, he did wisely foresee that our Savior,
therein, no longer counts them dogs and hogs, but admonishes them as Gods
people bought with a price, to the reading of the Scripture. But how shall I be
sure he speaks to none but the Pharisees and Priests, when V. 15. -- 18. --
the text says, he spoke to the Jews that sought to kill him, whom the man,
healed at the poole of Bethesda, had told of his healing? which Jews cannot be
showed to be the Priests and Doctors alone, but some of the laity withal, who
were as eager in persecuting our Savior as the Priests, and frequented the
Temple, and provoked him in all places where he was, as well as the Pharisees.
Or if it were granted he spoke only to the Priests, yet how does that avoid
the argument when the Jews had the Scriptures in their own language, neither
Priests nor people using them in any other? For it were too gross to say, the
people might not read that which they had in their own language, Act 15 21.
which they daily heard read in their Synagogues, and Deuteronomy. 6.7.
which they must rehearse continually to their families, 2. Tim. 3.15.
and wherein they brought up their children from their infancy. Secondly he
says, either they contain no precept, or but a conditional precept, or
license: that when they would not believe Christ himself, they might search
the Scripture. Feign he would say absolutely, it is no precept, because it
would serve his turn better. But belike he read in his Cyrill, In Ioh. l. 3 c.
4
that the common and received expopositionis, that with a certain COMMAND, our
Savior stirs them up, to search the Scripture. Athanasius Tom 2 p. 248.
Commelin. (...).
says, He COMMANDED them to search the Scripture. Aschet. p. 599. (...).
Basil, when a COMMANDMENT is given us, let us obey our Lord, saying, Search
the Scripture. Ho 40. and 39. in Ioh.
Chrysostom, he COMMANDS to dig deep into the Scripture, he sends them away
to the Scripture. Page 343. in Ioh.
Euthymius, He COMMANDS them to search. Iansen. concord. c. 36. Peter. sele^^.
disp. to. 4. in Ioh. 5. d. 20.
Our adversaries confess this to be the commonest exposition; and some of them
the best. In Ioh. 5.
Maldonat the Jesuit. Cyrill thinks the word SEARCH not to be the imperative,
but the indicative mood -- but Chrysostom, Theophylact. Austine, and, I think
ALL GRAVE AVTHORS, except Cyrill, do BETTER think it to be the imperative. And
this is confirmed by manifest reason. For in case of error, the Jews, and all
men, are bound by precept, to have recourse to such means as can reform them.
But the Repliar is content it be a precept, so he may have the hammering of it.
First, therefore he says, Its but a conditional precept, or rather a license,
that seeing they would not believe our Savior himself, they might search the
Scripture which they did believe. This is transparently against the Fathers,
yet it will serve my turn, and utterly destroy his cause. For such a license
the Pope and the Inquisitors will never grant, as Clement 8. has professed.
And if our Savior, when the Jews believed not him, permitte^ them to search
the Scripture, then, by this text, when the People believe not the Pope, but
misdoubt his doctrine, he must give license to them to read the Scripture,
which he will never do. Gretser (to help the Repliar a little) Tom. 1. page
893. c.
answers, There is not the same reason of Christians, that there was of the
Jews: and why so? the Jews believed not in Christ, but opposed both his
doctrine and person: whereas he that is a true Christian believes Christ and
honors him. This is true, that is said both of the Jews, and Christians: but
this difference is no reason why a believing Christian may not search the
Scripture as well as an unbelieving Jew. For the Christian, though he believe
in Christ, yet is ignorant of much of his will, or weak in faith, or assailed
with heresies increasing in the world, or desirous to confirm himself and
others in the truth: in which cases let the Jesuit show, why Christ for the
curing of the Jew should allow him to read the Scripture; and yet debar the
Christian, whose state needs the support of the Scripture one way, as much as
the state of the Jew does another? Nay this is a good argument against himself
and my Repliar. For if the reason why the laity may not read the Scripture be
because our Savior has commanded us not to give holy things to dogs, nor to
cast pearls before hogs: and the Jews not believing Christ but opposing his
doctrine and person, be more dogs and hogs then Christians; hence it will
follow roundly, that the Scripture is to be permitted to Christians much more
then to the Jews, because the Jews were permitted to read the Scriptures,
though they were dogs and hogs.

5 Secondly he says, that allowing it to contain an absolute precept (which
he does as a child kisses the rod (for he must do it, if he will follow the
consent of the Doctors) yet being an affirmative precept, it obliges not all
me^, nor at all times, but may be limited to particular times (as to the time
of the Primitive Church) and to particular persons (as now only the Clergy) and
other circumstances, which the Church of Rome shall think meet. I answer,
affirmative precepts first bind all persons to whom they are given. Secondly,
they bind at all such times as the matter therein contained agrees unto.
Thirdly, they receive limitation or restraint, from none but from the lawgiuer
himself; in all which properties they agree with negative commandments: and
therefore, omitting all intricate discourse touching this matter, the precept
of searching the Scripture binding in this manner, it is sufficient, for the
allowance thereof to the people. For first, they that cannot read may fulfill
it by hearing it read. Searching being restrained no more to the one, then to
the other. Secondly, there is none, but by searching, that is to say by
diligent labor, may understand them in their mother tongue, better then in
Hebrew. Because I have showed many times over, that the articles of faith, and
rules of good life, are set down so plainly, that the simplest may understand
them; unless he will make lay people so senseless that they have not the
common light of nature. Thirdly, we bind not every man, to read all the
Scriptures, and at all hours, doing nothing else: because there is no such
thing in the precept. Then I have satisfied his questions, and admit a
limitation, in things wherein the precept limits it self: but how follows
this? Affirmative precepts have their limitations, therefore the Pope may limit
them. Or this? Circumstances limit precepts: therefore the Church of Rome, upon
her Antichristian circumstances may restrain the precept of Christ. Or this?
Some lawful and legitimate circumstances may stay the execution of an
affirmative precept: therefore the malicious and desperate imputations laid
upon the people, or some misdemeanors committed by them indeed, may lawfully
debar the people from having the Scripture any more. Away with these
circumstances, and give us substance.

CHAP. LII.
1 The marriage of Priests and Bishops lawful, and allowed by Antiquity. 2
Some examples hereof in the ancient Church. The restraint hereof is a late
corruption. Priests were married, even in these Western parts a thousand
years after Christ

Page 281.
A. D. Fourthly, touching the marriage of Priests, M. White cites See Bellar.
de cleric. c. 19. Prot Apol. tract. 1. sect. 3. n. 1. and sect. 7. and tract.
2. c. 1. sect. 3.
a mistaken sentence out of the Apostle, and boldly affirms, after his
fashion, that marriage of Priests was ordinarily in the Primitive Church. But he
neither proves our practice unlawful, neither indeed can he prove that the
contrary practice, either of marying a wife, or using the company of a wife,
was ever lawful after holy orders: but rather may find it generally condemned
for unlawful. M. Whites examples to the contrary, either are not authentical,
or they speak of those that were married before holy orders; who never
companied with their wives after.
1 THe fourth example was the forbidding marriage to the Clergy. Which by
diverse pregnant authorities I showed to be contrary to the practice of the
Primitive Church. First, I alleged the words of the Apostle allowing it. Then
the examples of the Priests, in the old law, and diverse Bishops in the
Primitive Church using it then the confession of the most learned among our
adversaries testifying the present practice of the Church of Rome, to be but A
HVMANE CONSTITVTION, AND NOT THE DIVINE LAW OF GOD. Whereunto he replies
nothing, but as you see, in general terms, only denies the authorities, as
if there were not a God that abhorred lying and imposture, and these odious
practices of shuffling and concealements: and will one day severely punish
them. First, to the text of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.6.
where he says, a Bishop must be the husband of one wife, having faithful
children: his children in subjection with all gravity (which precept supposes
it lawful for him to have a wife and children) he replies, M. White cites a
mistaken sentence out of the Apostle: But what mistaking can there be in words
so plain? and when wife and children are mentioned, what mistaking is it to
conclude marriage? Chrysostom. ho. 2 in Tit. Oecu^, and Theophyl. in Tit. 1
Chrysostom, Theophylact, and the Greek scholiast, upon this text, write
thus: He will stop the mouths of heretics, calumniating marriage, and shows
the thing not only to be blameless, but so honorable, (...)
that therein (a Bishop) may ascend up to his sacred throne. These affirm that
a man in the state of marriage, without putting away his wife, or vowing single
life, may be a Bishop. And Soto mayor, a great Doctor at this day, in the
Church of Rome, Comm. in Tit. 1.. vnius vx^ris.
handling this place confesses it proves BB. and Priests to have been married at
that time. M. White alone therefore mistakes not the Apostle, but others also
with him.

2 Secondly, he says I boldly affirm, after my fashion, that marriage of
Priests was ordinary in the Primitive Church. But I affirmed nothing but what I
gave examples of: my fashion and course holden throughout my writing, being to
justify what I affirm, by authority. He is the bolder of the two that dares
charge his adversary with boldness, whose reasons and authorities he durst not
look in the face, nevertheless let that he says be considered. First be
says, he proves not our practice unlawful. This is folly. For whatsoever
restraines and forbids that which the Apostles, and their Churches permitted,
and commended, is unlawful. But M. White cannot prove it was ever lawful,
either to marry a wife, or use the company of a wife, after holy orders: but
he shall rather find it condemned as unlawful. All this I proved, as will
appear by reading what I writ, but yet you shall see what M. White can prove
more, though if he prove never so much all is one with my Repliar. For his
answer at the last will be the same that Aeneas, who afterward was Pope Pius 2,
made the Bohemians, Epist. 130. post med.
We are not bound to al things which the Fathers did in the Primitive Church,
they had wives, we have none, we therefore merit the more. First, L. 6. c. 17.
the Constitutions of Clemens expressly allows Ministers, Cantors, Readers, and
doore-keepers, Id asserunt omnes veteres Scholast. Dura^. do excepto. Et ex
recentioribus grauissimi quique -- idque videtur sensisse conc. Flore^t -- and
Trident. Bellarm. de ordin. c. 8.
who are within holy orders that is properly a sacrament in the Church of Rome,
(...). p. 99.
to marry after they are entered into orders; and if it were lawful for Bishops
and Priests also after their entrance into orders, to keep and company with
their wives, which they had married before, what reason can be given, why they
might not as well marry after their entrance into orders? Now that it was
lawful to keep, and live, and company with their wives after their entrance
into orders, I showed by the testimonies of Mon^d.
Nazianzen, Epist. ad Euopt.
Synesius, Epist. ad Dracont. (...). p. 739. Commelin.
Athanasius, L. 4. c. 23.
Eusebius, L. 5. c. 22.
Socrates, and L. 12. c. 34.
Nicephorus. Which I will not here repeat. And this was so far from being
condemned as unlawful, that it was justified, and practiced, against those
that began to mislike it. Nazianzen Orat. in sanct Bapt. (...) p. 656.
rebukes them that said, none should baptize them but an unmarried Priest.
Sidonius, a B. in France, about the year 480. being entreated to commend a
Metropolita^ to the province of Aquitaine, in France, commends one Simplicius:
reporting him to be married, and to have children, and having in many other
things praised him, as fit for the place, L. 7. conc p. 445.
he proceeds thus: His wife also is descended of the stock of the Palladij,
who, to the commendations of their order, have holden the seats of learnings,
or of the altars: and verily, in as much as the person of the matrone requires
a modest and succint mention of her, I will constantly avouch Respondere illam
foeminam, sacerdotij vtriusque familiae, vel vbi educta creuit, vel vbi electa
migrauit.
that woman to answer the Priesthoods of both the families, either whence she
was brought forth, or whither she came when she was chosen. Both of them, well
and wisely, instruct their children. This example does so plainly show that
Bishops and Priests companied with their wives after orders; that it cannot be
well eluded. For therein not only a married man is preferred to be a
Metropolitan almost 500 years after Christ, but thought to be the fitter
because of the quality of his wife; being, first descended of Priests, and then
a modest woman, and such a one as Filios AMBO instituunt.
together with her husband, instructed their children: which neither needed,
nor could be said, if he lived not with her. Isidorus Pelusiota, in L. 2. ep.
53. (...) p. 198.
a certain Epistle to a Priest, reporting a narration touching a woman, bids
him tell it his wife. That Priest was married therefore. But the Repliar, sure,
will allow no example to be authentical, unless it show they lay together:
the which I confess is much, when people living in marriage, yet have not their
secret cohabitation much reported: but whether they companied together or no;
the examples show, they were married, they dwelt together in one house, they
had children: and brought them up together: which liberty the Church of Rome
now denies. The Council of Constantinople, Est au^em etiam vniuersalis Bals.
p. 194.
which was universal, See Simanch institut. tit. 4. n. 38.
and the canons thereof legitimate, Can 13.
allows both the marriage and cohabitation: and says, it is the ancient
Apostolical constitution: Socr. l 1. c. 11. gr. Zozom l. 1. c. 23. gr.
the like did Paphnutius in the first Council of Niece. The WAY 2. edit. p.
344.
I alleged a place in Zonaras, upon the canons, which here I will put into
English. The Apostles (in the canon) say, that if a Priest, under the pretense
of religion, put his wife, he shall be excluded (excommunicate) till he
receaues her again; but if he persevere, and will not receive her again, he
shall be degraded, because it seems to be done in reproach of marriage, as if
the mixture of man and wife were uncleanness. Whereas the Scripture says,
marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled. The cannon also mentions Bishops
having wives, because AT THAT TIME THE LAVVFVLL COHABITATION OF BISHOPS WITH
THEIR WIVES, WAS NOT FORBIDDEN. Our adversaries answer, that this custom was
but in the Greek Church, and not in the West. But what? was not the Greek
Church (especially in those times) the Church of God? and have not they altered
the ancient faith that have altered that which was universal in the most
famous Churches of the world? and has not the Pope in the West, hereby showed
himself to be an Antichristian heretic, that condemns the universal
doctrine of so famous a Church? But the West Church also allowed the same
liberty, till the tyranny of the Pope (as The WAY digr. 51. n. 10.
I showed) exstinguist it. Scot. 4. d. 47. Ios. Angl. Flo. ril. in 4 p. 386.
Antidid Colon. p. 128. Coster. Enchir. p. 517. Greg. Val tom. 4. d. 9. q 5.
punct. 5.
All Papists, I think, will grant that married Ministers were ordained in the
Apostles Mariana pro edit. vulg p. 47.
times and after, yea such as had been twice married. So to mayor Comment. in
Tit. c. 1.. vnius vxotis.
says, it must be confessed and granted, that of old, in the Primitive
Church, reason of the small number of Ministers married, Bishops and Priests
were used by indulgence. That indulgence is Sotoes conceit, and not the truth,
as I have showed; for it is true that the faction against Priests marriage began
betimes, as appears by the story of Paphnutius and the Nicene Council, but it
was resisted by the godly BB. Dionysius, for example, the famous Bishop of
Corinth, (...) Eusebius p. 41. b.
called it a heavy burden, not to be imposed on the brethren. And therefore
Non horruit illa Tempestate Deus thalamos, cunabula, taedas. Mant Fast 1. and
the example of Simplicius before alleged.
still they married, even in the West under the Roman Patriarchate. Marius, a
Papist, De schism and Council part. 3. c. vlt.
says, he knows right well that in the time of Pope Formosus (which was 800.
years after Christ) it was permitted and lawful for Priests to marry wives:
and when the restraint came in he cannot tell, though he have most diligently
inquired. Cromer. de Orig. and gest. Polon. l. 7. p. 517
In Poland they had their wives, till almost 1200. years after Christ. Henr.
Hunting. p 378. prohibuit ante non prohibitas.
In England as long. Auentin. l. 5. see the WAY. page 377.
In Germany, France, and Italy as long. Which I presume, the Christian world
would not so stiffely have mainetained, if it had been against the sounder
practice of the Sea 26. q. 2. sors. Clictou. de contin. c. 4.
Church. But when they saw it was not forbidden by any law of God, but only
opposed first by faction, and then by tyranny, they stood as long as they
could, till they were oppressed by tyranny. Aureolus 4. d. 37. p 185.
says, the common way, of holding, is that Orders have the vow of continency
annexed by the institution of the Church. This is somewhat to show that God by
no divine law made it so: but if he had added that the Church which made this
institution had been a faction, first of superstitious persons, and then of
Antichristian heretics conducted by the Pope, he had said the truth and
opened the whole pedigree of it: but if he had added further, that which Istud
onus, quod adhuc quamplurima monstra fecit, ab audaci sertur pieta^e repertum.
Mant. Fast. l. 1. see Joh Mar. vbi sup.
not a few of his fellows supply for him, that by leading from Gods ordinance,
it has filled their Clergy with all manner of uncleanness and villanny, he had
said no more then all the world knows to be true, and will subscribe to.

CHAP. LIII.
Wherein is handled the doctrine of the Church of Rome touching the worship of
images, and the distinctions whereby the same is maintained are examined: and
our adversaries finally convicted of giving Gods honor to their images. The
Ancient Church was against image worship.

A. D. Fifthly, touching images whereas M. White White page 344, of the first
edit. and 345. in the second edition. Where for shame he adds a limitation
saying (some of them) having in the first edition absolutely said, without
limitation, The Church of Rome worshippeth* etc
says, Page 281.
that the Church of Rome worshippeth, and commands men to worship them, with
the very same divine honor which is due to God himself: first, no man holds
that the images of Saints are to beworshipped with the very same divine honor
which is due to God, because the Saints themselves, being more honored of us
then their images, are not honored with divine honor. Secondly, although some
say, that the image of Christ is to be worshipped with the same honor that the
Prototypon is; yet these be but some, and that which is said by these some, is
not so to be understood as M. White seems willing to make his Reader believe;
as though they meant, that the very honor, due to our Savior, should be
given to the image it self, which cannot be, unless we should be so foolish
as to conceive and judge that the image it self were indeed Christ the Son
of God, which none that has learned the first rudiments of Christianity can
conceive and judge. Those therefore that use that manner of speech, do only
mean that the image is worshipped with the same worship only improperly and
per accident or at the most Analogice. All which manners are far from giving
any divine honor even to the image of Christ himself, as will appear by only
declaring what it is to give worship to an image improperly, and what per
accidens, and what to give it Analogice: the which I think good to declare in
this place because I imagine if Protestants did but rightly understand our
doctrine, in this and other such points, they would not be so much auerted from
it as, through the slanderous misreports of our adversaries, now they are: Note
therefore first, that we are said to worship an image improperly when as we
take it obiectiue and make it the vicegerent of the thing considered as absent
or distant, by it representing to our mind the thing it self, no otherwise
then in a Comedy, or Play, the person of the king may be represented by another
person: to whom, in this case, all due respect of speech may be made as if he
were the king himself. In which case notwithstanding all the honor is
properly done only to the king, and is only improperly done to the person,
which represents him. In this manner it is that Preachers, sometimes fixing
their eyes on the image of the crucifixe, direct their speech to Christ
himself, not that they think, or would have the people to think, that the
crucifixe is Christ, more then those that make such a Comedy, or Play as I
speak of, do think, or would have others to think, that the person which
represents the king is the very king himself, or that the honor is done to
him as to one conceived really to be the king himself. In this manner also it
is that on good-fryday in Catholic countries they adore, and creep to the
Cross. For all this adoration and creeping is exhibited (properly speaking)
only to Christ himself: and none of this honor properly is given to the
cross it self: the which improper manner of honoring the cross or crucifixe
is no more iniutious or prejudicial to the honor of God then the kneeling,
which might be made in such a Comedy to him that represents the kings person,
or which men use to make before the Chair of Estate, is injurious or
prejudicial to the honor of the king. Neither are Christian people more
likely, by these customs of the Church, to fall into idolatry, by conceauing
images to be the very thing which is adored as God, or as a Saint: having both
their Pastors instruction, and their own reason and faith to tell them the
contrary; then kings subjects are in danger, by the foresaid Plays, or the
custom of kneeling to the Chair of Estate, to commit treason in conceauing
the Plaier, or Chair, to be the king and giving that respect of sovereign
duty to the Plaier or to the Chair, as to the very king: in regard their own
reason, and but ordinary instruction, will teach them that the Plaier, or
Chair, is not the king, himself, and that the respect given to them is not
given to them as to the very king. Note secondly, that we are said to worship
an image per accidens, when as we do not thus take the image obiectiue, as
vicegerent of the thing considered, as absent, or distant, but when as we
consider the thing it self presented, and as it were vested, with the image,
or shining to us in the image: as it happens to unlearned men, who sometimes
cannot frame a conceit of Christ crucified but by means of the outward image:
and as it happens to all men, who in this life (at least ordinarily) cannot
understand any thing but by means of the inward images of their imagination
and fantasy, according to that of Aristotle: Oportet intelligentem
phantasmata speculari. In this case the adoration which we make at the sight of
the image is, per se loquendo: only exhibited to the thing, yet it may be said
to be given per accidens to the image: no otherwise then when we bow down to
the king clothed in his Princely robes, our bowing, per se loquendo, is only
to the kings person, yet it may be said to be done per accidens to his robes.
Note thirdly, that we may be said to give the same honor to the image which is
given to the thing Analogice, to wit, the same in name not in nature, the same
in similitude of proportion not in substance or equality of perfection: which
I explicate thus: To an image, being a thing without life, or understanding,
properly speaking, there is not due, either latria, hyperdulia, or dulia, or
any other, so much as civil worship, of the same nature, substance, or
equality, which is due to the thing which it may represent, but a far
inferior manner of worship, proportionably more, or less, as the thing which
it represents is more or less worthy: the which, although thus it be far
inferior to the worship due to the thing it self: yet in regard it is given,
only for the resemblance, or relation it has to the thing, it may after a
sort, partake the name of the worship, due to the very thing: and may in a
secondary manner, be reduced to it: thereby being distinguished from the
worship due to other images, and receiving more, or less, moral dignity, then
is in the worship due to other images. This to be so, is proved, because that
what proportion there is betwixt the image, and the thing whereof it is the
image, the same is betwixt the worship due to the image, and the worship due to
the thing. But first, the image is not the same with the thing, in nature,
substance, or equality of perfection, but far inferior. Ergo the worship due
to the thing, and due to the image, is not the same in nature, substance, and
equality of perfection, but far inferior. Secondly, the image may have the
name of the thing, and may be reduced, in a secondarie manner to the kind of
the thing; thereby being distinguished from other images, and to receive
proportionablie more, or less moral dignity, then other images have. Ergo,
the worship due to the image may, in a sort, have the name, and may, in a
secondarie manner, be reduced to the worship of the thing, thereby being
distinguished from the worship due to other images, receiving also more, or
less moral dignity, then is in the worship due to other images. This
explication may seem perhaps too subtle for every ones capacity; as indeed
it is, being intended by me for the satisfaction of more pregnant, and
judicious wits. For the simple sort, it may suffice to understand, first, that
in truth, and speaking properly, none of us hold, that the same, but an
inferior kind of honor is due to the image, then is due to the thing, whose
image it is. Secondly, that to give such an inferior kind of worship to
images, proportionably more, or less, as we esteem, more or less, the thing
whereof it is an image, is no way to be misliked. For we see that every one
bears some kind of civil respect to the very picture of his friend,
proportionably more or less, as, in a civil amity, he loves his friend more
or less, setting it in a decent place etc. The which respect to his friends
picture is no way any hinderance, but rather a great help to show, and
increase his respect to his friend, in his own person; and cannot be accounted
injurious but grateful to his friend: Even so the inferior kind of religious
reverence, and respect, which we give to the image of Christ, and his Saints,
more or less, this reverence and respect (I say) done to the images relics,
etc. is so far from being a hinderance to the reverence, and respect due to
Christ himself, or to his Saints: as rather it much helps us to show, and so
to practice, and so to increase our reverence, and respect to Christ himself,
and to his Saints: and therefore cannot be thought injurious, See Bellar. l. de
imag. c. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
but very grateful unto them. Now understanding our doctrine, and practice
about worshipping of images in this manner, M. White does not, nor ever will be
able sufficiently to prove, or show, it to be unlawful, or contrary either to
Scriptures, or to the doctrine of the ancient Church. The proofs which he
brings are either impertinent, or of small moment, or are answered already by
Catholic Authors.
1 THe first example, wherein the Digression showed the Church of Rome to hold
contrary to the Primitive Church, was in the point of IMAGES: breefly producing
diverse plain testimonies out of the Scripture, and other Ecclesiastical
writers, whereby it appears that the use and worship of images, now so solemn
in the Roman Church, was not permitted in those days. My Adversary replies:
The proofs which I bring, are either impertinent, or of small moment, or are
answered already by Catholic authors. His author is Bellarmine, quoted in his
margent; but therefore M. White, made choice of this point, to see who, of all
his Adversaries, would step forth and first propound Bellarmines answers, and
then maintain them against that which would be replied. This had been a
directer course then thus, every where, to refer me to his books, whereby the
Reader can take no benefit. For I also can as easily refer him to the books of
those that have answered all that Bellarmine says. His reason rendered why the
authorities and proofs produced should be impertinent, and of small moment, is,
because we do not rightly understand the doctrine and practice of the Church of
Rome about worshipping of images, but slanderously misreport it: therefore he
will declare it, that it may appear to be neither unlawful, nor contrary to
the Scripture, or doctrine of the ancient Church. That which he says touching
our not rightly understanding the doctrine, may be true. For the idolatry is
so gross, that the distinctions and tricks, invented to defend it, are such
as themselves understand not: and the three things, here noted by himself, are
the very nice distinctions whereof De imag. c. 22.
Bellarmine and De Trad. p. 226.
Peresius confess, that neither the people nor themselves understand or
conceive them, or if they do, yet they Nec possunt nisi errando intelligere.
err in doing it. That it is no marvel if we understand not that which they
understand not themselves. But that the proofs alleged in the Digression are
impertinent, and of small moment, is easily said, but not so easily showed. For
three things I am sure the Replier will grant me: yea he grants them expressly
in his discourse. First, that in his Church they have and use images. Secondly,
that they worship them, at least with some kind of worship, either civil, or
divine. Thirdly, that some kind of images, they worship with divine honor, at
least with a distinction: either properly, or improperly: or respectively, or
accidently, or univocally, or equiuocally, or analogically. Now the authorities
alleged show that none of all this was done and allowed in the Primitive
Church: neither the setting up of images in the Church: nor the worshipping
them with civil worship: nor the worshipping of any of them with divine
worship, with any distinction whatsoever. And therefore the Reply, by running
into this irksome and wild explication of their doctrine, does but put a
trick on the Reader. For the Digression produced the authorities, not only
against worshipping of the images of Christ, and God, with divine honor,
properly and for themselves, but against worshipping them with divine honor, in
such manner, as he confesses it is given; improperly, accidently, analogically;
and secondly, against worshipping any images at all, either with latria, or
dulia, or hyperdulia. And thirdly, against the very setting them up in the
Church, for any end whatsoever. Now he, by running into his distinctions, makes
show as if nothing were required for answering me, but only to show that they
worship images with divine honor; only; improperly, and accidentally, or at
the most analogically. The which if he could show never so substantially (which
he cannot) yet when he had done, he had also to show the other three points:
That neither the setting up, nor adoring ciuillie, nor adoring with Gods honor
improperly, accidentally, and analogically, were against the practice and
doctrine of the Primitive Church, showed in those authorities.

2 Omitting therefore that which most properly concerned him, he only meddles
with that I said touching the worshipping images with divine honor, the very
same that is due to God. And first he says, no man holds that the images of
Saints are so to be worshipped, because the Saints themselves are not worshipped
with divine honor: and in his margent, he shows, how in the first impression
of my Book, I said absolutely without limitation, the Church of Rome worships
images with the same honor that belongs to God: but in the second edition I
added a limitation: the Church of Rome worships images (some of them) with the
same honor: the which, he says, I added for shame. I answer, the addition was
not for shame, as if there were any images in their Church which are not
worshipped with divine honor, but for the more perspicuity, to point at those
images which I would most challenge. And if he will not allow me thus much
without controlement, let the shame follow the chiefest writers in his own
Church. Stapleton, Suarez, Valentian, and his Briarly, who all in their latter
editions have added many things, to explain the former: and, with a witness,
let him reach it Bellarmine for his recognitions. I am so far from being
ashamed of that I said, They worship images, (yea images of Saints) with divine
honor, that I am contented the three words, added in the second impression, be
razed out again. For does he think we are so blind, that because in words
they renounce it, therefore we cannot discern of their deeds? is it enough to
discharge them when they say they worship them only with an inferior honor,
called (...), and yet give both Saints, and their images, that which belongs to
God alone? do they not invoke Saints in their prayers? and make vows to
them? and do they not kneel, and creep, and adore, and Pontifex imaginem
Mariae. thurificat. Pontif. Romans part. 2. p. 165.
burn incense to their images, all which being done in religion, Exo. 20.5.
Ro^. 14.11. ^est 3.2. cum 13 14 Ephesians. 3 14. Es. 45.23. Dan 6.10. Es. 19.21.
is only due to the God of heaven? does the Replier once hope that he can
distinguish the honor, given the Virgin Mary, and the service done to her
shrine at Laureto, from divine? he is deceived. Agobardus, the B. of Lions in
France, above 800 years after Christ, L^^e imag. p. 213
says, The works of men's hands may not be adored and worshipped, no not in honor
of them whose images they be -- Page 237.
and, If they who have left the service of the Devil (the Gentiles) should be
commanded to worship the images of Saints, I suppose they would think they had
not so much left, as changed, their Idols.

3 Secondly, he says, though some say, the image of Christ is to be worshipped
with the same honor, the prototypon, Christ himself, is: yet these be but
some. Here are two faults. For first he mentions only the image of Christ: as
if what his some say, were only touching that: whereas the doctrine is, that
every image is to be adored with the same honor the samplar is: therefore not
the image of Christ alone, but the cross, and the images A ddendum est has
imagines coli posse illo duplici modo, in alijs imaginibus explica^o. Suar. 1
d. 54. s. 6.. Secundo addendum. Idem Vasqu. de ador adorat. l. 2. nu. 167.
comparat. cum titul. disp. 6. nu. 156.
of the Trinity must be adored with divine honor. Then secondly, the some that
hold every image is to be adored with the same honor wherewith the samplar is
adored, and therefore the images of Christ and his cross must be adored with
divine honor, if they be reckoned, will amount to such a sum, that they will
be very near all the Divines the Church of Rome has. For 3. part. q. 25. art.
3.
this Thomas his conclusion; Seeing Christ is to be adored with the adoration
of Latria, divine worship, his image also is to be adored with the same
adoration.Now This sum of S. Tho. Aquinas comprehends all, lightly, that
the Catholics. -- Walsingh. p. 126.
that which Thomas teaches is holden, at least by the mayor part, if not by
all. Yea, Azorius Tom. 1. l. 9 c. 6
says, it is the constant judgment of their Divines. And Suar. to. 1. d. 54.
s. 4. Azor. vbi sup. Vasqu. ador d. 8. c. 14.
the Jesuits affirm it to be decreed in the Trent Council. And if the reader
list to see what some they be that hold it, let him turn back to the place
Chapter 48. nu. 2.
where I disputed touching the Councels of Niece and Frankeford.

4 It is certain therefore, that it is the doctrine of the present Church of
Rome, that images are worshipped with divine honor, such as God himself is
worshipped with. Now let us go forward. The Reply answers, that the meaning is,
that the honor is the same, only improperly, by accident, or at the most
analogically: and therefore it is not divine honor. And so falls to declaring
what it is to worship an image improperly, by accident, and analogically. But
before we come to this declaration, let the reader have his eye upon the point,
and remember he has two things to show. First, that this improper accidentary
and analogicall honor, is not divine honor, such as is due to God only.
Secondly, that the ancient Primitive Church condemned it not, but allowed it,
as the Church of Rome now does. The which two things being always kept in
mind, go we forward to his This his declaration is Bellarmines, de imag. c. 20.
declaration. First, he says: they worship the images of Christ, not per se,
by themselves, but by accident: not properly, but improperly: or at the most
analogically. Next he expounds this. The image is worshipped improperly when it
is taken obiectiue, and made the vicegerent of the thing, whereof it is an
image, to represent the same to our mind: as Tarleton, in a play, represented
the person of a king: and not properly in respect of it self. Secondly, it is
worshipped by accident, when it is not the suppositum wherein the reason of the
worship is, but is joined to it, and is the thing whereby it is worshipped, and
wherewith it is vested, and wherein it shines to us. As the Princes robes are
bowed to, because the person of the Prince is clothed in them. Thirdly, it is
worshipped analogically, in that the same honor is given it that is given to
Christ; not in nature, but in name; not in substance, or equality of
perfection; but in similitude of proportion: when for the resemblance and
relation it has to Christ it partakes the name of his own worship, and is
reduced to it; and so receives more moral dignity, and is of a higher
proportion, then is the worship due to other images. This explication denies
images, or the cross, to be adored properly, for themselves, or with Gods
worship the same in nature, substance, or equality: and affirms them to be
adored only as the vicegerents of Christ, which represent him, and by relation
are joined with him; and that with the same worship only in name, similitude,
and proportion. I answer three things. First, these distinctions are but the
late inventions of our Adversaries, to hide their idolatry, nether can they
either understand them themselves, or make others understand them; or if they
can, yet can they not hereby free themselves from error. Bellarmine De imag. c.
22. quarto.
confesses, that it is not void of great danger to tell the people the image
of Christ, or the cross, are to be worshipped, with the worship of latria; for
they which defend it are enforced to use most nice distinctions, which scarce
themselves, much less the people understand. And Peresius, Page 226.
they are a scandal to the weak, who are altogether ignorant of them, and
cannot understand them but by erring: and the Reply it self acknowledges they
are too subtle for every ones capacity. Secondly, it implies a contradiction,
to be divine worship, and yet only such in name, similitude, proportion. For
all divine worship is divine in nature and definition. Thirdly, the Church of
Rome teaches the giving of divine honor to these images, properly, and in
nature, and not improperly, and in name or likeness only. This I prove.

5 First, ens and verum conuertuntur. That which is so, is truly so. They teach
to worship an image with divine honor; therefore with true divine honor:
Therefore with that which is univocal divine honor: therefore with more then
the same in name, likeness, or proportion. Secondly, the words of the Popish
DD. import more. Coster the Jesuit Page 370. Ench
says, All the honor which is due to the samplar, may also be given to the
image: if All, then more then the name, and proportion: seeing, as himself,
Page 368.
a little before said, All kind of honor is given to Christ. For if all
contained within the definition of divine honor, be given to Christ: and all
that is given Christ, be due to his image, it follows that all contained
within the definition of divine honor is given to his image. Suarez To. 1. d.
54. s. 4.. Secundo infero.
says, By this adoration ( In his conclu.. dicendum.
whereby the sampler in the image, and the image for the samplar, is
worshipped) the image also is adored, not only with the external act (as of
kneeling, or creeping, or capping) which is not sufficient for adoration; but
with the internal motion and intention also, of him that adores: and that not
abusiuely only, but TRVLY and PROPERLY.. Alij vero.
And having reported the opinion of Biel, Cordubensis, and others, who
distinguish, as the Reply does, that the worship is but analogicall: he
confutes them, and says, they neither speak to the purpose, nor according to
Thomas his mind, but clean beside it. It is false therefore that the Reply
says, they worship Christ's image improperly, and at the most but analogically.
D. Saunders Treat. of imag. c. 17. p. 185. b,
says, the adoration of the image so passes, immediately, to the first
sampler and pattern, that it becomes not first one in the image, and then
afterward another in Christ, but it passes altogether (remaining still one and
the same) from the image, to Christ himself. He adds (* because he was not of
the Thomists and Jesuits opinion) Being then, in the image doulia, it is
doulia in Christ: but by his leave, if this be so, being divine honor in
nature, properly, and definition, in Christ, it must needs be the same in his
image. But Thomas his conclusion, and the ground thereof is so plain, that it
will not admit these distinctions. Vbi sup q. 25. art. 3. see Caiet. upon the
place.
His conclusion is, seeing Christ is to be adored with divine worship, his
image also must be adored with the same worship. His ground is, Because the
motion of the mind is one and the same to the image and the samplar. And
expounds how: when the mind conceaues the image, only as a mere thing, then
the motion is twofold: one to the image, and another to the thing: but when it
conceaues it as an image of another thing, then the motion is one and the self
same, both to the image, and to the thing signified by it. Hence I thus reason.
So as Thomas intended the motion of the mind to be one and the same, both to
the image and the samplar; so, and in the same manner, did he intend the
adoration to both, to be the same: But its clear he intended the motion of the
mind to be one and the same to both; not improperly or accidentarily, or
analogically; but the same to both, in nature and definition. Therefore it is
clear he intended the adoration to both, to be one and the same not
improperly, accidentarily, or analogically, but in nature and definition. You
will possible demand what it is then that Thomas, and his sectaries truly hold
touching this matter? I answer, they hold 4. things. First, that images are to
be adored with the same honor that is due to the samplar. Secondly, that
therefore the images of Christ, and his cross must be adored with divine
honor, the same that belongs to Christ himself. Thirdly, that this divine
honor is not divine only in name, and analogy, but indeed and univocally. For
that being the exposition of 3. d. 9. qu. vnic. concl. 6.
Gabriell, is rejected of all hands. Fourthly, that this honor is given the
image respctiuely for Christ, thereby to honor him, and to convey their service
to him: and not for the images own sake. He that reads Thomas, and the
Jesuits, shall find this to be true: wherein they have only the last point
to help themselves, and wherewith to excuse their idolatry. But it does them
no good; for so much as the Jews worshipping the calfe, and the Gentiles adoring
their idols, did it not for the images own sake, but respectively and
intentionally to God, using the image but as an instrument to convey their
service to him; yet notwithstanding for so much as in this manner, they
imparted divine adoration to the image, by creeping, bowing capping, kneeling,
informed also by religious motions of the heart; Psalm. ^06.19, 20, Romans 1.23.
God, without respecting their intention, vpbraids them with idolatry.

6 Nevertheless, to show that images may be adored with the divine honor of
Christ, improperly, accidentally and analogically, as he has distinguished, he
reasons thus: the worshipping of a crucifixe or image in this manner, and the
creeping to the cross, as in Catholic countries it is used on Good-fridayes:
is no more then kneeling to the chair of estate, or to one that in a Play
represents the Kings person. But to kneel to the chair of estate, or to one
that in a play represents the Kings person, is no treason, or prejudicial to
the honor of the King. Therefore the worshipping of Christ's image, in this
manner, is no idolatry, nor prejudicial to the honor of Christ. I answer,
denying the proposition: there is not the like reason in worshipping the image
of Christ, that there is in kneeling to the chair of estate, or to him that
represents the Kings person: they are not equal. The comparison does well show
and explicate, how it is possible to worship Christ in the crucifixe, and the
crucifixe for Christ: but it does not prove this to be lawful. For it is true
that the chair of estate is in a sort united to the person of the King, and
the person of the King is by a certain habitude united to him that represents
him. But how will the Replier prove, that so also Christ is united to the
image. I know the idolater in his conceit unites them; but who has taught him
so to do? what law, what word, what promise of God has repealed any such
union, or allowed him to conceive it? Secondly it is true, the chair of
estate, or he that represents the King, and the King himself, may be conceived
both together with one thought, and they may be reverenced both together with
one worship; the one properly, the other improperly: but thus to conceive, and
thus to worship Christ and his image together, is the thing that I say is
forbidden, and was condemned in the Primitive Church. Thirdly, it is also true,
that the chair of estate or the ambassador are not worshipped properly,
because they are not worshipped at al, but the King only in them: but the
worship given to the image, is bounded in the image it self, as it is an image:
and if it were not, but Christ only were worshipped before the image, as God
was before the Arc, yet that practice has no warrant. Albeit therefore there
be, as the Reply speaks, no danger in kneeling to the ambassador or chair of
the King, but it may be done without treason, or prejudice to his honor; yet is
it not so in the worship of images: first because the one is civil, the other
religious worship; and that may be done without treason in the one, that cannot
be done without idolatry in the other. Secondly Gods word permits the one, but
no where the other. Thirdly, the chair and ambassador are signs of the Kings
presence; but the image is no sign (ordained or allowed so to be) of Christ's
presence, neither is Christ any way united to it by his own ordinance, but
only by the worshippers idolatrous intention. And it is so true, that nothing
may be adored with God, that is not really united to him; Alexan. 3. par. q.
30. m. 2. Tho. 3. q. 25. ar. 1. and 2. Scot. 3. d. 9 q. vnic. and ibi communit.
Scholast Suar. to. 1. d. 53. sect. 2.
that if the humanity of Christ were separated from his person, and did not
subsist in the word, it might not be adored with divine honor, for no cause
but because then it should not be one with him.

7 This I have answered, allowing the Papists to do no more to their images,
then courtiers do to the chair of Estate, or then is done in a play, to him
that represents the person of a King. But they do more: and to take the
repliers own example, they do not only on Good-fridays exhibit their
crosse-creeping to Christ, but they pray grossly to the Cross it self: Primer
of our Lady. tit. the Hymns. p. 10.
O thou right fair and comely tree, Whose worthy chosen stock was such, As
kingly purple did adorn, And did so holy members touch: Blessed be the tree,
upon whose bows, This worlds value did depend: His body made the price so
just, To free from hell it did intend. All hail o Cross, our only hope, Now
at this present passion time, Uprightness in the good increase, And quit the
guilty of their crime. In which prayer, many things are, that can be said of
nothing but the wood it self; as Pontifex imponit thu^ in the ribulum, deinde
aspergit crucem aquae benedicta, and mox eam incensat --. Tum Pontifex flexis
ante crucem genibus, ips^m deuote adorat, and osculatur. Jdem faciunt qu^cunque
alij voluerint. Pont. To. p. 164
the bowing of the knee, kissing, and incensing it, are too soul to be washed
off with this distinction. And all the instruction that popish Pastors use to
give: who themselves speaking thus, not with their eyes fixed on the crucifix,
but to the crucifix it self, (even in their pulpits all over Italy and Spain)
and teaching withal that it must be adored, at least improperly or
analogically, as well as Christ himself, even with divine honor; may not for
shame be said to keep the people from falling into idolatry, when by this
means they teach them, and embolden them in it.

8 His second reason is this: The thing wherewith Christ is vested, and wherein
he shines as a Prince clothed in his robe, and without which he cannot so
easily be conceived, may and must necessarily be worshipped with him: But such
is the image of Christ, that he is vested with it, etc. Ergo. This argument
lies couched in his second note: or if it do not, then all he says there, is
to no purpose: for to what end should he show, by the vesture and robes
wherewith a Prince is vested, and by the phantasmes mentioned, whereby things
are conceived, how the image may accidentally be conceived and adored with
Christ; if by the same things he intend not to prove the lawfulness of that
adoration? I answer therefore, first as I did before, that these examples will
serve to show, how it is possible to worship an image only accidentally, but
not how it is lawful. Secondly, the doctrine of the Church of Rome, is, that
all images are worshipped more then accidentally or improperly: Bell. c. 21.2.
sent
They are worshipped of themselves properly, so that themselves are the object
of the worship, as they are considered in themselves, and not only as they are
vicegerents of the samplar. He means not they are thus worshipped with divine
honor, but with some honor of another kind: yet he shows the Replier to say
false, that they are worshipped only accidentally. Nay by this conclusion it
must be holden, that they are worshipped for themselves (as images) and
properly, with divine honor: because all the worship given them, is to worship
Christ withal: and no man may worship Christ, but with divine honor. Now if
the Church of Rome honor the crucifix in a higher degree then the Kings robe is
honored; what faculty is there in the robe to prove the honor of the
crucifixe? Thirdly it is utterly false, that an image is the vesture of Christ,
or that his majesty shines to us in it: it is rather the vesture of Satan,
wherein he shows himself to all that worship it, whose image soever it be.
Fourthly, allowing that by phantasmes I come to the conceiving of things, and
see not the King but vested in his robe, and in my understanding, the image is
not conceived without Christ, but the motion of my mind is one to both, as to
the phantasmes and the things, to the robe and the King: yet I do not conceive
them as one, but as distinct things; conceiving the robe to be a robe, the king
to be a king, the image to be an image, and Christ to be God: whereupon it
follows, that the adoration following the conception, I need not nor must
adore any more then I conceive to be capable of adoration, which the robe and
the image is not. Durand, whom Gerson To. 1. p. 559. e.
thinks to be one of them that have written most purely and substantially, 3.
d. 9. q. 2.
says, Though the motion of the mind be one and the same to the image and the
thing whereof it is an image, yet the mind never says the image is the thing,
but always distinguishes between them: and therefore the worship given to the
thing, is never given to the image. The Repliers argument therefore may well
proceed in that opinion that holds Christ to be worshipped only before an
image, though so also it iustifies it not; but it cannot conclude that worship,
either divine or any at all, must in any sense be given to the image; because
the mind conceiving both at once, yet understands the image to be a block, and
Christ to be God. To the same effect writes Peresius a professor of Divinity
among our adversaries: Tradit. p. 224.
Though we may be carried with one and the same knowledge to the image and the
samplar, yet is it not hence concluded that the same may be done in worshipping
and adoring them: for there is great dissimilitude between this and that. For
it is not repugnant to an image, as it is an image, to be conceived with the
same knowledge wherewith the thing represented is known: but it seems to be
against the nature of an image, as it is an image, that it should be reverenced
with the same reverence wherewith the samplar is, seeing it exceeds not the
limits of an insensible creature: and of this comparison of a Kings robe, he
says, There is no likeness between an image and the robes of an Emperor.

9 In his third note, the Reply having explicated his analogicall adoration,
which he says is the most they give to images: he says thereupon, the worship
given to images in the Church of Rome, is not the same in nature, substance or
equality of perfection to that is given to God, but far inferior:
demonstrating it by two reasons. Thus he distinguishes, because the Digression
had said, The Church of Rome worshippeth images with divine honor, the same
that is due to God. But I have sufficiently adswered, that even this
analogicall honor, thus given, as he distinguishes and proves, is condemned by
the Scripture and authorities alleged in the Digression, for two causes:
first, because it is some kind of worship; and all kinds of worship are
condemned: secondly, it is divine worship, though not of the highest degree,
yet divine in analogy; and in some sort also of the nature and substance of
divine worship, because, as I have said before, it can be reduced to any other
kind then that which by the image is given to God. Secondly I answer, and have
showed before, that the Church of Rome worshippeth images in a higher degree
then with analogicall worship. For it was Omnia coniuncta adorandu, sieve vt
parts praesentes vel praeteritae sieve vt alias specialem ordinem ad ipsae
habe^tia, propter se ^^o adorabiliat adoranda sunt eadem specie adorat^onis
analogice. 3 d. 9 q. vnic. concl. 6. id. lect. 49.
Biels opinion, they ought indeed to be worshipped no otherwise: but the
Jesuits, as I have showed confute him. For there are three opinions, whereof
this of the analogicall worship, is one: but the Jesuits and others in the
Church of Rome, hold it not, but go further.

10 Now follows that which is worth the noting. For the Replier having
distinguished the manner how divine honor is given to images, says, Perhaps it
is too subtle for every ones capacity, being intended only for the
satisfaction of more pregnant and judicious wits. But this latter clause, he
should have left out. For Bellarmine De imag. c. 22
says, It is not to be said at all, that the worship of Latria (which is
divine adoration) is due to images. First, because the Councels do not affirm
it, but simply deny it: then, it is not without great danger to say so. For
they who defend images are to be adored with divine honor, are enforced to use
most subtle distinctions, which THEMSELVES hardly understand, much less the
rude people, etc. This is a notable dog-trick, thus to teach the adoration of
images; and when they have done, to confess it is not fit to utter it. What
shall the doctrine be then, that men shall hold them to? It may suffice for the
simple sort to understand, that IN TRVTH and SPEAKING PROPERLY, not the same,
but a far inferior kind of honor is due to the image, then is due to the
thing whose image it is. If this be the truth, then Azor. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 6.
that which is the constant judgment of the Romish Divines, is a lie, and
comes from the father of lies, and shall be punished accordingly by him that
hates all lies; pestilent hypocrites thus to maintain that, in whole volumes,
which themselves know not to be the truth. But now the doctrine of Thomas and
the Jesuits, and so many great Schoolmen, and the constant judgment of all
Divines, is cast off, and this inferior kind of worship is supplied; how shall
it appear this also is not to be misliked? he answers, that as a man bearing
respect to the picture of his friend, yet is not counted injurious to him
though he respect not the picture so much as his friend, but rather so much the
more grateful: so this inferior religious reverence given to images, is so
far from hindering the respect we owe to Christ, that it shows and practices
it the more, and increases it, and so cannot be thought injurious but grateful
to Christ and his Saints. So he. But let him take heed, that while he labors
to please Christ and his Saints, he displease not Thomas and his disciples: for
he knows they cannot abide this inferior worship; but seeing the motion of
the mind is one and the same to Christ and his image, they will have the
worship to both, be one and the same. And howsoever they take the matter, let
the Replier go roundly to the point, and show how this gratifying Christ with
his inferior worship, was gatefull to the ancient Church? And let him make
demonstration, where Christ has commanded it? For a man may make and use the
picture of his friend, as he pleases, (though Paleot. imag. l. 2. c. 20.
a great Cardinal be somewhat strait-laced in the matter, and allows not all
that liberty that we see used.) But where is any allowance to gratify Christ
by worshipping his picture? and where is the word of God permitting to make the
pictures of the Trinity? let this be showed, and there is an end in the
controversy: for that is the point which the Digression affirms the ancient
Church to have holden against the now-church of Rome; whose words against such
things, he should have answered, and not with an unlike comparison of a humane
picture have imposed upon the vulgar. But his own picture, for this trick,
shall never be made, because he flies out of the field, and leaves the matter
behind him. For no man will make the picture of a coward, that flies and dares
not abide it, In 3. Ps.
says S. Chrysostom.

11 For the testimonies both of the Scriptures and Fathers, though briefly
pointed to, yet very clearly show, that images in religion might no ways be
used under any pretense; but all worship of them they condemn so far, that
they will not admit it with any distinction: be it religious worship, divine or
civil, proper, improper, accidental, analogicall, inferior, the same that is
given to God, or not the same; if it be worship, service, adoration, kneeling,
kissing, crouching, capping, vowing, they condemn it all: and the second
Nicene Council, 800 years after Christ, was the first that confirmed it; to
the great discontent of the godly in the Church, as I have Chapter 48. n. 4.
elsewhere showed in the narration of the Councels of Frankford and Paris.
Walafridus Strabo In his colendi superstitionem and hebetudinem. page 3 37. b.
Nouimus non adorandas nec colendas iconas. ib. d.
called it superstition and blockishnesse to worship them. Jonas the B. of
Orleance living the same time: Page 609. Bibl SS. Patrum, edit 1. tom. 5. page
609. c.
That which you said the worshippers of images answered in defense of their
error: We do not think any divinity to be in the image, but we worship it
only in honor of him whose image it is; we reprove and detest as well as you;
because WHEN THEY KNOW THERE IS NO DIVINITY IN IMAGES, THEY ARE THE MORE TO BE
INVEYED AGAINST, FOR GIVING TO AN INFIRM AND BEGGARLY IMAGE, THE HONOR THAT IS
DVE TO THE DIVINITY. How much the maintainers and followers of this error go
astray from religion, I need not particularly declare --. God grant they in the
East (he means such as held and followed the second Nicene Council) who have
inthralled themselves to this most wicked error, may be delivered from it. The
like is testified by Agobardus the B. of Lions at the same time, who wrote a
book to prove images should not be worshipped: De pict. and imag. page 237.
wherein he says; They which answer, they think no divinity to be in the
image they worship, but only they worship it in honor of him whose image it
is, are easily answered again: because if the image he worships, be not God,
NEITHER IS IT TO BE WORSHIPPED IN HONOR OF THE SAINTS, who use not to arrogate
to themselves divine honor. And he adds, that the images of the Apostles, and
our Lord himself, were expressed by the ancient, after the custom of the
Gentiles, RATHER FOR LOVE AND MEMORY, THEN FOR ANY RELIGIOUS HONOR OR WORSHIP.
And concluding his book, Agobard. page 251.
he says: THIS IS THE SINCERE RELIGION, THIS IS THE CATHOLIC CUSTOM, THIS
THE ANCIENT TRADITION OF THE FATHERS: LET THIS HIGHWAY THEREFORE BE HOLDEN;
THIS IS THE DOCTRINE TAVGHT BY THE APOSTLES, THE MASTERS OF THE CHVRCH, THE
RAMMS OF THE FLOCK. And that this image-worshippe thus set afoote by the
Nicene Co^ncell, yet was not uniformly entertained of a long time after,
appears by the manifest opposition that even within these 400 years, See
Polyd. invent. l. 6. c. 13. Gers. declat. compend. defect. eccl. n. 67. Henric.
quodl. 10. q. 6. Dur. 3. d. 9. q. 2. ad. 4. Dur. rational. l. 1. c. 3 n. 4.
Pic. Mirand. apol q 3. Holt. in Sap. lect. 157. B. Catharin. l. de cult. imag.
Biel: lect. 49. Cassand. consult tit. de imag.
as learned men as any lived in the Church of Rome, made against it, misliking
and condemning it.

CHAP. LIIII.
1. The Popes supremacy was not in the ancient Church: neither is it
acknowledged at this day by many Papists. Nun Brigets speech touching the
Pope. And Cyrils riddle.

A. D. Sixthly concerning the Supremacy, Page 285. 1 Bell. l. 2. de Romans Pont.
c. 2.13.14.15.16. etc. 21. and deinceps and lib. 5. c. 7.8. Iodoc. Cocc. and
others
there are so sufficient testimonies both of Scriptures and Fathers alleged by
our Authors for it, that it is marvel that M. White durst adventure to reckon
it for a point wherein we disagree from antiquity, especially upon so slight
grounds and insufficient authorities, which are so ordinarily answered by our
Authors, as I think it not worth spending ink and paper about them. True it
is, that the practice of this authority might as occasion urged, be more at
one time then at another: but the fullness of all Pastoral power over all
Christ's sheep, was equally in all Popes from the very beginning, when it was
given by our Savior peculiarly to S. Peter, and in him to his Successors.
But THE WAY,. 36. n. 11. and inde. and Digr. 30.
I showed, this fullness of power was given neither to Peter nor his
Successors; and made it so plain to the Reader, that the Repliar and his
consorts have nothing to say in defense of it. Their guise is to give the onset
with much breath; but when they are a little taken down, they think it not
worth ink and paper to proceed any further: they marvel we dare adventure
upon so slight grounds: their grave onsets, that promised all sincerity and
undeniable proofs, are resolved into Thrasonicall brags. For the testimonies
alleged in the Digression, did not only show the practice of the Popes
authority to have been less in the Primitive Church then now it is; but they
make it evident, that what he now practices, and then began to claim or
usurp, more then the other three Patriarks had, was unlawful. I showed his
title of universal Bishop; his intermedling with Appeals; his going beyond
the Church canons, and out-stripping the other Patriarchs; his malepertnesse
with Kings and their states, was all condemned in those days, by the doctrine
and practice of the Church. This was directly to the point, when he bad me show
what point of doctrine the Romish Church now holds or denies, contrary to the
universal Churh. He says, the authorities alleged, are ordinarily answered
by his Authors, Coccius and Bellarmine. This is his ordinary answer. But had he
told the Reader what his Authors say, it would not have endured daylight. And,
as it pleases God, all the world now sees the uttermost that can be said for
the Supremacy, is vented; and Bellarmine himself is not only confuted by
others of his own side, but is at that fault, with his direct and indirecte,
that we justly begin to think he dotes. The B. of Ely
As good a man, and as learned as himself every day in the year, has so
uncased him, that the titles of his learning, and reputation of his greatness,
shall deceive us no more. And this I admonish the Replier, that if the Pope
spend the revenues of his triple crown upon ink and paper, he cannot justify
his present usurpations: which not we alone abhor, but his own Church See
controu. memorab inter Paul. 5. and Ven.
at Venice and at De eccl. and polit. potest. Paris. 1612.
Paris this day has cast off: and Occh. Rosell. Rosat. Marsil. Mayor Alliac.
Zabarel Cusan. Dantes, Walra^. Lupold. and diverse others, whose books are well
known and extant.
many of his own Doctors, within the compass of the last 400 years, have
condemned; and the late Councels of Constance and Basil, labored to restrain.
And the Replier is too immodest to say, he maruels I durst adventure to reckon
this of all points; when the disagreement from antiquity is more sensible in
no point. That now we may say of the Pope, as Brig revel. l 6 c. 96.
Nun Brigit sometime writ: He that should cry, Come, and you shall find
rest to your souls; now cries, Come and see me in pomp and ambition beyond
Solomon: come to my Court, and OVT WITH YOUR PVRSES, AND YOU SHALL FIND
DAMNATION TO YOUR SOVLES. And SIMVLTVM STABIT SVPER ^OS DIADE RVTILANTE: VT
TIBI E^FVNDANT ELECTRVM. EA PROPT ER RVDES MIGINA MANDENT VIRODERE: ET BLACE
BLICIAE ALLVDE B^NT: TVNC CELIBES ET BLASCONES LVGERE CV^ ROBOAM: B^ BLENONES
MIXTOS DORTONIBVS RIDERE CVM JEROBOAM. page 11.
the riddle of Cyril the Monk, reported by Telesph. de Cusent. l. de magnis
tribul. Venet. 1516.
Telesphorus in his book of prophecies, may be expounded: The devil shall
make a Pope with a worm in his head, and a sort of hungry parasites laughing
at his heels.

CHAP. LV.
1. The Communion in ancient time was ministered to the people in both kinds. 2.
An innovation in this point, in the Church of Rome. 3. The pretenses used
against the Cup.

A. D. Seventhly concerning the Communion in one kind. I answer, Page 286.
that the practice of the ancient Church it self, did use sometimes receiving
in one kind, as is showed by See Greg. de Valent. tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 8. p. 5..
8. 9.
Catholic authors: and although it used also receiving in both kinds; yet
this proves not, that to receive in one kind is contrary to the law of God,
but rather that it was by the law of God left indifferent. Now in matters left
indifferent by the law of God, the practice of the Church may be different, in
different times or places, according to the difference of occurring motives and
reasons, and all good. Which answer may be applied, in case M. White show other
differences in the ancient and present Church practice: which to show, is
altogether impertinent to this our question: where we are to see only whether
there be any practice or point of doctrine maintained by the present Church,
contrary to the law of God, or contrary to the doctrine of faith held
universally by the ancient Church.
1 THe communion in one kind, I showed to be contrary to the practice and
doctrine of the ancient Church. For Mat. 26.27.
Christ ordained it in both kinds, and 1. Cor. 11.28.
commanded the use of it in both kinds. Chrysostom Hom. 18. in 2. Cor.
says, There is wherein the Priest differs not from the people; as in the
participation of the sacred mysteries, (...). Idem Ieron. in Soph. l. sub init.
where one Body and one Cup is exposed to all alike. And innumerable places
might be brought out of antiquity, and be added to that which I but briefly
touched in the Digress. but it shall not need: for I presume no man will deny
Defens. lib. de offic. pij viri. under the name of Veran. Modest. Pacimont. p.
138.
Cassanders words to be true: This use of our Lords blood, together with his
body, in the ministration, has the institution of Christ, and the custom of
the whole Church above a thousand years, and of all the East to this day. The
consideration whereof, moves the minds of many men, religious, and truly
Catholic, vehemently to wish and labor, that by some general constitution,
this so ancient and long continued custom of ministering the Sacraments wholly,
might be reuolued. The Reply answers, it was left indifferent by the law of
God, and therefore the Primitive Church used it also, sometimes, in one kind,
as Greg. Valence has showed. This I deny. Gregory has raked together all
the places he could hear of, in antiquity, to give some color to
ministration in one kind; and has most leudly bestowed his wit to avoid the
authorities that show the contrary: but it cannot be proved, either that the
thing is indifferent, or that the Church solemnly in the congregations used
but one kind, as the Church of Rome now does; or that the practice of such
particular persons as he pretends, was according to the doctrine of the Church:
which are the things whereupon the true judgment of this question depends.

2 But this it is: the B. of Rome and his Church, are now grown to that height
of presumption, that whatsoever Christ instituted and practiced himself, and
commended to his Church; and the Church accordingly practiced and taught many
generations after him: yet by virtue of the chair, and under pretense that he
has power to dispense and vary in diverse things; any thing may be altered,
without changing the ancient faith. But say, good student, say directly, what
reason can be assigned why the use of the cup should be less commanded by
Christ, then the use of the bread? and why Christ should be thought to have
left the cup indifferent more then the bread? The words in the institution,
sound alike for both: the company to whom he ministered, received both, and
were bidden to use both. If the cup be not necessary, because no lay people
were among them; then by the same argument, neither is the bread necessary. I
will only use the testimony of Cyprian, to prove that our Lord left not this
mattter mutable or indifferent: he Ep. 68. edit. Morel.
says, Know ye that we are admonished, in offering the cup, to keep the Lords
tradition: that nothing be done by us, but that which the Lord did for us: that
the cup which is offered, be offered mingled with wine. Here Gregory Page
1002. A.
answers, that Cyprian affirms no more but that when the cup is given, it must
be given in the same matter that Christ did, not affirming the cup should be
given to all. This (that the reader may have a taste of his doings, because the
Reply referres me to him (is but a trick: for he affirms both: not only that
we must offer it in such matter, but that we must offer it. For if that which
Christ did, were the reason why it should be offered in such a matter, then is
it also a reason why it must be offered. And that this was Cyprians mind,
appears by Ep. 54. and 63.
another text, where he and diverse more, to the number of forty Bishops,
appointed the Communion to be given in both kinds to the Christians in
persecution, give this reason: For how do we teach or provoke them in the
confession of his name to shed their blood, if we deny them the blood of
Christ, when they are ready to fight? or how shall we make them fit for the
cup of martyrdom, if we do not first admit them in the Church to drink the
cup of our Lord, by the right of communion? They thought the cup necessary for
such as should shed their blood for Christ, but such are all men, and at all
times: the cup therefore they thought necessary for all. Again, all have right
to it; it is not therefore indifferent.

3 The reasons why the Church of Rome restraines the cup, are needful to be
known. I will take only them that Tolet In 1. Ioh. 6. ann. 27. confirmed by
Suarez. Quia vix posset moraliter id fieri, sine magnus incommodis and
periculis contra reuere^tiam huit sacramento debitam, quae vel propter
multitudinem comunicantiu^, vel propter eorum varietatem, tam in conditionibus
and affectibus corporu, quam in animi prudentia and circumspectione, vel
denique propter ministra^tiu^ incuria^ nullatenus possent iuxta humana^
conditionem euitar^ Suar. defens. fid cathol. l. 2. c. 5. n. 20.
gives. First for the reverence and decency of the Sacrament, that the cup be
not spilled, and the wine shed, in so great and confused a company. Next for
uniformity, that all people every where might receive alike: which should not
be, if the cup were ministered: for some people love no wine. Thirdly to avoid
their error that hold it may not be ministered in one kind. Fourthly for the
preservation of the Sacrament; and that it might be carried to the sick: which
in wine it could not for sowring and spilling. Lastly for the instruction of
the ignorant, that they may know Christ (by Thomas his concomitancie) is
perfectly under either kind. It were no hard matter thoroughly to show the
vanity of these reasons, and merrily to whip them: but the Cardinal had
forgot, that all these reasons (in his own opinion) held in the primitive
Church, and yet then they moved not the Church to take away the cup. I have
read of words uttered in a great frost, which freezed in the venting as they
were spoken, and were not hard till a thaw came a long time after: so belike
our adversaries will answer; These reasons might be uttered in the ancient
Church, but they could not be conceived till Praeterea nosse debueras quod
fecit. Deus duo magna luminaria, etc. de maiorit. and obed. Solitae. in decr.
l. 1. tit. 33.
the great light in the firmament of the Church, had showed them with his
beams now of late within these three hundred years.

CHAP. LVI.
Touching Transubstantiation. 1. It was made an article of faith by the Lateran
Council 1200 years after Christ. 2. How it came in by degrees. 3. The Fathers
never believed nor knew it.

Page 286.
A. D. Lastly concerning Transubstantiation, White, page 343. 350.
M. White sets down some conjectures, whereby he endeavors to persuade his
Reader, that the belief of Transubstantiation came into the Church of late, to
wit, at the Lateran Council. But See the Prot. Apol. tract. 1.. 3 n. 2. where
it is showed, yt eue^ Protestants (far better learned then M. White will be in
haste) do grant ye Transubstantiation was believed long before the Lateran
Council. See Bellar. l. 3. de sacram. euchar. c. 19.20 21. Gre. de Val. tom. 4.
disp. 6. q. 3. p. 2.. 2. 3.
this is false. For although the name Transubstantiation was not perhaps used
before the Council of Lateran: yet the thing signified by this name, to wit,
the real presence of Christ's body succeeding in the place of the substance of
bread, was held and believed from the beginning, as appears by plain and
sound authorities of Scriptures and Fathers, set down by Bellarmine and
others. And although the Church had no necessary occasion to make express
determination what was to be held in that point before contrary heresies arose,
which might be one cause that some men did not, or were not bound to know it so
expressly, as after the matter was explaned and determined by full authority
from the Church, yet at least implicit all did and were bound from the
beginning to believe it. And although some in their ignorance did, before this
declaration of the Church, doubt or hold opinion to the contrary, yet this
hinders not that they might believe this by implicit faith, in regard private
doubts and opinions, so long as they are in ignorance without obstinacy,
especially with resolution and readiness to yield to the Church, do not take
away implicit faith infolded in the general assent, which every Catholic
gives to that article, I believe the Catholic Church.
1 TO show the doctrine of Transubstantiation to be contrary to the faith of
the Primitive Church, and to be brought in afterward, and never to have bin an
article of faith before the Lateran Council, I set not down conjectures, but
direct and full testimonies: first Another like heretical and most dangerous
a^sertion of theirs (the Jesuits) is, that the ancient Fathers, Rem
transubstantiationis ne attigerunt. Quodl. p. 31.
of the Fathers expounding the words of Christ touching the Sacrament, and
auouching the substance of bread and wine to remain, as we do: then, of diverse
great Papists, Schoolmen and others, who confess the same I say, either in
express words or in effect; that not only the NAME of Transubstantiation, but
the DOCTRINE and thing it self was made a matter of faith by the Lateran
Council, no man being bound to believe it before. Their words are reported in
the Digression, and will give testimony to themselves without my contending
about them. The Reply says, though the name Transubstantiation were not
perhaps used before the Council of Lateran, yet the thing, to wit, the real
presence of Christ's body succeeding in the place of the substance of bread,
was held from the beginning: as Bellarmine and others have showed: and even
Protestants far better learned then M. White will be in have, do grant. But
the authorities alleged in the Digress. show the contrary: not only the name,
but the thing it self to be new; as will appear by viewing them. And though
Bellarmine take upon him to prove Transubstantiation by the Scripture and
Fathers; yet he confesses it is not improbable that Scotus said: There is not
extant any place of Scripture so express, that without the Church declaration,
can evidently constrain us to admit it. For though the Scripture which I have
brought, seem to us so clear, that it may constrain a man not froward; yet
whether it be so or not, IT MAY WORTHILY BE DOVBTED, when men MOST LEARNED AND
ACVTE do think the contrary. Let this be noted: he bring De Euch. l. 3. c.
23.. Non dissimili.
Scripture to prove that which may worthily be doubted whether it be so or no:
and such Scripture, as cannot convince without his Churches declaration:
Decernit (Synodus) vt nemo sacra^ Scriptura^ contra eum sensum quem tenuit and
tenet sancta matter Ecclesia, cuius est iudicare de vero sensi^, interpretari
audeat. Con. Trid. sess. 4.
that is to say, unless it be expounded so as shall agree with the doctrine of
the Church of Rome. The Reply therefore must not call them sound authorities of
Scripture, which, without this wresting, prove nothing; and with all this
wresting prove not so much but a man may still worthily doubt, and most learned
and acute men do doubt: and the reader may see, in what case he is that shall
follow Bellarmine and the Reply in this opinion of Transubstantiation upon
their authorities of Scripture, proving it no otherwise then thus.

2 The same is to be said of his Fathers, who will prove as little, unless as
the Scripture is allowed the Church declaration, so they also be allowed their
Ind. Exp. Belg c. vt liber Bertrami.
pious and commodious, and devised expositions: so that, for all the Replies
confidence, the ground that Transubstantiation has, either in the Scripture or
antiquity, shall be this in the end. There is for it sound authority, both of
Scripture and Fathers, if you will allow the church of Rome, who is a party,
to declare the sense of the Scripture, and her Divines the Jesuits, a faculty
to give the Fathers a sense, if not true, yet fit and pious, and to devise
tricks which they never meant: thus it may be proved soundly, though when all
is done, it may still be doubted whether it be so or no: as the learned and
acutest in the Church it self still do doubt it. Which being the case, then
the conjectures will no longer be M. Whites, but his adversaries, and the best
ground he can yield for his doctrine. And whereas he adds in his margent, that
Briarly has showed in his Prot. Apolog. that even Protestants (far better
learned then M. White will be in have) grant Transubstantiation was believed
long before the Lateran Council; M. White answers, that the parenthesis,
touching his learning, is true; neither can he refuse the comparison: but he
renders to God his most humble thanks that he, so far inferior to so many,
yet has done that which is sufficient for the maintenance of the truth against
Romish heresies: and the Replier finds himself so galled with it, that it may
be he will say to his fellows, as Iud. 9.54.
Abimelec, wounded by a woman, did to his page, Draw thy sword and slay me,
that it be not said, a woman slew Abimelec. But yet the rest is false: as Prot.
ap. p. 94. n. 3. and inde, ad 22.
the Deane of Winchester has fully showed in his answer: and the uttermost
that either the Centuries or the other Protestants alleged, say, is not that
Transubstantiation was believed long before the Lateran Council, but that
before that time, in the writings of some particular Doctors, there are some
forms of speech, which possible they like not so well; as seeming to give
courage a^^^ boldness to them who afterward (abusing every thing to their own
errors) would use them to confirm their Transubstantiation: but that they
grant the doctrine now taught in the Church of Rome touching Transubstantiation
was believed, is a base untruth, no way to be gathered from their words. For
Transubstantiation had his growth by degrees. First the Fathers, without so
much as dreaming of it, only to increase the reverence, and to suppress the
profanation thereof, used vehement and hyperbolicall speeches of the
Sacrament. Secondly, in time a kind of real presence began to be conceited.
Thirdly then, what these men could find in antiquity that sounded that way,
they wrested to their opinion. Fourthly, till at the last in the Council of
Lateran it was confirmed as an article that must be received, and had a name
given it in token it was newborn.

3 The reason assigned in the Reply, for that which Lateran did, contains
matter worth the marking. First, before contrary heresies rose, the Church had
no occasion to make express determination. This fully overthrows himself.
For if no determination were made, then was it no article necessary to be
believed: if no article, nor necessary, how could there be any heresy against
it; when Dico hactenus nihil esse, in hac controuersia, ab Ecclesia definitum,
ideoque sententiam non esse de fide. Suar. 2. to. p. 30 e.
nothing is an article that is not defined: nor Postquam autem (propositio
aliqua) patefacta est per determinationem Ecclesiae, esse contratia fidei,
secundum se, and quoad nos; -- haeretica denominatur. Caict. 22. q. 11. art. 1.
See Silu. v. haec. 1. n. 4 can. loc. l. 12. c. 12.
nothing heresy but what is against a definition? Secondly, men were not bound
to know it so expressly, as they were after the determination. Therefore it was
not determined till the Lateran Council: therefore it was no article of the
ancient Church faith: therefore it is not expressly or manifestly conceived in
the Scripture or Fathers. Therefore they do but trifle that allege them for
it. These consequences proceed in the thing as well as the name, and cannot be
avoided. But all did, and all were bound even from the beginning to believe it,
at least implicit. But this is a beggarly shift: for if it was believed but in
the virtue of that article, I believe the Catholic Church; then the Church
was but with child of it for 1200 years: till the Pope, her midwife, brought
her abed of it, and so the Fathers had neither faith nor knowledge of it then;
but believed whatsoever the Church should hereafter define: this they never
believed, but held constantly the Church of Rome, and a general Council,
might define an error: and if they believed no more, what treachery is it to
prove by their writing what they never knew and what they could not mention;
but lay hidden in the bosom of the Church, to be revealed at the Council of
Lateran? But what will not this man say, that auouches such as held contrary to
Transubstantiation (as indeed the ancient Church did) yet did also believe it
by implicit faith? How does a man believe that which he believes not? he
answers: by resolution and readiness to yield to the church, they might
believe that which in their ignorance they erred in. Let us make an end then:
the Reply has got the victory: The Fathers, and the Church her self, might
for 1200 years be ignorant of Transubstantiation, yea hold contrary to it, or
not express it in their writings: and yet believe it too; and their writings
be full of testimonies for it, in every age: because they were not obstinate,
but had implicit faith, infolded in the general assent that every Catholic
gives to that article, I believe the Catholic Church. By which faith they
believed contrary to that they writ. This, Reader, is our Adversaries case;
and the last end of their antiquity, not in this point of Transubstantiation
alone, but in all the rest: they boast of succession, and Doctors, and
Councels, and Antiquity, and Catalogues; and yet these D D. and Councels in the
Catalogue held these things but implicit, and that must be enough to stop the
Protestants mouth. Sure this is one of the wittiest and acutest distinctions
that ever I read. For thereby I can prove all the ancient D D. to have taught
and believed flat contrary to all they writ. For first, I will make the present
Church of Rome the Catholic Church. Then I will say they believed that
article, I believe the Catholic Church. Now the Church of Rome may define
contrary to that they all writ, as the B. Virgin not to be conceived in sin:
and so they shall believe just that they believed not, and the direct contrary.

CHAP. LVII.
1 Touching the first coming in of errors into the Church, with the persons,
Time, and Place. 2 Purgatory and pardons not known in the ancient Church, nor
in the Greek Church to this day. 3 The true reason why the ancient prayed for
the dead.

Page 287.
A. D. To conclude, it is not enough for M. White to name these eight, or any
other points of our doctrine, and to say that we hold, or practice, contrary to
the doctrine of the ancient Church; but I must require him to set down the
time, place, persons, and other circumstances of this supposed innovation;
which circumstances are commonly noted in Histories, when any such innovation
against the universal doctrine of the Church, did arise. This my demand, White
Digr. 5. page 374.
M. White (who will, it seems, stick at nothing) takes upon him to
satisfy, by naming seven points of our religion, offering to show the time,
when, and manner how they got into the Church. And thereupon first he names
pardons, and purgatory, the use whereof (he says) came lately into the
Church. To this I answer first, that he names not the particular Time, Place
not Persons that first brought in the use of pardons, and purgatory: and so he
says nothing to the purpose. Secondly, I answer that our questions is not so
much about the use of pardons, and purgatory, as whether the doctrine which
holds purgatory to be, and pardons duly used to be lawful, came in of late,
contrary to the former doctrine of the Church. Now M. White will never be able
to show, that that Church did at any time universally believe that Concerning
prayer for the dead, (which supposes the belief of Purgatory) learned
Protestants grant it to have been general in the Church, long before S. Austins
time, as may be seen in the Protest. Apol. tract. 1. sect. 2. nu. 4.
purgatory was not, or that pardons duly used were unlawful, or that the
doctrine, concerning the substance of these points was first brought in of
late; naming the first time, place or persons which brought it in contrary to
the former faith, and showing who resisted it as an heresy, and who continued
to resist it.
1 Having no power to answer the examples I gave of the Church of Romes now
holding contrary to the ancient Church, he concludes, that it is not enough to
name the points: or to say they hold contrary to the doctrine of the ancient
Church, unless I set down the Time, Places, Persons, and other circumstances
of the innouations; as Histories use to note them, when any such innouations
arises: and therefore he must require me to set them down. I answer, it is
sufficient that I have showed the points not to have been holden by the ancient
Church. For if the ancient Church held them not, what skills it when or by whom
they were brought in, when they were brought in since the times of the ancient
Church? for that which was not at the first is not Catholic, but by some, at
some time, was brought in contrary to that which is Catholic. And THE WAY.
50. n. 5 and 6.
I have showed that there be many confessed changes wherein these circumstances
cannot be showed. Nevertheless, for example THE WAY Digr. 51.
I named him seven points, and the circumstances of Time, Place, and Persons,
of their getting in: whereof the use of PARDONS was the first. He replies, that
I have not named the particular time, place, nor persons, that brought them in,
and therefore say nothing to the purpose. Here let the Reader judge, whether
having showed, out of the confession of his own writers that they, are not
from the Apostles times: not expressed in the Scripture or Fathers: nor brought
to our knowledge by their authority; but lately come into the Church: this be
not enough? for what is not from the Apostles times, came in since: there is
the Time when. What came in lately, was not used in the Primitive Church. There
is the Time again: what is not mentioned by the Scripture, Fathers, and
ancient Church: was devised by innouators, there is the Persons. What the
Scriptures and Pastors of the Church reueals not, that grows up as cockle and
weed in the Church, there is the place. Let me add to the rest whom I alleged
in the Digression, the words of B. Fisher, Art. 28 p. 86. b.
Pardons therefore began AFTER men had a while trembled at the torments of
Purgatory. I have therefore brought evidence sufficient to prove pardons to be
an innovation, because it proves they were not used in the ancient Church, nor
revealed by the Apostles.

2 He replies that the question is not so much about the USE of pardons and
purgatory, as whether the DOCTRINE that holds them, came in of late, CONTRARY
to the doctrine of the Church. And I answer again affirmatively, that it did.
For the use is founded on the doctrine, and the doctrine cannot be without use.
There was no use, ergo there was no doctrine. But M. White will never be able
to show that the Church believed there was no Purgatory, or that pardons were
not lawful. This is folly, for how should M. White show the Church condemned
that which was not yet in rerum natura? no man being able to speak of that
which is not in being. If pardons therefore were not, M. White must be pardoned
if he cannot show how the Church condemned them. And touching Purgatory, though
it be much ancienter, yet neither did the Catholic Church believe it. There
were some in the Church that conceited such a thing; and the Fathers began, in
Saint Austines time, (but Non redarguo, quia forsitan verum est, etc. Aug
ciuit. l. 21. c. 26. see Enchirid. c. 69. and the Apol. of the Gre. p. 132.
waueringly and without any resolute certainety) to mention it, but it was not
believed in their days as a matter of faith, that he which denied it should be
an heretic, as it is now believed in the Church of Rome. Besides, the East
Church believed it not to this day, therefore the universal Church believed it
not. Hear their own words in an Apology written touching this matter. Apol.
Graec. p. 119. (...).
We have not received from our Doctors that there is any such Purgatory, or
temporary punishment by fire; and we know the East Church never thought so.
Hear also what the B. of Rochester Art. 18. p. 86. b.
says: No true believer NOW doubts of Purgatory, whereof notwithstanding,
among the ancient, there is very little, or no mention at all. The Greeks also,
to this day do not believe there is a Purgatory. Let whose will read the
commentaries of the ancient Greeks, and, so far as I see, he shall find
very rare speech of Purgatory, or none at all: and the Latins (in the West
Church) did not all of them together receive the truth of this matmatter, but
by little and little: neither, indeed, was the faith, either of Purgatory, or
pardons, so needful in the Primitive Church, as now it is. We need no more
then this confession of our adversaries, and testimony of the Greek Church to
show the nouelty of this doctrine.

3 And that which the Reply has added in his margent: Prayer for the dead
(which supposes the belief of Purgatory) learned Protestants grant to have
been general in the Church long before Saint Austines time, is most weak: for
whatsoever learned Protestants say, touching the antiquity of prayer for the
dead: (which is impertinent now to be debated) it is not true that the use
thereof supposes Purgatory, which I will show most evidently: that the Reply
may bewail his cause when he sees no medicine applied to it, can recover or do
it good. For the Greeks prayed for the dead; and yet, as you have heard, they
believed not Purgatory. And See the Liturgies of James. Basil Chrysostom. and the
rest.
in the prayers mentioned, they prayed for (...) Lit. Jacob,
the martyrs, the B Virgin, John Baptist, and for all the righteous from Abel
to that day: yet neither they nor the Church of Rome ever thought them to be in
Purgatory. Not the Martyrs: for Bell. Purg. l. 2. c. 1.
they are exempted by privilege. Not Rhem. on act. 1.
the B. Virgin: for she had no sin to purge; but was carried immediately to
heaven. Not the just from Abel to Christ, for Tho. Argenti. 3. d. 22. art. 4 p.
35. Gabr. ib. dub. 3.
Christ at his descent emptied Purgatory. It remains therefore, that their
praying for the dead was not because they thought any to be in Purgatory, but
by way of commemoration only. So says Cabasilas Nicol. Cabasil. exposic.
Liturg. c 33. p. 503. in Bibl. S Pat. edit. 1.
in his exposition: The Priest gives God thanks and offers supplication,
laying down the causes of the thanksgiving, and the matter of the
supplication. The causes of thanksgiving are the Saints. The matter of the
supplication are they who are not yet consummate but have need of prayer. For
which Saints he offers this reasonable service, as A THANKS GIVING to God,
and, above all the rest, for the B. Mother of God, who exceedes all sanctity.
Nihil pro eis orat.
Therefore the Priest PRAYS FOR NOTHING for them, but rather prays to them
that he may be helped by their prayers -- Haec quidem verba habent
supplicatione^, ostendunt autem etiam gratiarum actionem and Deum praedicant.
These words contain supplication, but show thanksgiving, and praise God the
benefactor of mankind, by remembering the persons whom he has sanctified, and
almost consummated, saying, Give us the grace which already thou have given the
Saints, to sanctify us as thou have sanctified them before, who are of the
same kind with us. It was not therefore with an opinion of purgatory, that the
ancient prayed for the dead, but in expectation of the resurrection, and in
remembrance of Gods goodness toward them; who had begun to glorify them, the
consummation whereof they desired. For it was a general opinion of the Church
of those times, that the souls of the Saints departed saw not God, nor should
see him, by beatificall vision, till the day of judgment; in which regard they
prayed for the dead that their glory might be consummate, as all faithful
people pray for that good which they believe is to come, the certain fruition
whereof they apprehend. Bartlemew Medina, writing upon Thomas Bart. Medin. 12.
qu. 4. art. 5. p. 56. edit. Bergom. an. 1586.
says, that Almost all the ancient Fathers: James in his Liturgy, Ireneus,
Iustine, Tertullian, Clemens, Origin, Lactantius, Victorine, Prudentius,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, Theodorit, Arethas, Oecumenius, Theophylactus,
Euthymius, Bernard: at the first sight (but in the scanning of their words,
both he and the rest of his fellows bewray it to be at the second sight too)
deny that the souls of the Saints see God until the day of judgment. The
like is testified by Sixth. Senens. Bibl. lib. 6. ann. 345. Perer. in Genesis l. 3
n. 45. Bellarm. ^e eccl. triumph, cap. 1. Vieg. in Apoc. page 334. Riber. ibi
page 198. lun. tom. 2. page 1587.
others, the trial whereof the curious reader may see in Sixtus Senensis, who
has collected together both the names and words of the Fathers to that
effect: that it is the vainest conceit that can be, to imagine the ancient
Church by praying for the dead intended a Purgatory, when they assumed it for
certain, that the dead came not into the presence of God till the last day.
Luce clarius constat quia perfectorum animae, mox vt huius carnis exeunt, in
celestibus sedibus recipiuntur. Flor. Magistr. exposit. Missae. page 65^
Which being an error, no marvel if they erred in what they built upon it,
nothing being sound that is built on a false foundation.

CHAP. LVIII.
1. The Popes Supremacy. 2. Single life of votaries. 3. The worship of images.
4. The Merit of works. 5. The sacrifice of the Mass. 6. And the Popish
doctrine touching original sin: all of them innouations. 5. The disagreement
of Papists in their religion. 7. And namely in their doctrine of original
sin.

A. D. Secondly, he names the Popes Supremacy, which he White page 376.
says, Page 288.
began in Boniface the third. But how false his assertion is, appears by that
which is showed by not only Catholic but also Protestant Authors. Thirdly,
he names Priests marriages to have been first restrained by Siricius. This
also to be false he may learn by Council. Carth 2. can. 2 see Prot. apol. tr.
1, sec. 7 nu. 3.
the Council of Carthage, which signifies that Priests were restrained from
company of wives long before Siricius his days, even by the Apostles
themselves. Siricius might upon occasion renew the prohibition, as also Gregory
the seventh might, but the first Authors of that doctrine, or practice, they
were not. Fourthly, he names worship of images to have been first brought in
by the Nicen Council But this Council was so far from being See Prot. apol.
tr. 1. sec. 3. n. 12.
the first author of this doctrine as it expressly says, it followed in this
point the doctrine of the holy Fathers and Tradition of the Catholic Church,
in which the holy Ghost does inhabit. Concerning that which M. White says,
White page 378. Conc. Nicen 2.
touching images, see Bellarmine de imag. C 8. Fifthly, he names the doctrine
White p. 379. See Bellar. l. 5. de iustif c 2. 3 4 Greg. de Val. tom 2. disp.
8. q. 6. p. 2. and. 4.
of Merit of works to have begun lately by the Schoolmen. But how See the
Protest apol. tr. 1. sect. 3. n. 6.
false this is, the authorities of the Scriptures and ancient Fathers,
alleged for this point by our Divines, do abundantly testify. Sixthly, he
names the Mass, But he neither names nor can truly name the time when, the
place where, or person which since Christ, was first Author of the substance of
it, consisting only in consecration, oblation and consumption of the sacred
host. As for other additions, which he mentions, they are impertinent, in
regard they are not any substantial part of the Mass If he urge them not as
substantial parts of the Mass, but as being in his opinion, substantial
errors brought in contrary to the ancient faith, I must require him to set
down, not only when, and by whom they were added as ceremonies to the Mass;
but when, and by whom, they were at first invented and taught: and who did
resist, and continue to resist them, as innouations in faith; the which he is
never able to show. Seventhly, he names White p 284.
Original sin. But he does not, nor cannot name the first Author, of any
thing held about this matter, See Iod. Coccius. Bellar. de Notis Eccl. c. 6.
universally by our Church as a point of faith, and therefore he wastes
words, anh speaks nothing to the purpose when he rehearses this or that
Doctors opinion in this, or any other point: Because here only my question is
not about private Doctors opinions, bu about doctrine of faith universally, and
authoriratiuely, taught by the Church: of which kind my Worton p. 393. White
p. 415.
adversaries cannot show any one point, held by vnanime consent of the ancient
Church contrary to that which is holden now by our Church as a point of faith,
whereas we can, and do, show diverse points held in that manner, by the ancient
Church directly contrary to that which is holden by Protestants as points of
their faith.
1 THe Reply needs not so often distinguish between private opinions, and the
doctrine of faith universally taught by the Church. For every one of the
examples given, in the Digression, show that the Church of Rome now holds
against the universal doctrine of the Church in former times. Touching the
Popes SVPREMACY, I said diverse things, whereof that concerning Boniface was but
one. I showed, out of good Authors, that in ancient time he had superiority
neither over Kings, Councels, nor Bishops, out of the Roman Patriarchie: but
was in all things like to other Patriarks concerning jurisdiction. To all which
the Reply says not a word; but only answers touching Boniface, that it is
false I say, the supremacy began in him. But if it be false, then his own
authors, whom I alleged, should have been answered. For we Protestants make
account, that when we prove that we say by the testimonies of the chiefest of
our Adversaries themselves, there is reason we be discharged, and our assertion
credited. But this matter, of Bonifaces getting the supremacy of Phocas, is so
plain, and witnessed so generally, by all Histories, that it was the
desperatest answer that could be made, to say it is false. I showed Digr. 27.
n. 31. let. m.
in another place before, that this is the general report of all
Historiographers. Anastasius, Luitprand, P. Diaconus, Martinus Polonus,
Marianus Scotus, Otho Frisingensis, Rhegino, Albo Floriacensis, Platina,
Vrspergensis, Sabellicus, Nauclerus, Duarenus: all whose testimonies to deny
with one word, it is false; is a good ready and easy way, but it will not so
easily remove the evidence: and whereas he adds that the falsehood of my
assertion is showed not only by Catholic, but by Protestant authors;
referring the Reader to Briarlies Apology: I must entreat him to mend that
fault: for there is not one Protestant alleged that denies my assertion, or
affirms the Pope had the Primacy before Boniface. And indeed but that tyrants
are seen by experience to hold fast, a man conversant in antiquity would
wonder how our Adversaries for shame, should avouch this Primacie. I showed in
the 27 Digression, that the Church government was equally divided among all the
Patriarks: and the B. of Rome was confined within his own limits. And
restrained from taking appeals out of other countries. He had no authority over
general councels, either to call them, or be president, or to ouerrule them:
himself acknowledged the name and state of a universal B. to be
Antichristian. Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 2. c. 52. and inde l. 3. c. 6.16.62.
l. 4. c. 18.36.41. and orat ad Sanct. caet. post sin. l. 4. Socrat. l. 5.
Proaem. Justin. edict. de fid. orthod. in iur. graeco. tom. 1. page 521. and
Novel. 123. Nouel. Heraclij. Basilij, Leonis, Nicephori and aliorum, in iur.
graecor. tom. 1. Ausegis. statut. Ecclesiam. Caroli and Ludouici, Isid. cod.
Leg. Wisigoth. l. 2. tit. 1. c. 11.29 30. l. 3. tit. 4. c vlt. l. 4. tit. 5. c.
6. l 5.
And the Emperors and Kings of the Catholic Church did so ordinarily command
and prescribe the things belonging to religion, that it amaseth me to see it
denied. And if there were any superiority, in those days, of one Patriarch
over another, the Greeks will as confidently speak for their Patriarch at
Constantinople, as our Adversaries do for the Pope: and Anna Porphyrogenita in
her history with others, (...). page 31. Graecorum plerique a Chalcedonensi
Synodo principatum Ecclesiasticum Constantino. politanis tributum esse
putabant. Haesch. Not. p. 179. (...). Leo. and Constant. Tit. 3. n. 9 (...). in
inr. Graecorom. to. 2. p. 85.
say it expressly. My assertion therefore, that the beginning of the Popes
supremacy over other Bishops, was in Boniface, must stand till the authorities
whereupon it stands be taken away, which the breath of a Seminary cannot do.

2 Thirdly, touching Priests marriage, he says its false that Siritius first
restrained it: but he that shall read histories and observe the course of
things, shall find it to be most true. And I for my part can justify it no
otherwise, and therefore I alleged five authors for that I said, all of them
Papists; whose testimony if the Replies bare word be enough to infringe, I can
say no more but think it good being a Mass Priest, when his bare word shall
make that false which is justified by many witnesses. But he says, I may
learn by the 2 Council of Carthage, can 2, that Priests were restrained from
company of wives, long before Siritius days, even by the Apostles themselves.
I answer, the name and canon of this Council is notably abused. First, it was
not holden before Siritius time, but under him. Secondly, the canon alleged
cannot be proved to be a canon of the Council, made by all the B B. but a
motion or bill put up by Aurelius, wherein he moves that they which attended on
the Sacraments, be continent in all things: that so what the Apostles taught,
and antiquity held, we also may keep. Thirdly, this canon was moved Sed and
canones illos, spectantes ad continentiam clericorum, quoniam ea esse statuta
apparent ex admonitione Siritij Romani Pontificis, ea de re scribentis ante
decennium ad episcopos Affricanos -- dignum est existimare fuisse alicuius
alterius Coneilij Carthaginensis, eo tempore, post acceptas eiusdem Siritij
Papae litteras, celebrati. Baro. an. 397. n. 46.
by the suggestion of Siritius: and therefore most strongly iustifies my
assertion. For if the Council of Carthage restrained Priests marriage; and
Siritius by his letters and suggestion drew the Council thereunto, then it is
plain Siritius made the restraint. The Reply possible will say: But the
Council says the Apostles taught it, and antiquity kept it: and so the
restraint was long before Siritius, even from the Apostles. But I answer: that
he which suggested the motion, suggested also the reason: and so consequently
Siritius, moving the restraint, is the author of those words, wherein he
innouated as well as he did in the canon it self. All this is plain against
the Reply, and most sensibly demonstrates Siritius to be the author. Fourthly,
I answer yet closer to the point, that so much as the Bishops consented to,
was, that Clergy men should live honestly and chastely, whether in the state of
marriage, or single life; and not come at their wives at certain seasons. This
I prove. First by the answer of the B B. It was said (to Aurelius his motion)
by all the BB. it seems good to us all, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or
such as handle the Sacraments, the maintainers of chastity, abstain also from
their wives. It is said of all: it seems good that chastity be maintained in
all, and of all that serve at the altar. Here is no canon that they shall have
no wives, but that contrary, their wives are mentioned, and they commanded
chastity; which I hope the Reply Heb. 13.4.
dares not deny to be in cohabitation with a man's own lawful wife. Secondly,
either the same, or another Council of Carthage, at the same time: ( See Baro.
vbi sup. and Balsam. Who puts this canon into the 6 Council of Carth. p. 310.
for many things are printed in one Council of Carthage that belong to
another) Placuit vt presbyteri, Episcopi, and Diaconi, proprijs terminis etiam
a suis abstineant vxoribus. can. 74. Synodi Carth. apud Balsam.
ordained that Priests, Bishops, and Deacons should abstain from their wives
AT SET TIMES: but other Clergy men should not be urged thereto, but keep the
custom of their Churches. It was therefore no part of the Councels mind that
they should be restrained marriage, or the use thereof out of those SET TIMES.
Thirdly Balsamon, expounding these canons has these words: In can. 4.
Out of this canon (which I last cited) it is showed, that Priests, Deacons,
and Bishops lived with their wives; neither did the Synod forbid their company
with them, but in THEIR SET TIMES: that is, in THE SET DAYS OF EVERY MAN'S
COURSE: when he was to attend on the altar: In can. 74.
and note that in the time of this Council, Bishops had their wives without
prejudice, with whom yet they did not converse in the time of their course: for
the ministry of Priests was divided into weeks. If therefore the Reply had
devised with long deliberation, he could not have given me a better weapon
against himself, then this canon of the Council of Carthage made by the
suggestion of Siritius himself, and yet obtaining nothing of the Council but
only abstinence of Priests from their wives at certain times.

3 Fourthly, touching images I showed two things. Both that images of the
Trinity were not used: and that the beginning of image worship was in the
second Nicen Council. Touching the images of the Trinity he bids me see
Bellarmine, but there is nothing to be seen to the purpose; for he alleges
neither example nor testimony that there were any in the Primitive Church: but
only stands to prove them lawful. Now this is not the question, but whether
the Primitive Church used or permitted them? I showed no, by the testimony of
a Pope and a Council, and must be answered again by disproouing the
authority: which if he cannot do, I will not give much for Bellarmines proving
of the lawfulness, when it appears the Pope and a Council 800 years ago
misliked it: and himself confesses, That it is not so certain whether the
images of God, or the Trinity, may be made, as it is that the images of
Christ and his Saints may be made: and that Abul. in Sent. 4. q. 5. Durand. 3.
d. 9. q. 2 Peers. tradit. 3. tract.
most learned Doctors in the Church of Rome utterly condemn it. For if this be
true, himself had a good steel conscience when he would take upon him to
justify that which was not certain, but only an unsettled opinion, gainesaied
by as learned as himself in his own Church. Touching the Nicen Council he
says, it was so far from being the first author of image worship, that it
says expressly it followed, in this point, the doctrine of the holy Fathers and
tradition of the Church. Now sure this is a poor answer, and like the former
of Siritius. For is it therefore the doctrine of the Fathers, and tradition of
the Church, because they say it? could not they that decreed idolatry, learn
of their images to tell a lie? Is there any more truth in their pretense of
antiquity then in the image worship it self? This is like the former example
of the Council of Cathage, where the restraint of marriage must be by the
Apostles, because Siritius, that made the restraint, suggests so much to the
Council. But let the Repliar hear me a word with patience; of this paltrie
Nicen Council Chapter 48.
I have said enough already: and to give him some taste of that which it
decreed, a great Bishop of his own Church Claud Espencae. 2. Tim. page 151. a.
has lately confessed, That they who (in that Council) defended the worship
of images, did abuse thereto the apparitions of Devils and old wives dreams,
as may be seen in the 4. and 5. actions of the Council. I suppose the
doctrine of the Fathers, and traditions of the Catholic Church, uses not to
be supported with such stuff. And what impudency was it for them to say it,
and yet be able no better to show it?

4 The fifth point was the Merit of works. Which his own Waldensis calls
Pelagianisme, and charges to be a late invention. To this he replies his
accustomed argument: It is false, as our Divines abundantly testify. But was
not Waldensis his own Divine? and is not his testimony enough to discharge me,
who profess no more, but what I say to make good by the confession of my own
adversaries? If he think his Divines have spoken so abundantly for it, let him
say, ingeniously, how chances his Bellarmine De iustif. l. 5. c. 7.
confesses, that by reason of the uncertainty of a man's own righteousness, and
for fear of vain glory, the safest way is, to repose our who^^ confidence in
the sole mercy and goodness of God? how chance his Waldensis says, Page 30.
Sacram. The same merit of condignity condemned also by Grego. Ariminensis,
Burgensis and Echius: says Vega qu. 5. de merit. p. 788.
He is to be reputed the sounder Divine, and the better Catholic, and more
consonant with the Scripture, that simply denies such merit, confessing that
simply no man merits the kingdom of heaven, but obtaines it by the grace and
free will of God that gives it? These are strange courses therefore, to affirm
that an ancient doctrine which is neither so Catholic nor so safe as the
contrary, nor so agreeable with the Scripture. But of this point I have
entreated at large the WAY Digr. 35.
elsewhere, and laid down enough to show the foulness of it: here I am
only to uphold that I said; It was begun lately by the Schoolmen, which is
the confession of Friar Waldensis, a man as learned as any of them all that say
the contrary, and Quod opus (Doctrinale antiquitatum sidei Thomae Waldensis)
non immerito And. Vega fontem esse asseruit, ex qua postea plerique omnes, qui
contra nouos haeresiarchas scripserint, hauserunt. Posseu. Bibl. sell. p. 286.
Thoma^dico Waldensem, vberrimum fontem, ex quo hauserunt bonam partem fete
omnes, qui Luteranam sectam impugnarunt. Vega qu. 4. de merit page 782.
to whom the best of our adversaries are beholding.

5 The Sixth point was the Mass, wherein the Digress. by clear testimonies
showed the use of an unknown tongue, the Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice,
and the outward form, to be all brought in, and added to the Sacrament since
the Apostles time, and the time of the Primitive Church. Whereto the Reply
says no more, but that I cannot name the time when, nor place where, nor the
persons, in whom the substance of the Mass, consisting only in the
consecration, oblation, and consumption of the host began. I answer, first,
these 4. the Latin language, the Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice and the
form of Prayers, and other actions used, as their garments, ceremonies,
elevation, adoration, circumgestation, etc. Essentia sacrificij Eucharistiae in
duobus consistit, nempe in ritu externo, and in significatione Suar tom. 3. p.
958. c.
belong to the substance of the Mass, and the Digress. showed they were not
used by Christ, nor his Apostles, nor yet in the time of the Primitive Church.
Now that which was not thus used, is an innovation; for so much as Christ left
both the substance, and manner of ministering the sacrament certain and
determinate, and indispensable: and it is not necessary in every innovation to
show one determinate time, person, or place where it began: because if it began
after Christ and his Apostles, it is an innovation, when, or where, or by whom
soever it was brought in. Secondly, touching the Sacrifice, which is the maine
substance, and very heart of the Mass, I showed the full confession of some
Papists denying, that Christ offered any sacrifice of himself, under the
forms of bread and wine, at his last supper. This is close to the matter: for
Catholici scriptores -- omnes in eo potissimum laborant, vt oste^dant, in
Missa, offerri Deo vere ae proprie corpus ac sanguinem Domini. Bell. de Miss.
l. 1 c. 5.. e contrario.
if the sacrifice be the sustance, and Christ offered no sacrifice when he
instituted it; Nam tota haec essentia ex institutione pendet. Suar. p. 961. e.
its plain the substance of the Mass is not from Christ. Therefore an
innovation, an addition, an alteration: therefore not Catholic. Thirdly,
before the Repliar be so resolute about his sacrifice, and substance; it were
expedient for the question in hand, to be at some certenty, touching the thing
wherein his sacrifice consists: for there is much reasoning about a sacrifice,
and yet no agreement what, or which it is. Bell. de Miss. l. 1. c. 27.
Some say there is but only one sacrifice. Tapper art. 16. Cassal. de sacrif
p. 63. c. 20. Roffensis Alphons. Gab. Hos. Ca^et. Alexand. Eck. Mag. Turrecre^
quos refert. Cassal. ibid. p. 64
Some two. They that say two, hold the bread and wine to be one, and the body
and blood of Christ another. They that hold only one, are not agreed what it
is: Refert Suar. p. 959. B.
whether the body and blood of Christ only, or Bell. vbi sup.
the forms of bread and wine withal. Again, whether Suar. d. 75. s. 2.
the actions exercised in the Mass are six: First, the oblation of bread and
wine by elevation, prayer, and other ceremonies, before consecration: Secondly,
the consecration, Thirdly, the distribution. Fourthly, another oblation after
consecration. Fifthly, the breaking of the host and putting part of it to the
wine. Sixthly, and the eating of it, which the Reply calls consumption: it is
not agreed in which of these the essence of the sacrifice consists: but See
them in Suar. s. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6
there are as many opinions as there be men: and their assertions and reasons
are so ridiculous that nothing can be more. When therefore the Reply has no
certainty touching the substance of his sacrifice, but all things are still in
question, it is but folly for him to brag that the first author of this
substance cannot be named. But let him name the substance, and show me an
agreement among his fellows and masters, that what he names is the substance,
and he shall have an author. Else when I have named the author of this, he may
say neither this, nor that belongs to the substance; but the other. For there
are not so few as 6. opinions, every one whereof is guarded with special
authors; that we may entertain them in their opinions as Hermias did the
Philosophers. Herm. gentil. philosoph. Irrisio.
Let them show me what is true, and I will obey them. But they pluck my mind
in pieces: and I confess I cannot endure this frequent conversion of every
thing. Now they tell me I am immortal, and I rejoice: presently they say I am
mortal, and then I weep: by and by they turn me into water, air, fire: a
little after, I am none of these, but a beast or a fish: now I swim among the
Dolphines; anon I am a dog or a bird. When I look upon my self I know not how
to call me; whether a man, or a wolf, or a serpent, or a Chymaera. These wise
men turn me into all manner of things: I swim, I fly, I creep, I run, I
sit: Empedocles turns me into a tree. When I hear Anaxagoras I believe him:
then comes Melissus and Parmenides, and I know not how, I change my mind.
Quonsque tandem talia edoceor, verum tamen nihil addisco.
How long shall I thus be taught, and yet never taught to learn the truth?
(...) Thus he flouted the Philosophers, that would say as much to our
adversaries, and justly might for any certainty they have to rest upon, in any
thing they hold against us. Let them take the Council that Vigilius gave such
as they are. Contr. Eutych. l. 2. p. 555.
Seeing both of you are contrary to your selves, its not amiss if both of you
yield to confess the truth with us. You are divided far asunder; the way,
you have left, is in the midst. Come hither unto us, one of you this way, the
other that way, and meet together. Let the one go into the others opinion, so,
that he leave not his own: let that which you hold privately be common among
you. The contempt of which advise is it that, in all ages, has made heretics
so notorious for their disagreements with themselves, that this has been
observed for the mark of their heresy. They are divided, Paschas. comment. in
Lament. l. 4. c. 4. page 74.
says Paschasius, one from another through the singularity of their wicked
inventions, and are able to agree neither with themselves nor with the
Catholic believers of the Church.

6 In the last place I named their doctrine of original sin; affirming that it
was not universal in former ages: nor is not, to this day, agreed upon. This
proves directly that it is not the same which the Apostles and Primitive Church
taught. Because what they taught must be certainly known and agreed upon,
which this their doctrine is not, there being yet no certainety what the point
is that the Church of Rome holds touching this matter. The Reply answers, that
I cannot name the first author of any thing, which the Church of Rome
universally holds, touching this matter, as a point of faith. Meaning belike,
that the opinion of this, or that Doctor, may be a late devise, but not that
which the Church holds. I answer, the Church of Rome cannot deny but our first
Parents left the effect of their sin in all mankind, their posterity: Ephesians.
2.3.
whereby they are borne the children of wrath: which effect is called original
sin: but what it holds universally as a point of faith touching the nature
and form of this sin, the Repliar cannot assign, that when he had assigned it
I might try whether I could name the first author thereof or no. But let him
give me any definition of original sin holden in his Church, whether
universally or privately, against that which the Church of England teaches; and
though possible it may fall out that I cannot name the first author thereof,
yet I will show it not to have been the Catholic doctrine of the Primitive
Church: whereupon it will follow consequently that it is an alteration, wherein
the now church of Rome believes not as did the Primitive Church. In this
variety of opinions therefore I made choice of Bellarmine, as most likely to
be that which should be the point of faith, and universal; and showed it not
to be so; but to be a late device, without antiquity or universality. But my
adversary craftily forbearing to name what he holds to be the universal
doctrine of his Church; and making show as if Bellarmines opinion were not it;
bids me name the point of faith holden by his Church universally, and then show
the first author: Because the question is not about private Doctors opinions,
but about the doctrine of faith, universally and authoritatiuely taught by the
Church. Wherein he deals neither plainly nor directly: for if neither the
opinion of Bellarmine nor of Catharinus (which were all I named holden against
us) be that which universally and authoritatiuely is taught by his Church; he
should have named what it is, that I might have showed it not to be catholic.

7 The truth is, Tantae est doctorum hominu^ varietas and inconstantia, vt vix
vlla alia in re mayor. Peltan. de orig. pecc. p. 80.
there is such variety and inconstancy, and shuffling of opinions, touching
this point of original sin, that for his life he cannot tell what his Church
holds, and which is safest to follow: which is an unanswerable argument, that
the true faith they have forsaken, and minced into lend and absurd opinions.
The Council of Trent Sess. 5.
speaks warily and reseruedly, defining nothing, but leaving all sorts to
their own opinion. Andradius Orthod. expl. l. 3. p. 216.
says: The Council of Trent, when it had defined original sin to be sin
truly proper to every one; yet, of set purpose, forbore to speak of the proper
reason thereof: the which thing was also done by other Councels long before:
which delivering no certain and express reason of original sin, left it
free for every one to follow his opinion. Hereupon it is, that there are so
many opinions: Dur. 2. d ^0. q. 1. Tap. art. 2. p. 69. Cathar. tract. de orig.
pec. disp. 6. p. 150.
some hold that it is not sin properly, nor can be imputed, by reason it came
by the will of another: Pigh. contro. 1. p. 29. and Apol. p. 34. and inde.
that it is sin, but not our sin, but that which Adam did, whereby he made
himself and his posterity sinners. Roff^ns. art. 2 p. 29. Altisiod. sum. p.
97 col. 4.
Some, that it is only the guilt which lies upon mankind for Adams sin; being
thereby excluded from eternal life, without the mercy of God. Biel. 2. d. 30.
q. 2. conc. 6. Gre Arim. 2. p. 114. Aureol. 2. d. 30. art 2. p. 284.
Some, that it is a corrupt or diseased quality in the soul, derived
thereinto by the corruption of the flesh. Mag. 2. d. 30. Alexand. quem resert
Dionys. 2. p. 4^8. col. 2.
Some, that it is the concupiscence that is in us to evil: not every
inclination, but that which is in the mind or will. Occh. 2. q. vlt. lit. v.
Scot. 2. d. 3.. Circa istam.
Some, that it is only the privation or destitution of the original justice
that was in Adam, and should be in all men. Tho. 12 q. 82. art. 3. Bonau. quem
refert Dionys. 2. p. 489 Capreol. 2. page 495. ad 4.
That it is formally the privation of original justice, but materially it is
concupiscence. Sot. de not. and great. c 9. Azor. sum. part. 1. p. 287.
That it stands wholly in the want or deprivation, not of the habit of
original justice, as the sixth opinion affirms, but of that subjection unto
God, and union of mind with him, which all men should have had if Adam had not
transgressed. Which of all these is that which the Replier calls the universal
doctrine of the Church, authoritatiuely taught, I cannot define, nor himself
determine; when all these have been, and yet are holden in his Church, and have
their patrons, who will all of them maintain that his own opinion is the
doctrine of the Church. This therefore is it I said; that had their doctrine
touching original sin, bin the truth anciently taught in the Apostles Church,
it could not have been thus often changed and removed, from opinion to opinion,
till the opinions be multiplied to as many as there be Doctors.

8 And this example shows how frivolous the common answer is, that their
differences are not in points of faith, but in by-matters, not determined,
wherein it is lawful to hold any part. For this difference is in a point
defined, though not by any Popish council, yet by the word of God: or whether
it be defined or no, it is in a matter wherein they hold against us, bearing
men in hand that they can show catalogues and whole companies in all ages that
held therein with them. FOR WE DO NOT SO MVCH CARE TO SHOW THEIR DIVISIONS TO
BE IN THE SVBSTANCE OF THEIR FAITH, (albeit they have infinite such) AS TO MAKE
CLEAR DEMONSTRATION THAT THEY AGREE IN NOTHING WHICH THEY HOLD AGAINST THE
PROTESTANTS. The which kind of disagreement is sufficient to show the things we
have refused in their Church, to be matters broacht and brought in, which never
had the general approbation of the Church. That wherewith he concludes, we can
show diverse points of the Protestants faith directly contrary to the ancient
Church, is a stale untruth, already sufficiently confuted in every passage. He
can refer us to his Coccius and Bellarmine, but himself I think can show
little of his own knowledge; being one of them whom not knowledge but rumor
and popularitie have carried to the Popes side.

CHAP. LIX.
Objections against the outward succession of the Pope. 1. Touching Peter's
being at Rome. 2. His pastoral office, what it was. 3. Whether there be any
divine authority for the Popes succession. 4. Not certain what Popes have
succeeded one another. 5. Vacancies diverse in the Sea of Rome. 6. The story of
the woman Pope, of what credit. 7. 8. The Pope has been an heretic, and
erred e Cathedra. 10. The Pope succeeds by Simonie and violence. Such
succession is a nullitie by his own law. 11. The Pharisees in Moses chair,
how? A. D. defends the succession of an ASS. 12. Many Popes at once. 13.
Vrbanus his cruelty toward the Cardinals. 13. What the Protestants say
touching the succession of the Church of Rome.

A.D. The fifth objection. -- Lastly, Page 289.
my adversaries may object against the Roman succession, which in this
Catalogue I mention: FIRST that it is not certain that ever S. Peter was at
Rome. SECONDLY that we have no divine but only humane proof, that the Bishop
of Rome, White, page 416 Page 418. page 419. page 421.
rather then he of Antioch, is S. Peter's successor. THIRDLY, admitting that S.
Peter had one to succeed him in Rome, it is not certain who this was which
succeeded him, and who afterward succeeded one another. FOURTHLY the Sea has
been void a good while together. FIFTHLY a woman was once Pope. SIXTHLY diverse
Popes have been heretics. SEVENTHLY, some have entered into the Popedom by
simonie and violence, etc. EIGHTHLY, there have been 30 schisms, and therefore
it is uncertain who was the right Pope.

To the FIRST I answer: that so many ancient See the Fathers cited for this
point, in the Rhem. Test annot. Romans 16
Fathers do witness, and so many monuments yet remaining do testify that S.
Peter was at Rome, and died there, that it is great ignorance and impudency to
deny it.


1 THe objections here mentioned, the first excepted, I proposed Digress. 53.
and they clearly show, that the outward succession of Bishops in the Roman
Church, is neither so entire nor perfect, as is pretended. Our adversaries
never have done with urging the lineall succession of their Popes, from S.
Peter, to this day, making it a sign of the Church, and concluding from it,
that they alone are the Bishops and Pastors of the world, which have preserved
the truth from all corruption and innovation. Which outward succession, in some
degree, the Protestants deny not; only they affirm two things against it:
that the same is to be found in other Churches as well as in the Church of
Rome; and that it has been so tainted and interrupted with defects of all
sorts, that it can prove nothing against us, but rather shows manifestly, that
the ancient faith and government, commended by Christ to his Church, has been
changed; as will appear by viewing the several things that are objected.

2 To the first he answers, that so many ancient Fathers, and monuments yet
remaining, testify S. Peter to have been at Rome, and died there; that it is
ignorance and impudency to deny it. He affirms three things. First that we
deny Peter to have been at Rome. This is untrue. Let the writings of our D.
Fulk. answ. to the Rhem. Romans 16. nu. 4. D. Rainol. conser. c. 6. diuis. 3. D.
Whitak. controu. 4. ^. 3. c. ^. Iun. contr. 3. l. 2. c. 5.
Divines be viewed, and they deny it not; but the uttermost they say, is, that
the reasons and testimonies brought out of antiquity, whereupon his being there
is grounded, are uncertain, and may sensibly be dissolved. If Whose
demonstrations that Peter was never at Rome, are printed by Illyricus with his
book called Refut. inuectiu. Bruni. printed at Basil an. 1566. by Oporin.
Velenus, or some special men with him, have brought the matter in question,
it was free for them so to do, and almost necessary for the bolting out of the
truth: all things in antiquity touching the same being perplexed with such
difficulties, that it were able to make any man misdoubt it. Yet the
Protestants are not curious, and the Church of Rome gains not a straw by it.
Secondly, that the ancient Fathers testify he was at Rome. This I grant: but
yet all the Papists living cannot reconcile their testimonies, nor maintain
either that he came thither in such a time, or stayed there so long as is
reported. The which consideration has moved as learned Papists themselves as
ever were any to doubt of his being there at all, if my adversary think them
so impudent that do it. Marsilius Patauinus Marsil. defens. Pacis part. 2. c.
16. printed at Basil in fol.
says, that by the Scripture it cannot be convinced either that he was Bishop
of Rome, or ever was at Rome at all. And then considering the Ecclesiastical
histories that affirm it, he so does it, that it plainly appears he believed
them not. Whence it follows that his being there was a common opinion, but not
certain, for so much as it was grounded on no surer testimony then these
circumstances of Time were. The first that says he sat 25 years there
(wherein sundry of the ancient, and all our Adversaries to this day, follow
him) is Printed at Basil by Henrico Petri, and elsewhere in Latin. Olympiad.
205.
Eusebius chronicle translated by S. Ierom: and yet in the Greek, Printed an.
1606. Lugduni Batauorum.
set forth by Scaliger, (...). This is all he says.
there is no mention of any time of his abode, but only that he went to Rome:
whereby it may be gathered that this matter of Peter's being Bishop of Rome, was
much less at the first then afterward it came to be. And whether the Fathers
had any certainety of that they said, or only followed a common rumor, begun
by such a one as Papias was, without examining it; God knows: but our
Adversaries themselves feel the difficulty, and cannot remove it. Thirdly,
that so many monuments yet remaining do testify he was at Rome. But those
monuments are not so many. There is Baro. an. 45. n. 11.
an old chair, belike, that on certain days is showed the people: and a
sepulcher, and certain parts pretended to be relickes of his body; but how
shall these things be proved to be such indeed, when the iugling and imposture
with relickes is so well known, that the world has, long since, abrogated all
credit given to such monuments? It has not been the least part of the Church
of Romes policy, for many ages together, with fained miracles, and counterfeit
relickes, to breed and nourish in the vulgar people an opinion of the Roman
holiness. But let them, that will be led by such monuments, first make sure
they be not counterfets. I would take some pains to discover these monuments,
but that the thing he intends to prove by them is not so great that I will
contend about it.

Page 290.
A. D. To the SECOND I answer, that we have divine authority to assure us,
that there must be always one in the Church, who is S. Peter's successor,
having the same absolute Pastoral authority, that S. Peter had. For first the
name Pastor (being peculiarly appropriate to S. Peter, Ioh. 20.21.
by these words Pasce oues meas) signifies an ordinary office, which dies
not with the person, but is to be continued in a successor. Secondly, the end
of this office, being common to all ages, argues that our Savior meant so to
institute it, as it might serve for all ages: and consequently that it should
be continued in a succession of such Pastors. Thirdly, the love and care which
moved our Savior to institute this office, for the good of the Church, was
common to the Church of all ages: and the necessity, which the Church had of
such a Pastor, was not only for that first age, but for all succeeding ages:
and therefore it is not to be thought that Christ our Savior meant to
institute that office, only for to continue in S. Peter's person, and to die
with him, but that he ordained it to continue in others, who from time, to
time, should succeed in his place. Now that the Bishop of Rome, rather then of
Antioch should succeed in S. Peter's office, is not indeed expressly written in
the Gospel; but is partly, gathered from that which is there written, and is
known unto us by tradition of the Church, to be Christ's institution; as is
learnedly declared, proved, See Bellarm. l. 1. de Romans Pontif. c. 12. Stapleron
relect. controu. 3 q. 2. art. 2
and defended by Gregory de Valent. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. de object. fid. p.
7. 36. 37. and 38. The which to be so, is confirmed, in that, by Christ's
appointment, one or other is always to succeed S. Peter in the office of
chief Pastor: but my Adversary cannot assign any other, besides the Bishop
of Rome, that did or could, upon so sufficient ground, pretend to be S. Peter's
successor.
2 This answer affirms three things. First, that S. Peter had absolute
Pastoral authority, appropriate to him by those words, Pasce oues meas.
Secondly, that this authority was not to die with him, but to continue for ever
in the Church, in some, or other that should succeed him. Thirdly, that the
Bishop of Rome, rather then he of Antioch, was to succeed him in authority.
Touching the first, and second, let it be distinguished. The Pastoral authority
of Peter contained two things, being taken in the whole latitude. First, his
duty to preach the Gospel, and teach the people by ministering the word and
sacraments to them. Secondly, his extraordinary and eminent power thereunto,
wherein he exceeded all ordinary Pastors, being called to be an Apostle, and
enabled to plant Churches, convert nations, reveal Christ, work miracles,
etc. Our Adversaries add a third; his supreme jurisdiction over all the
Apostles also, and all the powers on earth, spiritual and temporal, whereby
he was the ordinary Pastor and judge over all the world directly, as some say,
or indirectly, as othersome will have it. The first of these is called his
Pastoral office: the second his Apostleship: the third his Primacy, or
supremacy. The which distinction being laid; we grant that S. Peter had
absolute Pastoral authority, in the first and second senses, to preach the
Gospel, as all other Pastors do, and beyond them all to be an Apostle. We
grant secondly, that authority, to be an Apostle, and Pastor of the Church,
that he might feed the flock of Christ, was either given or ratified to him by
those words, feed my sheep. We grant thirdly, that the Pastoral authority,
taken only in the first degree thereof, was not to die with him, but to
remain for ever in his successors, the ordinary Bishops and Pastors of the
Church. But all this will do the Pope no good; for it neither preferrs him of
Antioch, nor him of Rome, but makes them both equal. Fourthly, we deny any to
have succeeded him in his Apostleship, or God to have ordained any succession
in that second, and eminent degree of his Pastoral charge: neither dare our
Adversaries themselves simply and absolutely affirm it. The Jesuit therefore
in this his answer means the authority of Peter in the last sense, as it
imports the PRIMACY and jurisdiction over the other Apostles, and the Kings and
nations of the earth to rule and ouergouerne them. This is denied, and the Text
alleged, Feed my sheep, proves it not, as I have fully showed in Digress. 26.
nu. 15. and 22. The learned Reader may see Is. Casaub. exercitat. 16. nu. 132.
p. 705.
THE WAY, where it was first offered me. Whence it follows that he could have
none to succeed him in any supremacy, because he had none such himself. For no
man succeeds another in more then he has himself. And the Repliars three
arguments proceeding only for the first degree of his Pastoral authority,
prove nothing for the second or third. By reason the Apostleship was not
needful for all ages, and the supremacy intended was never given him at all,
nor meant by the words of Christ.

3 Neither do the Repliars reasons prove that the Bishop of Rome rather then
of Antioch succeeds S. Peter in that wherein succession holds: as I have also
showed in the 29 Digression, whereto he says nothing. The first: it is
gathered from that which is written, is false. For what one word is there
written in all the new Testament, either that the Bishop of Rome should be
Peter's successor, or that Peter should be Bishop there himself? Occham Occham.
dial. patr. 1. lib. 2. c. 3.
says, These are in the number of things that neither are contained in
Scripture, nor can be manifestly proved by it alone: that Peter was Bishop of
Rome: that he removed his Sea from Antioch to Rome: that the Bishops of Rome
succeed S. Peter. That the Church of Rome has the primacie, whereof there is
no mention in the Scripture; as likewise there is not that he governed the
Church of Rome, nor any thing touching the Papacy thereof. The second, that it
is known by tradition to have been Christ's institution, is false likewise,
when the tide of Valences his learning is at the highest. For neither does he
show any such tradition, nor can such traditions be of infallible verity. The
common opinion is that the succession of the Sea of Rome depe^ds upon Peter's
fact. Cornelius Mus Cornel. Mus. concio de Cathed. Petri. p. ^39.
says, that if Peter had died at Antioch, that had been the chief Church and
the first Sea. Suarez: Defens. fid. Cathol. lib. 3. c. 13. nu. 12.
In that Peter placed his seat at Rome, and united the Pontifical dignity to
that Bishopric (whether this union was of divine institution by a special
commandment and revelation, as some will have it; or only of Peter's own
humane will, though inspired of God) upon this very point, that it was never
altered any more by Peter, while he lived, it remained ratified; and therefore
he that succeeded Peter in his Bishopric, necessarily succeeded him also in
both dignities. If the succession therefore depend only on Peter's dying at
Rome, what divine institution is this, unless it can be showed that God would
the succession should be in the place where he died? For the supposed primacie
and the episcopal power may be separated, that it is not necessary this always
draw that after it. Doctor Stapleton gives no other reason of the Popes
succession then this: Stapl. relect. controu. 3. q. 2. art. 2. ad 3.
that our Lord Christ commanded Peter to go to Rome, who thereupon removed his
seat thither, and died there: as Marcellus in his Decretall Epistle, and
Innocent in an Epistle to Alexander the Bishop of Antioch, write. And he says,
that more then this shall not be given Calvin: seeing all antiquity, and the
monument yet to be seen at Rome, shows it: namely that Peter, by the
persuasion of the brethren, going from Rome, and shunning the persecution, met
Christ, and saying to him, Lord, whither go thou? Christ answered, I go to
Rome again to be crucified: whereupon Peter, by the commandment of Christ,
returned to Rome. See Egesippus his third book and second chap. This is the
same I said THE WAY, Digr. 29. nu. 38.
in THE WAY, that now the Popes succeeding Peter, depends on this consequence:
Peter died at Rome by Christ's appointment: Therefore it was Christ's will, the
Pope should succeed him. This consequence the Doctor proves not, nor can it be
proved by any industry or wit of man. For what such connection is there between
Peter's dying at Rome and the Popes succeeding him, that Peter's death being
allowed to have been by Christ's will, the Popes succession must necessarily be
by the same will? Away with these absurdities, and let Christian cares no
longer be molested with them. Again, the antecedent is false. The only
authors thereof being arrant counterfets and forged books. Margarin. Dignae.
Bibl. SS. Patrum, tom. 1. ad Lect. Posseuin. apparat. verb. Linus. Baron. an.
69. n. 6. and an. 44. n. 45.
Linus, See Cens. Patrum, by M. Ed. C. Posseuin. v. Hegesipp.
Egesippus and this Anto. Co^tius, annot. in did. 16 Septuaginta.
Marcellus: whose Ep. 2. Marcel. apud Binn.
Decretall also says no more but that by our Lords appointment he removed the
sea to Rome. As for Innocent, he says Innocent. 1. epist. 18. apud Binn.
nothing at all to that purpose. And such as have reported it afterward,
followed what they had heard, without examining the credit. Let our adversaries
therefore sit down and reckon how many points they have to clear in this
difficulty. First, that Peter was Bishop of Rome. Next, that he died at Rome
by the special commandment of Christ. Then, that he died invested with such a
Primacie. And finally, that his so dying there, is sufficient (without a new
revelation from God) to make the succession of the Bishop of Rome of divine
authority. When these things are sufficiently demonstrated, the succession
shall be acknowledged, but not before. To his confirmation, I answer: that, by
Christ's appointment, Peter was to have his successors: not one or other, in any
special place, but the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, all of them, in
every place: and not in the office of chief Pastor, expounded by the Primacie
and Apostleship (for his Apostleship died with him, and Primacie, such as is
intended, he never had any) but in his Pastoral cure of preaching and
ministering the word and sacraments, and governing the Church in community with
other Bishops and Pastors, as himself did these things in community with the
Apostles. Therefore the Bishop of Antioch succeeds him in place as well as the
Bishop of Rome; but in office, all the Christian Bishops of the world succeed
him; and in preaching and ministration of the sacraments, all the inferior
Pastors of the world. But in that which is called his supremacy and monarchy
over all other Bishops and Kings of the earth, he has no successor, because no
such thing was given him by Christ, but first was devised by the Pope himself
for his own advancement.

A.D. To the THIRD I answer, that the disagreement of authors, in assigning
which particular men did, Page 291.
in order, succeed one another, is no argument that there was not at all an
orderly succession: as neither the like disagreement of authors, about the
year in which our Savior suffered, is no sufficient argument to prove that he
suffered not at all in one or other year.
4 This answer affirms it to be an orderly succession, which he confesses
cannot be put into order. Yet he excuses the matter by the like disagreement of
authors about the year of Christ's passion. But this is idle. For the
disagreement that is about the time of Christ's passion, makes the same time
uncertain to such as rely on those authors: and so the contrariety of
opinions, makes the order of succession uncertain in the Papacy. Which is as
much as we require. For hereby we make plain demonstration that our
adversaries cannot assign what persons succeeded one another, but are
constrained to set them down out of order, and some also that never were
Bishops of Rome at all. Whence it follows that the succession is not precisely
in those persons, nor in that order that the Jesuit has set down in his
Catalogue, and our adversaries pretend. They which blaze their catalogues of
Popes from Peter, and boast so fast that Gods ordinance has vpholden a visible
succession in the Church of Rome, are bound to place every person in his own
order, or else content themselves with that succession which is in faith and
doctrine.

A.D. To the FOVRTH I answer: that vacancie of the Sea, Page 291.
is no moral interruption of succession, although the vacancie continue for a
good space: neither is it any maine inconvenience; so that in the mean time,
no special matter of importance happen, which cannot be ended without one in
that office, to interpose his authority.
5 Though every kind of vacancie take not away succession, yet the vacancies of
the Roman sea, disable the succession thereof for being of that nature which
our adversaries pretend: who hold the Pope to be such a Head, that without him,
there can neither be unity in faith, nor stabilitie in the truth, nor life in
the Church: in as much as these things See Can. loc. l. 6. cap. 8. ad 1. Greg.
de Valen de object. fid. punct 7. qu. 7.
are holden to have their influx into the Church by no other means then
through him. So long time therefore as the Sea wants a Pope, the Church wants a
head, and means to convey the truth to it, if the Pope be the only Head and
Means. And although every distance and period of time, require not authority
to interpose it self in things of question, yet if it be Gods ordinance thus
to direct his Church by the Pope, and by no other means, he is bound to
prevent such long vacancies, and perplexities, wherein no man living, for many
years together, can tell who is true Pope. Let the words of Canus, touching
the time of the Popes death, be noted, and applied to our vacancies. Loc. l. 4.
c. vlt. ad 12.
When the Pope is dead, the Church no doubt is still one, and the Spirit of
truth abides in it: yet is it left LAME and DIMINISHED, being WITHOUT CHRIST'S
VICAR, THAT ONE PASTOR OF THE CHVRCH. Therefore albeit the truth still be in
the Church, yet if any controversies arise, the Churches judgment without the
Head is not so certain.

Page 291. See Onuphr. annot. super Platin.
A.D. To the FIFTH: it is a mere fable, without all probability, or moral
possibility, that ever there was any such woman Pope. And if there had been
so, it proves nothing but a vacancie of the Sea for that time.
6 For the vacancie I have said; and by pretense thereof the succession of the
foulest heretics that have ever been, may be salued, the time of their sitting
being expounded to be but a vacation. But to say, the succession of the woman
Pope is a fable, without all probability, is a desperate answer, when so
innumerable authors write it, and, being as moral as A. D. is, believed it
also. In the Church of Sienna in Italy, Papir. Masson de episc. Vrb. l. 6. in
Pio 3.
where the pictures of the Popes that have been, have used of long time to be
set up, the image of this Pope Ioane, till Florimund. fab. Joan. c. 22. n. 2.
page 19 1.
within these twenty years, that the Pope and the Duke of Florence, at the
intercession of Baronius, cast it down, was to be seen standing in it place
among the other Popes that had been of ancient time. It is no contending with
obstinacy, but when the first and sole authors of the story, and the
confidentest reporters of it, were the wisest and learned Papists that lived
in their time, and Onuphrius and the Jesuits were the first that ever denied
it; it is folly for the Replier to think to discredit the story. M. Cook
has so well quit it, both from Onuphrius and the rest that have followed, that
I will only refer the reader to his Called Pope Joane printed ann. 1610 for
Edm. Blount and William Barret
Book, which handles the point thoroughly and exactly.

A. D. To the SIXTH: Page 291. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pontif.
the learned Cardinal Bellarmine does show that there was never any Pope
heretic, even as a private man: and all the best learned Catholic Divines
agree, that never any did, or shall, or can ex Cathedra, define any error or
heresy, to be true faith; or authoritatiuely teach the Church any thing
contrary to the true faith Which being, although some of them, in their private
opinion, had held any error in faith or heresy, it could not prejudice the
Church.
7 Here are three things affirmed touching the Pope. First, that there was
never any Pope Heretic, even as a private man: as Bellarmine shows. This I
disproued in THE WAY Digress. 28. and 47. nu. 15.53. nu 8.
three times over, and it is a desperate untruth against the experience of many
Popes, and against the mind of diverse most learned Papists. True it is, that
Bellarmine says it is probable, and piously may be believed, and does his best
to quit such Popes as are commonly charged; but his answers are insufficient
and against the universal consent of all history. And to insist upon a
particular example or two: Honorius, the first of that name, fell into the
heresy of the Monothelites, holding that Christ had but one will, and so
consequently but one nature: and for the same was judged, and condemned in
Council. 3. Constantinop. Synod. 6. act. 13. sub. Agatho. Phot. Biblioth. in
Synod. 6. graec. p. 6. Council. Nicen. 2. act. 7. epist. 1. Synodal. ad Augg.
and epist. 2. ad omnes Fidel. council. 8. act. 7. colloqu. 3.
three general Councels. Whereto Bellarmine, with all his magnified learning,
De Pontif. Romans l. 4 c. 11. ad secundum dico.
can answer no more but that the Councels are corrupted: the which thing
Albertus Pighius Alb. Pigh hierarch. ecclesiast. l. 4. c. 8.. Sedquoniam ex.
page 251.
having said before, Diatrib. de Actis 6. and 7. Synod. praef. ad lecto.
was admonished thereof, and wished to recant it: and Dominicus Bannes Dom.
Bann. 22 qu. 1, art. 10. dub. 2. p. 116.
says, Certainly it is ridiculous, that, now after 900 years, Pighius should
find those witnesses false and forgers. And Cano, Can. Loc. l. 6. c. 8. ad 11.
that this conceit was never heard in the Church before. Holding himself
resolutely that Honorius erred, and alleged diverse proofs for the same.
Liberius fell into Arianisme. Athanasius and Hierom Athan. epist. de solit.
vit. agent. p. 647. graec. Hieron. catalog. script. in Fortunat.
say, that for fear of death he subscribed to the Arians. Damasus Damas. vit.
Liberij.
says that Vrsacius and Valence, two Arian Bishops being sent to him by the
Emperor, he consented to him. Diverse other examples are well known and
commonly objected. Dominicus Bannes Bann. vbi sup. page 115.
says, the Pope, as he is a Doctor, and a private person may err in matters
of faith, even with pertinacy, that he becomes an Heretic. And this
conclusion he affirms to be generally holden by all the ancient Bishops of
Rome themselves, and by all the school Doctors before Albertus Pighius, and by
the grauer sort of Doctors also since him. And to what purpose should
universally all the Divines of the Church of Rome, till of late years, so
curiously debate the questions touching the Churches power over the Pope, Turre
^rem. sum. de eccl. l. 2 c. 112. and l. 4. part. 2. c. 20. Caietan. de author.
Pap. and council. cap. 18. Anton. de Rosell. Monarch. tract. de council. p. 67.
Occham. dialog. l. 6. partis 1 c. 12. and inde.
in case he should chance to be an Heretic, if they had thought, with the
Repliar, that he could not be an Heretic at all? Alphonsus a Castro Adu.
haeres. l. 1. c. 4.
says, every man may err in the faith, although it be the Pope himself. For
touching Pope Liberius, it is manifest he was an Arian, and he that has read
histories doubts not but Anastasius favored the Nestorians -- I CANNOT BELIEVE
THERE IS ANY MAN SO IMPVDENT A FLATTERER OF THE POPE, AS TO SAY HE CANNOT ERR,
or be deceived in expounding the Scripture. For when, IT IS WELL KNOWN THAT
DIVERSE OF THEM ARE SO VNLERANED, THAT THEY ARE ALTOGETHER IGNORANT OF GRAMMAR,
how can they expound the sacred Scripture? My Adversary therefore, and his
learned Cardinal, are egregious flatterers and parasites to the Pope, by
Alphonsus verdict, and such as he presumed the world should never have seen;
but he was deceived: we now see them and hear them, and my Adversary, it
seems, believes them. Aen. Sylu. comment. in Panorm. de dict. and fact. Alph.
l. 1. n. 3.
Pope John the 23 was wont to say, when flatterers praised him, though he knew
they lied, yet he felt himself something tickled with that they said. Which
humor of the Pope being now better known, you must give his servants leave to
gratify it.

8 Secondly he says, All the best learned Catholic Divines agree that never
any Pope did, shall, or can, ex Cathedra define any error, or heresy, to be
true faith, or authoratatiuely teach the Church any thing contrary to the true
faith. Indeed this is the opinion of the most Papists now adays; devised of
late to put off the inconveniences that pressed them; that whatsoever heresies
and abominations of the Pope were objected, they might be salued by this
distinction, that he taught them not out of the chair, but from his own
stool. But it is false that all the best learned Catholics agree in it. For
very many of the ancienter sort held it not, but the contrary, whose learning
will abide any comparison that can be made with the Jesuits, that now so
presumptuously assume from their predecessors, all the learning to themselves.
Hadrian, who himself was Pope, In 4. de sacra. confirm. sub finem.
affirms it to be certain that the Pope may err, even in things touching the
faith, and avouch that which is heresy by his determination, or decretall.
Turrecremata, a Cardinal of that reputation for his learning Catharin. tract.
de certa sanct. glor. l. 1.
that the Pope honored him with the title of Protector of the faith, assigning
certain cases wherein pertinacy, or wilfulness in heresy, lies, Turre crem.
sum. de eccl. l 4. part. 2. c. 16.
gives this for one: The seventeenth manner whereby, the Pope specially, may be
convinced of pertinacy in heresy is: if he SOLEMNLY DEFINE THE ERROR, and
affirm it to be holden, by Christians, as Catholic. It was therefore Azor.
tom. 2. moral. l. 5. c. 4.
his judgment that the Pope might err, even iudiciously e Cathedra. Waldensis
Waldens. doctrinal. fid. l. 2. c. 19 tom. 1.
affirms, that no Church or Council, no not the particular Church of Rome, is
free from error, but only the Catholic Church dispersed all over the world
from the times of Christ and his Apostles to this day. If only the Catholic
Church, thus considered, be free from error, then he thought the Pope, every
way howsoever, might err; and his particular Church and college being allowed
to help him, yet they not being the Church mentioned in the creed, in Waldens
(...) the innocent, promoting the faithless, defaming Catholics, exalting
schismatickes, hating good men, oppressing the truth; with all their power, and
by all means possible, without fear, advancing forward heretical prauitie.
The time, alas, is come, whereof the blessed Apostle prophesied 2. Tim. 4. The
time shall be when men will not abide wholesome doctrine, but, with itching
ears shall heap to themselves teachers after their own lusts: and turning
their ears from the truth, shall give heed to fables. Which prophecy indeed
is fulfilled in our days, which I speak with grief. -- And that I may
conclude in few words, with a whores forehead and execrable boldness, they
hasten to subvert both King, and law, divine and humane, etc.

9 The third thing the Reply says, is, that the Popes private errors cannot
prejudice the Church. But this is folly. For who sees not, that if his decrees
be admitted to be infallible truths, the Church shall be constrained by the
consequence of this principle to receive, for such, many of his errors? the
reason is, because he cannot possibly decree otherwise then he privately
thinks; and in decreeing, he is not bound either to follow or use the counsel
of other Bishops; in which case, what has he to lead him but his own
erroneous private spirit? They will say possible, Gods promise and providence
is to preserve him when he teaches the Church e Cathedra; else the Church
should be tied to an inconvenience, and be bound to follow his errors. I answer
in a word, that privilege shall be granted him when our adversaries can show
us where God has made any such promise. Those promises that are, belong not to
the Pope, but to the universal Church and the lawful Councels thereof: as the
most ancient and learned Papists do, for the most part, expound. Thus the
Fathers of the Councels of Pisa, Basil, Constance. Thus all the Divines that
hold a Council to be above the Pope. And this was the cause why in the ancient
Church, not the Bishop of Rome, but a Council was the highest judge of all
controversies that fell out: for which cause the Church in all ages has used
to call such Councels; which needed not if the privilege of not erring, had
bin given to ye Pope alone.

A. D. To the SEVENTH: whereas M. White says, Page 291. White. p. 419.
it is the Popes own law, that if any man be installed Pope through money, or
favor of men, or by popular or military tumult, without the Canonical
election of Cardinals and Clergy, let him not be accounted Pope, or
Apostolical, but Apostaticaell: I acknowledge with M. White that this was a
very good law: but how will M White make good his inference, to wit, that by
virtue of this law, the succession of the Roman Church is wholly overthrown?
how this inference will be made good, I confess I cannot see. For first among
so great a multitude that have succeeded one another in the Popedom, M. White
cannot show many examples of Popes who entered into the Popedom, in such manner
as the law forbids: or if they entered first unlawfully, who were not after
confirmed, and so made lawful Popes, by the consent of the Clergy: or if any
rare example could be found of one that did enter and continue in the Papacy
unlawfully, the most that is proved thereby, is that the Sea was vacant for
that time; Gods providence in the mean time procuring, either that no cause
necessary to be determined by the Pope, should happen; or else exciting some
other means extraordinarily to relieve the necessity of the Church, in such a
rare and extraordinary case. As for other abuses, which M. White says
continued long; White, p. 420.
so long as they hindered not that the Pope might be a lawful Pope, they are
impertinent to our purpose. For the send life of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Matthew. 23.2.
was no just cause to hinder people from being bound to do as they, sitting in
Moses chair, did say. Neither was young years any hindrance, since that out of
the mouth of INFANTS, our Lord can work his own praise. Psalm. 8.3.
Neither is ignorance or want of learning and discretion, any impediment, when
by the mouth of an ASS, God can instruct a prophet. 2. Pet. 2.6.

10 Here my adversary says, he cannot see how simoniacall and violent
intrusions into the Papacy, overthrow the succession: let others therefore
help him with their eyes. The Popes law is, that such unlawful entrance makes
the election a nullitie. Let not him, D. 79. Si quis.
says the law, that thus enters be counted Pope, but apostatical. And Iulio
the second ( See his election in Guice. hist. lib. 6.
as simoniacall a Pope himself as ever lived) in his Council of Lateran:
Sept. decretal de elect. and elect potest. tit. 3. c. 1.
Let such election or assumption to the Popedom, give no faculty to the
elected, but be void. Albanus Alban. de potest. Papae, part. 1. nu. 15.
says, he has no Pontifical dignity, that is not lawfully elected. This
being the law, it follows consequently the succession has been interrupted,
if my adversary will yield an interruption to be where there is a nullitie, or
a void succession; and that for a long time together. For what is interrupting
or overthrowing any thing, but the staying and ceasing thereof, that it
proceeds not, nor is continued? Thus therefore I reason: To be void, or fail,
is to be overthrown: But the succession has failed, and bin void by simonie
and violence: Therefore it has bin overthrown. He answers three things.
First, that I cannot show many examples of Popes that have entered contrary to
the law. This makes me think it true indeed that he says, he cannot see: for
my words, to this point, it seems, have dashed out his eyes. Page 419. of the
seco^^ edit.
I alleged the words of Platin. in Siluest. 3.
Platina: It came to pass that he which most prevailed, not in learning and
holy life, but in briberie and ambition, even he alone obtained the Papacy,
good men being oppressed and rejected: which custom, he says, is retained in
our times also. The which words, with the rest that I alleged touching this
matter, show plainly that scarce any enter otherwise, as it were easy to
discover particularly in the most of them, as Guicciardine does in Alexander
the sixth, and Iulio: of whom Papit. Masso. in Alexand. 6.
Alexander would often say to his familiar friends: The Popedom was more worth
then unskillful persons used either to buy or sell it for, which might be the
cause why some few have got it at a lower rate. But to insist in one example:
Chronogra. lib 4. an. chapter 901
Genebrard says, that almost for the space of 150 years, all the Popes, in
number fifty, were apotacticall and apostaticall rather then Apostolical, by
reason of their unlawful election, or violent intrusion; and entered not in by
the door, but by a back door: of all which, only five are scarcely, and
that very slenderly commended. The examples therefore are not so rare, as my
adversary would bear the world in hand, but enough, at one time, to show an
interruption of the succession for at the least 150 years together. And the
manner of succession now in our days, appears to be no better, that it made
the Pasquill in Rome, not long ago, sing Re, Me, Sol, Fa: and his Nouus homo
supplicate for a general Council, by reason there has bin a nullitie in the
succession ever since Sixtus Quintus. Secondly he says, they which entered thus
unlawfully, were afterward confirmed by the consent of the Clergy, and made
lawful Popes, and so all is well again. But he is deceived, for he cannot show
that ever any simoniacall or violent entrance was thus confirmed: or if the
Cardinals afterward allowed such a one for lawful Pope, then this makes the
matter worse, in as much as so unlawful entrance into S. Peter's chair should
be ratified, and succession, which ought to be by free and lawful election,
should, in the cheifest Sea, be continued by violence and villainy. But the
truth is, that a Pope thus entering cannot be confirmed. Septim. decre. tal. vbi
supra.
The words of the law are these: Such election, or assumption to the Papacy Eo
ipso nulla existat.
shall be a nullity, and give no faculty to the elected to administer any
thing, either in spiritual or temporal matters: -- So that he shall, of no
man, be received as Bishop of Rome, but himself shall fall from all his honor
that he had before, and stand deprived of his Cardinalship, and all other
dignities whatsoever -- and be accounted not Apostolical, but Apostalicall, a
Simoniacke, an Arch-hereticke, and perpetually incapable of all and singular
the foresaid dignities and promotions. Here the law you see disables both the
Clergy from confirming him, and himself from being capable of confirmation.
If the Reply will imagine that as the Pope made this law himself, so he may
repeal it again; I answer, first if he do, it is nothing; because it is the
natural and moral law of God, indispensable, that violence and corruption
shall bring none to the altar. Secondly, de facto it has not hitherto been
repealed, nor See Cresper. sum. v. Papa. and electio.
the many laws to the same effect made from the beginning; and therefore it
and they hold in all the unlawful successions that are past, nullifying and
disabling them. Thirdly, the Pope thus entering cannot repeal them, because by
them he is no Pope, and none can abrogate a former decree but he that is a
lawful Pope. If therefore the Popes own law, or the original constitution of
the universal Church, forbidding simoniacall, heretical, and violent
entrances, be of any force to give being, or not being, succession, or not
succession, thereunto; it is more then manifest that by Simonie and violent
intrusions the outward succession of the Bishops of Rome has notoriously been
interrupted and overthrown. To that he supplies touching the vacancie I have
said before.

11 But I objected yet three other things. First, the wicked and monstrous life
of many Popes. Secondly, the infancy of one, and the youth of some other. For
Bennet was but 10 year old when he was chosen. Thirdly, the vnlearnednesse of
many who understood not any part of the word of God: by all which I showed the
succession to have been overthrown, as well as by the former. To the first he
says, that as the lewd life of the Pharisees was no just cause to hinder the
people from hearing them, sitting, as they did, in Moses chair: no more does
the evil life of the Pope disable him from being the universal Pastor of the
Church. Yet who sees not that if the Pope were Christ's vicar, the rule of
faith, and judge of religion, whom all men must obey in whatsoever he teaches
touching faith and manners; God were bound to guide him from falling into such
horrible wickedness? They have been heretics, murderers, Sodomites,
Incestuous, Adulterers, Traitors, Coniurers, Nigromancers, Drunkards, Atheists,
Devils incarnate, the only monsters that the Church has bred; and when they
are at the best, they are commonly worse then the ordinary sort of men (all
this I have showed and proved) and is it probable God has put such persons
into such authority, and committed the whole administration of his Church to
them? True it is, the Pharisees must be obeyed The text affirms no more. See
the WAY. 14. nu. 8. (...). Theophylact in Matthew. 23. p. 97. Maldonate, the
Jesuit, having cast off the exposition that said. The chair constrained them
to teach the truth: expounds it thus. Ergo cum iubet ser^are ac facere, quae
Scribae and Phar^saei, dum in Cathedra Mosis sede^t, dicunt, non de ipsorum,
sed de legis, ac M^sis, doctrina loquitur; perinde enim est, ac si dicat, omnia
quae lex, and Moses vobis dixerint, Scribis and Pharisaeis recitantibus,
seruare ac facite.
in that they taught truly, notwithstanding their wicked lives: and this
privilege we deny neither the Pope nor any Bishop; be he never such a monster;
if he have a calling to the place he holds, and teaches according to the chair
of truth, let not his unholy life discharge the flock from hearing him. But
neither has the Pope any lawful calling to the office he claims and
exercises, nor does he teach according to the chair of truth; and therefore
his wicked life argues Gods curse upon both his place and his person, to
occupy such a place as God has not ordained. To the second and third he
grants a young child, or a wild youth, or an ignorant unlearned man, may well
be Pope, because our Lord, out of the mouth of infants, can work his praise,
and by the mouth of an Ass instruct a Prophet. Hearken then you that are the
Popes subjects. I will but keep quarters with his answer: you have often heard
of Asinus ad lyram, now you may hear Asinum in Cathedra: my Adversary says,
if a golden Ass take holy orders, or, which God forbid, De Asinitate Romani
Pontificis. Schiopp. Ecclesiast.
should chance to be made Pope of Rome, and, stabled in the Vatican; when
heresies, or controversies in Religion arise, the Cardinals and Bishops adoring
him, might safely inquire at his mouth what is to be done, and what to be
holden for the truth. In old time Iud. 10.4. and 12.14.
Princes children had wont to ride upon Asses, now the news is, that Asses
may ride upon Princes and Cardinals, and Friars may be his footmen. This is the
consequence of my Adversaries Reply: for it deserves no better answer, that
maintains the sufficiency of a child ten years of age, and of an ignorant
unlearned man, or for need, of an Ass, for the supporting of the faith and
frame of the Catholic Church of Christ. Sidonius Sidon. lib. 1. epist. 8.
says merrily of the lake of Rauenna, that there, as if the world were turned
vpside down, the walls flow, and the waters stand; towers sail, and ships
stand still; sick men walk, and their Physicians lie, the living suffer
thirst, and the dead swim; thieves wake, and powers sleep; Clearks exercise
usury, and Jews sing. This perverse order of things is allowed in the Church
of Rome by my Adversaries conceit of infants and Asses.

A.D. To the EIGHT I answer: Page 292.
that the Schisms which have been in the Papacy, do not overthrow true
succession. For in those Schisms, (unless for a time there were vacancie of
the Sea) there was always either one who truly was, and who was, to some,
certainly known to be Pope (as for example Vrbanus and his successors were,
in the time of the great schism, known to be true Popes:) or else if for any
short time, there was none certainly known to be true Pope, there wanted not
means, in Gods Church, in such a case, to clear the doubt, by making a new
vndoubtable lawful election, either in an ordinary manner, prescribed by some
precedent true Pope, or in an extraordinary manner, prescribed by the Church,
in a general Council, or otherwise, grave and urgent circumstances requiring,
that such extraordinary manner of election should be then used. As for example,
when in time of schism great doubt is who is true Pope, in which extraordinary
manner Martinus Quintus was lawful elected true Pope. Thus I hope I have
answered the chief arguments that my Adversaries do or can object against my
Catalogue, etc.
12 What man would imagine a succession, wherein have been more schisms then
ever was in any one Sea, should be offered us with that confidence that this of
Rome is? There are assigned not so few as 30 several times wherein there have
been either four, or three, or two Popes at once: of which schisms some have
continued a long space together, with the greatest violence and outrage of one
Pope against another that can be said: no man living being able to discern
which was the true successor; whereby unanswerably it follows, that there was
no visible head of the Church, infallibly known, all that time: but, according
to our Adversaries own principles, the Church wanted means to instruct and
confirm her people in the faith: yea the living rule of faith ceased and was
overthrown in these schisms. The Jesuit replies, that in all these schisms
either the true Pope was known; or if he were not, yet there was means to
clear the doubt, by electing a new. The first of these is false: that in all
the schisms the true Pope was known. For in some of them there were so many
learned men, and Princes of the earth, following each part, divided one against
another, that it was impossible there should be any certainety. And my
Adversary could not have instanced with me in a worse then in Vrbanus, whose
reputation was so small, by reason of Whereof read Theodor. a Niem de schism.
l. 1. c. 2.
the manner of his entrance, and government, that he was generally nicknamed
Turbanus: and so odious to his Cardinals, that in revenge, Ibi. cap. 51. and
Pandulf. Collenut. hist. Neapolit. l. 5. p. 233.
some he tormented upon the rack in base and miserable fashion, and afterward
tied up in sackes and so drowned them, and others he baked in an oven, and
carried them when he had done upon mules before him, when he traveled, with
their Cardinal hats upon them. Now it is a rule among our Petr. Cresper. sum.
Cathol. fid. verb. Disciplinae page 180.
Adversaries themselves, that a doubtful Pope is to be accounted for no Pope.
The succession therefore failed all the time of these schisms. And albeit, as
the Reply speaks, there was means, by a Council to elect a new Pope: yet
what success these means had, he may perceive by the stories of the Councels
of Pisa. Constance and Basil: whereof this last Aen. Sylu. comment. de Gest.
Basil. Council. lib. 2.
deposed Eugenius, and elected the Duke of Sauoy, calling him Faelix the fifth;
and yet our adversaries still hold the succession in Eugenius: yea the Replier
has put him in his Catalogue, and left Faelix out; which by this his rule he
should not have done. And besides, though a Council may depose the
schismatickes, and elect a new Pope, yet who shall he that is thus elected
succeed? or how can a Council, or any other means that shall be used, piece
together the interruption past, that it may truly be said, the succession was
never broken? Martin was elected by the Council of Constance, but let the
Jesuit, and Gregory of Valence his master, of whom he has borrowed all that
he says, answer whom he succeeded? whether Urban and his successors, or
Clement and his: which side soever he takes, he cannot rid himself. For
Clement, and they that followed him in his time, are thrust out of the
catalogue, and Vrbane, with those that followed him, put in: yet the said
Urban, in his time, was thought no right Pope; and Eugenius that immediately
followed this Martin, was deposed by the Council of Basil.

13 The Jesuits hope therefore, that he has answered the objections, will
fail him: things may wittily and cunningly be pretended, but let every man
that will stablish his conscience in the truth, enquire whether the reason of
true succession can hold where such things as these fall out: and whether it be
possible, or can stand with Gods providence, that a succession, planted for
such purposes as our adversaries pretend this of Rome to be, shall be furnished
and peeced out with boys, women, heretics, ignorant and unlettered dotards,
simoniacall intruders, and so many times diverse of them at once? Two things
therefore touching this matter of succession are the truth. First that the
outward and personal succession of Bishops, in the Church of Rome, is not so
entire as is pretended: but has been defiled and poisoned with so many
disorders, that it is as lame a succession as any is wheresoever in the world.
Their catalogues assigned, and drawn to exhibit to the vulgar people, look
smooth on the outside, and nothing but well is discerned in them; but examine
the particulars, and enquire into the histories of their succession, and there
was never any thing so patched and peeced together as they. Secondly, the
succession of doctrine is the true succession, and is not tied to that which is
in place and persons: and therefore let not the Jesuits blaze out their
catalogues of names, until they can prove the corruptions which they have
added to religion (wherein only we forsake the Church of Rome) were holden and
believed by the persons named. For what foolery is it to make a catalogue of
Jesus Christ, Saint Peter, all the Apostles and Evangelists, the virgin Marie,
and the whole Church of the first six hundred years, as if these had professed
what the Pope and his rabble now teach: did these adore images? use the
Communion in one kind? believe Purgatory? did these teach it lawful for the
Pope to excommunicate, depose, murder the Kings of the earth? Are not all these
things against their express doctrine? Let our adversaries retire back to
modesty and truth, and give over their courses. There are two parts of their
religion. One wherein they and we agree, as that there is one God, three
persons, one redeemer Jesus Christ: that the Scripture Canonical is Gods word:
that the dead shall rise: and all the rest wherein we consent. Another part of
their religion is it which we and all the reformed Churches have cast off: as
Images, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Traditions, and a hundred such like
points. The Catalogue assigned, sufficiently shows the former part, both for
them and us, against all Jews and Gentiles that deny it. The latter part they
cannot show to have been holden by the persons named, until many ages after
Christ, as they came in by degrees: in all which time the truth maintained by
the Protestants against them was holden still; and the Papacy was but a
faction in the Church, opposing the sounder part thereof. And so the visible
Church of Rome it self is it wherein the Protestants faith, in all ages, has
been professed, for the substance thereof.

Vincat veritas. I. Wh.


