A handful of wholesome (though homely) herbs, gathered out of the goodly
garden of Gods most holy word; for the common benefit and comfortable exercise
of all such as are devoutly disposed.

Collected and Dedicated to all religious Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others; by
Anne Wheathill, Gentlewoman.

Imprinted at London by H. Denham. 1584.

To all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others, which love true religion and virtue,
and be devoutly disposed; Grace mercy, and peace, in Christ Jesus.
FOr a testimonial to the world, how I have and do (I praise God) bestow the
precious treasure of time, even now in the state of my virginity or
maidenhood; lo hear I dedicate to all good Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others,
who have a desire to invoke and call upon the name of the Lord, a small
handful of gross herbs; which I have presumed to gather out of the garden of
Gods most holy word. Not that there is any vnpurenes therein, but that
(peradventure) my rudenes may be found to have plucked them up irreverently,
and without zeal.

Whereupon of the learned I may be judged gross and unwise; in presuming,
without the counsel or help of any, to take such an enterprise in hand:
nevertheless, as GOD does know, I have done it with a good zeal, according to
the weakness of my knowledge and capacity. And although they be not so
pleasant in taste, as they can find out, to whom God has given the spirit of
learning: yet do I trust, this small handful of gross herbs, wholesome in
operation and workeing, shall be no less acceptable before the majesty of
almighty God than the fragrant flowers of others, gathered with more
understanding.

But without presumption I may boldly say, they have not sought them with a
more willing heart and fervent mind; nor more to the advancement of Gods glory,
and the desire of acceptance, than I have done. Which if I may obtain, with
the good judgment and liking of all my brethren and sisters in the Lord, I
shall think my time most happily bestowed: for that thereby I did avoid
idleness, to the pleasing of almighty God; and have gained those, whom I know
not, as well strangers to me, as my acquaintance, to be my friends, that shall
taste these gross herbs with me.

The Lord Jesus Christ, who moisteneth all his elect with his most precious
blood, give us all a sweet taste in him: whom I humbly beseech, from the
bottom of my heart, to give unto those that are virtuously bent, a desire to
increase therein; and those, which have not yet reached thereunto, I pray the
holy Ghost to inspire their hearts from above, that they and we may be worthy
to meet together, in the blessed kingdom of our heavenly father, which his
dear son our savior Jesus Christ did purchase for us; whose blessed name,
with the living father, and the holy Ghost, be praised and magnified now and
for ever, Amen, Amen.

Yours in Christ, Anne Wheathill, Gent.

A table of the prayers contained in this book, as they begin and follow one
another in number; from 1. to 49.
A Prayer for the morning. prayer. 1. A prayer for remission of sins, etc.
prayer. 2. An other prayer for the same. 3 An Evening prayer. prai. 4. Against
the temptation of the devil, etc. prayer. 5. A prayer for faith, and for Gods
help and assistance, etc. 6. Another for the same. prai. 7. A prayer of the
justice of God, and of his mercy. prai. 8. A prayer for humility, and a
confession of sins, etc. 9. A prayer for patience in trouble, etc. prayer.
10. A prayer wherein the bountifulnes of God is confessed and praised. prayer.
11. A prayer for grace and repentance. prayer. 12. A prayer wherein we desire
the life to come. prayer. 13. A prayer for comfort in trouble. prayer. 14. A
prayer for the prosperity of the church. prayer. 15. A prayer that we may be
heard of God. prayer. 16. A prayer against the enemies of the church. prayer.
17. A prayer of the afflicted person. prayer. 18. A prayer of the justice of
God, etc. prayer. 19. A prayer for faith and grace. 20. A prayer of the
creation of mankind, etc. prayer. 21. A prayer and thanksgiving unto God, for
his manifold gifts, etc. prayer. 22. A prayer wherein the heart powers out it
self before God, etc. prayer. 23. A prayer wherein the afflicted person
prays against his enemies, etc. prayer. 24. A prayer for the increase of
faith, etc. prayer. 25. A prayer unto God the father, etc. prayer. 26. A prayer
unto the son of God, etc. prayer. 27. Another to the son, etc. 28. A prayer
unto the holy Ghost, etc. prayer. 29. A prayer in the remembrance of death,
etc. prayer. 30. A prayer to hear the word of God and keep it, prayer. 31. A
prayer wherein the word of God is praised, etc. pr. 32. A prayer to be said at
all times, etc. prayer. 33. An humble confession of our sins before God, etc.
34. A thanksgiving unto God for the redemption of the world, etc. prayer. 35.
An other prayer of praise and thanksgiving, etc. 36. A brief confession, etc.
37. A prayer, showing that none, but God, is omnipotent. 38. A prayer of
lamentatio^, etc. 39. A prayer, wherein the fatherly love and preservation of
God is set forth, etc. 40. A prayer, for grace, etc. 41. A prayer against
offenses. 42. A prayer for the good estate of the church, etc. prayer. 43. A
prayer, that the wisdom of God is to be praised, etc. 44. A prayer wherein is
showed, how blessed they are that trust in God, etc. prai. 45. A prayer of Gods
majesty, 46. A prayer, wherein is showed how blessed they are that fear the
Lord. prayer. 47. A prayer, showing that God dwells in the hearts of the
righteous, etc. 48. A prayer, showing that God is always our protection, etc.
49.
FINIS.
1. A prayer for the Morning.
O Mighty maker and preserver of all things, God omnipotent, which like a
diligent watchman, always attendest upon thy faithful people, so that whether
they sleep or wake, live or die, thy providence never forsakes them: look
favorably upon me, O Lord, thy poor and sinful servant, which am not
worthy, but through thy great mercies offered to me in Christ, once to lift
up mine eyes unto thy mercy seat.

Wherefore in the name of thy dear son my Lord and Savior, I offer unto
thee, through him, the sacrifice of praise and thanks giving; that thou have
preserved me both this night, and all the time and days of my life hitherto,
until this present hour. I beseech thee of thy great mercy to illuminate my
understanding, that I may lead and frame my life as thou have taught me in thy
holy word, that my light may so shine here on earth, that my heavenly father
may be glorified in me, through Jesus Christ our Lord and redeemer; for whose
sake hear me dear father, and send thy holy Ghost to direct me in all my
doings. To thee O glorious and blessed Trinity, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, be given all honor and praise, now and for ever more, Amen.

2. A prayer for remission of sins, for victory against satan, and for the
inward light of the soul.
O Merciful Father that art the sure safeguard and defense of all that
earnestly trust in thee, and desire not the death of sinners, but their
conversion and amendment of life; I acknowledge unto thy highness, all mine
offenses by me committed, which if I would hide from thee Lord, I could not. I
consider the miserable estate, whereto through sin I am brought: for thereby
I have worthily lost thy favor, and am fallen from thy grace, which while
thou withdrawest from me, I can do no good thing, nor think one good thought.
My sins have caused thee to put me out of thy remembrance, and to forget me,
delaieng to give me that which is my strength and comfort. But how long will thou forget me, Lord? For ever? How long will thou withdraw thy grace from me?

Thou know my hearty contrition and sorrow; for that I have unkindly
forsaken thy service, and served thine enemies, the devil and sin. But
trusting assuredly in thy promise made to me, and all people, by the mouth of
thy prophet Ezechiel, that is; If the sinner will turn away from all his
sins, that he has committed, and keep all thy commandments, doubtless he
shall live and not die: as for all his sins that he did before, thou will not
think upon them. I now most entirely beseech thee, that as my sins were the
cause, why thou did put me out of thy favor; so let my hearty repentance
for them, cause thee to put my sins out of thy remembrance.

Suffer me not long to remain in this perplexity of mind, and to take sorrow
inwardly in my heart from day to day, continually fearing the punishment due
to my sin, and looking still for thy coming into my soul by grace to
deliver me. Hope has caused me long to look for thee, that art my life and my
health; thy long delaie in coming has much increased my desire; my fervent
desire at length is now turned to a vehement pain. Wherefore make have Lord, I
beseech thee, to help my sick soul, and tarry not.

Let not mine enemy the devil long triumph over me, whose property is to
tread under his feet, like a cruel prince, all those that be vanquished, even
to the pit of hell. He did long hold in captivity all mankind, until the
coming and passion of Christ for our redemption; and since, through his
crafty trains, he has brought to utter confusion many of those that
profess thy sons religion. Wherefore behold Lord, and consider my miserable
estate, hear my humble petition, touching my deliverance from out of his
danger.

Lighten the eye of my heart and understanding, with the light of thy grace and
comfort, thereby expelling the darkness of ignorance. Lighten also one other eye
of my soul, which is the eye of the affection. The sight of this eye is so
dim, that it has no perfect and true judgment; yea it is so blinded with
the vanities of this world, that one thing in appearance seems to be twenty;
like the sight of the deceitful eyes of glass. I beseech thee save my said
eye, that it be not put out by our enemy the devil; and send me the light of
grace, while I have here time, and space of repentance, that at my latter end,
mine enemies say not with joy, that they have the upper hand over me.

But all my trust is in thy mercy: for though thou hide thy self in a cloud,
that my prayer should not go through it unto thine ears; yet are not thy
mercies clean gone, neither does thy loving kindness cease. Thou art therefore
Lord my portion, and in thy mercy still will I hope, and in none other
creature; knowing for certainty, that as God thou only may help me, and
as my loving father thou will help. Wherefore in thee my heart shall be
ioifull, and in thy saving health, which is thy son Christ our Savior and
redeemer.

The Philistines, knowing the presence of thine arc to be in the camp of the
Israelits, on the day of their battle, were sore afraid, saying; Who shall
deliver us out of the hand of this mighty God? Much more will I be glad, and
take sure trust, having the presence and comfort of thy lively grace. And in
token of the victory which thou have given me over mine enemies, I will not
cease (as I have good cause) to sing the praises of the Lord, that has so
lovingly dealt with me, and magnify the name of the most high, all the days
of my life, Amen.

3. An other prayer for the same.
O God give me the excellent feeling of thine abundant mercy, for thou art my
whole goodness. Who am I, that I dare be so bold to speak unto thee? I am thy
most poor sinful servant, a vile worm, and much more poor and miserable,
than I either know my self, or dare tell unto thee: for my sins stick so
fast to me, that I have nothing, nor worthy any thing. Thou only art good,
thou just, thou holy, and able to do all things, and do perform all
things. Thou fulfillest all things, leaving the sinful only void and empty.

My conscience accuses me so, that I can have no rest, till I be reconciled
unto thee O God my savior. Remember thy mercies, O Lord, and fill my soul
with thy favor: for how may I continue in this life, unless thy mercy and
favor do strengthen me? Give me grace to put my whole trust in thee, without
grudging or doubting: for I have, and do daily wait for thy saving health.

Turn not away thy face from me, neither withdraw thy comforts from me, least
my soul do seem in thy sight like unto the earth that is void of moisture.
Lord teach me to do thy will, learn me to walk worthily and humbly before
thee: for thou art my wisdom, and know me what I am in all respects, and
understand my thoughts long before.

Grant me always to seek thee in singlenes of heart: for the remembrance of
thy favor is more sweet unto me, than all the pleasures and deinties of the
world. For my cheifest comfort is in thee O Christ, and not in any worldly
means, who have said; Who so overcomes the world, to them will I grant to
feed upon the tree of life. Which grant me for thy holy name sake, to whom
with the father, and the holy Ghost, be praise now and for ever, Amen.

4. An Evening prayer.
O Everlasting light, whose brightness is never darkened; look favorably
upon me thy poor and sinful servant, who has not only this day, but all
the days and times of my life hitherto, until this present hour, offended
thy divine Majesty, in thought, word, and deed; whereby I have most justly
provoked thy wrath and indignation against me. And now I how the knees of my
heart unto thee most merciful and heavenly father, beseeching thee for Jesus
Christ his sake, to forgive me all my sins, negligences and ignorances. For I
confess how wickedlie I have misspent the talent that thou gave me, abusing
thy gifts of grace many ways, burieng the same in obscure darkness, worse
than the servant that hid his masters treasure, not putting it to any
increase; for he delivered the principal again.

But I most miserable creature, can show unto thy majesty no part of that
which thou gave me, to use to thine honor and glory: for the which I am most
heartily sorry, and do unfeignedly repent, having no mean to help my self,
but only to lift up the eyes of my faith unto thy dear son Jesus Christ,
beseeching him most instantly to make perfect my wants, and to renew
whatsoever is lacking in me. For I commit my body and soul, this night and
evermore, into his most holy hands; hoping, O Christ, thou will make me an
acceptable sacrifice unto thy father.

I have no place to fly unto, but to shroud me under the wings of thine
almighty power, who wast so loving unto us, that thou wast contented to shed
thy most precious blood, for the sins of the whole world; for the which I
most humbly and heartily yield unto thee thanks, honor, praise and glory.

O lamb of God, son of the father, hear thou me, thou that saiedst; I am
thy health and salvation, I am thy peace and life; cleave fast unto me, and
thou shall live. O Lord I am the woonded man, and thou art the good Samaritane:
power oil into my wounds, and bind them up. Lord heal thou me, and I shall be
whole: for thou art my God and Savior.

Hear thou therefore my supplications from heaven, and have mercy. Take from
me all my sins and wickedness, and give me thy grace and holy spirit.
Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death: so shall I ioiefullie, after
this sluggish sleep of sin, rise again, living in thy fear all the days
of my life. Which grant me to do, O Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three
persons and one true GOD, world without end, Amen.

5. Against the temptation of the devil, and for Gods favor and grace.
O Lord preserve me, that I fall not into temptation, neither let me be as one
of them that contemn thy word, falling from thee; but arm me with an
invincible strength and constancy: so shall I be sure, that all the powers of
the world shall not overcome me. For there is none in heaven, earth or hell,
that can do any thing, but as thou give them power. Seeing that all are thy
creatures, thou must needs govern and guide them.

Thy mercy O God almighty is also annexed to thy divine nature, for when all
mankind was lost and dead in sin, then did thou, sitting in thy
celestial throne, look down to the earth upon our miserable state, and
loosedst us from the bands of the devil, and sendedst down thine only
begotten son, that by his death he might deliver from death, such as
worthily were the children of death: for the which I praise thee, and do
confess from the bottom of my heart, that our deliverance comes only of
thee O God, and not by man's power.

Wherefore I will not come empty into thy presence, but with all humility I
offer unto thee my troubled spirit for mine offenses: and this sacrifice I am
sure thou will not despise; for I confess my self ignorant, till thou have
taught me, O Lord. My heart is also variable, and separated from thee. Join my
soul and body to thee O God, and confirm me in thine obedience: for I desire
not to live, but to serve thee as I ought, which we cannot do aright, except
thou open our eyes. I respect no man, but set thee always before me, as the
chief helper and judge of my doings.

Certeinlie we can do nothing of our selves: but when thou O God do
inwardly instruct us by thy holy spirit, then feel we thy graces sweeter
than the honey and the honey comb. There is no acception of persons with thee,
but all people that fear thee, and work righteousness, thou will accept. If
we be thine, thou Lord wilt strengthen us with all power, and bless us with
all felicity. But thy indignations are most constant against the wicked, and
pass all our understanding: for thou O God never forsakest any that seek
unto thee. Therefore man is cause of his own destruction.

Give me thy favor, and be merciful unto me for thine own sake: grant me thy
heavenly wisdom and grace to be governed by thy holy word, which if I
follow, I shall have all prosperity, corporal and spiritual, bringing forth
such fruits as have life. I acknowledge that all my acts, thoughts, or any
part of my life cannot be hid from thee O God, though thou seem to be far
off; so that they are evidently known to thee: for thou O GOD understand
my meaning, before I speak; and sendest the dewes of thy grace upon me, which
causes me to bring forth the fruits of good works, to thine honor, and the
help of my neighbor: for it is of thy power, strength, and grace, when I do
any thing that is good, and not of mine own power.

There is none good, but thou alone; thou killest and give life; thou
woundest, and make whole: neither is there any that can speak a word,
except thou give it him, nor none can save himself by his own labor, nor
any worldly means. Wherefore I will rest in thee, as mine only God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, Amen.

6. A prayer for faith, and for Gods help and assistance at his good pleasure.
O Lord GOD almighty, which by thy power and wisdom have made all the world,
and dooest govern the same, and all that therein is: from thy holy heavens,
wherein thou dwell, look favorably upon us, and grant that in temptation
we may have faith to fight against the devil, and all his false suggestions,
and to cry inwardly unto thee with groaning, always aiding us with thy holy
spirit, to be humble in all afflictions, with true repentance. For when all
man's help does fail, thou O God wilt help us, even as it were by a miracle;
if we call upon thee with an upright conscience.

Lord grant us never to require more of thee, than is necessary; neither to
seek to separate thy power from thy will, least we should tempt thee: for
though thy help does not presently appear, yet have thou sown and laid up
in store for us. We will therefore be mindful of thy benefits, and only
trust in thy defense: for though the wicked rage against thee O God, yet those
that be thy children shall praise thy name and mighty power. For the more
liberally that thou O God dooest deal with thy people, the more do thou
punish them that abuse thy benefits. For thou O God have care over thine, and
dooest chasten them for their health, that they should not perish for ever with
the wicked. For thou will restore the government of good things to their use,
and then the godly shall follow thee cheerefullie.

Grant us we humbly beseech thee to know thy ways, and to ascend up unto the
throne of thy majesty by faith, giving thee praise and glory, for thy
fatherly preservation and health toward us continually. For thou have been
a house and defense for us: thou have chosen us to be thy people, before the
foundation of the earth was laid. Wherefore we are sure that thou will hear
us, whenever we call and cry unto thee for mercy and grace. Bless us now
and ever with all goodness, that we may lead our lives according to thy will,
living in thy fear all the days of our life, that after this course is ended,
we may dwell with thee, world without end, Amen.

7. Another for the same.
I Make my humble petition in thy sight, O GOD most holy, which biddest us
ask, and it shall be given; seek, and we shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened unto us; and believe only, and we shall receive whatsoever we desire.
Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief, and give me that faith which shall be
most acceptable in thy sight. Sow in my heart, good Lord the grain of
steadfast faith, which may aspire and spring up unto the mercy seat of thine
almighty majesty: for without true faith and obedience we cannot call upon
thee a right.

Give me therefore, good Lord, that most precious jewel of faith, that thou
may thereby hear me. And give me comfort and salvation through thy merciful
goodness, O God, who never dooest forsake thy faithful servants, that come to
thee in humbleness of heart, looking upon Jesus Christ thy dear son our
Lord and Savior: for he is the tree of life, which stands in the midst of
paradise, by whom we have entrance unto thee O dear father.

Whosoever seeks any other way than this thy dear Son, he is a thief
and a robber, and shall never be partaker of the benefits, which he of his
mercy has most lovingly bestowed upon us: which grant me Lord Jesus never to
forget, but evermore to show my self thankful. For it is thou O Lord that
art worthy to receive all glory, honor, and praise: for thou have created
and redeemed all, and without thee we cannot do any thing that is good.

Wherefore Lord Jesus I come unto thee, craving at thy merciful hand an humble
and contrite heart, a patient mind, a quiet conscience, the gift of faith, and
of the holy Ghost. O thou lover of souls, hear me poor wretch, although
unworthy once to think, much less to speak unto thy majesty. But thou art
the same Lord, who dooest most lovingly say; Come to me all ye that are
heavy laden, and I will ease you.

Which comfortable saying of thine, O Christ, makes me bold to come into thy
presence, vnloding my sinful sack of corruption, before the face of thine
almighty power; not doubting but thou will mercifully hear me, and ease me
with thy help: for I cast all my burden on thee, who art the giver of life
and salvation. Wherefore I turn my self unto thee O Lord Jesus Christ
desiring thee by prayer to renew whatsoever is amiss in me, either by mine
own frailty, or malice of the devil.

For I acknowledge, O Lord, that I am the most wicked, the most frail of all
others, the weakest to resist my ghostly enemy. But I trust, through thy
mercy, to be of the number of them, for whom thou have overcome the devil and
the world: which grant me, Lord Jesus, for thy bitter passions sake, that after
this life I may enioie the endless bliss and glory of heaven. To thee, with
the living Father, and the holy Ghost, be given all honor and glory, all
praise and thanks, for ever and ever, Amen, Amen.

8. A prayer of the justice of God, and of his mercy.
O GOD almighty, Lord of heaven and earth, from whom nothing can be hid or
kept secret, thou art the searcher of the heart and reins, which know the
thoughts of all men: when I remember thy just judgment, I tremble and quake for
fear, considering the burden, wait, and filthiness of sin to be so great,
that for one proud thought, a great number of angels fell from heaven. The
earth was not able to bear the burden of Corah, Dathan and Abiram; but for
the rebellion against thee and thy servant Moses, the earth opened, and
swallowed them quick.

For the sin and pride of David, who mustered his men, putting his trust in
the multitude of them, rather than in thee that art the living God, thou
scourgedst him with the plague of pestilence, so that there died four score
thousand of his people, within the space of three days.

Who would not then fear, seeing we sin daily with most grievous sins?
Now have we no remedy to fly from thy wrath, but to shroud our selves in the
bosom of thy most dearly beloved son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
making him our bulworke and house of defense, between thine anger and us: most
humbly beseeching thee for his sake, and for the bitter pains that he
suffered for our redemption, to be merciful unto us, and rebuke us not in
thine anger.

Let not the sentence of everlasting death take place, which thou gave
against Adam, and all his posterity for his disobedience. Thou art meek,
gentle, and long suffering of thy self. It is our grievous offenses, heaped
one upon another, that provoke thee unto anger. Therefore, acknowledging our
offenses, we pray thee most merciful father, to have compassion upon us: for
we are not able of our selves to arise; it is thou Lord, and thy blessed son
that must heal our infirmities.

We have no strength to withstand the temptation of our enemies, thy son
Christ must reach us his hand, as he did to Peter, walking on the water, when
he was in peril of drowning. His patience is our medicine and health, thy
grace and his are sufficient remedies. We are all carnal, sold under sin; so
that the good we would do, that do we not; but the evil that we would not,
that we do. We are all evil of our selves. Consider O God our contrite
hearts, and penitent minds, and hear, heal, and amend us.

Hope bids us still to cry and call upon thee for help, as the woman, of
Canaan cried still upon thy son Christ for the help of her daughter, and at
the last was heard to her own contentation: so we, knocking and calling still,
doubt not but thou will grant, through our importunacie, our desires, as he
that granted his neighbor three loaves.

We do now knock, cry, and will never cease, till thou Lord turn toward
us, and deliver our souls. Turn, we heartily beseech thee, from thy wrath,
to pity and mercy; deliver us from the manifold troubles which we have in
our consciences. Oh save us for thy mercy sake, for thy blessed Son Jesus
has dearly bought us. Wherefore Lord, we thy faithful creatures, being
through thy grace, and the battle of thy son upon the cross restored to thy
favor; and having the house of our hearts and souls swept and made clean
from all vices, which were wont to inhabit in us, we most humbly pray thee
to give us strength, to keep our souls from the invasion of the wily serpent.

Dwell in us still by thy continual grace, make us to be of thy household, that
we may live and praise thee in this world, and after this life we may enioie
the blessed presence of thine eternal majesty, one God in persons three, and
everlasting in unity, world without end, Amen.

9. A prayer for humility, and a confession of sins, with a petition to have
the same remitted.
LOrd give me humility, being the beautiful flower of virtue that grows in
the garden of man's soul; one of the most pleasant, most necessary, and most
acceptable, whose power was so great, that it drue the son of GOD, the second
person in deity, from heaven, into the womb of the meek virgin, whom of all
other he chose to be his mother, for that she was so humble and virtuous. Thou
O Christ our Savior, being Lord of all the world, walkedst all the days of
thy life in humility, and therein endedst, humbling thy self unto the vile
death of the cross.

The wise humility of Abigael pacified the fury of David, when he was minded
to kill all the men of the house of her husband. The humble submission of
wicked Ahab, assuaged the wrath of GOD, which was the cause that the almighty
preserved him all the days of his life. The great goodness of this virtue is
made manifest, by opening the heinousnes of the vice contrary thereto, which
is pride: which appeared in the proud Pharisie, when he made boast in his
prayers of his good deeds, and despised his poor neighbor, which caused his
prayer not to be hard, when the poor Publican, standing a far off, with
humbleness, durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but with hearty repentance
knocking his breast, said; Lord be merciful to me a sinner: which hearty
confession of his sin, was cause of his justification, and that he was made
righteous.

Wherefore most gracious Lord our heavenly father, considering the power of
humility, and the knowledge of our sins, with hearty repentance, to be of so
great efficacy; I thy poor creature, unworthy to appear before thy
majesty, do power down here, before thee, my sack that is full of sin,
which I have committed even from my youth, they are great and many, without
number: nevertheless, trusting of thine accustomed nature and property, which
is, to be merciful to all sinners, that be sorry for their offenses from the
bottom of their hearts, turning to thee, knowing that thou did send thy
loving son, not to call those that seem in their own sight to be just, but
to help those that confess themselves to be sinners.

I therefore, Lord, willing by the help of thy grace, utterly to forsake
sin, and to fulfill thy holy will hereafter, desire thee humbly of
forgiveness, and to admit me among the number of those that are blessed, and
their unrighteousness forgiven. I will not cover from thee my sins, neither
yet excuse them; but I pray thee Lord hide them in the bloody woonds of thy
son Christ, where they shall be put in perpetual oblivion. Blessed is the
man, unto whom thou do not impute sin, and in whose spirit there is no
guile.

Wherefore from the bottom of my heart, Lord, I am sorry for all my sins, and
do ask thee forgiveness. I will acknowledge all mine offenses, and accuse my
self unto thee Lord. So soon as I was determined no longer to hide mine evil
ways, thou Lord strait forgauest me. Thine ear was in my heart, before my
voice was in my mouth. Thy mercies washed away my sins, or ever my
confession was made. Thou art as ready to hear and forgive, as we to ask.

Wherefore I will say with the prophet Daniel; It is I that have offended and
sinned against thy majesty. I humbly beseech thee cure my sick soul, for I
have highly sinned against thee; yet doubt I not, but thou have and wilt
forgive the wickedness of my sin. It is thou Lord that must help us; which
thou will do, if we call upon thee, whilst we are in this life, for after
death, no entreaty will be heard. It is then too late.

Wherefore Lord keep us in the right way, and suffer us not to swerve on the
right hand, nor on the left. Thy eyes of protection and mercy are ever
firmly fixed upon us; grant us to set the eyes of our minds upon thee. Lord
call me, pluck me Lord from mine ungodliness, that I may know thee, love thee,
and put my hope wholly in thee. O glorious God, my maker, savior, and
sanctifier, dwell in me and give me grace to dwell in thee, Amen.

10. A prayer for patience in trouble, and constant expectation of Gods goodness.
O GOD almighty, grant us never to refuse thy chastening. For though thou make
a wound, thou give a plaster; though thou smite, thy hand makes whole
again. Thou shall deliver us in six troubles, and in the seventh there shall
none evil come unto us. In hunger thou shall save us from death; and when it
is war, from the power of the sword; thou shall keep us from the evil tongue;
and when trouble comes, we shall not need to fear. In destruction and death
we shall be merry: for the stones of the land shall be confederate with us,
because the Lord of hosts is our defense and refuge for ever.

Let us therefore put our whole trust in him, reioising with melody of
thanksgiving unto his majesty, who only is true, and can help us with
deliverance. Let us lift up our eyes unto GOD, who has all power; and
therefore ought to be feared. For whatsoever he be that fears man, more than
God, falls into a snare, and is destroyed. As for all our sins and
transgressions, thou requirest nothing of us, O Lord GOD, but to turn unto
thee, and to obeie thy holy word, following thy precepts and commandments.

For thou say, O Lord, those that honor thee, thou will exalt; and
whosoever despises thee, shall be despised. For thou preferrest to honor, and
put down, according to thy blessed will. The wicked when they feel thy
heavy hand, grudge at the same: but the godly humble themselves, and cry for
mercy. For thou O Lord wilt not hear hypocrites, but those that pray unto
thee with an unfeigned faith, and true repentance. For the prayer of the
faithful is a bar to stay thine anger, that thou consume not all.

Thy mercy is so great toward thine, that thou will not destroy them for
their sins, but correct and chasten them, till thou have purged and pardoned
them. Thy favor O God is cause of all prosperity, and thine anger of all
adversity. For thy care is so much over thine, that thou will cause their
very enemies to preserve them. It lies in thy mighty power, to govern the
hearts of all, thou O God preferrest and preseruest them, which are zealous of
thy glory, and have a care and love toward their brethren: as for them that
forget thee in prosperity, who art the giver of all good things, they procure
to themselves utter perdition. For thou do cast them behind thy back; but
thy loving countenance does comfort the troubled, that patiently wait on
thee, constantly putting their trust in thy mercy.

In this world is continual trouble and disquietnes: in heaven is perpetual
rest. Yet many there be, who love this world, that could content themselves,
for lack of faith, that are loath to loose things certain for things
uncertain. But thy faithful know, through faith, that when in this world the
day passes away, then comes the night and darkness: but in heaven all is
there but one day eternal, a life everlasting, which endures for ever, which
the soul of the righteous shall enioie, through thy mercies O GOD, because in
this world they walked before thee; of which number make me one, for his sake
that died for me; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be given all
honor and praise, world without end, Amen.

11. A prayer wherein the bountifulnes of God is confessed and praised.
O God eternal, the giver of all felicity, whose love is like the evening and
morning rain upon the earth, whose mercies cannot be numbered, whose wisdom
and divine providence is such, that it reaches from one end of the earth unto
an other: most mightily and lovingly dooest thou order all things. Thy
bountifulness, Lord, to all mankind, is so manfest, that no reasonable
creature can say, but that he has tasted thereof: for what good thing has
man that he has not received of thee?

Thou art good to all men, but specially to those that have an upright
conscience, and straight heart, a mind not bowing down to carnal and
temporal things, but aspiring unto heavenly and eternal things: for it is
not enough, O God almighty, to praise thee with mouth, except our whole heart
agree thereunto, framing our life unto the same; for whosoever does otherwise
than thou have commanded, does pollute thy name. Wherefore give us grace to
fear thee, and to obeie thy holy word. Give us also a mind to praise thee for
thy benefits past, that thereby our minds may be strengthened against all
perils. When I have grace, O Lord, to take thee for my defense and trust, I
shall perceive thy protection to be a most sure safeguard unto me. For though I
have not altogether hither to known thy Majesty, as I ought to do; yet I most
humbly thank thee Lord, that I went not from thee; but did cleave fast to
thee by faith.

Though I had almost slipped and fallen from thee, yet I did not forsake thee.
And thou full mercifully knowing my good will toward thee, did hold me up
by my right hand, as thou did Peter, when he was in iopardie of drowning; thy
goodness brought me to the knowledge of mine infirmity, thy grace called me
from mine error into the right way, thou sauest me as thou did Lot and his
house, thou did lead me with thy counsel, preserving my weakness in this
present life. Wherefore my trust is, that thou will not take thy spirit from
me, but wilt receive me into glory: for thy favor has been my guide.

Thy grace does direct me in all my doings, by which I am that I am, and thy
grace held me still through faith. Wherefore my trust is, that thou will not
leave me, but bring me to thine everlasting rest. What wretched fool therefore
was I, to desire of thee, temporal, frail, and deceitful prosperity and
pleasure; knowing by faith, that thou have prepared for me, and for all
faithful that love thee, such rewards as neither eye has seen, ear has
heard, nor heart can imagine?

What is there then that is ordained for me? Even thou thy self Lord, and the
fruition of thy perfect Godhead, wherein is included all the joy that may be
devised, a treasure that is immortal, it indureth pleasant for ever. Shall I
then be so mad, to desire of thee most merciful God, worldly honor, pleasure,
ease, or riches, more than is requisite for this present life? Should I desire
of thee that love me, those gifts, wherewith thou rewardest thine enemies?

The most wicked upon the earth have these trifles of thy great goodness and
liberality, but there is nothing upon the earth that I desire save only
thee. The sweetness of thy goodness has made all evil to cease in me: for thou
Lord art become the strength of my heart, thou art my portion for ever, thou art
my reward thine own self, wherewith my heart is sufficed. For thou art the
very life it self, in whom whosoever believes, shall live everlastingly,
and shall not come into damnation.

Wherefore it is good for me, to hold me fast by thee, to draw near unto thee
by faith, from whence good works do spring toward my neighbor, and then to
put my hope and trust wholly in thee, as in a sure and immovable altar, from
whence no blast of winds of temptation shall drive me. Through hope I trust to
be delivered from a corruptible body, into thy heavenly glory: and this by
patience I now abide and look for. Wherefore, whilst I live, I will not cease
to declare and set forth all thy noble works, which thou have wrought, to
thine honor and praise, and to the profit of them that shall profess the same
Christ's religion, while the world indureth. As for me, I have none other refuge
but thee, in whom my conscience does rest: for thou O God have humbled me by
affliction, that I should cry unto thee, and receive the fruit of thy promise:
which grant O father, son, and holy ghost, to me and all thy church to
aspire unto, Amen.

12. A prayer for grace and repentance.
O Lord God, we are ashamed, and dare not lift up our eyes unto thee our God;
for our wickedness is gone over our head, and our trespasses are waxen so
great, that they reach up unto the heavens. Since the time of our fathers, we
have sinned and trespassed against thee, even unto this day: and now our God,
what shall we say? Continually do we forsake thy commandments, and harden
our hearts in misbeleefe: but thou O God open our eyes, to behold thee with a
steadfast faith; and the ears of our hearts, to hear thy words, and to
understand them, that we may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent; for whose sake hear us, O dear Father, and send thy
holy Ghost, to confirm this faith in us evermore. To whom, with thee O
Father, and thy son our only savior, be all honor and glory, power and
dominion, now and for ever, Amen.

13. A prayer wherein we desire the life to come.
O Most high and mighty prince of power, Lord of hosts, GOD and Lord of the
heavenly army of angels, that are thy ministers: when I consider the greatness
of thy mighty Majesty, I am so rapt with the desire thereof, that my heart and
my flesh reioiceth in nothing but in thee alone, that art the living God. All
earthly tabernacles and worldly goods I nothing esteem, when I behold thine
everlasting felicity, which although I see now but darkly as in a glass; I
hope to see thee face to face.

Grant me therefore O Lord, whilst I am in this tabernacle, to build upon
faith, which is the altar of thee that art the Lord most mighty, my King and
my God, upon which we give unto thee sacrifice, laud and praise in the unity
of thy faithful Church, whereof thy Son Christ is the sure rock. The
faithful build on this foundation. Blessed are they Lord therefore, that dwell
in thy house, who have occasion to praise thee. They are replenished with
abundance of all things that they desire, they are made like unto thee, they
see thee, even as thou art; of which sight they shall never be fully
satisfied: such joy and love shall they conceive of the sight of thy glorious
majesty.

But to this beatitude can we not atteine, merciful God, of our own strength
and power; but through the help of thy gracious assistance. Thou must ingraue
in our hearts thy laws, and direct us in thy ways; and when we are brought to
thee by the right way, we must be continually aided by thy grace, that thou
may stay and keep our feet from slipping. Who so trusts to his own
strength or power, or to the help of man, is much deceived, and leans to a
rotten staff: contrariwise, he that puts his trust in thy gracious power,
wants never succor at need.

Thou have put us into this present world, to fight and to strive with our
enemies, who do continually assault us; but thy grace makes us able to
repel all their invasions. Thou suffer us not to be tempted above our
strength, and for our triumph thou rewardest us with a crown of glory and
immortality.

The ungodly fall from thee, descending downward from one vice to an other:
but thy faithful and elect increase daily in godliness. For of thee Lord
comes all our power and strength to do good, and of thy son Christ Jesus,
our master, our teacher and governor, who promises, that if we weep and
morn hear in this vale of misery for our sins; we shall hereafter laugh
and be ioifull in eternal glory.

If we sow with heaviness, we shall reap with gladness; if we persevere good
and strong champions here in batell, we shall for our reward behold thy
glorious face, in thy heavenly mansion; we shall see also thy son Christ,
who is thy wisdom, and thy power, which who so sees, enioieth all pleasures:
to see that delectable sight, our hearts do much desire of thee, that art the
Lord of hosts.

For this we make humble petition to thee, that art the GOD of Jacob, who
wrestled with thine angel, and prevailed; whose name thou did change, and
calledst him Israel, that is, the fear or beholder of God. Even so make me a
strong wrestler against mine enemies in this world, that I may after this life
behold thy incomprehensible deity, to the full contentation both of my soul
and body.

We are much unworthy to obtain any thing of thee, considering our unkindness
showed unto thee, and our wretched estate: wherein we remain. Nevertheless
Lord, we pray thee to be our defender and protector, through thy grace; not
for our merits, but for the merits of thy most entirely beloved son Christ,
thine only anointed above all other, with the oil of joy and gladness. He
is our head, we are the members of his body: he dwells in his faithful, and
they in him. Who so receives any of his elect, receives him. He was
incarnate for us, suffered death for us, bare our iniquities on his back, and
rose again for our justification.

Wherefore we doubt not, but that through the infusion of thy grace, thou will
look upon him in us, and show us mercy for his sake; that we may have
abundance of grace through him, and casting all the vanities of this world
behind our backs, we may enter into the court of thy bright heavenly
Jerusalem, where one days abiding is better than a thousand in this wretched
world.

John Baptist (as witnesses our Savior) was the greatest and most perfect
upon earth: yet (said he) the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than
he. Wherefore most mighty Lord, thy faithful doubt not, whilst they are here
in this vale of misery, but that thou will ever assist them, guide them, and
bless them that put their whole trust in thee, who art the living God, and
give to thine abundantly all things necessary to this present life; and
afterward, the fruition of thy Godhead in heaven eternally, there to dwell
with thee everlastingly, Amen.

14. A prayer for comfort in trouble.
THe chiefest comfort that I receive in this miserable, wretched, and
troublesome world, O heavenly Father, and God almighty, is, when I call to
mind the truth of thy great promises, made to me in Jesus Christ, for whose
sake only I do acknowledge and confess, that thou art my merciful and
loving Father, and so carest for me through him, that nothing is able to
remove thy grace and favor from me. Wherefore I come unto thee in humblenes
of heart, craving at thy bountiful hands the assistance of thy holy spirit, to
suppress my wicked affections, that I may with a steadfast faith obeie thy most
divine Majesty, in thought, word, and deed. For thou disposest all things most
wisely, and preseruest thy children in their greatest dangers. Wherefore thy
holy name be praised now and for evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, Amen.

15. A prayer for the prosperity of the Church.
O Most holy, glorious, and blessed trinity, three persons in one Godhead, by
whose goodness all creatures have their being, whose eyes behold althings, as
well that are past, as that are to come, and are accoumpted as present to thy
mighty Majesty: we thy poor faithful subjects of the Church here militant
upon earth, show forth our lamentable prayers, beseeching thee pitifully to
behold the miserable estate thereof, which never had more need of thy godly
assistance than at this present it has.

The nature of man is so corrupt and abominable in wickedness, that none
does good upon the earth; for many there be that despise God, and oppress the
poor. Wherefore, Lord, we beseech thee, to arise up for the trouble sake of
the oppressed, and at the complaint of the poor, help him, and set him at
rest.

Thy Son Christ is our saving health, in whom who so trusts, rests in
suertie, and cannot be deceived. Arise up we pray thee merciful God, and cast
us not away for ever; comfort thy small flock, to the confusion of thine
enemies; and make us able, through thy grace, to keep thy laws, which are
pure; even as the silver, which from the earth is tried and purified seven
times in the fire.

Thou art near Lord unto all, that in this life call upon thee faithfully;
and thou keep them from all dangers: for in the midst of this world, we are
in many temptations and vices, and in the company of the proud and wicked
people, and in many tribulations. We see the vanities of this world ready to
move us, we suffer persecution; yet thou keep us from desperation, and thy
grace preserves us, that they come not near us. Their entisements we esteem
not, because we hope in thy mighty power, who art our defense in trouble.

Thy son Christ is the strong rock, in the which all birds that build do
rest out of ieopardie; to him all sinners may sly for succor and comfort,
being holden by him, they may be eased. This rock the devil cannot undermine
nor scale: no water of tribulation can drown those that build on this rock.
Pharao king of Egypt, with a great host pursued the children of Israel, but he
could not hurt them: thou Lord wast their defense, and did destroy all
their adversaries. Even so art thou our defense, our hope, and our comfort.

Thou will compass us about with ioifull deliverance. The house of our bodies
is environed with enemies, but thy providence will defend us out of all
dangers. Thou will inform us, and show us the way wherein we shall go. This
life is a pilgrimage, and a iorneie for us to travel in. Thou art the end of
our way, O God. Thou art the mark that we shoot at, when we come to our
iornies end, in thee Lord we hope to have rest. Thou give knowledge and
instruction by faith, that if we pass well through this world, we shall have
joy everlastingly: to the which bring us all, thou Lord that diedst for us
all, Amen.

16. A prayer, that we may be heard of God.
THy hand is not shortened, O Lord, that it cannot help; neither is thine ear
stopped, that it will not hear: but our misdoings have separated us from thee
our God, and our sins have caused thy face to be hidden from us. Our hands
are defiled with unrighteousness, our lips speak leasings, our toongs do
set out wickedness. No man regards righteousness, and none judges truly:
every one hops in vain things, and imagines deceit, conceiueth wearines,
and brings forth evil. For our offenses are many before thee, and our
sins do testify against us, and we acknowledge that we have done amiss,
transgressing and dissembling against thee, Lord, and fallen away from our
God, using presumptuous imaginations.

Nevertheless, thou art our God, and everlasting father, our nourisher and
defender, which would not the death of a sinner, but mercifully receiuest
all those, that with repentant hearts come unto thee. And now we set our eyes
and face toward thee, lifting up our hearts unto thy mercy seat, who have
promised to unload us, whenever we come unto thee. Hear us therefore, and
forgive us all our offenses, which we have committed, from the time of our
birth, until this present hour. O bless us, and the works also of our hands,
that we may live and praise thee, world without end, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and savior, Amen.

17. A prayer against the enemies of the church.
THe sure ships, O Lord, fleet in the sea under their sails, and pass
through the stormy tempests without drowning: so do thine elect, O God
almighty, pass through the fearful perils of all their enemies in this
world, by the means of thy ship the church, and the true faith thereof; of
which ship our Savior Christ is the sterneman, the guide, and the sure anchor,
to be cast in all necessities, who so trusts in him, shall be brought to the
fair haven of perfect beatitude.

Who so keeps him within the boords of his faithful ship, needs not to
fear the dreadful dragon, that sturdie strong Leuiathan, to whose power no
power on earth may be compared: for he is so mad, that he fears nothing: he
is king over all the children of pride. This is yt Lucifer, that fell down
from heaven; he is the serpent that deceived in paradise, and brought death to
all mankind.

Nevertheless, when thy faithful people are penitent for their offenses,
resist his temptations, and follow thy laws, putting their whole trust in
thee and thy blessed son, then do they mock and deceive him; as Christ did
with his humanity, which when he thought to devour, by tempting the Jews to
put Jesus to death, he was tripped in his own turn, and taken into bondage by
the virtue of Christ's divinity. And whenever we that be his faithful, be
caught (as this our enemy thinks) in his danger, we turn to our head Jesus
Christ for refuge, and by his help do vanquish him.

Great, good Lord, is thy mercy and goodness, that suffers not thy faithful
to be tempted above their strength; but in the midst of their temptation make
a way for them to escape out. The enemy has no power of himself, but as
thou suffer him; he, with all other creatures, hang upon thy will and
commandments: all wait on thee, that thou may give them meat in due season;
when thou give it them, they gather it.

Thy works Lord are mercy and forgiveness; thou art our justice, whereby thou
make us just, which before were most wicked sinners; thou make us thine
humble creatures, to tremble for fear of thy mighty power and justice: our
pride thereby is abated. We account the good deeds, which we have done, to be
of thy gifts and goodness; nothing presuming of our own frail power: for we
know that thy holy spirit rests upon those that have a lowly troubled
spirit, and do stand in awe of thy word.

The proud and stifnecked people dooest thou touch with scorpions and
punishments, and then they come to the knowledge of thy Majesty; then will
they say as Nabucadonosor said, after his punishment; Honor and praise be
unto thee O God of heaven, whose power endures alwais, and thy kingdom from
one generation to another. Then shall they be driven to praise thy mighty
Majesty, as thou art worthy.

Cruel Saul was touched of thy hand, and became Paul a well-beloved apostle,
through the help of thy grace, and labored more abundantly than all other
of thine apostles; such is the power of thy gracious influence. This thy noble
grace send me, most merciful God, whereby I shall have a loving desire to
honor thee, to praise thee, my God and savior, so long as I have any being,
I will not cease to confess my sins to thee, and to lament mine iniquities:
then shall my words be pleasant and acceptable to thee.

And as I joy wholly in thee, that art my creator; and in thy son, which is
my redeemer: so shall thou also delight in me that am thy poor creature and
handie work, granting me the fruit of thy sons passion, which he suffered
for my redemption: to whom, with thee O Father, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, all power and dominion, now and for evermore, Amen, Amen.

18. A prayer of the afflicted person.
O Lord God, thou art just, and all thy works and ways are mercy and truth
and thou iudgest truly for evermore; remember me, and look on me O Lord God,
and punish me not according to my sins, or mine ignorance; but deal with me
as it seems best unto thee. And now, O Lord, work thy will in me, and
command my spirit to be received in peace, that I may be dissolved of this
foul fleshie mass, thorough the which I do nothing but offend thee my Lord
God.

Yet nevertheless, if it be thy blessed will, to give me longer life in this
vale of misery; forgive me all my sins for Christ's sake: for thou art a
merciful God, slow to conceive wrath, and most ready to forgive. Wherefore
extend thy favor upon me, O Lord, which shall confirm the faith of others.
Though I deserve destruction, yet let thy mercy pity my frailty: for thou
art great, O Lord, for evermore, and thy kingdom is world without end.

Thou scourgest and healest, thou leadest unto hell, and bring back again:
and there is none that may escape thy hand. O give thanks unto the Lord ye
children of men, for there is none holy, but he; none almighty, but thou O
Lord God. Thou have chastined us for our misdeeds, and of thine own mercy
sake thou have saved us: wherefore thee will we fear and dread, and magnify
the everlasting king in his works.

As for me and my soul, whilst I live will I praise thy Majesty; as long as
I have any being. For ever since I was borne, thou have given me great cause
to praise thee; for thou have been the defense of my just cause. Hear now my
vehement prayer, my secret complaint, and my sighs which I make before thee
this day, into whose holy hands I commit my body and soul: for thou have
redeemed me, O thou God of truth, Amen.

19. A prayer of the justice of God, and for the assistance of Gods spirit,
with an invocation upon the Trinity.
O Lord I confess thou dooest not punish me without my deserts, and therefore I
will never accuse thee of rigor, as the wicked do: for I acknowledge that
when thou laiest thy hand heavy upon any, there is just cause why thou
should so entreat them. We are occasion of our own perdition, and can
pretend no ignorance to excuse us withal: for thou O God call us by thy
word and works, to follow virtue, and fly vice; which if we bend our selves
unto, depending only upon thee, thou have promised to be our schoolemaister
and protector.

Thy providence, O GOD, does not only watch over thy church in general, but
also over every member thereof: for thy word, O Lord, is easy to find, if we
have a desire thereunto, if we be not blinded by the prince of this world. Thou
most mighty have power both of land and sea, stretch forth thy merciful hand
to help them up that sink, to keep them up that stand; for thou art above
all, and over all kingdoms of the earth. Thou have made the heaven and earth.

Lord bow down thine ear and hear, Lord open thine eyes and behold. Our true
refuge and succor in all temptations and dangers is; to fly unto thee by most
earnest prayer. Thou will not here, O Lord God, for many words sake, or often
repetition, but thou do consider our faith and fervent mind: for thou do
look upon the heart of man, and not upon the outward appearance.

It is great grief, O Lord, unto thy children, when they see not the fruits of
their prayers, which causes them to think, that thou hear not: yet do
thou but defer them, to cause them to pray more earnestly and often. For when
there seems to man's judgment to be no recovery, but all things are brought
to despair, then thou O GOD do show thy mighty power, there is nothing
done without thy providence and decree.

Wherefore I will call upon thee with a steadfast faith, being assured of thy
mercies; because I have found thy help at need in my most danger: for thou
never forsakest them that put their trust in thee, because of nature thou art
very merciful. Therefore the faithful reverence thee, and are bold to
approach near thy mighty Majesty; most humbly beseeching thee, for Jesus
Christ his sake, that thou will cast all our sins behind thy back; and give
us thy grace and holy spirit, to lead the rest of our lives in thy fear,
doing always that is righteous in thy sight.

For whosoever walks in his vocation, and has the light of God for his
guide, needs to fear no danger: thy rod and thy staff shall always hold
him up. Guide me. O Lord, and give me the most precious gift of faith, which is
the head spring of all good works. Baptize me inwardly with the holy Ghost,
burn and consume all vice in me, inflame my heart with the love of thee, and
cast thy favor upon me, O Lord and holy father.

So do likewise O Christ my Lord and Savior, who wast contented to put off
all thy glory, that thou wast in before the beginning of the world, to take
our nature upon thee, and to suffer most bitter passion upon the cross for our
redemption. Wash me with thy precious blood, and make me a chosen vessel to
thy self: give me a thankful heart to praise thy name with continual
thanksgiving for thy great mercies. Come holy spirit, inspire my heart with
the true knowledge of the father and the son, proceeding from them both; one
God in Trinity, and Trinity in unity, world without end, Amen.

20. A prayer for faith and grace.
LOrd give me faith and grace, that I may be wounded in heart to seek unto thee
for mercy: for thou, O God, have taught us in thy holy word to look for aid
and help of thee in all perils, and that thou art the only giver of victory
in all temptations of our enemies, bodily and gostlie. For when thou give
sentence against the wicked, they must needs confess thee to be just, and
themselves sinners. For thou O GOD, which love pureness of heart, and may
justly destroy man, who is by nature a sinner: much more will thou lay thine
hand upon them, whom thou have instructed in thy heavenly wisdom. Thy favor
O God, is the fountain of all prosperity, for thou O Lord do still behold
us. Thee will we reverence, in what place soever we be.

Help me therefore, O Lord God, in my good purposes, and holy worshipping, or
serving of thee; and grant unto me to make a perfect entrance and beginning in
thee; for I have bin an unprofitable servant hitherto. O Lord give me a mind
never to show my self unthankful for all thy benefits: for thou art the God,
which ever has been and shall be; the GOD almighty, by whom all things have
their being; full of mercy, mindful of thy promise. Who so seeks any other
than thee, O Christ, in whom does rest only the salvation of our souls; that
creature shall find nothing but misery and sorrow. Wherefore Lord make me rich
in thy favor and grace, conducting me by thy power. Graft in me a full trust
in thy promises for my deliverance, make me one with thee in everlasting love,
that when it shall please thee to call me out of this miserable world, I may
live with thee and my Savior Christ, who died for me and all people: whose
name, with thee O Father, and the holy Ghost, be praised now and for evermore,
Amen.

21. A prayer of the creation of mankind, of the true Samaritane, and for
strength against temptation.
O Father of heaven, of power almighty, which with thine only word did
create and make all the whole world, and all for the profit and service of man,
whom thou did create of all other a most noble and perfect creature, giving
him power upon earth, the waters, and all the fowls and birds of the air;
thou made him also after thine own similitude and likeness, induing him with a
reasonable soul, and all the powers thereof, thou also did put him in the
pleasant garden of paradise, excepting nothing from him, but the eating of the
only tree of knowledge of good and evil: and further, for his help, comfort,
and company, of a ribbe of his side thou made for him a woman, and gave
her to him to be his wife.

There had they instructions given them, and the law of life for an heritage.
Before them was laid both life and death, good and evil, with a freewill given
them to take which liked them best. But their frailty was such, that they,
through a small intisement, chose the evil, and left the good: they left life,
and chose death. Thus Lord, through sin, and breaking of thy commandments, man
lost the freewill that was given him in his creation, and purchased death to
all his posterity.

In the way as he went to Jerusalem and Jericho, he fell in the hands of
thieves, who hurting and wounding him sore, departed, leaving him half dead;
so that he could have help of none, but only of the good Samaritan, who, as he
passed by the same way, powered wine and oil into his wounds, and took the
cure of him.

This only Samaritan was thy dear Son Christ, which took upon him all the
iniquities of mankind, and laid them on his back by his death, purging and
clensing him, not only from the original sin of our father Adam, but also
from all our sins which we commit from time to time, by the virtue of his
passion, and the sacrament of baptism upon our repentance. For as by Adam,
death came to mankind, so by Jesus Christ was mankind restored to life.

For this great and high benefit of thy sons blessed passion for our
redemption, we thy poor creatures praise and thank thee, most humbly
acknowledging his inestimable love toward us, in that thou vouchsafedst to die
for us, being then sinners, and thy mortal enemies. Nevertheless, most
merciful father, we are of our selves not able to do any thing that good is,
no not so much as to think a good thought, without thine aid and assistance.
We wander here miserably, in the low parts of the vile earth; our strength
will not serve us to clime to the high of the hills, where thou dwell in
thy mount Sion, a place prepared for thine elect, a chosen inheritance of thy
faithful servant Abraham, and his seed.

Wherefore since we, being burdened with the affects of worldly pleasures,
and also with other cares and troubles, can by no means ascend to thee, that
art on the top of so high a mountain, (so many legions of angels attending on
thy Majesty) we have no remedy, but with the prophet David now to lift the
eyes of our hearts and minds toward thee, and to cry for help to come down
from thee to us thy poor and wretched servants.

We wander here below, as lost sheep, having no shepherd; we are assailed on
every side with manifold enemies; the devil ravening and hungering, seeks
whom he may devour; the world allureth us also to her deceitful vanities; our
flesh also, which we carry about us, is our enemy ready and prone to draw
us unto all vices and pleasures. From this can we by no means be defended, but
by thee Lord.

Send us therefore thy help and holy angel, to assist and strengthen us: for
of thee most merciful Father flows all bounty and goodness. Thou O Lord God
made heaven and earth for thine honor, and man's commodity; establish
therefore good Lord the chosen works of thy hand with thy eternal help: from
heaven send us down the welspring of thy grace, and thy strong angel to aid
us by his help, that no assault of our spiritual enemies do prevail against
us: but from all evils by thy word defend us, Lord, both touching the body,
and also the soul, that no temptation prevail against us.

Thou have been our protector, even from our mothers womb; and our trust is
that thou will so continue all the days of our life, and specially at the
hour of our death, that we may ascend to the heavenly Jerusalem, where we
shall reast in the bosom of our father Abraham, the father of all faithful
believers, there to praise thee, and thy loving Son, and the holy Ghost,
world without end, Amen.

22. A prayer and thanksgiving unto God, for his manifold gifts, with an
acknowledgment of our sin, and pardon for the same.
O Praise the Lord our God for ever, and let us give thanks unto the name of
his glory, which exceeds all other thankesgiuings and praises: for thou art
our God alone, thou have made the heaven of all heavens, with all the host of
them; the earth, and all the creatures, which live by thee; the sea, and all
that move therein: thou preseruest them all through thine omnipotent power. For
the which all the host of heaven praises thee, and we thy poor children here
on earth do cry unto thee; Holy, holy, holy, art thou, which ever was, and
ever shall be, O Lord God of sabbath.

Thou have made good all thy words and promises, for thou art righteous and
true, and have considered the misery of our forefathers: for they were
stubborn against thee, not regarding thy precepts and commandments, neither
were mindful of thy wondrous works that thou did for them, whose
footesteps we are prone and ready to follow in all ungodliness, in these our
days: but thou O Lord art merciful, patient, and of great goodness, and
forsakest us not whenever we return unto thee.

Wherefore, O Lord, hear us from heaven, and forgive us all our unthankfulness,
and give us faithful hearts to follow thy commandments; which if we do, we
shall live in them. For it is not in man's power to order his own ways, nor to
rule his own steps or goings: therefore chasten thou us, O Lord, but with
favor, not in thy wrath. Bring us not utterly to naught, for we have none
other savior, neither can we help our selves; for by our salvation thy name
shall be praised.

Therefore Lord help us, seeing that of thy mercy thou have made us a most
dear posession unto thee, and we through our sins are worthily punished.
Declare again thy love, and finish the work that thou have begun in us; so
shall we live and praise thy holy name for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ
our Lord and redeemer, Amen.

23. A prayer wherein the heart pours out it self before God, with humble
submission and christian lowlines in diverse considerations.
THe most pleasant thing that I can offer unto thy majesty, O Lord, is to give
thee a thankful heart for all thy benefits, and to be inwardly sorry that
ever I did any thing which should offend thee; then, to mortify the
concupiscence of the flesh, to put off the old Adam, and put on Christ; to
leave to be carnal, and to become spiritual. Wherefore I will call on thy
holy name, for thy gracious aid and assistance; to help me and strengthen me
in these my good purposes, not doubting but thou will most graciously hear me.

My heart and my whole body, I offer willingly unto thy service, which
although it be of small value in deed; yet I do not mistrust but it shall be
accepted in thy sight: as was the offering of two mites, which the poor woman
threw into the treasury at Jerusalem, which small sum of her poverty thou
did more esteem and praise, than all the great gifts of the rich men.

I humbly beseech thy highness to accept this gift of my poor soul and
body, which is a declaration of my loving mind toward thee; and vouchsafe
Lord so to work in them by thy grace, that they may will and work that which
may be acceptable in thy sight: so that I may truly perform my vows made
unto thee, by keeping thy laws and commandments with my whole heart, which I
and every true christian profess to keep. For whosoever he be that breaks
but one of them, is guilty of all.

It is not in man's power to turn to thee O God, but thy work only to
convert us: for we consider thy Majesty, and the weakness of our sinful
flesh. Thy mercy works in us sorrow and repentance for our former life. All
things are governed by thy providence O God; if thou bless us, all creatures
shall favor us. Let thy holy spirit counsel me how to come forth of this
careful and troublesome life, that I may hide my self under the shadow of
thy wings, where I know I shall be defended by thy power, which shall be a
sign of thy fatherly care toward me. Wherefore I will resign my self
wholly unto thee, trusting in thy protection.

Thou O God art only the true felicity, to heal me thou art able, and to
raise me to life, though I were dead long ago, and turned to dust. For I
acknowledge thee to be almighty, and that there is nothing done on earth
without thy will and ordinance: wherefore I will not trust to any worldly
help. In the days of my trouble thou keep covenant and mercy with thy
servants that walk before thee with all their heart; and though thou
correctest from time to time, yet thy help will not be far off, if we
return to thee.

Thy mercy is great to poor sinners; for thou art more ready to pardon them
with long suffering, rather than to punish them. Thou show favor toward the
fatherless, which walk after thy commandments as thou art God, and creator
of the soul and body, so would thou have us serve thee with both, and that
thy people be continually subject unto thee. For the greater gifts that we
receive at thy merciful hands O Lord God, and the higher that thou dooest
prefer us, the more are we bound to praise thee for the same. And though we
be high or low in degree, yet can we not be exempted from doing our duties.

Thou O God art the giver of all good things: wherefore I am ready to bestow
all that I have at thy commandment. Give me grace, O Lord God, that I never
provoke thee to anger by my sins, that thou may mitigate thy punishments
toward me, and strengthen me with thy holy spirit, that I may lead an
upright life, with true faith and repentance, unto the glory of thy holy
name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

24. A prayer wherein the afflicted person prays against his enemies, that
God would turn upon them his judgments.
O Lord God of our fathers, help me poor desolate creature, I beseech thee:
for thou have don al things from the beginning; and look what thine
everlasting counsel has devised, it came ever to pass: for all thy ways are
prepared, and thy judgments are done in thine everlasting foreknowledge. O
look thou now upon mine enemies, and bring to pass, O Lord, that the pride of
them may be cut down: for thy power stands not in the judgment of men. For
there was never proud person that pleased thee; but in the prayer of the humble
and meek has thy pleasure been evermore.

O thou God of the heavens, thou maker and Lord of all creatures, hear and
help me calling upon thee, and putting my trust in thy mercy: for I have none
other helper but thee O Lord God. Think upon me, and show thy self unto me,
in the time of my distresses and troubles, strengthen me with patience in all
adversities. Thou Lord of all power know all things. O thou mighty God
above all, hear the voice of them that have none other hope but only thee;
deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies, and make me not a scorn unto the
foolish.

Hear thou my God, for I am despised; turn their shame upon their own heads:
for they are puffed up with pride, as the stomach that is choked with fat. O
Lord of hosts, thou righteous searcher, which know the reins and the very
heart; let me see them punished, if it be thy will: for unto thee do I commit
my cause. For though they wickedlie provoked me to do evil for evil, yet thy
word kept me back: for I behaved my self vprightlie toward mine enemies.
Therefore I humbly beseech thee, let them know that thou art the defender of
my just cause.

Let my persecutors be confounded, but not me; thou shall bring upon them the
time of their plague, and shall destroy them right soon. Wherefore O Lord my
savior, let the same shame and confusion light upon them, which they intended
to have brought upon me, and because thou have all things in thy hands and
power, thou will speedily reward them after their deseruings: for the deapth
of thy providence governs all things, and disposes them as it pleases thee.

Good Lord make me not a mocking stock unto the wicked, nor wrap me up with
the deceitful, when they are put to shame: for seeing my troubles come of thy
appointment, I will with thy help endure them with patience, for I put not my
trust in any worldly thing, but in thee O God my maker and defender. I will
serve thee with a pure affection, and with the godly that worship thee in
spirit and truth: which that I may the better fulfill, bless me with thy grace,
now and for ever, Amen.

25. A prayer for the increase of faith, wherein also the unmeasurable love of
God the Father is recorded.
O Merciful GOD, that art so good and loving a Father, make me heir of thy
heavenly kingdom, with thy blessed son Jesus Christ; increase my faith in
thee O Lord, that I may most faith fully believe all that thou have commanded
in thy holy word: for whatsoever is not of faith, the same is sin. Faith is
the sure and perfect foundation of all christian religion, whereby thy faithful
hope surely, that all thy promises made unto them of thy mere goodness and
liberality, shall surely, and undoubtedly be fulfilled. Heaven and earth
shall perish, rather than thy word and promise shall be unperformed.

By faith Abraham was justified, and by faith he was ready to make sacrifice
of his only begotten son Isaac. Upon those that were faithful did our
Savior work his miracles, in so much that in his country of Galilie he did
not many, because of their unbelief. And by this faith, with the help of thy
grace at this day, and to the end of the world, are and shall all thy chosen
people be saved, and that freely, without any deserving of theirs.

And being fully persuaded by thy holy scripture, I believe in thee my most
mighty God, three persons in one essence, and in all things contained in thy
holy word; and the same faith I will not let to confess before all the world.
I will not do as many of the Jews did, which believed on thy son, yet
durst they not boldly confess him, neither make their faith known, least they
should have been expelled out of the synagog. They more esteemed the glory of
this world, than they did esteem the glory of God.

But through the help of thy grace, Lord, I will speak nothing, but that I
firmly believe, and that which I do believe; I will by no means hide, but
speak boldly: for I know, that who so does confess thee before men, him
will thou confess before thy father which is in heaven. Faith causes me to
love thee for thine own sake, above all creatures. Love causes me to confess
thee before all the world, and for thy sake to work toward my neighbor, as
thou haste commanded me. It is thy grace that makes man virtuous and good,
which grace is the nurse of all good things: it leads man from one virtue to
another; it keeps us from falling, lifting us up again when we are fallen.
Thy loving kindness has been from everlasting, and endures for ever.

What shall I give again unto thee O Lord, for thy manifold benefits, that
thou have done unto me? Great cause have I to be thankful, when I remember
thy tender love, showed unto man, in his first creation, next in power,
wisdom, knowledge, and understanding to the nature of angels, made also
touching the soul like unto thine own image; which he through frailty did
abuse: yet nevertheless, thou of thy merciful pity, being willing that this
noble work of thine should not utterly be lost, did send thine only
begotten son to become man, and wiledst him to suffer death for man's
redemption.

What more love could be showed than thou have showed? what more could be done
to thy vineyard than thou have done? thy charity was fervent to us when we
were all sinners; few men would now die for their righteous friend, but thou
sendedst thy son to suffer death for thine enemies, that were sinners: yea,
when we daily now do fall still from thee, by committing all kind of vices;
yet dooest thou mercifully suffer us, and gently receive us, so often as we do
return again to thee by repentance.

We forgive our neighbors scarcely one or twice, when they displease us: but
thou Lord forgiuest us, not seven times, but seventy times seven, that is, so
often as we fall. Even so willest thou us to forgive one another. Wherefore,
Lord, reach unto me thy helping hand, as thou did unto Peter; and as he was
thereby made able to walk upon the water, so shall I be able thereby to
perform thy holy law, which my heart is desirous to do in the presence of
all the congregation, that other may take example by my doings, and glorify
thy Majesty for thy noble gifts.

Strengthen me, Lord, with thy holy spirit; give me an heart and will rather to
choose to suffer death, than to break any of them: for right dear in thy
sight is the death of thy saints. Thy name will I call upon, and honor it all
the days of my life. I will also, as I have promised, fulfill my vows that I
have made unto thee. I will give up my self to thee, as an oblation; and
seeing I am thy image, I will declare unto the holy congregation, how
mercifully thou have received me to thy grace. I will honor thee in thy
church, whereof I am partaker, through the means of thy son Christ Jesus, my
only Lord and savior, Amen.

26. A prayer unto God the father, wherein the sinner opens his grief of
conscience.
O GOD I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies and truth, which thou have
showed unto me thy servant: for though thou have, O Lord assaide me with the
one hand, thou have ever holden me up with the other: for thou art ever present
with us, to succor us in our troubles. And if thou O God did not open our
eyes, we could neither see, nor use the means, which thou have set before us.
As for me, when thou openedst mine eyes and heart, I was ready to obeie thee,
being assured, that I was written in the book of thine elect to this end: for
thy providence watches always to direct thy children, that they slide not.

Wherefore now, O Lord, call to remembrance the cares and greefes which we have
suffered; consider and see our confusion. Our inheritance is turned unto
strangers, we are become careful and fatherless; our parents, which now are
gone, have sinned, and we must bear their wickedness. Alas that they and we
have sinned so sore! Therefore is our heart full of heaviness, but thou O Lord
that remainest evermore, and thy seat world withou end, do not forget us.

Let all the world see thy judgments, in that thou art our God, and ruler over
all: which we will ever confess, because thou art so glorious; and through thy
merciful aid I will remain steadfast, being vpholden by thy power O GOD. For I
have ever this hope of conscience, that thou will not impute unto me my
ignorance. Wherefore grant unto me from henceforth, to live in thy fear all
the days of my life, and to end this pilgrimage in faith and truth, to the
glory of thy holy name. Which grant us, O dear father, for thy dear son
Jesus Christ's sake, who is blessed with thee O father. To whom with thee, and
the holy Ghost, be given all honor and praise, world without end, Amen.

27. A prayer unto the son of God, wherein the soul is comforted, by the
rehearsal of Christ's manifold benefits.
O My soul, enforce thee with all thy strength to set forth the noble praises
of the Lord thy GOD and redeemer. Thou have within thee many goodly gifts of
nature and grace, which give thee occasion never to cease from giving of
thanks. Forget not these beneficial gifts, which he has given thee: for of
forgetfulness comes vnvnthankefulnesse; which unkindness makes thee not
worthy to enioie that is given thee. Consider my soul, first, the miserable
estate wherein thou wast brought by sin.

Thou wast the enemy of God, the bond-seruant of the devil, and subject to
death everlasting. From this has thy merciful brother Jesus Christ, being
both GOD and man, delivered thee, making satisfaction for all thy sins,
through his death and passion. What greater love could he show, than to die
for thee, whereby he drives away all thine offenses.

If thou set before thine eyes the multitude of thy sins, then shall thou
also behold the benefits and goodness of thy redeemer. Give him therefore the
sacrifice of praise, and glorify him; for therein he delights: not for his
profit, but for thine; not for that he is any thing thereby advanced, but that
doing thy duty by faith, thou may be made partaker of joy everlasting with
him.

And though he send thee many adversities in this world, think that he loves
thee: for if he did not, he would leave thee to sink in thine own sin, to
the utter loss both of body and soul. But he has saved thy life from
everlasting destruction, he has redeemed thee with his most precious blood, he
died for thy sins, and rose again for thy justification. Love him therefore
my soul, and magnify him all the days of thy life. Put thy whole affiance in
him, and fear no violence of enemies: for although they assault thee, yet can
they not vanquish thee.

For he, that through his mercy and loving kindness, has given thee power by
him to vanquish thine enemies; will not fail, after thy fight and victory, to
reward thee with a crown of glory and immortality. When death thy last
enemy shall be overcome, then shall thou be admitted to the ioifull company
of angels and saints in heaven, there to have more joy and comfort than heart
can wish. When the glory of the Lord shall appear then shall thou be fully
satisfied, to thy contentation. His countenance shall replenish thee with all
io^e.

Wherefore my soul, whilst thou art in this present life, joined with thy
frail and heavy carcass, give thanks lovingly to thy gentle redeemer, for
his unspeakable kindness. His grace is ready at hand at thy call, fight
therefore manfully and mightily, against all sinful concupiscence and vice;
put off the old man, and leave all the works of darkness; put on the new man,
and arm thee with the armor of light.

Begin a new life, and fly unto Christ the strong tower and sure rock;
leave all worldly pleasures and vanities, and call for his grace, and doubt
not but he will make thee live a new spiritual life, and give thee
immortallitie both of soul and body in heaven everlastingly, where thou
shall continually behold the face of God, to the fullness of all thy joy and
contentation.

Stand fast in this hope, and mistrust not the mercies of GOD; call to
remembrance the ancient goodness of thy heavenly father, which is all one with
the mercy of his son and the holy Ghost. Behold how merciful and
beneficial he has ever bin to those that believe and trust in him. For look
how high the heaven is from the earth, so great is his mercy also to them that
fear him.

How much are we bound to serve this our God in Christ, by whom we have
received redemption? He is a God of all gods, mighty and terrible, which
accepts no persons, nor takes rewards. Thou do right unto the
fatherless, and helpest the stranger that is in distress. Come unto me most
loving God and savior, help and fight thou for me; let not mine enemies have
the victory over me.

Power forth thy grace upon my corrupt nature, and I shall be purged from all
wickedness. I am almost dead in sin; quicken me, and give me life again,
sithence thou art God the author of life and health: for none can do it but
thou alone, my God and savior; then shall my tongue praise thy righteousness,
O Lord God, without ceasing, Amen.

28. Another prayer unto the son, wherein the miseries of this our mortal
life are remembered.
O Most loving Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that art the very natural son
of the almighty heavenly father, God of God, light of light, a God thou art
without beginning, a Lord from everlasting, before the mountains were brought
forth, or ever the earth and the world were made, whose kingdom likewise
shall endure world without end. Thou Lord (I say) that art equal with thy
father in power and glory, did not disdain to become man among men, to the
intent thou would by suffering painful passion, be the refuge of mankind,
from one generation to another.

The young chickens, when the kite strikes at them, have none other refuge but
to run dickering under the wings of the hen: no more has mankind any other
defense against his ravening enemies, but only the covering of thy grace, and
the shadow of thy most precious passion; which is unto us a strong tower, and
sure shield of defense against all invasions.

This grace, merciful Lord, we humbly beseech thee to send us, that by
turning thy favorable countenance upon us, we may know our own infirmities;
and leaving all pleasure in vile temporal things, we may turn to thee that
art our Savior, and redeemer, our God and our brother.

Make us to know in what misery, in what trouble, and in how many kind of
displeasures we lead our lives here continually, until the time that age or
sickness comes upon us; at which time thou will call us, saying; Ye children
of Adam, return ye now again into the earth from whence ye came. This is the
debt due unto nature. Of earth we came, in the earth we travel, of earth we
live, and into earth me must return again.

For the life of man is to be likened unto a night watchman, that when his
hour is past, takes his rest. Thus fares it by the life of man, who first
passes away his childhood, next in youth, the third in manhood, the fourth in
age, which vanishes away like smoke that passes away out of the chimneie.
For as soon as men begin to live, they begin to die; as soon as thy pleasure
is, Lord, to have them, they fade away suddenly like the grass, which is in
the morning green, and growing, and in the evening it is cut down and
withered.

In youth we are pleasant and merry, lusty and strong, springing up green as
does the corn: but when harvest comes, it ripeth, and withers, and is cut
down. When age comes, the body of man dries away; then death ouertaketh
us. All this remembered, who can take any comfort? who can be merry, that
remembers the last end? for we bring our years to an end, even as a tale that
is told. Wherefore teach us, merciful Christ, to number our days, that we
may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Give us grace to have in remembrance the short days of our life, with the
dangerous passage of our time in this world: so that having no trust or
affiance in the uncertainty thereof, we may wholly apply our selves to the
contemplation of thy heavenly wisdom; that we may consider earnestly thy
goodness showed unto us, who art the power and the wisdom of God thy father.

Behold Lord our hearty repentance for our sins, we beseech thee, turn thy
mercy and loving kindness unto us, be gracious to us that are thy servants:
for although we fall often times from thee, through frailty of our nature; yet
we forsake thee not utterly, but return to thee, as the prodigal son
returned to his father after long absence, and was received and well accepted
of. We are thy servants, ready to serve thee by the help of thy grace.

Hear therefore our humble petition, which is, to crave thy mercy and grace:
with the same satisfy my soul, most gracious Lord, for the which all thy
faithful do sore hunger and thirst, so long as they abide in this life, but
they shall be perfectly and faithfully most fully satisfied, when thy glory
shall be manifest unto them in thy heavenly habitation.

Then shall we reioise and be glad all the days of our life. With that ioifull
day comfort us, good Lord, in recompense of the years wherein we have
suffered much adversity. Let thy grace shine upon us, let it ever assist us, O
merciful Jesus, which art the bright light of God thy father. Then shall we
prosper in this world, and after follow thee the lamb, wheresoever thou go:
which grant for thy mercy sake. To thee, with the Father, and the holy Ghost,
be praise and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

29. A prayer unto the holy Ghost, wherein his glory is confessed.
O Holy Ghost, thou art my strength, power, and refuge in time of my trouble:
thou did help me in my youth, when I had more strength; help me now, good
Lord, so much the more in my old age and weakness, for the depth of thy
providence governs all things. Thou art the Lord of life, whose throne is
most excellent, with God the Father and the Son, which dwell in the place
of our holy rest. Thou art the comfort of thine elect, and the seuenfold
disposer of the works of God. All they that forsake thee shall be confounded,
and they that depart from thee shall be written in earth, because they have
forsaken the Lord of life.

Turn ye therefore all ye sinners, and do righteousness before God, and be ye
sure that his holy spirit will not depart from you. For he did not refuse the
prayer of Abraham, when he was entreated for the wicked Sodomites, if there
could have been found ten righteous in the city: how much more will thou
grant the prayers of the godly, when they call upon thee, either for
themselves, or for the preservation of thy church? Wherefore, because thou art
just, O Lord, lead me out of the danger of mine enemies: for unto thee do I
make my prayer, O thou most high possesser of heaven and earth. Be not terrible
unto me, O Lord: for thou art God my comforter, in whom I hope, when I am in
peril. O thou finger of GOD, touch my heart, and unloose the same from all
worldly vanity.

Inspire me with thy grace, that I may confess the father and the son, with
thee O holy Ghost, to be one GOD in persons three, and everlasting in unity;
who guidest and gouernest the world, through thy omnipotency, whose mercies be
praised for all thy benefits, in the world of worlds, now and for evermore,
Amen.

30. A prayer in the remembrance of death, wherein the vanity of riches is
touched, and the revelation and reward of men's works is promised.
MAke us, O Lord, to remember our end, whereunto all men by nature must come:
then shall we never do amiss. Instruct our hearts in thy godly wisdom, that
we may apply our time according to thy holy word and will. Defend us from
the snares of our wicked enemy the devil. Let us not be entangled with the
wicked mammon of this detestable world, nor boast our selves in the multitude
of our riches, for they and we shall fade and fall away, as the fresh flower
that keeps his color and sweet savor for a short space, but the heat of
the sun makes it wither, his beauty to perish, and his flower to fall
away. Even so shall it be with all such as put their trust in their riches;
they shall perish together with their abundance; their goods may serve them
here for a short space, but no man can with money win his brother from death,
or make agreement unto God for him, for it cost more to redeem their souls,
so that they must let that alone forever.

Only thy son Jesus Christ was our redemption, which price if it well not
serve the wicked, for that they end in sin, our savior will not pay for
them a second death to redeem them withal, but leave them to be tormented for
ever. Wherefore give us grace Lord, that we may lay up our riches in the hands
of Christ, the sure tresure house, that is, in the hands of the poor; that we
may be sure to find it again, with greater gain, when we depart out of this
wretched world: so shall we lay up temporal things, and receive again
eternal.

For if we will be rich in good works, and ready to give and to distribute, we
shall lay up for us a good foundation against the time to come: contrariewise,
the wicked, which are now here in great glory; whose dwelling is in the night,
their works are hid, and appear not; but at the great judgment, when Christ
which is our life shall show himself, then shall the just appear with him
also in glory; then shall it be clear daylight, all men's works shall appear
as they be.

The tree that in the winter shows no freshness, shall then receive sap from
the root, and appear beautiful, where the flower and herb that was in sight
pleasant for a while shall wither away and fall. Then shall the strength of the
wicked consume, hell shall be their dwelling in perpetual moorning. Thus will thou destroy all the ungodly, yet have we a sure hope thou will deliver our
souls from the power of hell, and receive us to thee by grace, here in this
world; and after, when thou shall come to the last judgment, to take us to thy
self in glory; that where thou art, there may we be with thee. For we are not
grieved at the ungodly, nor afraid when they be made rich, and the glory of
their houses increased. We know that their honor indureth but a small season,
and vanishes away as does the smoke; for thou regardest them not: therefore
thou give them things of small estimation.

Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his concubines, and sent them away; but
unto Isaac he gave his possessions, and all that he had: so Lord, to the wicked
thou give temporal things, but for thy faithful thou reseruest thy
everlasting heavenly inheritance. This is a sure and permanent reward, the
othee soon slippeth away; their time here is but short, and when they die,
they shall carry nothing away with them, neither shall their pomp follow
them. For thou O Lord wilt drive them away.

As wax melts at the heat of the fire, so shall the ungodly perish at thy
presence; then shall thou change their honor into shame: for while they lived,
they were counted happy men, and so long as they were in prosperity, men
spoke good of them; but when they follow their fathers generation, they shall
never see light any more. They were the children of Canaan, come of a wicked
progeny, they have followed their forefathers steps, their deeds were evil,
they loved darkness better than light. Wherefore they shall have everlasting
darkness with torments, they shall have fire, but it shall give them no
comfortable heat.

These pains are ordained for them that were in honor, and had riches in
abundance, and did forget their estate, and for lack of knowledge were led
into captivity. Wherefore O good God, let us not be of the number of them; but
build us upon thy blessed son Jesus Christ, the head corner stone: in him
whosoever is builded, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord his God. For of
our selves we have hard hearts to believe, except thou write thy law in our
hearts by thy holy spirit. Now is the acceptable time; Lord let us find grace
and favor in thy sight, pardon our wickedness and sin, and take us to thine
inheritance, that we may reign with thee in glory, for ever and ever, Amen,
Amen.

31. A prayer that we may hear the word of God and keep it.
I Am thy servant, Lord, give me understanding, that I may learn thy law and
decrees: incline my soul to the words of thy mouth, because thy talk flows
like unto dew. The Israelits said unto Moses; Speak thou unto us, and we will
hear she, but let not the Lord speak, least we die. Howbeit, I pray not so,
O Lord, but rather with the prophet Samuel I do humbly and earnestly beseech
thee thus; Speak on Lord, for thy servant does hearken, for thou art the
giver and inspirer of life, who art able without any to instruct me.

Thy Ministers speak for thee thy secreats, but thou vnlockest the
understanding of the things pronounced; they rehearse to us thy commandments,
but it is thy aid and help that gives strength to walk over the same, and
give light unto the minds. Wherefore, because thou art the everlasting truth,
speak thou Lord my God unto me, least I die, and be made unfruitful: for thou
have the words of everlasting life. Speak therefore that thing, which may
bring both comfort unto my soul, and amendment unto my life, and also may
cause glory and immortal honor unto thee. For man does perish, but thy truth
indureth, O God, for ever.

Blessed are they therefore, whom thou instructest and give knowledge unto O
Lord, and do teach thy law, that thou may help them in time of trouble,
that they perish not. Look favorably upon me, O GOD, and grant (I pray
thee) that thy truth may teach me, keep me, and bring me unto a happy end.
Let the same deliver me from all wicked lusts, and from inordinate love. Thou
have infinite means, and all creatures are at thy commandment; therefore good
Lord show some sign, whereby I shall be delivered, and send thine holy
angel before me, to keep me in thy way, and to bring me to the place which
thou have provided for me, that I may live with thee everlastingly, world
without end, Amen.

32. A prayer wherein the word of God is praised, and what things are thereby
to be wrought and accomplished, his mercy and justice also is hear declared.
GRant me, good Lord, to serve thee with a perfect heart and willing mind: for
thou Lord serchest the heart, and understand all our imaginations and
thoughts. If we seek thee, thou will be found; but if we forsake thee, thou will cast us off for ever. If we depend only upon thee O God, we shall not
need to be troubled with these worldly respects: for thou will give us at all
times that which shall be necessary for body and soul; if we fear thee, and
obeie thy holy word, which thou will have found true, and also magnified for
thine own honor and glory, and for our commodity.

Upon thee therefore will I still call, trusting that thou will shortly hear
and help me; I will also call upon the mighty name of thy son Jesus Christ,
in whose name the faithful have and do daily cast out devils from the
possessed. They have spoken and do speak with new toongs. And though they
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. By which also they are
procured to leave their wicked minds, and devilish works, in the which they
before lead their lives.

They speak thy holy word, and also set forth thy verity, leaving all lies
and deceits. They do suppress the old serpent satan, plucking out the sting
of his tail, wherewith he was accustomed to wound them. And if at any time
they have consented to sin, and received his poison, this name of our savior
shall keep them from all hurts; because they made invocation on his holy
name, which does purge them clean after their hearty repentance. For thou O
Christ wilt deliver thine, though all worldly meanrs fail. And though we be
committed by tyrants unto temporal death, yet through thee shall we vanquish
all our enemies: for the death of thy saints is dear and precious in thy
sight: they need not fear those that have power only to kill the body, but
let us fear thy mighty hand, which have power to slay both body and soul.
This worldly death is a way to bring us from much trouble, to the haven of
everlasting health, into the land of livers.

Nevertheless Lord, of thy justice let the unjust and cruel enemies of the
faithful stand in dread of thy stretched out arm, wherewith in thine anger
thou will strike them. Of thine infinite goodness thou suffer long, abiding
their conversion; but after long forbearing thou strikest very sore, throwing
both body and soul into the pit of hell, having such measure of punishment,
as they gain in this world. For as thy mercies is unmeasureable, so is thy
justice vnremooueable to those that depart this world in their wickedness.

Make me, O Lord God, of the number of those that be thy faithful children;
let me not waver nor fall from my hope, but put on me the shield of faith, that
I may strongly fight against my ghostly enemy. Grant me to vanquish and
overcome him, that after triumphant victory, I may live and reign with thee O
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three persons, and one true and everlasting
GOD; through the merits and death of thy Son my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, to the which most glorious Trinity, be given all honor, glory, and
praise, now and for ever, Amen.

33. A prayer to be said at all times, wherein our frailties are confessed, and
request made to have them redressed.
BLessed art thou O GOD of our fathers, and blessed is thy holy name, which is
most glorious for ever. Let the heavens bless thee, and all thy creatures,
thou art the Lord, strong and merciful, gracious, slow to anger, and abounding
in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquities,
transgressions and sins, making the wicked innocent, if they will repent with
all their whole hearts, and return unto thee.

Thou visitest the sins of the fathers upon the children; unto the third and
fourth generation: for as thou art merciful, even so goes justice from thee.
For thou set so much store by man, that thou have a regard over him, and
daily carest for us, O Lord God, and make proof and trial of him every
hour, beholding those with a fatherly eye that serve thee in faith and truth.

Thou have used correction unto us, but we gathered thereby no repentance; thou
have corrected us, to the end we should amend, but we refused thy fatherly
visitation. For those that are thine enemies, thou will declare thine heavy
judgments against them; but thou will show thy favorable kindness toward thy
children. For thou have said; I will punish them that serve me otherwise than I
have commanded them, not sparing the chief, that the people may fear and
praise my judgments. For to the wicked and carnal man thou appeerest as a
flaming fire, but unto them that be drawn with thy holy spirit, thou art like
a pleasant saphir to be hold.

Holiness pertains unto thee O Lord GOD, and thou O GOD art most holy, and
nothing unholy may appear before thee. Therefore whosoever comes unto thee,
must be washed from all sin and corruption. And seeing thou gouernest all
things by thy providence, thou will put a difference between the godly and
ungodly. Wherefore we humbly beseech thee O Lord GOD, lighten our hearts with
thy holy spirit, that we may feel thy favor toward us, as those that be
thine elect do. The right hand of thy majesty is glorious in power.

Grant us, O God, continually to depend upon thy providence, with patience,
from day to day, with full trust in thy promises for our deliverance. For
though we provoke thee justly to anger, O God; yet will thou never forsake us.
Thou art our Lord almighty, Jehovah is thy name, which declarest that thou art
constant, and wilt perform thy promise.

Grant us grace therefore, that we may worship thee aright, in the place which
thou have appointed us: for thou O Lord requirest purity. We cannot be thine,
except our sins be purged with the blood of Jesus Christ, by whose grace we
may learn to detest all sin. Which grant us all to do, O Father, for
Christ's sake, whose figure we represent, on him we lay all our offenses, who
is able to bear the burden of them for us all. We present him to thee O
Father, whom we know both can and will make us clean and perfect before thee,
whose mercies we daily praise, with thee O father, and the holy Ghost, now
and for ever, Amen.

34. An humbly confession of our sins before God, as also a petition to have
the same remitted.
O Lord hear my hearty repentance, for I am sorrowful and grieved with the
burden of my sins; the remembrance of them is intolerable. Wherefore look
down upon me with thy favorable eyes of pity, and behold me which lie here
prostrat before the sight of thy majesty: for I confess that I am waxen old
in sin and wickedness, wherein I first was conceived, but now my most hearty
desire is to be borne anew, and to be graffed in my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

For thus my faith does persuade me, that none can come too late unto thee,
who forgauest the thief all his wickedness at his last hour, when he asked
mercy of thee. And many other more examples I find in my most holy word, how
merciful thou have been always to those thy servants, that sought the same
of thee. And shall I then despair, hearing daily thy voice cry out unto me,
saying; Come all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. Knock, and it
is heard; ask, and it is given.

Who can yet think that he shall miss of mercy, if he crave it in faith;
seeing thou art so true and just in all thy promises? Thy creatures fail in
their words and works, but thou keep thy promise and fidelity, and thy word
indureth vnremooueable for ever and ever. O thou God almighty, unto whom all
things are known, show on me thy mercy, even in the sight of the children of
men, that they may know and see how gracious and merciful thou art unto
those, that give over themselves unto the hands of thy almighty Majesty.

Thou art the helper of the forsaken and freendles, and there is none that may
be compared unto thee that art so rich in mercy, and loving kindness, that
did not spare thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ, to give him a slain
sacrifice for my sins, and the sins of the whole world; but also have
promised, that whosoever does come unto thee in his name, with full assurance
in his blood, death, and passion, shall not only receive remission of all
their sins and iniquities that ever they have committed, but also inherit the
crown of everlasting glory, which thou will give unto all those that be thine
elect in Christ. Of which number, through thy grace, I account my self for
one, making me most assured thereof, because thou have promised the same.

Which does imbolden me at this present, to crave thy most merciful aid, and
assisstance of thy holy spirit, to strengthen me in faith, to confirm me in
hope, to stablish me in charity, that I may be known by thy cognizance and
badge, to be thy child and faithful servant; that I may use the talent which
thou have given me, to thine honor and glory, and the health of my soul.

That when it shall please thee to take a reckoning, how I have spent the gifts
of grace, which thou have lent me, I may yield a just account, with much
advantage, so that I may be worthy to hear thy voiee, saying unto me; Come
thou true and good servant, thou have been faithful in a little, I will make
thee ruler over much; enter thou into thy masters joy.

O blessed and happy are they that shall be so placed of thee; they have
fought a good fight, and thorough Jesus Christ have overcome the battle, and
prince of this world. Therefore shall they live and reign with the same
Christ, their grand captain; because they took him for their guide, in all
their doings, and fought manfully under his banner. Thy poor soldier I am,
Lord, and fight daily. Lord help me for thy mercies sake, to overcome all
mine enemies.

Give me, O Lord, a waking mind, an understanding heart, and renew in me a right
spirit, which may lead me unto thee, who art the way, the truth and the life,
whose mercies remain for ever, whose truth indureth from generation to
generation. Glory be to the father, who so mercifully created us; and to the
son, who lovingly redeemed us; and to the holy Ghost, who sanctifies us,
and makes us blessed, three persons and one GOD, whose name be praised for
evermore, Amen.

35. A thanksgiving unto God for the redemption of the world, wherein is
showed from what graces he fell, and how he was restored.
O Most holy father of heaven, the only living God, of power inestimable, of
wisdom incomprehensible: to thee be honor, and glory, and thanks, for thy
noble works, in the creation of mankind, and also for our redemption out of
captivity, and thraldom of the devil, by the passion of thy most dear
beloved son Jesus Christ. For thou made Adam the first man, and gave him
free will to obeie thy commandments; from the which he fell by the intisement
of the devil, and by his own stubbornes, whereby he spoiled himself and his
after comers, of those godly gifts, which thou of thy mercy had bestowed
upon us.

Howbeit, thou of thy fatherly goodness did not utterly leave him, but
gave him faith to believe thy promises made unto him, and to us all, in Jesus
Christ, with grace and obedience to keep thy law. By faith we believe in
thee, by charity we work toward our neighbor, according as thou have
commanded. No man lives without sin, but happy and blessed are they to whom
thou give thy grace, not to abide and sleep in sin, but by penitence to come
to a godly conversation.

Lord give us faith, and a willing heart to follow thy holy word, so that we
may exercise our selves in it all the days of our life. Make us, O Lord, like
unto the wise virgins, that were provided of oil in their lamps, against the
coming of the bridegroom. Then will thou know us to be thy faithful children
by election, and open the gate to us, that we may enter in, to our comforts.
Which grant us Lord for thy blessed sons sake, who to save us suffered bitter
passion, whose mercies be praised for his goodness, with thee O father, and the
holy ghost, in the world of worlds, now and for ever, Amen.

36. An other prayer of praise and thanksgiving to the same purpose aforesaid.
WHat living creature can give condign thanks, most gracious and heavenly
father, for the manifold gifts which thou of thy infinite mercy and goodness
have given him? First for his noble creation, wherein he excels all other
earthly creatures; and then for his redemption, through the bitter passion and
resurrection of thy most loving son. For the which I, as one of thy poor
creatures, most humbly give thee thanks. For had not our redemption ensued our
creation, it had been much better for us that we had never been made.

Thy love above all other was most fervent, when thou did not spare to give
thine only begotten son for us, washing away all our filthiness in the
blood of that meek lamb, thine only natural son, who being GOD, was made
man, to the intent that we, who naturally are the sons of men, by him
(through grace) might be made the sons of God.

And not being contented with this kindness, thou also Lord, considering our
weak and frail nature, ready to sin, dooest with thy grace, guide us and
govern us, as the shepherd does his sheep, suffering us not to want any
thing, defending thy poor flock from the ravening woolues, that would else
devour us. Thy blessed son has put us to feed in the pleasant, green, and
beautiful pasture of his holy church, making us to rest in the unity
thereof, by a lively faith and hope in him.

Which church is very plentiful, abounding with all spiritual meat of the
word of God, which nourishes and gives life to the soul, as bread and other
food feeds the body. With this food thou did feed the prophet Ezechiel,
when thou did cause him to eat a book, wherewith his bowels were filled,
and it seemed in his mouth sweeter than honey.

In this pasture runs also a fresh and pleasant river of running water of
godly doctrine, wherewith we often do refresh our souls. In this also is a
water of spiritual washing, by baptism, whereby we were woonderfullie
refreshed in our youth. For our souls being made foul, through the devil and
sin, by baptism are repaired and made beautiful, according to the first
creation, that is, to thy likeness and image: and by this water we are
replenished with thy holy spirit.

This water saw the prophet Ezechiel long ago, gushing forth of the right side
of the temple, and grew to a great river, that no man could wade over; to which
water whosoever we come, was made whole. Even so, in the water of our baptism,
we were borne again, in the water of godly doctrine we are nourished, and
without these we are but dead in sin and wickedness, and at the end shall go
to everlasting death: but these waters are to us a well springing up unto
everlasting life. And if at any time by our frailiie we fall into sin; yet
is thy merciful son ready to receive us to his grace, and quicken our
souls; if we be sorrowful and penitent.

By which grace he makes us also to know how to love him, and not to esteem
the pleasures of this world, but to have our eyes only fixed upon him. So
that with thine apostle Paul, we account all things but loss, that we may
win Christ, and be found in him, not having our own righteousness, but that
which springs of the faith which is in Jesus Christ. Whose grace if we have,
though we walk in the vallic and shadow of death, yet we fear none evil; for
thou art with us.

This life is a shadow of death, after which we trust by faith to dwell with
thee. Nevertheless, whilst we are here, thou art with us, and thy son has
also promised to be with us unto the end of the world; his rod of discipline
and correction does chasten us, when we swerve at any time out of the right
way: by which we judge that he does love us; for whosoever he be that he
loves, him he does chasten. Christ's strong sheepheards staff does stay us,
when we are weak, as a sick man is by his staff.

In Christ thy son is the fulness of grace, from whom distilleth all goodness
that we have; through his holy spirit is our cup filled full of pure liquor:
it causes us, for joy of heavenly contemplation, to forget all the troubles
and miseries of the world, the dregs of worldly pleasures, and carnal
affections. For as thy mercy has gone before us, plentifully giving us
abundance of thy great graces: so we trust, and doubt not, but it will follow
us all the days of our lives, and keep us that we fall not from faith.

Thou Lord must help our house, or else we labor in vain; thou must be our
beginning and end, and then we be sure to dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever. For we know surely, that if our earthly mansion, wherein we now dwell,
were dissolved, we have a building ordained of God, an habitation not made with
hands, but eternally in heaven, where is perpetual joy and beatitude, world
without end, Amen.

37. A brief confession, that we receive all goodness from God.
ARise up O Lord God, and let thine enemies be scattered before thee, and let
them that hate thee be brought to confusion. Declare O Lord thy might and
power, for thou art a consuming fire, and a gelous God, visiting the sins of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation. For thy
government is so just, constant, and without change or repentance, that thy
very enemies shall be compelled to confess the same.

O God almighty, thou do punish thine elect by measure, and give them
grace to bear it; but to the reprobate, it is thy just vengeance, to drive
them headlong to all madness. For thy omnipotency has all power in it self,
to execute thy terrible judgment against obstinate sinners: as thou art rich in
mercy to comfort them which obeie thy word and love thee.

The faithful, in all their adversities, do know that all shall go well with
them: for GOD will be merciful and just, and though they want for a time, yet
thou will send them comfort in due season. For thy Majesty is so great, that
it fills both heaven and earth, and there is no power so high that can let
thee, when thou will deliver thine. The wicked rise up suddenly to honor, and
perish as quickly; but the inheritance of the children of God continues for
ever. For thou O GOD wilt take vengance upon the wicked, and measure them
according to their dealings.

Thus thou O God can pluck back the bridle of tyrants, and deliver thine
own out of the lions mouth: for though the wicked swell never so much, yet we
fear them not. They cannot utterly destroy us, for thou Lord have promised
to abide with thy faithful people, to the end of the world. Thy grace will not
leave us, nor any that love thee and serve thee with a faithful heart. Thy
favor O God rests on thine, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, that from him
we might receive thy blessings. For we deserve nothing of our selves, but thy
wrath and indignation.

Wherefore grant us, good Lord, first to seek thy glory, and above all things
reign thou over us al, and let us render to thee perfect obedience, as thine
angels do, whom thou have commanded to take charge of thy children. For the
which if the wicked despise them, thou of thy mercy wilt revenge their cause:
for thou will preserve the faithful branches of thy vineyard; but the rotten
stocks will thou destroy, according to their hypocrisy. For there is none
like unto thee in heaven above, or in the earth beneath. Thou dooest bless the
labor of the poor, and consumest the goods of them which are negligent,
because they boast and think they have enough.

The wicked wallow in their riches, yet are they but slaves to the godly that
are true professors of the gift of God. The cup which thou gave to the wicked
to drink, is much bitter than that thou do bestow on thine own: them thou
measurest by mercy, the other by justice. And though thou suffer thy children
to live under the cross, least they should embrace wickedness; yet thou will
not suffer it to rest upon them, that it should drive them from their hope: for
all thy promises are true. Wherefore we are sure of thy helpful deliverance,
seeing the earth and all creatures remain in that estate, wherein thou have
created them; much more thy truth indureth constant and unchangeable. Blessed
be thou O God of truth, and blessed be the glory of thy holy name, world
without end, Amen, Amen.

38. A prayer wherein is showed, that there is none omnipotent, but God alone.
O Lord GOD almighty, it is not in man's power or counsel to hinder that thou
have determined shall come to pass: for as the insensible heaven is not
subject to any alteration and change, so shall the truth of thy promises be
unchangeable, since our infirmities cannot in any wise comprehend thee in thy
majesty. There is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee: thou
killest, and give life; thou woundest, and make whole. Wherefore blessed
are they that confess thee, and obeie thy word: to them thou give life and
felicity.

The ioies that are steadfast and perdurable, are given of thy goodness, to
those that are meek and humble in spirit. Thou dooest grant to the faithful
of thy goodness, both grace and glory; so that no good thing shall be
withholden from them that live in thy fear: for thou castest away none that
will seek thee in righteousness. And though thou suffer the world to hate thine
elect, it is because thy children should forsake the filthiness of this world,
and cleave unto thee. Wherefore grant us, O Lord, that we may always have the
eyes of our faith fixed upon thee: for whatsoever thou O GOD have promised,
shall surely be performed. For as it was thy free mercy, O God, that did
choose us: so is it thy free mercy that must save us. Thou do call us by
thy rod, to consider the shortness of our life: for our sins have abridged our
days, which be not only short, but miserable, because we are so sinful, that
we do nothing but provoke thee to wrath; so weak we are, so frail, and
unable of our selves to do that good is, inclining always to things
forbidden. There is nothing so secreatlie done on earth, but thou O God do
see it, who dooest fulfill both heaven and earth.

Grant us, O Lord, always thy fear, which shall be a bridle to stay us from
all wickedness. For as thou have created all people, even so dooest thou
govern the hearts of all, ioining the salvation of thine with thine own
honor, so that they cannot perish, unless thy glory should be diminished.
For thou art so merciful, that a sinner can no sooner humble himself, but
thou receiuest him to mercy, waiting as it were with patience, to call him to
repentance.

Wherefore we cry now unto thy majesty, from the depth of our hearts; most
humbly beseeching thee to put all our wickedness out of thy remembrance, and
give us grace to put our only trust in thee, from whom we look for our
deliverance, who shall change our bodies, and make them like to the most
glorious body of thy son Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee, and the holy
Ghost, be given all praise, honor, and glory, now and for ever more, Amen.

39. A prayer of lamentation, wherein the sinner lamenteth his miserable
estate, and cries for mercy.
MY God, when I do earnestly behold mine own state, whereunto I am brought
through sin, not only being naked and bare of all goodness, but also to be
overwhelmed in the depth of all iniquity; I cannot but lament, moorne, and
cry for help, as does a woman, whose time draws near to be delivered of
her child; for she can take no rest, till she be discharged of her burden.

No more can I, Lord, as long as I feel my self laden with my heavy burden
of sin, the weight whereof draws me down to the deep bottom of all
misery; from whence I can by none be delivered, but only by thee, that art
the guide and the eye to those that are blind through ignorance, the succor of
the oppressed, the comfort of the weak, the life of those that are dead; so
that they repent and turn unto thee.

It is not the long distance of us from thy highness, which keeps our
prayers from thee; thine ears are ready in the hearts of all that are willing
to cry for the help of thy grace. Who so is made far from thee, through
sin, by repentance is made near unto thee. He that is in the bottom of the
sea of misery, if he begin to call for thy help, he shall not be suffered
to sink. From all deep dangers most merciful God deliver me.

I cry and call pitiouslie unto thee, which art only able to help me. Hear
therefore, I most heartily pray thee, my sorrowful prayer, and let my poor
petition pearse the ears of thy Godhed. And since thy son Christ died for to
release us of sin, let not my sins be a stay, whereby my prayers should
not be heard, but wipe them clean away, that they never more appear. For I
miserable sinner do fly to the gentleness of thy favorable mercy, whose
nature and property is to have pity and compassion.

From thee flows all mercy and grace, which was so great unto us, that it
moved thee to send thine only Son to die for our redemption; whereby thy
justice was satisfied, and thy mercy found that it sought. O how fervent was
this thy noble charity to us vile wretches! It took root and beginning in thy
mighty deity, and from thence it was derived to mankind; being an example
that we thy christian people should, like loving brethren, bear one another
burden.

Wherefore I am most willingly contented, to remit all injuries done to me; as
it has pleased thy goodness to forgive me much greater offenses committed
against thee. And whenever it shall please thee to scourge and punish me, I
will gladly receive thy chastisement, for that I know it proceeds of love
for my wealth and surety; trusting that after my long abiding and suffering in
this life, I shall surely obtain thy reward, by thy promise, that is; If we
suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him.

Such sure hope have I ever had in thee Lord, and by the same hope I trust to
have thy favor, and live for ever. For blessed are they that trust in thee,
most merciful Father; and cursed are they that trust in man. Of thy grace and
mercy only comes all goodness; thy mercy forgiueth only our sins
daily and hourelie, and the painful death of thy son Christ delivers us
from all the pains due for our sins. Thou boughtest us not with gold and
silver, but with the precious blood of that lamb without spot, thy blessed
Son, whose death had been sufficient for thousands of worlds.

The greatness of thy love caused the plentiful payment of the price of our
redemption. The charity of our Lord Jesus Christ has burnt up, and consumed,
by his death, all our iniquities. Wherefore the faithful, being thus delivered
from all dangers, by thine only goodness, may now give thanks unto thy
mighty Majesty, resting in hope to have, after this life, everlasting joy
and felicity; thorough Jesus Christ our merciful Lord and redeemer; to whom
with thee O dear Father, and the holy Ghost, be given all honor, glory, and
praise, now and for ever, Amen.

40. A prayer, wherein the fatherly love and preservation of God is set
forth, and a request that we may continue faithful and constant unto the end.
GRant us, O Lord that we may constantly believe in thee; that being certified
by thy justice, taught by thy wisdom, governed by thy power, we may
steadfastly persevere even unto the end, in hope of that joy that is set
before our eyes, framing our lives continually in christian exercises, that we
may show our selves thankful to thee our God, with dutifulness to our
neighbor. For thy judgments appear manifest in this world, against those
that suppress thy word, and persecute thy servants. For thou dooest disappoint
the lot and expectation of the wicked, turning their joy into sorrow, and the
tears of the godly into gladness, dwelling in the hearts of thy faithful by
thy holy spirit, who are called thy glory, because thy image, and the token
of thy grace shines in them.

Thou art a light to comfort thy people, and a fire to consume thine enemies.
Thou art he, O Christ, that touchest the hearts of all thy servants, mortifieng
their concupiscence: but to the wicked thou art the savor of death. Wherefore
the faithful desire of thee to be delivered, that thou by them may be
glorified: for thou have promised to be true and just unto all that trust in
thee. Wherefore we will take thee for our defense against all our enemies, what
danger soever we fall into.

Thy word gives life unto man, causing him to see and try the secrets of his
dark heart. For thou show thy self most liberal to thine, when they seem
to be most destitute, keeping them under thy protection, that they may be safe
against all dangers, and free from the cruelties of their enemies. For as to
the elect all things turn to their profit; so to the reprobate, even those
things that are good, turn to their damnation.

As for me, I will never boast of mine own virtues, O God; but confess that
thou of thy free goodness, have ever bin merciful unto me, and given me power
against mine enemies, as to one of thine household. Wherefore grant me always
to make my prayer unto thee, from the fountain of my heart, that I offend thee
not through hypocrisy.

And though the wicked deal rigorously with me, yet I beseech thee let me
find comfort from thee; for hitherto have thou strengthened me against my
outward and inward enemies, so that all the world shall confess, that thou
have wonderfully preserved me, and performed thy promise. For thou dooest ever
guide me with thy hand, that I can turn no way but where thou appointest me.
Thy providence does so fast hold me, that I cannot by any means escape from
thee. Thou have made me in all parts, and therefore must needs know me.
Wherefore, considering thy wonderful work in forming me, I cannot but praise
thee, and fear thy mighty power, who art the creator of all things, the
keeper of justice, the lover of right, the hater of malice; beholding from the
high throne of thy Majesty the children of men.

Bow down thine ear, O merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee, and hear me
thy servant, whom thou have hitherto brought up from my tender age, and
delivered me until this day from the hands of the wicked, whose rage was
furious, until thou brakest their force. I set my hope in thee O God, and life
everlasting, knowing that these earthly things shall perish, having a sure
hope, that both my soul and body shall enjoy thy presence, O God of my
salvation, in the last resurrection. Then shall I feel thy mercies, and
answer when thou call me.

Wherefore I set all my felicity and joy in that I am united with thee O God,
and shall inioie thy presence; so that I reject all other things save that
which furthereth me to attain to thy heavenly treasures, which is sure, and
cannot be found in any but in thee alone, whose praise shall endure for ever,
world without end Amen.

41. A prayer, wherein the sinner prays for grace, that he may make a godly
end.
BLessed Father of heaven, fountain of all grace and goodness, that art rich in
mercy, and plentiful in giving the same to all that do faithfully call upon
thy holy name. O good God, thou having a son no less rich in power,
wisdom, knowledge, and mercy, than thou art thine own self, did not
spare to send him from thy heavenly palace, down to the earth, into the womb
of a virgin, for the salvation of mankind, to declare thine abundant love
toward us.

Thou did for our sakes make him poor, which before was rich; to the
intent that we, which before were very poor, should by his poverty be made
rich; that he which before was all one with thee, in thy divine substance,
might now be made one with us, that are members of the body, whereof he is the
head. Hearken good Lord, give ear unto my prayer, let my petition ascend up
before the sight of thy Majesty. The coming of thy merciful son did make me
thine, but the vileness of mine own acts has cast me down, and made me very
miserable. The greatness of mine offenses has caused thee to turn away thy
face from me, withdrawing thy grace, which was the cause of the good works I
did.

Thou can find no good thing in me, worthy of thy favor; wherefore, Lord,
behold the face of Christ thy dear Son, my mediator; for his sake give me
that which of my self I am much unworthy to obtain of thee. Look on me with
thy pitiful eye, and in the time of my trouble incline thine ear and hear
me. My old enemy daily assalteth me and vexes me. Wherefore I will not cease
to call upon thee daily: but specially at the hour of my death Lord hear me
and defend me, at which time my cruel enemy will most busily invade me. At
that instant Lord look upon me with the eye of thy mercy, now whilst I am in
this wretched world.

I crave not of thee abundance of earthly goods, but as honest necessity
does require, but the abundance of thy grace in this life. This have thou of
thy mere liberality promised to grant, to all that in steadfast faith call
upon thee. This hasty calling upon thee dooest thou delight in, for thou art
as ready to answer me, as I am to call upon thee. Wherefore make speed in
hearing, as I am bold to call upon thee for I confess O Lord I have left thy
holy word and commandments, which is as bread unto the soul, giving
nutriment and moisture by faith and charity, and have eaten of the tree which
thou forbadest me.

I have, with our father Adam, followed the illusions of the serpent, and
tasted of sin; but thy blessed son my savior Jesus Christ has shed his
blood for us, whereby we are restored unto thy grace, mercy, and favor,
through the sacrament of baptism, if we heartily repent. He quickneth us,
which before were dead in sin; he slaieth, and can raise again; he strikes
and heals: as he did Paul in his persecution.

How much therefore are we bound to his grace, that without any deserving on
our parts, willingly offered himself to the death for our redemption: and to
thy majesty also, who did not spare thine only begotten son, but of thy
pure pity, sentedst him down to suffer the most vile death of the cross for
our sakes.

Wherefore I am much ashamed to lift up my eyes to heaven toward thy
highness, being so unkind to thee again so many ways. I have loved the
works of darkness, and therefore I fled from the light of the bright sun of
justice: for which cause do I sigh, sorrow, and bewail my wretchedness, in
the bitterness of such thoughts for fear of thine anger toward me; knowing
that at the time of thy coming to the dreadful general judgment, the storm
of thine indignation shall go forth, and fall down upon the heads of the
ungodly.

Thou liftest me up of a great hight, in that thou thou made me like unto
thine image, touching my reasonable soul, and have given me power, by thy
grace, to inherit everlasting ioies of heaven, both body and soul, if I lived
here after thy rommandements. What greater gift can thou give me, Lord, than
to have the fruition of thee? But alas I bear so heavy and erthlie frail
body, joined to my noble soul, that my heart and mind is drawn down from
the consideration of thy goodness, and from well doing, unto all kind of vices.

Wherefore, Lord, grant me, that in the shadow of this life, I may have grace
to see light, and to know thee, thy ways, and thy holy word, which gives
light and understanding unto babes: for after this life, there is no place nor
time left of repentance. And since my time is here but short, continue thy
grace toward me, that I may live in thy fear all the days of my life, and
end my life in thy favor, who do endure for ever, and thy remembrance
through all generations, world without end, Amen, Amen.

42. A prayer against the offenses of this world.
MY heart shall praise thee O GOD, for my soul is in love with thy majesty,
for the which I despise all earthly things, in respect of of thee the
everlasting GOD, without measure, who feeds all things. Thou art the comfort
of the soul, and the true joy of the heart. Wherefore Lord continue thy
graces toward us, and help our present necessities: for we are far unworthy
of thy great benefits, which thou bestowest upon us and all people, who
appointest the earth to bring forth to man's use. Thou art a most nourishing
father, providing for all creatures their daily food; for none is able to do
any thing, but as thou appointest them, since they are but instruments to do
thy work, though intentions be diverse.

Thou O God art the sender of peace and war, prosperity and adversity,
punishing whole nations for their sins. How can we then so foolishlie
persuade our selves, that we shall escape unpunished for our offenses? Seeing
thou hear and see all things, who have in all ages plagued all such as
maliciously and contemptuously depart from thy truth. For who so forsakes
thee O God, shall be punished, and made weary of his sins, wherein he
delights. As for me, I hate them, O Lord, that presumptuouslie dare attribute
unto themselves, that they can guide their own hearts; seeing it lies in thy
omnipotency to give the will, and further the work. For there is none able to
speak a word, except thou give it him; neither is any able to think a good
thought, without thee: much less may any do the thing that good is, without
the assistance of thy holy spirit.

Wherefore regenerate me, O Lord God, by the same spirit, and restore me to
thine image, giving me grace, and an assured faith, to think and do that
which is righteous in thy sight. For I desire to live but only to please
thee, as thy servant Moses did, who was brought up with the daughter of Pharao,
and taken as her son; where he might have lived still in much wealth, if he
would. But when he was great through faith, he refused to be called her son,
and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, than to enioie
the pleasure of sin for a while; and all for that he had respect to the
reward to come in thy heavenly house.

Which grant me to aspire unto, for thy mercy sake, whatsoever vexation or
trouble my body bide. For what should all the world gain me, if I lose my
soul? Better I were in this world to feed upon the bread of tears, and to
wash my cup with moorning, than to live in all prosperity, wallowing in
worldly wealth, and forget thee my God, as the rich glutton did. For
assuredly it is thy plague, when the rich man has not a liberal heart to use
his riches, to thine honor and glory. For there is no power so high or
mighty, but thou O God can visit him with thy rod; neither is there any
mountain or hill so strong or mighty, that it can preserve the wicked from
thy wrath, O most mighty, when thou will strike; for thine office is to take
vengeance on the wicked, and to reward them according to their wickedness and
deserving. Bless me, O GOD, and make me of that number, which regard not the
pleasures of this world, with the temporal commodities thereof: but make me
strong against my spiritual enemy, that I may be thy well beloved child and
servant: for I have no other refuge but thee O Lord, in whom my conscience is
at rest. Thou art named merciful, gracious, and long suffering: Lord show thy
self so unto me thy poor creature, who is most weak and frail of all other.

Lord I have confessed all mine offenses and imperfections unto thy Majesty:
and now I depend wholly on thee, resting still on thy most holy word;
beseeching thee to strengthen my poor soul, which sigheth and groneth unto
thee, with greefes that cannot be expressed, until thou have mercy upon me.
Which grant me for thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord and savior, Amen, So
be it.

43. A prayer for the good estate of the church and congregation of God.
ARise O LORD GOD, and have mercy upon thy church and faithful congregation.
Give us that be of the household of faith, joy and consolation. Thou did
ever show mercy unto thy servants; for ever since the fall of angels, unto the
end of the world, thy mercy has ever been, and shall be abundantly showed
to all mankind: but chiefly it was showed when thy son was sent into this
world, to suffer death, whereby the gate of heaven was opened, which before was
shut, that no man might enter. This time was the beginning of grace, and was
certeinlie appointed, when the fulness of time was come, which was before sin,
by the everlasting wisdom of thy deity, whereby thou dooest all things in
most perfect order. This time of grace, we trust, shall continue for ever, to
those that are penitent.

Wherefore we pray thee without ceasing, to have mercy upon thy church: for
we faithfully build upon a sure rock, thy son Jesus Christ is our
foundation. Wherefore most loving father, turn thee unto the prayers of us
that are poor and destitute of any help; but only of thy help, through thy
mercy. Despise not, we humbly beseech thee, our humble desire. Behold our
petitions with thy fatherly eye, wherewith thou did look upon the oblation
of Abel, and receive it thankfully, wherewith also thou beheldest the the
prayer of the Israelties, being in bitter bondage in Egypt, and deliueredst
them: with those same merciful eyes vouchsafe to look upon us, and our
prayers, whereby the noble fame and praise of thy mercy shall be written for
those that come after, which shall be borne in faith by baptism, and may
praise thee. For those that be thy children, shall have a power above nature,
and in their age shall they bring forth most sweet and pleasant fruit.

Thou will ever declare thy self the preserver of the church in destroieng
thine enemies, as thou did in thy red sea. Thou O God art merciful, and
wilt not forsake us, neither destroy us: nor forget the appointment of our
Fathers, which thou swarest unto them. And for so much as thou O God have
appointed that thy church in this world shall be under the cross, both because
we should learn, not to put our trust in any worldly thing, and also feel
thy comfort when all other help fails. Therefore we humbly beseech thee O
Lord, gather thy church which is dispersed, and give us constancy under the
manifold crosses which we suffer, that we may with one consent all together
praise thee for ever. For thou have promised, by the mouth of thy sweet son
Jesus Christ, that thy power, and thine assistance shall be with her unto the
end of the world.

Strengthen us therefore with thy grace and holy spirit, that we may sow the
seed of good works in this world, that they may declare us to be thy faithful
servants, and that they may be acceptable fruit in thy sight: for thou dooest
try our faith, and teach us to forget the world, and to depend on thee O
father of al goodness. Thy promise never fails, thou gouernest, by thy holy
spirit, as seems best to thy godly wisdom: for thou O God art rich in
mercy and truth, which feedest all things, and none can justly complain. For
as by thy presence all things have life; so if thou withdraw thy blessing, we
all perish.

Thou have a little flock, feed them with thy spiritual food, and govern
thy church, seeing thou have chosen them out of the world: join it unto thy
self, that thy faithful may continue for ever. For thou art everlasting, thou
have ever loved truth, thou art verity it self, all thy promises are
vnremooueable. Thou did promise to Abraham to multiply his seed, as the
stars of heaven, and as the sands upon the sea side; which promise at the last
he enioied: even so did thou promise Isaac and Jacob. When Ezechias was
sick unto the death, thou did promise him life fifteen years more, which
thou did perform for thy names sake.

Even so Lord keep thy promise with us, that are thy poor sheep, so shall we
praise thee, and thy Son our savior Christ, which is our good sheepeheard;
who suffered death for his flocks sake, to make them triumph over their
enemies. And as he rose again for our justification, so grant that we may rise
in newnes of life, and aspire unto the same place whither our savior is gone
before; whose name be praised, with thee O dear father, and the holy Ghost,
now and foreuermore, Amen.

44. A prayer, wherein is showed, that the wisdom of God is to be praised; as
also how he tries his servants is declared.
THou, O most mighty God art the creator and maker of all things, whose power
is everlasting, which shall never be put down; whose kingdom indureth incorrupt
for ever, and thy going out has been from everlasting. Great art thou, high
and unmeasureable; thou only know the ways of wisdom none other is there
that can find her paths, but thou the mighty God, which have found her out
with thy foreknowledge; and by the same thy godly wisdom have created all
things, according to thy noble will and pleasure. This thine omnipotent power,
Lord, I thy sinful servant and subject do honor, and thy exceeding wisdom
I have in great reverence. By the one thou made all things, and by the other
thou knew what thou would make, long before they were made; in both these
have thou declared thy self to be the living God.

And although our acts, which be past, present, and to come, be all open before
thine eyes, and our thoughts manifest in the sight of thy divine presence; yet
dooest thou daily search and prove thine elect people, sometimes by
adversity, sometimes by prosperity, to cause us thereby to be known to
other. After this sort did thou prove Abraham, in the oblation of his
son, to the intent his obedience might be an example to all that should come
after him. Thus also did thou prove thy servant Job, and he was found both
faithful, constant, and just. Thou know what men be, before thou triest
them. But after the trial, thou hear them and their prayers, and allowest
their good acts and intentions: by such proof, Lord, have thou tried me both
within and without.

And though through frailty I have erred, wandering from thee; yet at length
have I been found to return again to thee, that art the perfect way, and to
believe faithfully in thee, as in my very God, to trust wholly in thee, and
to love thee as my merciful father: and all through the gift of thy grace, not
of mine own strength or will. For what were I silly wretch, if I were
destitute of thy help? I do consider thy goodness, and thy godly providence,
by which thou wast the cause of my first being; and still am I much bound unto
thy Majesty, for the great love thou barest unto me. First for my creation,
and also for thy meruellous protection, assistance, inspiration, redemption,
and reconciliation, which the eye of my soul does right well consider.

Wherefore I most humbly pray thee Lord, to regard what shall redound to thy
glory: for thine honor is more advanced in saving one poor miserable and
sinful creature, through thy mercy, than in the damnation of a thousand, by
the rigor of thy justice. For in hell none can praise thee, but curse, wail,
moorne and lament their miserable estate. Now, O my GOD, I most heartily
beseech thee, to give me grace to fly the company of all such as speak
untruely of thee, and of thy holy will and word; and also of them that exalt
themselves presumptuouslie, least being conversant in their wickedness, I
might fall from that right way, in the which it has pleased thy gracious
goodness to direct me: for whosoever is familiar with the proud, shall be clothed
with pride.

He that does evil, is worthy of death; so are all those that communicate
with him that has pleasure in evil. As for such as decline from thee, I will
abhor: those that do me any wrong, I cleerelie forgive and forget
whatsoever they do unto me; yea I do pray unto thee my most merciful
father, even from the bottom of my heart, to forgive them. But those, Lord,
that maliciously resist thee, and thy holy word, I hate them, even as though
they were mine enemies. Nevertheless, I do pray thee for amendment of their
lives, and salvation of their souls.

Consider Lord the frailty of our nature, none can stand in the right way,
but shall slide and fall, unless thou give him the staff of thy grace, to
stay himself thereby. As for me, I have wandered from thee, as a sheep that
is straied from the flock: but thy goodness has found me out again, and
brought me unto the fold. Lead me therefore, out of mine own wicked way, into
thie blessed way of truth, through the merits of thy deer beloved Son
Christ, who is the very true perfect path to all beatitude, by whose help I
may so direct my steps, in the way of this life, that I may keep the way
unto life everlasting, Amen.

45. A prayer wherein is showed how stranglie preserved, and how blessed they
are, that trust in God: the mercy of God also toward sinners is declared.
O Lord almighty, father of mercy, and God of all comfort, which in the
treasure of shine infinite mercies, disposest all things, not only among us thy
poor creatures upon earth, which is bountifully replenished therewith; but
also among thy holy angels, and blessed spirits in heaven, who are all
preserved by thy grace. Lord God, whose nature and property is to have mercy
upon all those that love thee, and in faith call on thee; thou say by thy
prophet Esaie, that the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall
down, but thy loving kindness shall not move from those that trust in thee.

Thou Lord, of thy mercy, sauedst Noa from the general flood; and Abraham in
his voyage; Lot, from sinking among the sinful Sodomites; Joseph, from the
danger of his wicked lady and mistres; the Israelites, from the bondage of
Pharao; Daniel, from the lions; Jonas, from drowning, being three days and
three nights in the whales belly; the three young men, from burning, that were
put into the flaming furnace; with many thousands more, whom of thy natural
accustomed mercy and goodness, thou dooest preserve, and ever wilt do, all
those that it pleases thee to draw unto thee, thorough grace.

I most miserable and wretched sinner do now call upon thee for mercy and
grace, acknowledging my self greeuouslie to have offended the eyes of thy
deity, so many ways, that I am not worthy to bear the name of a christian;
the burden of mine offenses is so great. Wherefore discharge me of them, Lord,
according to thine infinite mercy. For small sins, thy small mercy
suffices; but my great sins require thy great mercy. And as my offenses are
many in number, so is there of thy mercies a great multitude: yea they cannot
be numbered. But of one thing I am sure, that it lies not in man's power so much
to offend, as it is in thy merciful power to forgive. My woonds cannot be so
great and noisome, but thy medicines are most precious and healthsome:
wherefore heal thou me, and I shall be whole from my sins.

The children of Israel might not come into thy sight, being once defiled with
any uncleanness, till they were sanctified; and the priests also durst not
come to thy presence, till they were washed, for fear least they should
perish: how much more need I then to desire thee Lord to wash my unclean
soul? For my soul has need of many dews of thy grace, and many secret
drawings to thee with spiritual violence, or ever it can be made clean. The
leprosy of Naaman of Syria could not be cleansed, till he had washed himself
seven times in the river of Jordan: how many waters have I need to be washed
with, or I be purged from my uncleanness? But thy mercy, O Lord, is as great
as thy self. Thy grace makes a stony heart to be a fleshie heart; in a
sturdie stomach, it breeds an humble spirit; of a fierce lion, it makes a
meek lamb. Why should I then despair of thy goodness, considering that thy
justice wills me to trust in thee?

Thy promise is to have mercy on all those that be penitent for their
offenses, so that thou will no more remember them. This promise no doubt, shall
stand fast and sure, when both heaven and earth shall pass away. Wherefore I
offer now to thy majesty a heart contrite, being sorry for the wickedness by it
conceived, with a body subject to thee with all humility, and sorrowful for
all the sins by it committed. I acknowledge my faults, and my sins is ever
before me; I punish my self with contrition, because thou Lord should give
me grace and remission. I have it ever in remembrance, and set it up in my
sight, because thou should forget it, and put it out of thy sight. Consider
Lord (I pray thee) the frail metal whereof I am made, receive me thy poor
creature into thy favor: for before thee I accuse my self, to the intent thou
should show mercy, as thou have promised, who have ever been found just in
all thy saiengs.

I have long straied from thee, yet now am returned to thee, with all my whole
heart. Make me therefore upright. and so to aspire to heavenly things, that
neither adversity, nor worldly pleasure pluck it downward. Cast away my
sins behind thee, but cast not me from thy merciful countenance, as thou
did king Saul for disobedience. For if I loose thy gracious presence, I am
then sure thou will also take from me thy holy spirit, as thou did from
Saul. O how gracious and sweet is thy spirit in all things, it passes all
other sweetenes, it leads those that love thee, into the land of righteousness.

This thy holy spirit I desire may remain still with me, to teach me all
verity, to confirm me in goodness, to make intercession for me unto thee in
all my necessities and infirmities. Give me therefore again the comfort of thy
help, and stablish me with thy principal spirit. For thou only art mighty,
faithful, and constant, and never failest them that call upon thee in faith
and truth. Wherefore I offer unto thee the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, for all thy mercies and benefits, putting my whole trust in
thee, who have never failed me; for which cause I am bound to praise thee, now
and for evermore, Amen.

46. A prayer of the majesty of God, and of his bountiful liberality toward
mankind.
O Lord, thou art my GOD, and my King, my hope and my comfort, who have by so
great providence created and ordained all thy creatures, that the beauty and
excellency of them declare thy mighty magnificence, to us all which are thy
reasonable creatures. The power of thy majesty to us known before, is by the
contemplation of them made manifest, causing us to praise and magnify thee
with all our powers. We acknowledge thy power, thy wisdom, thy honor also,
and thy great glory, wherewith thou art garnished. Thou art the everlasting
light, and thy wisdom is the brightness thereof, which shall never be
quenched. Thou art compassed about with bright angels, and with thy saints
shining in clearenesse, whose inheritance is to enioie light.

As for us thy poor creatures on earth, great cause have we to praise thee
world without end; because thou have so mercifully declared thy great goodness
to mankind, in this world, to his most comfort that could be devised, giving
unto us all things to do us service. All beasts thou made subject for his
use; which to nourish and to feed, thou causest the ground naturally to bring
forth grass, and all kind of herbs, replenishing the earth with all kind of
fruit, to the comfort of man's heart.

But above all things, Lord, feed us with thy holy word, whereby our souls
are made strong and comforted. For in a miserable case do they live, from whom
thou take away thy holy word, which is the true bread, which came down
from heaven: which whosoever eats of, shall live for ever. Lord never take
the same away from us again, but evermore feed us with this bread. Thy word
makes our enemies afraid, they have no further power to hurt thy faithful,
than thou permittest them. Wherefore, although the wicked swell never so high,
yet we fear them not; they may invade thy church, and many of the elect
members of the same, but they shall never have power to destroy them. For thou
Lord have promised to abide with thy faithful, unto the end of the world; thy
grace will not leave them that love and serve thee.

Send us, good Lord, this grace, that we may fervently embrace the spiritual
food of our souls, that it may cause us to forget our wanton and idle lives,
that we have hitherto lead, and now begin to frame a new, spiritual, godly
life, building the house of our souls on the sure rock, which is thy son
Jesus Christ, resting in him as a sure habitation. For it is he, Lord, that
thou have anointed above all other, to be our mediator and mercy seat, who
is so gentle, merciful, and loving, that he is most ready to receive us,
whenever we come unto him. O glorious God, how excellent art thou? How noble
and manifest be thy works, passing far the capacity of all thy creatures to
comprehend?

But thou full wisely have wrought all things, by the same wisdom that has
bin with thee before any thing was created, and before all times, by the which
thou have numbered the sands of the sea, the drops of rain, the days of time.
By it have thou measured the height of heaven, the breadth of the earth, and
the deepenesse of the sea. This wisdom is thy very son, our Lord and
Savior, the second person in Trinity, he is the power, in whom are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. By him have thou wrought the work of
our redemption, and delivered us from eternal damnation.

And although thou be sometimes angry with us for our wickedness; yet
nevertheless, if we call upon thee in thy sons name, thou will show us mercy:
for it is thy nature and his to be merciful. Lord keep our enemy far from
us, let him not devour those, for whose redemption and salvation thou
vouchsafedst to send thy most entirely beloved son, to suffer death and
passion. Bring them also (we humbly beseech thee) into the true faith of thy
holy church, that they may know thee, and him whom thou have sent for the
salvation of the world; that there may be on both sorts one shepherd, and one
flock. Send us all, most merciful father, thy gracious favor, and open thy
liberal hand, and fill us all with thy goodness, hide not thy face from us for
our offenses.

O send forth, good Lord, thy sweet breath upon us, make us new again, that we
may leave our old naughtines, and become new creatures. We acknowledge our
selves to be dust and ashes, send therefore thine holy spirit to renew our
souls, making it conformable to thine image, according as thou did first
create it; which through sin we have made very foul and deformed. Then
shall we give glory unto thy majesty, which indureth for ever, and thy
kingdom from one generation to another, world without end, Amen.

47. A prayer, wherein is showed how blessed they are that fear the Lord.
O Lord Lord, thou art a great God, mighty in power whom no man may overcome.
Let all thy creatures praise thee, for thou spakest the word, and they were
made; thou sentest thy spirit, and they were created, and there is none that
may withstand thy voice. The mountains shall remove from the foundations, and
the waters shall melt like wax; but they that fear thee, shall be great with
thee in althings. For thou dooest abhor the sacrifice of the ungodly, but
the prayer of the righteous is acceptable unto thee: and whosoever follows
righteousness, him thou dooest love.

The fear of thee O Lord God, is a well of life, and the right way to avoid
the snares of death: for thou preseruest the welfare of the godly, and
defendest them that walk innocentlie, and keep them in the right path,
preserving still the way of thy saints, and never suffering their souls to
feel hunger, but giving them long life. As for the ungodly, thou put him
from his desires, shortening his years with grief.

Lord grant me therefore to put my trust in thee, with all my heart, that I
never lean unto mine own understanding; but in all my ways to have respect
unto thee: so will thou order my goings. For it is thou O Lord, that give
wisdom, and out of thy mouth comes knowledge and understanding. O God my
father, thou art he that have brought me up, and lead me from my youth;
therefore of thy mercy have regard unto me, and keep me steadfast in the fear
of thee, in mine age, until I depart in peace, according to thy word. For mine
eyes do daily see thy salvation which thou have prepared for all thy people,
which is thy dear son Jesus Christ.

He is my merciful mediator, advocate, and intercessor, by whom I hope to have
pardon of all my sins: in him I live, move, and have my being; and after I
am dissolved of this my corruptible body, I believe, through his mercy, to
rise again an incorruptible body: for that I know my redeemer lives, by
whom I shall live, and shall see him face to face, not with other eyes, but
with the same eyes which I do now, O God my savior, lift up with a sorrowful
and repentant heart, for my most grievous sins and iniquities, unto the seat
of thy majesty.

Beseeching thee, O my most sweet Lord Jesus, to wash me clean, with thy most
precious blood, and make me one with thee, as thou and thy heavenly father art
one; and as thou ouercamest, so grant me to overcome all the temptations of the
devil, that I may be a pillar in the temple of my God, and sit with thee on
thy seat, as thou have promised to all that overcome the world, and die in the
faith of thee. Thou art the way, the truth, and the life. No creature comes
to the father, but by thee; and none can trust in thee, except the father draw
him.

O dear father, which art the good husbandman, graft me in the true vine thy
son. O Lord Jesus Christ, nourish me a true branch in thee, that I may abide
everlastingly, and bring forth much fruit. O holy ghost, water me with the dew
of thy grace, that I may be green, and grow in the love and favor of my
father and redeemer. O thou, which art the finger of Gods hand, touch my heart,
and unloose the same from all blindness and hardness, that I may hear the
voice of Gods heavenly word, and bring forth much fruit, until I be come
unto my full perfection, that I may be worthy to be placed among thy chosen
and elect people: through the precious death and blood shedding of Jesus
Christ, my only Lord and savior; to whom, with thee, and the father, be all
honor and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

48. A prayer, wherein is showed, that God dwells in the hearts of the
righteous, though his seat be in heaven.
THe mighty power of thy divine majesty, O Lord of Lords, and God of all
gods, with the plentiful abundance of thy goodness daily declared unto
mankind, inforceth me to consider mine own weakness, and insufficiency, in
yielding to thee any recompense. Thou Lord art omnipotent, and made al
things of naught: I am thy simple creature, made with thy hand, and without thy
help I am able to do no good thing. Thou art the GOD eternal, besides whom
there is no god; I am a woorme of the vile earth, not worthy to bear the name
of a christian, for that through mine own sin, I have defaced the beauty of
the principal part of man, which is my soul, made to thy godly image.

Nevertheless, since thou art the reformer of all our hearts, and the inspiror
of all grace and goodness, I most humbly beseech thee, to correct by thy
power, that which through my frailty is amiss. Redres by thy pity that which
I have mard through my folly; make me able to yield unto thee, that which thou
requirest of me, acknowledging mine own unworthiness; and to render unto thee
noble praises, and loving thanks for thy manifold gifts of grace, whereby thou
have, of thy mere liberality, endued both my soul and body. Make me worthy
to laud thee, which I cannot do unless thou give me grace, to wipe away all
mine iniquities. For thy praises be not seemly in the mouth of a sinner.

Yea Lord, I pray thee inflame my heart with the love of thee, so that from the
bottom thereof, I may speak them, and not to love any thing in this world
but thee, and for thee. Thou art the true God and savior, and there is none
but thou O Lord. Out of thy mouth comes the word of righteousness, which no
man may turn. Wherefore, all other gods set I asside, to thee only will I
sing praises, and confess thee only to be the living GOD, which I will
acknowledge before the whole congregation of the faithful.

Thou know the inward intent of the heart, for in the hearts of the
believing is thy seat, and resting place. The souls of the just are the
temples, wherein thou dooest inhabit. To this temple, good Lord, will I turn
my self, by pondering the state of mine own soul; for strength whereof I
call most humbly unto thee, most merciful God, that I may be able to vanquish
the illusions of the subtle serpent.

Perform in me, that which thou have promised; for all thy ways are mercy
and truth. Thy mercy reaches unto the heavens, and thy faithfulness unto the
clouds: and thy righteousness stands like the strong mountain. When thy goodness
is considered, all the rulers of the earth must needs confess, that great is thy
might and thy glory. Nevertheless, although thou dwell above the heavens,
yet have thou a loving respect unto the lowly and meek of spirit, and dooest
behold them, as one looks on his friend, if they trust in thee.

Thou drawest near unto them that seek thee, to hear their prayers; yea thou
art their sheeld and protection, in all their necessities: as for the proud
workers of iniquity, thou see them a far off, thou beholdest them with a
fearse look, to their confusion, to destroy and root out their memorial out
of the everlasting beatitude. Who so therefore will have thy majesty come near
unto him, must pluck down his mind, and become low in heart. For the meek
and humble people be those that shall enioie the heavenly country. And though
they walk in the midst of trouble, yet shall thou refresh and quicken them.

This world is a place ordained for trouble, and not for rest. Here we are
appointed to travel, in this place is no want of tribulation: but thou ever
graciously comfortest the faithful, thou suffer them not to be overcome in
any tribulation; for through thee they vanquish all their enemies. Wherefore,
Lord, power out thy mercies (I beseech thee) upon thy flock; deliver us from
all our enemies, spiritual and temporal; let thy right hand save us, and lead
us through thy grace, into eternal felicity. As for riches, ease, honor, or
any kind of temporal pleasure, which be thy gifts also, but of thy left hand,
we nothing esteem.

Many times thou bestowest these benefits upon thine enemies, the other thou
reseruest for thine elect, to receive after many tribulations. And the same,
Lord, I humbly beseech thee, to keep in store for me, thy poor servant.
Regard not the wickedness which I daily commit, but look upon the merits of
thy son Jesus Christ, my God and my savior: for it is he that has paid my
debt, and thou Lord have sealed the acquitance: grant me to honor thee
therefore, as I ought to do, now and for ever, Amen, Amen.

49. A prayer, wherein is showed, that God is always our protection, if we
trust in his son Jesus Christ.
O Lord, thou art my God; I will praise thee and magnify thy name, and thy
word above all things. Thou bring marvelous things to pass, according to
thy will and pleasure. Thou art the poor man's help, and a strength for the
needful in the time of trouble, defending them against all weathers, and their
shadow in the time of heat. Likewise to the presumptuous, thou art like a
strong whirle wind, that casts down the boasting of the ungodly, because
they know not thee to be the everlasting strength: but the righteous Lord, have
a respect unto the way of thy judgments, and thy name and remembrance
reioiseth their hearts. As for my soul, it thirsts after thee, both day and
night; and my mind hastes freely unto thee, because thou art so merciful
unto all them that seek thee in singleness of heart: for thou will be found
of them that thirst after thee.

Thou art the well of pleasant waters, whorewith whosoever is filled, they
shall never be a thirst: for thou O lamb of GOD, that dwell in the midst
of the throne, wilt lead thine unto the founteine of living waters, and give
them everlasting rest; because that in this world they made themselves white in
thy blood, bearing thy crosses with willing minds, and confessed thee before
men on earth. For this cause will thou acknowledge them before God thy father
in heaven, where they shall praise thee and him, world without end. O God most
holy, I acknowledge that I am none of those that have deserved half such
mercy at thy hands: but I hope, through the mercies and merits of thy dear
son Jesus Christ my Lord and savior, to be made as perfect before thee, O
heavenly father, as if I had never sinned.

For thus I steadfastly believe; if I come unto him, he will not refuse me; and
if I pray heartily, desiring his help, he will hear me, and cloth me with
his righteousness, and take from me all the sins that ever I have committed,
from my birth until this present hour, as he has promised in his holy word.
Come Lord Jesus, for thou art true and just in all thy ways, and wash me with
thy most precious blood. Sanctify me with thy bitter passion, precious death,
and glorious resurrection. Restore me to those ioies, that thine elect do find
in thee, and power thy holy spirit into my heart, that he may draw my mind
continually unto thee: for thou art the way, the truth, and the life. Blessed
are they that trust in thee, and with a steadfast faith make thee their only
stay and refuge; they shall be sure of all happiness in this world: and when
it shall please thee to call them hence, they shall enioie with thee, the
crown of glory, who have all power given thee, both in heaven and earth: for
the father judges no man, but has committed all unto thee, who art the very
wisdom of God.

Wherefore, Lord Jesus, make me blessed with thee, like as thou art blessed; for
I commit my self, both body and soul, into thy merciful hands, who have
redeemed me, O thou God of truth. Thou O Lord, art worthy to receive all
glory, and honor, and might: for thou have created all things, and for thy
wills sake they were and are created. O most noble creator of light, shine
into my heart, that it may cleerlie see the excellency of thy majesty; and
quicken my soul and spirit, that they may continually be stirred to honor
and glorify thee, as thou art worthy, which by thy grace I shall not cease to
do, with heart soul, mind, and strength, among thy faithful congregation,
which of thy mercy, Lord preserve and keep, that we may praise thee, one God
in persons three, and everlasting in unity, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.
1584

printer's device of Henry Denham H D
OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT

Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
sign of the Star.

Cum priuilegio.


