LONDONS WARNING, BY JERUSALEM. A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS ON MID-Lent
Sunday last.

By Francis White, Mr. of Arts, and sometime of Magdalene College in OXFORD.

Devt. 32.29 Oh that they were wise, then they would understand this: they
would consider their latter end.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for Richard Flemming: and are to be sold
at his Shop at the Sign of the three Flower-de-L^^^s, in Saint Paul's Alley,
near Saint Gregory's Church. 1619.

Vox index animi: Vox index esto libelli:
Vox clamans titulum: Signat amans animum.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND RELIGIOUS Lady: MARY Lady HVNSDEN: as also to her
truly Noble, and most virtuous Son, Henry Lord Hunsden: the blessing of
Heaven and earth be multiplied.
Right Honorable:
PResuming on your favors, I am emboldned to present you with the firstlings
of my endeavors, who may best challenge them, being the first who gave life and
breath in your encouragements to these my intendements. For never had I engaged
my self so far in these more public employments, but had contented my
self in an obscure retire on my rural Charge; but that the experiments of
your favor did for a while dictate another course unto me: which since good
considerations have altered; it being as well your religious desire, as my care,
to feed mine own flock at home, though but a very little one, being in a
place altogether dispeopled, rather then to intend another Charge abroad: I
had sometime thought the desolatenes of the place had been sufficient
privilege for absence: but I find it otherwise: many being ready to find
fault, as Eliab did with David for leaving, 1. Sam. 17.28.
though but a few Sheep in the Wilderness. And therefore, to give offense to
none, I will seek no farther excuses for my absence, but return unto mine
own: and since my absence can no longer suffer me to perform that service to
your Honors which I could wish: I shall leave this small Present with you, as a
pledge of that duty and service which I owe: making up in my daily prayers to
God for your Honors, what shall be wanting in the performances of my service to
you: desiring the God of Heaven to bless your Honors with the blessings of
this life, and blessedness of a better.

Your Honors most devoted Chaplain: FRANCIS WHITE.

TO THE WORTHY SOCIETIES OF CITIZENS in this famous City of LONDON, in
especial to his loving friends of the Parish of St. Sepulchers.
WHat was sometime preached to the ear, is now presented to the eye: and the
rather this, because the more may take notice of it, if any thing there be,
which any ways may concern the Peace of our Jerusalem. Nothing there is at
all, which may deserve the Printing: but if any thing there be, which any ways
may avail the souls good; the Lord Print that in the Heart: which is all I
aim at, or can desire. I hope it will be offense to none, but to such only
who put the gain of Deceit into a broken Bag (for whom I pass not) that our
Prophets Inuectiue against the scant measure, wicked Balances, and the bag of
deceitful weights, is renewed in these times, and some of the City corners not
exempted from it: which Discipline in time (no doubt) will redress and purge;
That glorious things may ever be spoken of thee, Psalm. 87.
thou City of God: and the Lord may still love the habitations of Jacob, where
his Name is called upon, and his will observed. Thus seek we still the peace
of our Jerusalem, breaking off our sins by repentance, being at peace with
God; that the God of peace and love, may establish for ever peace within our
Walls, and set plenty within our Palaces, to his glory, and the comfort of us
all in Christ Jesus.

Yours in all Christian Offices, and services of love, FRANCIS WHITE.

LONDONS WARNING.
MICAH. 6.9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom
shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.


Majesty in this Chapter seems to parley even with misery: God parlies with
man; and that the quarrel of a gracious God, with an unthankful people, may
appear most just, Heaven and earth, the dumb creatures of God, which in the
nineteeneth Psalm are styled the silent Preachers of Gods glory, and mercy,
unto man, are here cited to be eare-witnesses of man's unthankfulness unto God.
For in the second verse, Hear ye, O Mountains, and ye mighty foundations of
the earth, the Lords quarrel against his people. The witnesses thus produced,
Rocks and Mountains, to convince the hardness of man's heart, and height of
rebellion against his God. God, he begins his plea, and shows the ancient
evidences of his love: O my people, what have I done unto thee, or wherein have
I grieved thee? testify against me. Is it, because I brought thee out of
Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants, and led thee like a
flock, Moses and Aaron? Is it, because I turned Balaams curse into a blessing
unto you? Is it, because from Shittim unto Gilgal, nay, from Egypt, unto
Canaan, I made known to you, my mercy, my power to your enemies? Is it this
that ye lift up the heel against me? Is it this my kindness, which makes you
thus unkind unto me? Remember, O my people, these great mercies of your
Savior, and so acknowledge the righteousness of the Lord. This is Gods gracious
plea with his unthankful people, which did so wound and abash their guilty
conscience, that they cry out in the sixth verse: In quo occurram? wherewith
shall I come before the Lord? And now God, he shall have burnt offerings; he
shall have thousands of Rams; nay, ten thousand Rivers of Oil; nay, their
firstborn child, the fruit of their body, for the sin of their soul, And
all this now if the Lord he will be but pleased. But this God, well he knows,
to be but crusted obedience; much like unto a wound, which deceitful skill
gathers to a skin, while within it is putred and rankles to the bone: For so
this seeming obedience, it does often palliate the rancour and malice of an
evil heart: and therefore, indicauit tibi, O homo, God he shows thee, O man,
in the 8. Verse, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee: Surely, to
do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God, which is the
full sum of the Decalogue, and the whole duty of Man. And all
burnt-offerings, thousands of Rivers of Oil, the fruit of the body, for the
sin of the soul, they are all but splendida peccata, they are but glittering
sins, if this be wanting, to do justly man with man, which is the one halse
duty of man, and to walk humbly with thy God, which is the other. This
therefore being the very life and soul of our obedience, without which our
obedience, like a dead carkase, stinkes in the nostrils of the Lord, that you
may all of you take notice of it, and not content your selves with imperfect
Comma's of obedience, to do some part of that which God commands: nor yet
with imperfect Colons of obedience, to do the one half of that which God
commands: but that you may still endeavor to conclude all your actions with
full Points of obedience, to do all which God commands; not man's, but the
Lords voice cries this in your ears; For the Lords voice cries unto the
City, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name. Hear ye the Rod, and who
has happainted it. Which Text of holy Scripture seems to have in it the
composure of a Syllogism. The Mayor Proposition in these words: The Lords
voice cries unto the City. The Minor in these words: The man of wise dowe
shall see thy name: that is, shall see and consider the glory of Gods name, his
Majesty, and his power, and so with reverence attend unto his voice. The
illation, or Conclusion, by way of exhortation, in these words: Hear ye
therefore the Rod: He that is a man of wisdom amongst you, let him lend his
ears and heart to hear of a Rod which the voice denounces; unless ye turn
from the evil of your ways: which God has appointed most certainly to bring
upon you; unless you prevent his punishments, with your penitence. In the
Mayor consider we, 1. Cuius hac vox, whose voice this is: it is the Lords
voice. 2. Qualis, what manner of voice it is: It is a crying voice: The Lords
voice cries. 3. The vbi, the place where it cries; and that is the City. The
Lords voice cries unto the City.


In the Minor consider we: 1. Quibus, to whom this voice is directed: to men of
wisdom: The man of wisdom shall see thy name. 2. The reason why the voice
is directed only unto such: and that is, because they see Gods name: they have
an awefull fear and reverence of the great Majesty of God, which tunes their
ears and hearts, and makes them tuneable to this voice, to attend with
reuernce unto the voice of so high a Majesty.


In the Conclusion, consider we:

Quid clamat: What the voice cries: It tells us lovingly of a Rod from God:
Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.

These be the parts of this Text, and you have the Lords voice in the front of
it, and the Lords Rod, in the conclusion or shutting up of it; to show how
that they who will not hear the Lords Voice at the first, shall be sure to
feel his Rod at the last. Let us therefore in the first place attend unto
that, which is first proposed: which is, Psalm. 29.
Vox Iehouae, the Lords voice. The Lords voice (says the Prophet David) is a
mighty voice, it makes Heaven and earth to shake: And so terrible is this voice
to flesh and blood, that in the 20. of Exodus, Israel cry out unto Moses:
Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we
die.

Adam, before his fall, could well enough endure to hear the voice of God; but
no sooner had he transgrest, but as you read, Genesis 3. when he hears the
voice of God, he is afraid: I heard thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid.
And this is the condition of us all, since the fall of our first Parents, we
are so afraid to hear the voice of God, that we cry out with the Israelites:
Let man speak with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us,
lest we die. And therefore, though in my Text mention be made of the Lords
voice, this voice, it is not the Lords voice, which ye are afraid to hear,
lest ye dye: But the Lords Prophet is the Lords voice in this place, which if
ye hear not, ye die: and this it is no new thing, for the Lords Prophet to be
styled the Lords voice. For in the first Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, there
is (...), the word, and (...), the voice Christ, he is the Word: Saint John the
Baptist Christ's Herald, he is the voice to publish and proclaim this word.
So that Saint John, he was the Lords voice to proclaim unto the Jews verbu^
Dominum, the Word which is God. And our Prophet Micah in this place, he is the
Lords voice to publish unto the Jews, verbum Domini, the Word of God, the Word
of the Lord. Now it is not said to be the Prophets voice which publishes the
message, but the Lords voice; because the people should attend with reverence
to the Prophets, Gods Ministers voice, even as they would to the Lords own
voice: since Gods Messenger, he is no other but vox Iehouae, the Lords voice.
Man indeed is the voice, because we are confounded when God himself does
speak: but not man's, but the Lords is the voice; because though man utter
them, yet we should take the words as spoken from God, who else would speak
the words unto us himself, but that our infirmity cannot away with the
Majesty of the Speaker, who therefore makes man the voice, because man may well
away to hear what man does speak: and therefore though he make man the voice,
yet will not have the voice acknowledged to be man's voice, but the Lords
voice; because we should attend to what is spoken, as spoken from God, and not
from man, who is only the Lords voice.

And thus now you see who is the Lords voice in this place: See we withal what
instructions we have by this: why, first we have Gods mercy commended to us,
who vouchsafes to send a voice, before a rod: a voice to premonish, before a
rod to punish: Secondly, we have Gods Ministers duty set before us, in that
he is vox, in that he must be a voice. Thirdly and lastly, we see Gods
Ministers dignity, in that he is vox Iehouae, the Lords voice. For the first,
Gods mercy, in that he sends a voice to premonish, before a rod to punish.
And this mercy of God, it is every where commended unto us in holy Writ; from
the Alpha, to the Omega; from the beginning, to the end. The first man Adam, no
sooner had he lost himself, straying in forbidden paths from his Gods
command; but the voice of mercy seeks him out in the third of Genesis: Vbies?
Adam, where art thou? Wicked Cain, he murders a righteous Abel: and the voice
of mercy straight upon the murder calls upon him, to strike him with remorse
for his sin, Vbi est? Where is thy Brother Abel? Alas, Genesis 4.
what have thou done, that thy Brothers blood cries in mine ears for
vengeance? The old world, 1. Pet. 3.19, 20.
though now even drowned with the ouerflowings of ungodliness, yet, it
perished not by the flood, but it had first a voice to admonish it: righteous
Noah was sent unto it a preacher of righteousness. Nineueh that great City,
God, he had purposed to destroy it, for the Cry of their sin, which came up
to Heaven: but a voice is first sent unto them; Jonah like a Dove is sent from
before Gods Mercy-Seat, with the Olive Branch of Peace in his mouth, Jonah 1.
to fly to Nineueh with the silver wings of mercy, offering them mercy, if
they do repent. And to come nigher home. Here in my Text, you see Jerusalem;
rebellious Jerusalem; a City so unthankful to her God; yet she has a voice
first sent unto her, the voice of mercy, to make her hear the rod, before
the hand of justice is upon her, to make her feel the rod. And as the City
Jerusalem was vouchsafed this voice of Mercy, to win her home by repentance
to her God: So this our Jerusalem, this City of ours, a City as unkind to
God, as ever was Jerusalem, yet has it voices upon voices sent unto it; it is
full of voices: and these voices, with that voice of a Crier in the third of
Matthew, forewarne us to flee from the wrath to come. Some of these voices Cry
unto the City, to take heed how she harbors Drunkards, lest the Land spue out
her Inhabitants, as a loathsome burden to her stomach. Some of these voices
Cry unto the City, to take heed how she deal with Pride, lest pride, like
Samson, carry away the gates of the City upon her back, and betray the
strength of the City, whilst with her ouer-curious clothing she leaves the
City bare, and like an Ague, having fashious for fits, shakes the
Commonwealth, whilst she makes her wealth too common for other Nations,
dearly buying at their hands, their strange fashions, and new devices, till at
last Pride get a trip and (if prevention step not in) lay the Cities honor in
the dust. Some again of these Voices Cry unto the City to take heed she be
not too secure, for the Devil is like the Usurer, all is well with him, so long
as he sees security.

Thus the Voices, you see, they discharge like so many Warning-pieces upon you,
even from God, to forewarne you to flee from the wrath to come: now if ye will
not hear this voice of Mercy, but like wel-fed Horses will fetch your full
careeres in sin, and seem to spurn against the Decree of Heaven, disdaining
to humble your selves in dust and ashes, and to come before God, in Fasting,
Tears, and Prayer; if the rod of God, on the sudden smite any one, Dan. 5.
with Belshazzer quaffing in his Cups; or priding it with Iezabel; 2. Reg. 9.
or promising security to himself with Dives: let him not blame GOD for his
severity; Luke 12.
for God sent Voices upon Voices to recall him, but he would not be recalled:
and therefore let him blame his own stupid security, who would not be won
with the voice of Mercy, until he feel the stroke of Justice. For us
(Beloved) since God thus in Mercy still vouchsafes a Voice to premonish, before
a Rod to punish; let us hear and obey the Voice of Mercy, that so we may
prevent the stroke of Justice: for to be all ear and heart, to hear and
obey, is the Peoples duty, as to be all Voice and Heart, to exhort and obey
is the Ministers duty, which we have in the second place commended unto us;
in that, Gods Minister, he is vox, in that he is a voice. Gods Minister he must
be a voice. For in the 28. of Exodus, verse 35. we read, that Aarons sound
must be heard when he goes into the Holy place, to minister before the Lord,
that he dye not. Whereupon says venerable Beda, Sacerdos ingrediens, vel
egrediens, moritur si de eo sonitus non audiatur, quia iram contra se occulti
Iudicis exigit, si sine praedicationis sonitu incedit. Beda de vest. Sacerd. 1.
Cor. 9.16. Mar. 16.15.
The Priest coming to minister before the Lord, he dies for it, if his sound
be not heard: and the Minister of the Gospel, he stands guilty of death, if
he take upon him to minister before the Lord, and have not his sound heard in
the sincere preaching of the Gospel. Gods Minister then needs must he be a
voice. For woe unto him if he be not a voice: Woe unto me (says the Apostle) if
I preach not the Gospel; for their Commission is, (...), Preach the Gospel.
This then commends the necessity of preaching, against the common voice of the
world, which holds a Paradoxe against the School of Christ; that the more
preaching, the less practifing; and, Never were there more golden times, then
when there was less voycing it in the Pulpit, and more mumming and massing it
at the Altar: This is a strange world, when the more we are taught to do, the
less we do; and when men's ears are like the thin ears of Come, which
Pharaoh saw in a dream, in the 41. of Genesis; the thin ears devoured the
full ears: For so our thin ears, which scarce heard good instruction in
time of Popery, devour our full ears, which now in the light of the Gospel
are daily filled with good instructions: for when we heard little, the boast is,
we did much; and now we hear much, the cry is, we do just nothing at all.
And therefore if God should deal with us in justice, and not in mercy, rather
then he would suffer his voice thus to be wronged, to be thought the occasion
of our seldom practice, and slack performance, he would quite take his Voices
from us, and since we will not be content to be brought to heaven, by the
direction of his Voice, suffer us to go to hell, by the suggestion of the
Devil, but God pities our infirmity: and though we (such is the weakness and
error of our judgment) think the voice cry too too often, yet God (such is
the deadness and dulnes of our hearts) thinks the voice never to cry often
enough. And therefore in the 58. of Isai. verse 1. says God unto his Voice,
unto his Prophet; Cry, Cry alowd, Spare not, but lift up thy voice like a
Trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and to the house of Jacob
their sin.

Now does the voice of God say, Cry; the voice of man, needs must it cry, what
the voice of God would have it cry. And therefore all that be Voices, let them
not spare to cry, while they have a voice to cry, let the world regard their
often crying as it please.

And as for those, who have the calling of Voices, who are called to be
Vocales, but prove muti: who are called to be vocal, but prove mute: it were
to be wished, they would a little strain their voice, to speak somewhat in
Gods cause; that if not their voice, yet at leastwise their sound might be
heard in Gods Temple, as Aarons was, whilst, though themselves be slow of
Speech, as Moses was, Exodus 4.
yet they procure some Aaron to be their mouth, their sound unto the people
that they die not, if their sound be not heard, and the peoples blood which
perish by their default, be not one day required at their hands.

Now as this, it is for the Ministers duty, that he is a voice; so is it also
for his dignity, that he is vox Iehouae, the Lords voice: and this that he is
the Lords voice, it first reflects in a memento, to the Minister himself; and
then secondly, to the people. For the Minister himself, in that he is the
Lords voice, it teaches him integrity, and humility.

And first, integrity: for he, whom the God of Heaven makes choice of, to be
his voice, need had he be, Luke 1.
as was Zacharias the Priest, a man just before God, walking without reproof.
Gods Minister then, he must not be a bare voice; but he must be, as was Saint
John the Baptist, (...), a voice, he must be more then a voice, and his heart
must utter works of piety, when his tongue speaks words of piety; his hands
must deal works of charity, when his tongue delivers words of charity: nay,
more then this, his modest clothing, like John's garment of Camels hair; Math.
3.
this must be a voice, and preach against the fashions of the times. His
temperate diet, like John's meat of Locusts, and wild Honey; this must be a
voice, and preach against the Riot of our times: and thus must he be, not so
much a speaking, as a walking voice; for he must approve himself to God, as
did Saint John: John 5.
not only a shining, but a burning light: not only a shining light, to
lighten the dim Candle of our understanding, and to make us to know God: but
a burning light to inflame the fire of our love, and to make us to love God. He
must be a preaching voice wheresoever he goes; as in the Temple, preaching
words of Piety; so out of the Temple, preaching works of piety, that the
sincerity of his works, may give countenance to the verity of his words. And
this was signified in Aarons garment; when as we read in the 28. of Exodus,
verse 34. upon the skirts of Aarons clothing, there was a golden Bell and a
Pomegranate: a Bell, to signify Gods Minister, he must be a sounding, a
preaching voice: a golden Bell, to signify the doctrine which he preaches,
must be sincere and pure; pure as the gold tried seven times in the fire: and
with this golden Bell is joined a Pomegranate, to signify Gods Minister: he
must not only be a Bell to sound out the Gospel; nor only a golden Bell,
sound in the sincere preaching of the Gospel; but he must be also, a
Pomegranat: as the Pomegranat is full of pleasant kernels, so must Gods
Minister abound always in the work of the Lord; be full of good works: vt
omnia quae loquitur, Beda de vest. Sacerd.
bonis confirmentur operibus, says Beda: That the confirmation of his
doctrine, may be the conformation of his life unto his Doctrine. Now if ever
any Church in the world had in it this ring of golden Bells, it is the Church of
England at this day. The church of Rome has indeed a ring of Bells, but they be
Tin, they be Lattine Bells, and the Latin, often broken Latin too, which
makes the ring so much the worse. For the Priests of Rome beat so altogether
upon Latin, in the services of their Church, that most of them (such is the
ignorance of their Mass Priests) do often break it: whereas our ring, it is
altogether of golden Bells, sound and sincere Preachers of the Gospel;
delightful for their pleasant sound, and as delightful for their pleasant
savor. For as they be golden Bells, for the purity of their doctrine; so be
they also Pomegranats, for their virtuous life. Now, if it so sometime chance
to hap you meet with a golden Bell, without a Pomgranat; a good Preacher for his
Doctrine, but not so good for his life; never the worse mislike the ring, but
hear his doctrine, and bear with his life. For well says a good Father;
Chrysostom. in Mat. 23.
Si been vixerint: The Ministers, if they live well, the benefit is their own;
Si been docuerint, if they teach well, the benefit is yours; accipite igitur
quod vestrum est, nolite discutere quod alienum est: receive therefore, and
skan their Doctrine, for that belongs to you: meddle not to skanne their life,
for that belongs to God; for they are the Lords Voices, and they stand or fall
unto their own Master: but (God be thanked) never were the Lords voices, these
golden Bells, better tuned, for life and doctrine, then at this day: the Lord so
continue them, who first vouchsaf't them to be his Voices, that these golden
Saint-Bels may ring all in, may win all misled Christians to join with us
in our holy profession, while their light so shines before men, that men seeing
their good works, glorify their Father, which is in Heaven.

Now in the second place, as the Minister sees his glory in this, that he is
Gods Voice, so that he may not be proud of this, that he is so highly dignified
to be the Lords voice, he must withal learn this point of humility, how that
he is but the voice, the Word, God puts it into his mouth what he shall fay,
and he is but the Voice to publish it. And this we have confirmed unto us out
of the 40. of Esaias, where at the sixth verse, says God unto the Prophet, Cry.
Now the Prophet thus approved, to be Gods Voice to cry, he awaits his message
from God, and in humility he replies to God, Quid clamabo? What shall I cry?
Now God, he puts his word into his Prophets mouth, and bids him cry, All flesh
is grass, and the grace thereof is as the flower of the field. So that by this
you see, though the Prophet be the Voice to publish the message, yet the Word,
God puts it into his mouth what he shall say. And therefore the Prophets
being to deliver their message from God, they show their warrant, and still
begin with this, Verbum Iehouae, the word of the Lord. For so begins our
Prophet Micah this his Prophecy, Chap. 1.1.
The Word of the Lord that came unto Micah: as if Micah, and all other the
Prophets, were but so many Voices, still ready at hand, awaiting and expecting
to receive the Word of the Lord, whenever it came unto them for to publish it.

Now, this being so, that Gods Minister, he is but the voice; the Word, God
puts it into his mouth what he shall say. Why then first, let no Messenger of
the most High, no Minister of the Gospel, be any whit proud, or lifted up with
this, though he far surpass all other in the gifts of the Spirit: for alas,
he, who thinks himself the best, and best furnished for the Ministry, he
is but the Lords Voice; and not a word, not a tittle can he utter of himself,
but only the Word which the Lord God puts into his mouth: even Balaam in
the 22. of Numbers tells him as much; where he tells us, no not for a house full
of gold and silver, he can speak a word good or bad, but only the Word, which
GOD puts into his mouth to speak; that, and no other can he speak. So that
every Minister of God, he must in humility acknowledge and confess, what John
the Baptist before him stood not upon to utter, John 1.23.
(...), I am but the voice of him that cries, of God that speaks by me: For
that which was matter of pride in Herod, to hear the acclamation of the
people, The Voice of God, and not of Man, must be matter of humility in the
Ministers of God, when they hear (The Voice of God, and not of Man) since they
be but Gods Voices, Acts 12.22.
and the Word, God puts it into their mouth what they shall say. And therefore
in the second place, in that Gods Minister he is but the Lords Voice, the Word
it is Gods Word, and he is but the Voice to publish it. This condemns the
great folly of the world which is so ready to tax the Minister. And if his
Doctrine, like the Arrow shot at peradventure, which smote wicked Ahab between
the joints, light upon some Ahab, 1. Reg. 22.34.
some ungodly man entering through, as the Word of GOD is lively, and mighty in
operation, Heb. 4.12.
to the dividing asunder of the soul, the Spirit, the joints and marrow: This
wicked Ahab, 1. Reg. 22.8.
this ungodly man, he will hate the Lords Michaiah for this, he will hate the
Lords Voice for this; because he prophecies, he preaches not good, but as he
conceitsit evil unto him; whereas sond man, he considers not with himself, how
that the word it is Gods Word, and the Minister, he is but the Lords Voice to
publish it, and the Voice neither can it utter good or bad, but what the Lord
God puts into the mouth to say, as Micaiah told the Messenger of Ahab, who
entised him to accord with the false prophets, and to bring in his omnia been
with the rest: Surely (says Micaiah) as the Lord lives, whatsoever the Lord
says unto me, be it good, or be it bad, 2. Reg. 22.14.
that, and no other can I speak. And therefore as we blame not the Bow, if the
Arrow hit us, but rather the hand which directed toward us: so let not men
storm against the Voice, which carries but the word unto our ears. But what
then, shall we storm against the hand of God which aims the Word directly
unto us? Why, storm we; if we will: but David tells us in his second Psalm,
we rage and murmr but in vain: and if our rage be not the sooner over, God
shall vex us in his displeasure, and break these vessels of Clay; these bodies
of ours like a Potters Vessel: be we wise therefore, and be we learned in Gods
fear, and take we heed henceforward how we storm against Gods Voices as we
do, Gamaliel tells us, Acts 3. we be found fighters against God. And take we
heed withal how we censure Gods Voices, as we do, bringing with us cutious
ears, which hear more to descant on the Minister, then to profit by his
ministry. For in that we censure the Minister of God, we seem to censure God
himself, such the Minister, he is but the Lords Voice, the Word it is Gods
own Word, and the Minister, he is but the voice to publish it. And therefore
as David took the indignities done to his Ambassadors by the Princes of the
children of Ammon, 2. Sam. 10.
as done unto himself, and so revenged them: so though even Princes, never so
great ones of the world, wrong and abuse the Ambassadors of the Lord, these
Voices of the Lord; God he will take the abuse as done unto himself, and will
one day repay it home.

Henceforth then let the people take heed how they hear, since it is Gods Word
they hear, delivered only by man's voice. And let the Minister also take heed
how he speak, since it is Gods Word, and not his own, which he is to
speak, that so, there being this sweet harmony between the Hearer of Gods
Word, and the Speaker, there may be more true devotion in the heart, and less
censuring prattle with the tongue. And so from the Ministers duty, proceed we
onward to the Peoples. It is so, you see, that the Minister, he is the Lords
Voice; and therefore as it is all our duties to reverence the Lord, so is it
also our duties to bear respect unto his Voices. For the Church, it is Christ's
Spouse, and the Congregation of the faithful: the Church of God cannot better
express her love to Christ her Husband, who is in Heaven, then by a due
respect unto his Voices, who are here on earth. Now the due respect of a
loving Wife unto her Husband, consists in three maine duties. First, to love
him: Secondly, to cherish him: Thirdly, to obey him. All which, the Church of
God, and Congregation of the faithful, because she is the Spouse of Christ, is
bound to impart unto his Voices, for they are Christ's receivers here ouearth,
to receive for him these pledges of our love: And so also (says our Savior)
he that receives you, receives me. Math. 10.40.


Now we are first to love Christ's Voices: and this is the thing the Apostle
beseeches at our hands, to have them all in singular love, 1. These. 5.12, 13.
who labor amongst us, who are over us in the Lord, who admonish us: to love
such, with a more then ordinary, with a singular love for their works sake;
and we are bound to love them in two respects: First, because they are Christ's,
his Ambassadors, sent unto us with an Ambassie of Peace, beseeching us in
Christ's stead, 2. Cor. 5.20.
to be reconciled unto God. Now if we love the Prince of Peace; needs must we
love these Ambassadors of Peace: and if we love CHRIST JESUS, who is (...), the
Word, needs must we love them, who are the Voices, to publish, and proclaim
this Word. Secondly, we are bound to love them, because they love us, they
watch over our souls; nay, they love many a man, better then he loves
himself: for these Voices, Hier. 9.1.
they oftentimes with Jeremy, carry about with them, whole fountains of tears,
in their head, and in their heart, and draw from these Wels, with the two
Buckets of their eyes, such abundance of tears, that their eyes shead tears
day and night, for their sins, who seldom, or never shead a tear for their
own sins: And therefore good reason have we, to love these Voices, or at
leastwise not to hate them, as too too many do, who little better esteem of
them, Genesis 16.12.
then of Ishmael: their hand against every man, and every man's band against
them.

I will say thus much, to the honor, and commendation of this famous City;
There is no Nation under heaven more respects these Voices, if they be the
Lords Voices indeed, then the more grave, and discreeter Citizens: And as for
the rest, they love them too, but not with so good discretion: for they love
them in a manner, as the Ape does her young ones: they love them so
importunately, that they kill them. And therefore it were to be wished, they
would love them a little more, in loving them a little less, while they give
the Voices a breathing time, to follow the Apostles rule to his beloved
Timothy: 1. Tim 4.13.
To give attendance to reading, and to exhortation, and to doctrine; that there
may be a breathing while, for the Voices, to give attendance to reading: as
well as all to exhortation, and to doctrine: For the Voices, they will be so
much the better able, to teach others by their doctrine, when they have first
taught themselves by their reading.

Now as we are bound, to love the Lords Voices; so can we not better express
our love unto them, then in cherishing them. For far be it, that the Lords
Voices should be fed, like mere voices indeed; only with air: and that
their maintenance should be the peoples courtesy and benevolence; for this,
it were a dishonor unto God, and a great abasing to the Ministry. The very
Heathens tell us as much. Ptut. Mor.
For Plutarch tells us of a Laconian, who seeing a Collector going about, and
gathering the peoples devotions for the gods: O (says he) I will now make no
more reckoning of the gods; so long as I see them go a begging, and to be
poorer then my self. And would not, think you, many a churlish Nabal, and
repining Laban of these days, be ready to fall into the same disdain of God,
and of his Voices, if the Offals only of their revenues, and cruel mercies of
their purse, were the stay, and maintenance of the Ministers life. This it were
great pity, it should be so; and hope suggests the best, that it will never be.
For were it so; as in the same Plutarch we read, Plut. Mor.
of one Philippus, a Priest amongst the Heathen, so poor, that he begged for
his living, and yet he would go about, and tell how happy he should be. When
(quoth one) will this be? When I am dead (says he.) Why, (then poor fellow
(quoth the other) thou art too blame, thou die not quickly, that thou may
be happy. Even thus should the Lords poor Voices be flouted of the world. The
Lord is our portion, say the Voices, and we shall be happy; but when, says
the world, shall you have this portion, that ye may be happy? When we dye, say
the Voices. Why, then says the world; ye are too blame, ye dye not quickly,
to be happy in Heaven, whom the world has took an order with, never to be
happy on earth. But this, it is the voice of the sons of Belial, who have
evil will at Sion, and had rather put a Church into their purse, then empty
their purse upon the Church.

For you (beloved) the Lords Voices are persuaded better things of you, how
regardfull of them you have always been, and how careful you be, 2. Reg. 4.
not only with the good Shunamite, to provide them a Chamber, a Table, and a
Stool, when they turn in unto you: but to send them away, as Joseph did his
Brethren; Genesis 42.
with their Sacks full of Corn, and every man his money in his Sacks mouth:
meat for the belly, and money for the back. For which care of yours, in
cherishing the Lords Voices; the blessing of Heaven, and the farnesse of the
earth, be your great reward. And may they ever live, registered in the Calendar
of Saints, who already have, or hereafter shall, more like the Primitiues of
old; then the hold-fast Possessiues of these times, thus bring in part of their
Possessions, and lay it down at the Apostles feet, bringing an offering, to
the work of the Tabernacle; to this so worthy a Work. Now as we are to love,
and cherish; so are we also to obey the Lords Voices. And this is it the
Apostle exhorts you unto, Heb. 13. Obey them which have the over sight of you,
and submit your selves: for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account, for them unto God, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief:
for that is unprofitable for you. You are then to obey Gods Minister: because
God has set him, as a watchma^ over your souls, and he must give an account
to God for your souls. Now if ye do what he commands you from God, his shall
be the joy; and yours the crown. But if yet will be stiffenecked, and not
obey; though his be the grief, to see his Ministry take no better effect
amongst you, yours shall be the peril. For if he give up his account of your
souls, with grief of heart, for your disobedience to the Gospel of Christ:
this, it is unprofitable, (...), for you, and not for him. And therefore, as
you tender your souls, obey the Lords Voices, which watch over your souls.
Give an obedient ear to the Lords Voices, to hear them: and an obedient heart
to the Lord himself, to fear him, that ye may be blessed. For in the 30. of
Deuteronomie, there be three ways set down; the three rodes, by which we come
to blessedness: the first is, by loving the Lord thy God: the second, by obeying
his Voice: and the third, by cleaving unto him; so that, if thou love the Lord,
because he is thy Father; if thou cleave unto him, because he is thy Saniour;
if thou obey his Voice, because he is thy Lord: thou, and thy Seed, shall
live, and be blessed upon earth. For if thou obey diligently the Voice of the
Lord, the Lord in the 28. of Deuteronomy. pronourices thee Blessed in the City, and
blessed in the field, blessed in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of the
ground, blessed in thy coming in, and in thy going out, blessed in thy
storehouses, blessed in all thou set'st thine hand unto. Thus shall the man be
blessed, that obeyes the Voice of the Lord. And therefore all ye, who desire
blessedness, hear, and obey, that ye may eat the good things of the Land. And
thus now, you see, how, for the Lords sake, whose Spouse the Church is, you are
to love, to cherish, and to obey, the Lords Voices: Now let every faithful
Christian, which is a member of the true Church, the Spouse of Christ, plight
faith to Christ, the Husband of this Spouse, for the performance of this
Christian duty: which God so requires at our hands. And so from the Voice,
come we to see the nature of the Voice. It is a crying Voice: The Lords Voice
Cryoth: and need had the Voice be a Crying Voice: for it has a City to Cry
in, and a whispering still Voice is not for the City: for this, none could
hear. Nay, an ordinary speaking voice, is not for the City: for this few
could hear. And therefore, the Voice, being sent unto the City, it is a
Crying Voice, that all might hear it. And thus does God, by sending a Crying
Voice unto them, take away all colorable pretenses, and excuses from the City.
For, had a still voice, or an ordinary speaking voice, come unto them, their
plea had been; non audiuimus: the Voice, it was so still, that, what, for the
clamours of the City, we heard it not. And therefore, the Voice, it is a
Crying Voice: that all might hear it: and none might have excuse, wherewith to
cloak his finne. Now then the Voice, it is a Crying Voice: in three respects.
First, it is a crying Voice, to make an outcry against crying sins. Secondly,
it is a crying Voice, to rouse and awake the City, dead asleep in sin:
which no Voice, but a crying Voice could rouse. Thirdly, it is a crying Voice,
to leave the City without excuse: to take away all excuse from the City. For
the first, the Voice, it is a crying Voice, to make an out cry against crying
sins.

Sin, it has got a voice in the world: yea, and that a loud crying Voice, in
the ears of GOD. Cains sin of murder, it had a crying Voice: for Abels
blood, in the fourth of Genesis, cries in Gods ears for vengeance. The sin
of Sodom, it had a crying Voice: For in the 18. of Genesis, the cry of Sodom
and Gomorrah, is said to be great in the ears of the Lord. And in these last,
and worse days of the world, sin has more lift up her voice then ever: for
sin has got a roaring voice: and now sin, which before did but cry to heaven
for vengeance; it now roares for vengeance: Now that there be many roarers
abroad in the world, who, because their father the Devil, is styled by Saint
Peter, of the damned; that tongue dipped in gall, to speak of nothing but
cursednesse and bitterness; that tongue dipped in blood, to speak of nothing
but blood and slaughter; so advancing it self, even to the Throne of God: if
it were possible, to pull God out of his Throne: one while crying out, Vbi est
Deus? Where is God? another while crying out, Non respicit Deus; God regards
not: yet another while flatly roaring out, Non est Deus, There is no GOD. This,
and far more worse then this, would be the language of the world, were there
no voice heard in the world, but the crying voice of sin: God therefore, to
stop the mouth of the Devil, who thus goes about to deface his glory: scoming
at his power, with Vbi est Deus? Where is God? deriding his providence, with,
Non respicit Deus: God regards not: Nay more then this; seeking to pull God
out of his Throne, with, Non est Deus: There is no God: God, he also sends a
crying Voice into the world, to make an outcry against this Cry of sin, and
to drown and confound this cursed language of the world, invented in hell, and
learned of the Devil: which being of a far higher reach, then ever Babel could
possibly have been, would tower up higher then to Heaven; even to the Throne of
God, if it were possible, to dethrone that great Monarch of the world, with Non
est Deus, There is no God. And now, that Gods crying voice is heard in the
world, the better part of the world has learned the holy tongue, and words of
piety, are now more often heard, then words of blasphemy; and the Voice of
prayer, is now more frequent, then the Voice of cursing: So that now, no
longer, Where is God? for, Iehoua in coelis: Our God, he is in heaven; no
longer now God regards not: for our God, as he is in heaven, so beholds he
all things that are done, both in heaven and earth, and his providence gouernes
all things. Wisd. 14.
No longer now, Non est Deus, There is no God; for our God, he is, (...), Reu.
1.4.
He, who is, who was, and is to come: our God, he is from all eternity.

Now, as God thus sends a crying Voice into the world, to vindicate his glory
from the unrighteousness of men, Romans 1.18.
who else would withhold the truth of God in unrighteousness: So does he
also, in great compassion unto man, send his crying Voice into the world, to
outcry crying sins, lest crying sins, still crying in Gods ears for
vengeance, should pull down the vials of Gods wrath, to consume man from off
the face of the earth: for the crying voice of sin, is still importuning the
hand of Justice, with one plague or other, to cut off the sinner. And one while
it calls for a second Deluge, to drown the world, for the ouerflowings of
ungodliness, which are in the world: yet another while, it calls for a famine,
to punish the want and scarsity of good men: yet another while, it calls for
pestilence and the sword, to punish our abuse of health and happiness. And
thus is the voice of sin still urging the hand of Justice, to write bitter
things against the sinner: but the crying Voice of mercy, which God, for the
good of man, sends into the world, speaks better things both from God to man,
and for man to God. And it first speaks from God to man, that man would
prevent punishment by penitence, that man would prevent a second flood, to
drown the world for sin, by first drowning his sin in a flood of leares:
leaving his crying sins, and falling a crying for his sins. Now as this
crying Voice speaks mercy from God to man, so does it also speak for mercy,
unto God for man: for in the second of Joel, the Priests, these crying Voices
of the Lord, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage over to
reproach; and God in the 18. and 19. verses, to show how much he accepts the
cry of his Voices, the cries and prayers of his Ministers, which they power
before him for his people, himself vouchsafes a gracious reply, and makes the
answer, how that at the cry of his Ministers, he cannot but be jealous over his
Land, and spare his people, and give them their hearts desire, corn, wine and
oil, and freedom from their enemies: such is the force of prayer for the
people, in the Lords Ministers mouth, if it be fervent from the heart. Now
then, ye people of the Lord, if ye have any care, or regard at all of your
souls, learn to distinguish between the cry of voices, that knowing which
cry against your souls good, and which cry for the good of your souls, you
may be able to discern, which you are to hear, and obey, which to shut your
ears against, and to avoid. You see here there be three crying voices abroad
in the world; The first is the crying, nay the roaring voice of the Devil, and
this voice cries unto you to breathe defiance against Heaven, and to write your
names in the earth, with the red ink of blood, or the black ink of hellish
villainy: This voice cries unto you with wicked Kain, to murder a righteous
Abel, it cries unto you to play the traitor with Judas, it cries unto you to
take away another man's possession with Ahab, it cries unto you to steal a
wedge of gold with Achan, it cries unto you to play the drunken Sot with Nabal,
it cries unto you to play the uncharitable Miser with Dives, it cries unto you
to dye your souls of the Devils hue, in the black deeds of darkness and of
wickedness. Now the second crying voice which is abroad in the world, is the
crying voice of sin, and this cries to heaven for a punishment for sinners,
it cries unto the clouds to deny the sinner rain, it cries unto the sun to
deny the sinner light, it cries unto the earth to deny the sinner food, it
cries to Mercy not to regard the sinner, it cries to Justice to renounce the
sinner, it cries to hell to receive the sinner, and it cries for tortures to
torment the sinner: this is the crying voice of sin, which is never with us,
but is still against us. Now the third and last crying voice, which is Gods
crying Voice of Mercy, this cries unto you, not to play Kains part, and to
kill, but to love thy brother as thy self; not to play Judas part, and betray,
but to obey from the heart those which are set over you; not to play Ahabs
part, and oppress, but to give to every man his own; not to play Achans part,
and to steal, but to work every man with his own hands, and to eat his bread
in the sweat of his brows; not to play Nabals part, and be drunk, but to be
sober, to watch and to play; not to play Dives part, and to be miserable, but
to do good, to distribute, to be to all men charitable; and then again, it
cries unto you, as you would have the clouds drop rain, so let your eyes drop
tears for your sins; as you would have the earth be fruitful, so to be
fruitful in good works as you would have the sun give light, so to walk as
children of light; as you would have heaven, and escape hell, so to have your
conversation in heaven, while ye live on earth. This is the Voice of mercy,
which is ever with us, and never is against us.

Now choose you which of these three voices will you hear: the Devils voice,
you see, how it comes unto you with a word clothed with death, and plays the
Orator for hell, to gain right to your soul through unrighteous practices;
and will you hear this voice, to obey and follow it? Why, follow it you may;
but know where it leads: it leads to the paths of death, and highway to
damnation. The crying voice of sin, this you hear, how it cries to, heaven
against you, and still in the end proves a backward friend to those her
vassals, who obey sin in the lust thereof; though at first, the better to
serve her turn, she fawn upon them: and will you now be won by the entising
voice of sin, to follow and obey it in the lust thereof? why, follow it you
may, but it threatens your destruction; for sin will one day pay her servants
their wages home, and will requite their evil life which was spent in her
service, with everlasting death, which is their wages for their service: Romans 6.
for, the wages of sin is death; and therefore as you tender your souls,
redeemed by Christ's precious blood from the power of sin and Satan, captiuate
not your souls again, by listening to the entisements of sin, and prouocations
of the Devil; but lend your ears only to the Lords crying Voice of mercy,
attend only this blessed Voice which cries abroad in the world, to bring
sinners home again to God by repentance: and if you shut your ears, the doors
of your soul, against all other entising voices of sin and Satan, and open
them only to the Lords crying Voice, to prepare a way for the King of glory to
enter in: assure your selves, such shall be the peace and joy of your souls,
that you shall have heaven in your souls in this life, and your souls shall
have heaven in another life. And so much for the first reason, why the Voice,
it is a crying Voice.

Now secondly, the Voice, it is a crying Voice, to rouse and awake the dead and
secure City: dead asleep in sin, which no voice but a crying Voice could
rouse: and this collection fitly arises from some variety of interpretation of
the word in the Original, which is here rendered a City; for (as Call uin has
observed it) some read it, Vox Iebouae ad ciuit atem; some again, Ad exper
gefaciendum clamat. Some read it, The Voice of the Lord cries to the City.
Some again read it; The Voice of the Lord cries to rouse, and to awake: which
implies the great deadness and security of the City, which could not be awaked
without a crying Voice; for as our blessed Savior, being to raise dead Lazarus
from death to life, is said to cry with a loud voice, Clamauit voce magna
(says the text) he cried with a loud voice, John 11.
Lazarus, come forth; so our blessed Savior being to raise the dead sinner,
dead in sins and trespasses, as it is Ephesians. 2. he makes his Voices crying
Voices, Surge qui dormis, Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.

Now as the City Jerusalem had need of this crying Voice: even so has our
Jerusalem, this City of ours. Our Citizens complain, It is now a dead world,
a dead time, and there is little stirring in the world, little trading; but
they may more justly complain in another sense, that it is a dead world
indeed, men carrying about with them living bodies, but dead souls; and, There
is little stirring in the world; for iniquity has got the upper hand, and iets
above honesty every where; so that honesty stirs little abroad, for she has
little trading in the world: while wicked men, who make a trade of sinning by
their evil customs, make the greater part of the world their customers: and
therefore if ever the Lords crying Voices cried to dead men's ears, to hear
the word of the Lord, now is the time; for the greater part of men, like the
widow which lives in pleasure, 1. Tim. 5.6.
are dead while they live. And could you but every week have bills brought you
in, to signify within the City liberties, and without, how many souls dye in
a week; some of a surfeit of drunkenness, some of a swelling tympany of pride,
some of the burning fever of malice, some of the dropsy of covetousness,
some of one or other disease of the soul; you would bless your selves, to see
most men's bodies to be but living Sepulchers for dead souls: and you would
pity the great task which is imposed upon the Lords crying Voices, to hear
them cry to dead men's ears, which hearing will not hear, and to dead men's
hearts, which will not understand: and therefore blame we not the Lords Voices,
for their importunate crying in our ears, crying unto us in season and out of
season, crying at all seasons; for they cry most unto dead men.

And well says Saint Augustine, Quam difficile sargit, quem moles male
consuetudinis premit: sed tamen surgit post vocem magnam, August. in Joan.
tract. 49.
Hard it is to awake a sinner, whom custom hardens in his sin, and yet such
a sinner, he may be wakened, if you often call upon him for repentance. At
much and often crying then, even the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear it; shall live: Cry then still, ye Voices of the
Lord, whom God has made the Cities Criers, to cry lost children home again to
him their heavenly Father, by repentance: and spare not to cry, whilst voice
and breath do serve to cry: and though ye cry to dead men's ears, yet is not
your labor in vain in the Lord: for Truth it self has said it in the fifth
of John, for the comfort of your labors: Verily, verily I say unto you, the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it, shall
live. And this is also comfort for the sinner, that though he be dead in
sins, nay with Lazarus, dead four days: Dead the first day by delight in
sin, dead the second day by consent to sin, dead the third day, by the act of
sin, dead the fourth day, by a customary sinning: so that it may be said of
him, as of Lazarus, (...) he now stinkes in the nostrils of the Lord: yet if
this dead sinner will but hear the Voices of the Lord, crying and crying
again, in precept upon precept, exhortation upon exhortation, (...) come forth
thou sinner: how come forth? why, S. Angustine tells thee how; quando
consiteris, procedis: August in John. ibid.
when thou do confess thy sin to God, thou come forth of the grave of
sin. And if the sinner thus come forth, vomiting up, as it were, his sins,
which are a burden to his conscience, the stomach of his soul, by an humble
confession unto God; Truth it self has said it, this dead sinner, he shall
live. And though he come forth of the grave of sin, bound like Lazarus, hand
and foot, bound with the chains of his sins: yet Christ shall give his
Ministers charge over him, (...), loose him from his sins, absolve him and
let him go in peace. And therefore to draw up all unto an end: Let not Gods
Voices despair of doing good, though they cry most unto dead men, because
Truth has said it for the comfort of their labor, The dead shall hear the
Voice of the Son of GOD: and let not dead men, men dead in sins and
trespasses, if they hear the voice of the Son of God, despair of mercy; for
Truth has also said it, to their comfort, They that hear the Voice of the
Son of God, shall live: they that hear Christ's Surgite mortui, Arise ye dead
in this life, and live the life of Grace in this world: shall hear Christ's
Surgite mortui: Arise ye dead after this life, and live the life of glory in
the world to come. And so come we to the third and last Reason, why the Voice,
it is a crying Voice, and that is to take away al excuse from the City, of
Nunqua^ audiuimus, We never heard the voice. For man, such is his folly, when
once sin lays open his nakedness, he flatters himself, all is well, if he
have but a cloak to cast upon his sin; for so our first Parents, no sooner
had they sinned, but they seek for a cloak to palliate their sin; Gen 3.
and Eve, she must be the cloak for Adams sin, and the Serpent the cloak
for Eues sin. And all we, Adams sinful posterity, have worn this cloak of
excuse even almost threadbare by long usage of it, in palliating of our sins:
And we cloak Drunkenness with good fellowship; we cloak Covetousness with
good thriftinesse; we cloak Pride with decency and comeliness: there is no
sin but we have a cloak for it, or else, if we want a cloak for our
sin, we are ready to fetch a cloak from heaven, and even to accuse God
himself, to excuse our sin: As Sr Thomas Moore tells us of a prisoner at the
Bar, who being convict of felony, pleads his pardon upon this, how that God
had so ordained him to be a Thief, and therefore he could no other do but
steal: For who ever resisted the will of God? But the Judge answered him very
well; If God has ordained thee to be a Thief and to steal, God has also
ordained me to be a Judge, and to hang thee for thy theeuerie.

Now as we spare not, thus to accuse God, to excuse our sin: So are we most
ready to excuse our selves, by accusing of Gods Word: and the whole world is
set on this: And some Nations in the world, think it excuse sufficient for
their sin, that they never had these crying Voices of the Lord, to sound his
Word and precepts in their ears: but Saint Paul tells them: (...), Romans 2.1.
Thou art inexcusable O man, who make this thy Plea. For thou have a visible
word, which, though it preach not to thine ears, yet does it preach unto thine
eyes: and makes thy two eyes, the two witnesses of Gods glory and mercy toward
thee. For the Sun, which gives thee light, the air thou breathest in, the
earth thou feedest on: these be dumb Preachers, Romans 1.19.
and preach Gods mercy to thine eyes: and no Nation is there in the world, but
it has this kind of preaching in it. Psalm. 19.3.
For there is no speech nor language (says the Prophet) where the voice of
these Preachers is not heard. And therefore this is enough to euince the worlds
unthankfulness unto God, for the riches of his mercies, and to leave the world
(as the Apostle witnesses) without excuse. Romans 1.20.
But yet God, he farther takes excuse from man (so loath he is man should cast
away his soul with excuses) and he writes the Notions of his Law, even in the
heart of every man: Romans 2.14. and 15.
making every man's conscience, to be his Accuser, or excuser before God: Nay,
more then this: yet farther, to take excuse from Man; God, he not only gives
a visible word to preach unto our eyes, nor only the Notions of his Law,
written in our hearts, but he sends an audible Word amongst us, his Voices to
cry and proclaim his Law in our ears, and to revive it in our hearts; so,
that we can plead no excuse at all for our selves: Our eyes are our witnesses,
which daily behold Gods mercies: our hearts are our witnesses, Romans 2.15.
which show the effect of the Law written in the heart: and our ears are our
witnesses, which daily hear Gods crying Voices (and they cannot choose but
hear them, because they be crying Voices) still crying unto us, This is the
way, walk in it. O let not us then, since God is so careful to take excuse
from us, make excuses to our selves, to destroy our souls. Let us not shut our
eyes from beholding Gods mercy; let us not shut our ears from listening to his
judgments; and let us not harden our hearts against his fear, to disobey his
Law, and dishonor his Name: but since he is so careful to preach his Name to
our eyes, to our hearts, and to our ears: let us obey these diverse calls of
mercy, that we may be saved: otherwise if we do, no excuse you see will serve,
but we must utterly perish.

Now if any Nation in the world be left inexcusable in these respects: this
little Goshen of ours, this little Island of ours, is most without excuse, which
(as speaks the Prophet Isaiah) in his 11. Chapter, is full of the Knowledge of
the Lord, Luke 12.^7.
For the Servant that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. And therefore, as you desire to secure the City from the
Lords Rod, and your own souls from his consuming wrath: Since God, to leave
you without excuse, sends crying Voices unto you, in mercy to forewarne you:
lend your ears, and hearts, to hear and obey that, which the Lords Voice
cries to your City: For the Lords Voice cries to the City.

It is a great and public task for the Lords Voices to Cry unto a City: And
therefore, Jonah being sent to Nineueh that great City, feign would he fly
from the presence of the Lord, fearing to be the Lords Crier in so great a
City; till the Word of the Lord comes unto him the second time, Ion. 3.1. and
2.
commanding him, Arise, and go to Nineveh that great City, and preach unto it
the preaching that I bid thee. Now as it fared with Jonah, so it fares with
most of the Lords Voices, but that the Lord is with them, and they preach the
preaching which he commands them, they would draw back, as fearing to cry unto
a City. And therefore when the Lords Voices, out of this and such like public
places, cry unto your City, blame not the Voices, for the Voices, they of
themselves are slow enough to Cry unto a City: but that the Lord in mercy to a
City, compels them, as he did Jonah, to arise and go unto the City, and
preach the preaching he commands them, which ye are the more willingly to
hear; because they preach no other, but the preaching which God bids them
preach. And therefore blame me not, though (who am I the meanest of Gods
Voices) if I show unto you how the Lords quarrel with this City in my Text,
agrees in some sort to this famous City. For let us but parallel Gods benefits
bestowed on both these Cities, and then see whether both Cities have been so
thankful unto God for these his benefits, as they ought to be. First, for
Jerusalem, this City in my Text, says God to her, in the fourth and fifth
verse of this present Chapter, Remember my loving kindnesses of old, how I
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and delivered thee out of the house of
Servants: nor only so, but gave thee Moses, Aaron and Miriam for thy guides.
And has not God done this, and much more for our City? Let us remember his
loving kindnesses of old, how God, he has delivered us from Egypt, Romes
tyranny, which in the 11. of the Revelation, is styled to us by the name of
Egypt, Pharaoh the Pope; who would still have made both Prince and People,
Servants and Vassals to his painted holiness: and who in one thing was more
then a Pharaoh, in that he sought to destroy by cruel death, not only all the
Males, but Females too of the Stock of Sem; who professed themselves members of
the true Church: nor only this has God done for us; but he has also given
us a Moses; a most gracious King: As he also gave us a Miriam, Queen Elzabeth.
a gracious Queen of happy memory, dear Sister to our gracious Moses, both a
nursing Father and Mother to our Church; and an Aaron, a holy and a learned
Clergy, to guide and govern us, ever since we set foot out of this blind
Egypt, in the way of peace and truth. Nor only this did God for the people of
the Jews; but in the fifth Verse, he bids them remember, how Balak. King of
Moab consulted their destruction; and how Balaams Curse, God, he turned it into
a blessing unto them. And has not God done this and much more for our City?
For let us but remember what in Eighty eight was consulted against us; when
Pope Balaam was sent for to bless the Navy, and to curse Gods people: How the
Lord turned Pope Balaams Curse into a Blessing unto us: let us remember these
old loving kindnesses of the Lord, and so acknowledge the righteousness of the
Lord, his faithfulness and his mercy to us: these be the benefits, which God,
he would not have his City Jerusalem, to forget parallel to the benefits
bestowed on us: which far be it, this our Jerusalem, this famous City of
ours should once forget.

And thus we see, God, he is as kind to us, as ever he was to his Jerusalem;
but let us see in the second place; whether we be not as unthankful unto God
for these his benefits, as ever Jerusalem was. Jerusalem betrayed her
unthankful heart to God two manner of ways: openly, by her many rebellions;
and secretly, by her hypocrisy: for her open rebellions, they are set down in
the three next verses following my Text, where you shall find treasures of
wickedness in the house of the wicked; scant measure, wicked balances, and a bag
of deceitful weights, violence and oppression in the rich men, a deceitful
tongue in the mouth of all. Now God wondering at this, to see for all the
mercies which he showed to them, for all the crying and preaching of his
Voices, such gross sins and enormities should reign in such a City, a City
so beloved, a City where his Word was so often preached, his Voices still
crying to the City, he breaks forth in admiration of the thing, Adhuc an
sunt? What, for all my mercies to you? What, for all the crying of my Voices to
you? Adhuc an sunt? Is it possible? Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in
the house of the wicked? scant measure, wicked balances, a deceitful weight?
And are yet the rich men full of violence, and every man's tongue deceitful in
his mouth? why, if it be so, high time it is to punish; and since mercy will not
win you, judgment shall compel you. Whereupon in the very next verses, God,
he proceeds to judgment: Therefore I will make thee sick in smiting thee, etc.

Now look we to it, whether this Cities rebellion be not the rebellion of our
City, whether Hierusalems transgression be not the sin of our Jerusalem; for
first, are there not with us the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked? Why, search the coffers of Extortioners and griping oppressors, there
shall you find the treasures of iniquity; search the coffers of corrupt
Patrons, there also shall you find the treasures of iniquity; search most men's
coffers, and more or less, you shall be sure to find the treasures of
iniquity: so that we cannot deny it, but with us the treasures of wickedness do
yet lodge in the house of the wicked. Now in the second place, to make a full
purse, do not some amongst us make a scant measure, and is there not with us a
scant measure, which is abominable, wicked balances and a bag of deceitful
weights? this must we needs confess that it is so: but it is the care of this
Honorable City, as much as may be, to redress it, that it be not so, and might
the delinquents in this kind smart for it, who bring Gods curse upon the City,
while they strive to get a pony by abomination, by a scant measure, which in
the tenth verse God has pronounced abominable. The meaner sort of offenders in
this kind, they are often met with, and Justice ouertakes them, but as
Demetrius told Alexander, when Alexander called him in question for his pyracy, I
indeed (says he) play the Pyrate in two small Erigots, and am called in question
for it, but great Alexander, he roames about, and with two great armies robs
the whole world, and no man dares to control him for it: So many a petty
Demetrius, who plays the false Merchant to get a penny or two by false
balances and weights, is often most deservedly punished for it: But there is a
great Alexander, a great man in the world, who dealing in whole sale, gets the
gain of whole pounds by false balances and weights, and, as a sip under his
full sail, cuts it away a maine; so these in their whole sale carry smoothly
away the gain of whole hundreths, by false balances and weights, and no man
regards it, but the God of heaven, who here inueighs against it by his
Prophet, and threatens a punishment to the City for it. Now in the third place,
Hierusalems sin was violence and oppression in her rich men, her rich men
were full of violence; and what, is our Jerusalem free from this? if the cry
of the poor and the oppressed will free the City, so much the happier is the
City: but it may be feared, that as our Prophet complained of the rich
inhabitants of Jerusalem, in the seventh Chapter of this his Prophecy, was a
brier, and the most upright, sharper then a thornehedge: So it may be feared,
there be with us many such briers and thorne-hedges, who if a poor sheep
chance to fall into their hands, will, like briers and thorns, make him leave
some of his fleece behind him, and well it is many times, if they leave him a
whole skin to sleep in: but let these rich oppressors, if any such harbor
within the City of God, hencesorward, take notice of it, that they are neither
good friends to the City, nor to their own souls: for these their unlawful
practices bring a curse upon the one and upon the other.

Now in the fourth and last place, Hierusalems sin was a lying and deceitful
tongue, for their tongue was deceitful in their mouth. In their mouth, may
some man say; what needs this addition? for how can the tongue be deceitful,
but in the mouth? but this, it is most Emphaticall, their tongue is deceitful
in their mouth, that is, they no sooner open their mouth, but their tongue is
ready to speak deceit: so that deceit, it not only lurks in the closet of the
heart for some assaies, but it lies lurking under the tongue, and is ready
still in the porch of the mouth, to vent it self upon all assaies. And this is
it which the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Ierem. 9.5.
They have taught their tongues to speak lies, they need not study long for a
deceitful answer, as occasion serves; for they have so well inured their
tongues to a lie, that they have it still ready at their tongues end. This
lying and deceitful tongue, it was Hierusalems sin, and so common amongst
them, that as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Ierem. 9.4.
Every one was to take heed of his neighbor, and not to put trust in any
brother: for every brother used deceit, and every friend dealt deceitfully. And
what, is our Jerusalem free from this? Plaine-dealing men, who have to deal
with nimble tradesmen, will tell you no; for alas, how many trades-mens
tongues with us now-a-daies are deceitful in their mouth, who are as skillful
in the trade of lying, as of selling, having words at will to bring a poor
simplician to their price? And as they thus can teach their tongues to speak a
lie, racking both credit and their honesty, for the advantage of their wares,
using fawning terms which sound like music in the buyers ears, and like a
Sirens song deceive the simpler sort: so do they also teach their nimble hands
to dance the measures, encroching on advantage in their measure, to the
defrauding of the buyers purse, if his eye be not still their ouerseer: so that
now, if ever, the advice holds good, Caveat emptor, let the buyer be wary, and
take heed, for the world is full of nothing but deceit: and to say truth, most
men's tongues are now-a-daies deceitful in their mouth; for it is a nimble and
a complementing world: and the world, like Naphthali, Genesis 49.21.
gives goodly words; but it is not like Dorcas, full of good works: Acts 9.36.
for, to speak in the Prophet David's phrase, you shall have words as soft as
butter, Psalm. 55.21.
but this butter will not stick upon your bread; for you shall have words, but
no deeds. So that we may cry to God with the Prophet David in his 12. Psalm,
for want of faithful dealing men; the Lord help us, for they speak every one
deceitfully with his neighbor, flattering with their lips, and speak with a
double heart. All this being so, the rebellions of our Jerusalem being so nigh
of kin to Hierusalems sin, may not God as justly complain of us, as of
Jerusalem here he does? and may not he truly say to us as to Jerusalem?
What, for all my mercies in that I delivered you from Egypt, from Romes
tyranny, and from the house of servants, the slavery and bondage of an usurping
Pharaoh the Pope? What, for all this, that I have given you a Moses and a
Miriam, Kings and Queens to be your nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers, and
holy Aarons for your Pastors? what, for all this, that I deliuerd you from the
evil in 88. was consulted against you, when I turned Pope Balaams curse into a
blessing unto you? what, for all this, that I daily send unto you Voices upon
Voices, to cry and proclaim unto your City what is the Lords will, and which
is the way, that ye should walk in it: for all these mercies of mine, for all
this crying and preaching of my Voices, adhucan sunt? What, is it possible? Are
there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked? Are there
yet scant measures, false balances, and a bag of deceitful weights in the
shop of the wicked? Is there yet Violence and Oppression in the heart of the
wicked? And is there yet a deceitful tongue in the mouth of the wicked? If
thus it be, and you will not be won by my mercies; if thus it be, and you
will not be cured by my menaces; thou City of God, as to Jerusalem, so must I
say to thee, though my beloved City; Yet thou shall be punished, and I will
make thee as Jerusalem, sick in smiting thee, because of thy sins, etc. And
therefore, thou beloved City of God, since God has so blessed thee with his
mercies, prove not thus unkind unto thy God, do not so requite thy God for his
mercies, as Jerusalem did, but remove with speedy hand these thy sins
wherewith thou art charged from the Lord, and repent thee of the evil of thy
sin, that God may repent him of the evil of punishment intended against thee
for thy sin. Did not thy God love thee, he would not send thee Voices upon
Voices as he does, to cry this in thine ears, that thou may prevent thy
punishment by thy penitence; and therefore if thou be wise, be thou warned by
Jerusalem, and auert Gods judgments from thee, by thy conversion to thy God.
And in thy conversion as thou art to shake off Hierusalems sin, and manifest
rebellions, so have not to do with her saultring and secret hypocrisy in thy
conuerersion: for Jerusalem, as she had her open rebellions, so had she also
her lurking hypocrisy; for do but behold her, and see her hypocrisy in the
sixth verse of this chapter: whereas if now she meant to make a mends for all her
rebellions, she breaks forth in a strain, pleasing enough in the ear of
man; but God, who sees the heart, knew it to be but glozing and hypocrisy.
(Oh) says she, in quo occurram, wherewith shall I come before the Lord? I will
bring with me my thousands of Rams, my ten thousand rivers of oil. I will
spare no cost to appease my God: nay, more then this; I will give the fruit of
my body for the sin of my soul: And what? not all this yet as much as God
requires? No (O) man, God he requires not so much of thee: for in the eight
verse this only is the thing the Lord requires; but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

And therefore, thou City of God, be thou farther instructed by Jerusalem, and
as thou art to leave Hierusalems sin, that thou may escape Hierusalems
punishment: So in thy conversion to thy God, play thou not the Hypocrite as
Jerusalem did. Bring we not then our thousand Rams for an offering unto God;
but offer we up our selves, soul and body, a living sacrifice unto God. Romans
12.1.
Bring we not our ten thousand rivers of oil; but bring we with us penitent
hearts and eyes like holy David's, to gush out rivers of tears, because we,
none of us keep Gods Law. Bring we not the fruit of our body for the sin of
our soul, but good works the fruit of our faith, for the sin of our soul,
the fruit of infidelity: and so do we that which God requires of us; to do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God; for this is it which
the Lords Voice cries unto the City, and let us now seek a man, a fit man, a
man of wisdom, to hear what the Voice cries: For the man of wisdom shall
see thy name. It is easy to find men, but it is hard to find (...), a man:
we may go up and down the City with Diogenes, and find thousands of men,
but not a man among a thousand. It is easy to find Adam, a man of earth, it is
easy to find Enosh, a man of infirmity; but to find Ish, a man of wisdom
and courage, this man is hard to find; and yet no man is a fit man to hear
the voice of the Lord, but this man of wisdom: and therefore we must seek
narrowly for this man of wisdom, whom we shall be better able to discern, if
we distinguish men into three ranks, and place in the first rank, men of
folly, in the second, men of wisdom, but with this restriction, in suo
genere, in their kind; in the third rank, men of wisdom indeed, men
sanctified from above, wise unto salvation, who are the only fit men to hear
the voice of the Lord. For the first, men of folly: There be at this day in
the world, two sort of fools, mad fools, and golden fools; and of the mad
fools holy David speaks in his 53. Psalm, verse. 1. The fool has said in his
heart, There is no God: and do but a while survey the passages of his life, and
you will say he is a mad fool indeed; for he has no other God but his belly,
for his belly is his god: Philip. 3.19.
and never did those foolish Babylonians in that story, offer up more daily to
their Idol Bell, then he does daily to his Idol belly, to his god, his belly;
his drinke-offerings are healths and carowses; the Incense which he burns,
Indian smoke: his Church, none but a Playhouse: the ordinary sermons which he
hears, a Comedy: his funeral scrmons, a Tragedy: his Morning prayer, God damn
me: his Evening prayer, Devil take body and soul. Now what a mad Bedlam is
this, in such mad humors, to jest away his soul? But (O) that this man were
wise, and would leave this iouiall folly, to learn Iehouahs fear, Luke 15.10.
that the Angels in Heaven might rejoice at his conversion, as the Devils in
hell now laugh at his folly and destruction!

Now the second sort of fools are of Dives kin, who for all his riches, Luke
12.20.
is called in the Gospel but a fool: and these fools, they say to the wedge
of gold, Thou art our God: and the service of their God is in conotousnesse,
which is idolatry; so that they be idolaters, Col. 3.5.
and delight in nothing more then in a mass, even a mass of money, which is
all they care for; now preach to such (...), preach profit to them, and they
hear you gladly; but preach unto them (...), preach Christ unto them, and they
hear you not: These, though they be not so mad, yet they be as bad fools as
the former: for though they will not abuse Gods blessings as the former, and
empty their purse upon their belly, yet (which is almost as bad) they will not
use Gods blessings at all, but empty their belly for their purse, whereas the
golden mean it is, which commends the man. And therefore the man of wisdom,
he stands by, and sees the folly of both these, and learnes the instruction of
wisdom by them both; so that he is neither for the belly his god, nor yet for
gold his god, but his only request to God, is that of the Wiseman in the
thirtieth of Proverbs, Feed me (O Lord) with food convenient for me. And thus
now you see the madness of folly: See we withal in the second place, the
folly of some wisdom: James 3.15.
There is a wisdom which Saint James tells us (...), is not from above; but it
is earthly, sensual and devilish. It is first earthly, it studies only how to
get lands and livings on earth, it cares not at all for the Land of the living
in Heaven: It is sensual, all it minds, is for the pleasure of the body, it
minds not at all the comforts of the soul: It is devilish, 2a. 2ae. Quaest.
45. art. 1.
Diabolica (says Aquinas) propter imitatione^ superbiae Diaboli, Devilish,
because it makes the man that has it proud, and envious as the Diueil. Now
this Devilish wisdom, it is in the Devils gift, and he has bestowed it on
the proud aspiring Jesuit, who by this Devilish wisdom, contriuing the death
of Princes, and downfall of States and Kingdoms, vpholds the sensual wisdom
of the Priests in pleasure, and the earthly wisdom of the Pope in state and
magnificence: but far be this wisdom from us, it makes us sapientes, it
makes us wise, Ierem. 4.22.
but (as says the Prophet) wise only to do evil. And therefore take we heed
of this wisdom; for it is devilish, it is from the Devil, and it fits us for
the Devil, making us the Devils Apes, by imitation of his practices in this
life, and the Devils Heirs, by partaking of his punishments in hell fire. And
therefore again and again take we heed of this devilish wisdom, and let us
seek for the true wisdom, which S. James tells us, is from above, from the
Father of lights, Iam. 1.5. and 6.
who gives the true wisdom to every one that asks of him, if he ask in
faith. Now this wisdom, which is from God above, and which only truly
denominates a man, a man of wisdom, has two properties: For first, as Aquinas
observes, 2a. 2ae. Quaest. 45. Art. 3. and Art. 6.
it makes a man contemplari diuina, to fix his heart in contemplation upon God.
And then secondly it serves, regulare humanos actus, to regulate and direct our
actions: For the first, the chief point of true wisdom is in the first place,
to have an eye to God and to his Laws; so that though we converse with men on
earth, Phil. 3.20.
yet our conversation may be with God in heaven: and this we have proved unto
us out of the 4. of Deuteronomy. verse. 6. where (says God) Keep my Laws and
ordinances, and do them: for, Haec est Sapientia, This is your wisdom: and if
ye thus observe and keep my statutes, the people round about you shall say of
you, Only this people is wise, and of understanding, and a great nation. By
this then shall you discern a man of wisdom, see thou a man like Zachary
and Elizabeth, just and walking in the ordinances of his God? See thou a man
like unto Cornelius, a devout man, and one that fears God? See thou a man
like unto Nathaniel, a true Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile? See
thou a man like unto S. Paul, crucified to the world, and therefore held of the
world but a fool for Christ's sake? Be bold to say it, Such a man as this, and
none but such a man as this, is the man of wisdom, of whom we speak: For
though the world be not so quick-sighted, as to pierce into the depth of this;
How this can be, that a man who forsakes the pleasures and vanities of the
world, and lives in the world, dead to the world, as a man out of the world,
whose conversation is in Heaven; that this man, he should be the only man of
wisdom in the world: Though (I say) the world does not easily attain to the
reach of this, yet may the world soon be brought to confess this truth, by
the evidence of her own judgment in worldly matters: For the world deemes him
the only wise man, who is provident for aftertimes, and who with Joseph can
lay up in time of plenty, Genesis 41.33.
for the time of dearth: now who more provident in this kind, then this man of
wisdom, of whom we speak? who more lays up for aftertimes then he? for he is
still conversant in Gods book, which is a rich storehouse for the soul, to
furnish it with the Panoplie of a Christian; Ephesians. 6.
and therefore he still has recourse to this rich treasury, to furnish his
soul with all things needful at all assayes for aftertimes; and in time of
prosperity, he stores up patience to help him in adversity; in time of
health, he stores up Gods mercies to refresh him in his sickness; in time of
peace and quietness, he stores up constancy and Christian resolution, to back
him out in time of persecution. And as he is thus provident for the good of his
soul in this life; so is he most of all provident for his souls good after
this life. For he like a good Pilgrime-Traueller, because he would not cumber
his soul too much with the trash of this world, which might hinder his
expedition in his journey to Heaven, he wisely sends his treasures to Heaven
before him: some on poor men's backs, clothing them; some in poor men's
bellies, feeding them; and some in poor men's hands, liberally relieuing them,
to meet him in Heaven, when himself comes thither, where his soul is sure to
find them, and a reward with them.

Now let the world speak truth; whether this so provident a man, be not the
only man of wisdom in the world. And I would to God all that have souls to
save, would be thus wise unto salvation, and would be as provident for their
souls, as they are careful for their bodies, that wisdom might embrace us
all for her children.

Now the second property of true wisdom is; it serves to regulate and rule
out our actions, making them go in a straight and right line: for all our
ways are crooked ways, till such time as wisdom make straight steps unto
our feet: and therefore Wisdom may well be called the souls Controuler;
and happy is the soul, where wisdom is controuler. For Wisdom or Folly is
the Mistress of all our actions, and folly is to our actions, as the Varlet
Baud is to the Strumpet, to entise us unto sin; but wisdom is to our
actions, as the natural Mother to her child, to win us unto goodness. Folly
says to the young heir, Be prodigal now thou have it, and let it fly in
vanity: but says Wisdom unto him, Live honestly, now thou have it, and use
it to sobriety. Says Folly to the old Man, Be covetous now thou have it, and
let it lie by thee. But says Wisdom unto him, Do good while thou have it,
for therefore was it given thee. Folly, bids the angry man give a stab for a
wrong: but Wisdom is for patience. Folly bids the ryotous man exceed in his
Diet: but Wisdom is for Temperance. Folly bids us get it, no matter how: but
Wisdom is for conscience. And thus do Wisdom and Folly strive for our
actions: and one while we yield to folly, and another while to wisdom: but
happy he, who when he sees Wisdom and Folly thus plead pro and con for his
actions, judges wisely of the matter, and gives Wisdom but her due. For such
a man, he is a man of wisdom, a man in whom Wisdom delights: For the
obedient ear, is wisdoms delight: And therefore this man, he is the only
fit man to hear Gods Voice; because wisdom makes him to see Gods Name, while
he still beholds God in an holy contemplation, and still draws nearer and
nearer unto God, in an heavenly conversation. For the man of wisdom shall see
thy Name: Videbit nomen, Shall see thy name. One would take it at first blush,
to be more natural in propriety of speech, for the Prophet to have said,
Shall hear thy name, rather then Shall see thy name. But it is most
significant as it is, The man of wisdom shall see thy name. For we often
hear Gods name, and we fear it not. For some, who hear it, blaspheme it: and
most, who hear it, regard it not with that reverence, as beseemes the high
Majesty of so great and glorious a name. Whereas, did we propose to our
selves to see Gods name: did we see, and behold, with the eye of Faith, the
holy Angels of Heaven still praising this name: Did we see and behold the
Devils in hell trembling at this name: Did we see and behold the Saints on
earth adoring this name: Did we see and behold all the creatures of God
obeying this name, our hearts would tremble within us, to take this holy name
into our mouth, but with fear and reverence: we would fear vainly to swear
by, and blaspheme as we do, this holy name, which the Angels in Heaven, with
continual. Halle-lu-iahs, praise and magnify: and the Saints on earth, with
all the devotions of an humbled foul reverence and adore: and we would even
quake and tremble, slightly, as too too commonly we do, upon every small
occasion, to use this holy name, at which even the Devils themselves do
tremble, and all the creatures of God stoop, and obey. And therefore, he that
is a man of wisdom amongst us, he will endeavor to see further then
ordinary; he will see Gods name: When he hears Gods name to be a name of
Power; he will withal in the rare workmanship, and exquisite fabric of
Heaven and earth, see and acknowledge the Majesty of this name: when he hears
Gods name to be a name of glory and great renown; he will withal, in the
continual praises of Saints and Angels, who daily sing Te Deums unto God, see
and acknowledge the glory of this name. To be brief, he that is a man of
wisdom amongst us, when he hears Gods Name proclaimed in his Word; if this
move him not, he will join his eyes with his ears, and see Gods name
glorious in his works, which will strike him with astonishment. For we are all
of us like the Queen of Saba, 1. King. 10.
readier to believe our eyes, then our ears: She hears of Salomons wisdom;
but she credits not the report, till she comes to be an eyewitness of
Salomons glory, when she is greatly astonished to see his wisdom, and the
glory of his house: So we, hearing of Gods wisdom, his glory, and his power
preached unto us in his Word: though our tongues confess not so much to the
world, yet our hearts (such is the imagination of the heart, only evil, and
that continually) oftentimes fondly call in question the truth of what we
hear, and doubts arise whether all be true: But when once with our eyes we
see Gods wisdom, in the order and governance of his creatures, and his glory
and power in their excellency, we then begin to stand astonished at the luster
of so high a Majesty. And this is it which holy Job confesses: I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, Job 42.5, and 6.
but now mine eye sees thee, I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.
And therefore again and again let me urge it to you, as you desire to
approve your selves men of wisdom; have this property of a wise man in you,
to have your eyes still in your head, ready upon all assaies to see Gods name.
And in your prosperity, see Gods gracious name, to praise him for his bounty;
in your adversity, see Gods powerful name, to call upon him for his help and
mercy: see his name, a tower to defend you in danger: see his name, a sweet
ointment to refresh you in sickness: see his name, a Savior to save you from
your sins, that ye despair not of mercy: and see his name, a Judge to question
you for you sins, that you presume not of mercy. To be brief, set God
always before your eyes, and in all your actions see Gods name; in the
beginning, to begin in the fear of his name, and see Gods name in the ending
to conclude to the glory of his name, that your actions being begun, continued,
and ended in him, they may be crowned and accepted of him.

Thus, would we still but see Gods name for the direction of our actions, we
should not need to fear Gods rod wherewith he punishes the obliquity of our
actions: but because we often, more for fashions sake then any true devotion,
press to this and such like places; only to hear Gods name, and yet prove
little better, because withal we do not propose unto our selves to see Gods
name, to fear Gods name, we, who will not use our eyes to see Gods name, for
this contempt are here summoned by the Prophet to use our ears, and to hear
Gods rod: Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it: of which but in a word.

It is not bear ye the rod, but only audite, hear ye the rod: so that if
ye hear the rod, and prevent the stroke with penitence and tears, with
fastings and with prayers, and all the true devotions of an humbled soul, it
is in your own choice whether or no ye feel the rod: For Nineveh that great
City, when she no sooner heard the rod, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be destroyed, but from the highest to the lowest, Jonah 3.
they humbled themselves in sackcloth, and in ashes. This humiliation of
theirs, their fasting, their sackcloth, and their ashes, were as so many
Orators to plead for mercy for them in the ears of God, and God spared the
City, and heard their cry: because they first heard the cry of his Voice, Yet
forty days, and Niniuch shall be destroyed, and straight upon it humbled
themselves in dust and ashes. Now God, he cries the same in the ears of this
City, as he did to Nineveh, audite, hear ye the rod: and if ye now hear the
rod as Nineveh did, and humble your selves with fastings and with prayers, nor
only so, but which is most memorable in Niniuchs humiliation, as it is
recorded in the 3. of Jonah, v. 8. If every man turn from the evil of his
way, some from their swearing, some from their carowsing, some from their
oppressing, all from their evil dealing: thou beloved City of God, upon this
thy humiliation, the rod shall much rather depart from thee, then it did from
Nineveh: only audite, hear ye only, ye men of Israel, and wash thee, O
Jerusalem, Ierem. 4. v. 14.
from thy wickedness, that thou may be saved. Now as the comfort is, the
rod, it comes not suddenly and unawares upon us, but with an audite, first
hear ye it, which is as the word of peace offered to a Nation, before the
sword be once unsheathed for the battle. So the comfort also is, that it is
but virga, it is but a rod, it is not the axe in the 3. of Math. laid to the
root of the tree, quite to cut down every tree that brings not forth good
fruit. It is not virga ferrea, Gods iron rod in the 2. Psalm. to crush and
break in pieces these bodies of earth, like a Potters vessel: but it is only
virga, it is only but a rod; and as the comfort is, that it is only but a
rod, so the comfort also is, that it is a Deo, it is from God, God has
appointed it, who is our Father, to be a gentle correction for his children.

But let not now these comforts make us careless of the judgment, and because
God is slow to anger, and does not straight punish, but often first call upon
us for repentance, Hear ye the rod, and so amend: Let us not wilfully mistake
Gods mercy, and upon this be slow in our conversion unto God, because the
punishment, when it comes, it is but a rod; let not us slight the punishment,
and seem careless of the judgment, because the rod, when it is upon us, it is
in a Fathers hand, who is most tender in his punishments; let not this
encourage us in our sins, for though the rod be from God a Father, yet is it
also from God a most severe Judge, though the rod come with an Audite, Hear
ye it, and make delay? Why, the more delays be in the stroke, the more heavy
is the stroke, and pays the homer when it comes: though the rod when it comes,
be but a rod, yet a rod it is, and such a rod, which makes the whole world our
enemy; for the whole world, it is Gods rod, wherewith he scourges the rebellious
nation. The fire, it was Gods rod, to consume the two Captains of the King of
Samaria and their followers, who came violently to surprise the Lords Prophet.
2. Reg. 1.
The earth, Numb. 16.
it was Gods rod, to swallow up Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, for their rebellion:
The water, it was Gods rod, to drown the old world, and to overthrow the host
of Pharaoh: And, for a long while, the infected air has been a rod unto this
City. War, it is Gods rod, to punish the unthankful abuse of peace: Famine,
it is Gods rod to punish the unthankful abuse of his creatures: Pestilence, it
is Gods rod, wherewith, for a long time, God has punished this City, and now
he does but strike a stroke or two with this rod, take away some one or two
with his heavy plague; and that not often neither, but now and then, to see if
this his gentle correction will make us wise; now at last men of wisdom, to
see his name, hear his rod, and fear his Majesty, that the evil come not
upon us for our sins.

And thus now you see, though it be but a rod which is here menaced against
us, yet in that it is a rod, it is enough to set heaven and earth against us:
and therefore since it is so, that every creature of God, at the great Makers
command, is a rod ready at hand, to scourge the rebellious nation, this should
teach us to live in an awful fear of this rod, and when Satan tempts us to
sin, to look about us, and think every creature we see, an enemy to us, if
we sin; for this will make us enemies unto sin. Have we then (if we be
wise) still an eye to this rod, and so learn we to fear God, in whose hand it
is, that while we live in fear of God and of his rod, God may not fear us
with his rod: For, as for us (Beloved) we fear what our sins deserve, there
is some rod, some judgment or other houering over our heads: but let us in
time prevent the Judgment, and hear the Lords Voice from Heaven. Now he does
premonish us, that he may take his rod from us, and not punish us, let us come
before God with tears in our eyes, with Peccaui in our mouths, with devotion
in our hearts, and with alms in our hands; that God seeing our penitence, may
remove his punishments. It is an usual saying amongst us, Every good child,
he will go unto his father, and keep his Mid-lent with his father. And let us
herein approve our selves good children indeed of God our heavenly Father, in
going this day unto him our Father, every one of us, who are so many Prodigals
of Gods graces and mercies toward us, following the good resolution of the
Prodigal: Luke 15.18.
go we unto our Father, and say unto Him; Father, we have sinned against
Heaven and against Thee, and are no more worthy to be called thy sons:
Accept us, Holy Father, we beseech thee, and embrace us with the arms of thy
mercy, now we come unto thee: spare thy people, who turn unto thee with
fastings and with prayers, and all the true devotions of an humbled and
sanctified soul, and take thy rod from us; for we will hear thy Voice to obey
it, and see thy name, to fear it and to praise it: Only open our eyes, that
we may see; and our ears, that we may hear; and withal, Open thou our
mouths, that our lips may speak thy praises: and so will we daily confess,
to the honor of thy Name, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests to God his Father,
even to Jesus Christ, Revel. 1.
that faithful Witness, the first Begotten of the dead, and prince of the
Kings of the earth; unto Him, and unto Him alone, for the riches of his mercy
unto us, be all glory and praise, from this time forth, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

