THE ORTHODOX FAITH AND WAY TO THE CHVRCH EXPLANED AND IVSTIFIED: IN ANSWER TO
A POPISH TREATISE, entitled, WHITE DIED BLACK; wherein T. W. P. in his triple
accusation of D. White for impostures, untruths, and absurd illations, is
proved a trifler: And the present controversies between us and the Romanists
are more fully delivered and cleared.

By FRANCIS WHITE Bachelour in Divinity, and elder Brother of Doctor John
White.

Cyprian Epist. 40. Qui mandatum Dei reijciunt, and traditionem suam statuere
conantur, firmiter a nobis and fortiter respuantur. Chrysostom. in Genes. hom. 5.
(...). Aug. de Genes. ad lit. lib. 2. cap. 1. Nullus reprehensor formidandus
est amatori veritatis. LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD for WILLIAM BARRET, and
are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the three
Pigeons. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, RICHARD LORD BISHOP OF LINCOLN, MY
Honorable Diocesan.
RIght Reverend Father, it were no small happiness to the Christian world, if
true Religion might reign as a law, vnthwarted and not opposed, and the
Orthodoxe faith, being obscured by no questions and cauils, were only
published and not disputed.

For Religion and Faith may not unfitly be resembled to streams, or wels of
water, which of themselves being pure and wholesome, become muddie when they
are troubled: so the former are made less pure, and many times defiled by
tumult and contention. And even as in inundation of waters, fields and meadows
adjoining are turned into mire: So when contention (compared by Solomon to the
ouerflowing of waters, Pro. 17.14.) ouerspreadeth the green pastures of sacred
truth, sundry parts of godliness are laid waste, and some filth of error
cleaves to the same.

Contentions in Religion produce many evils, whereof these are remarkable.
First, while people are rapt into factions by heat and humor of contention,
Publius Mimus, Nimium altercando veritas amittitur.
the very grounds and maxims of Religion use to be shaken, and scarce any
thing is left settled and indubirate (so far as the subtlety and pride of
man's wit can prevail.) Next, whiles one party hastily opposes another, it
falls out so, that each of them looking toward the adverse Tenet, do proceed
to some contrary extremity of doctrine, as dangerous many times, or perhaps
more then that which they oppugn. And in this case it is verified which S.
Augustine says De Genesis ad lit. lib. 9. cap. 8.
: It is difficile or hard for men, whiles they avoid one extremity not to run
peruersly into another. Also, discord reprocheth and disgraceth Religion: and
exposes Christian faith to the opprobrie and derision of the world. By reason
of that distraction which happened about the heresy of Arius, the Fathers
report that Christian Religion was brought upon the stage, and made ridiculous
to the Pagans Eusebius. vita Constantin l. 2. c. 60. and l. 3. c. 12. Greg.
Nazian. apol. fugae. Socrat. hist. eccles. l. 1. cap. 3. Sozomen. hist. l. 1.
cap. 15.
. And Chrysostom says Chrysostom. in Gala. cap. 1.
: For this cause are we become a reproach to Jews and Gentiles, because the
Church is rapt into a thousand factions.

The same also has caused States and Commonwealths more unwilling to harbor
Religion. Libanius the sophister, and other Pagans, took occasion to incense
Julian to the extirpation of Christianity, because the Empire was so much
molested by the contentions of Christians. And Ammianus Marcellinus Hist. Romans
lib. 22. number. 8. page 253.
reports, that the same Julian was wont to say in reproach of Christians: That
no savage beasts were so cruel one to another, as Christians were among
themselves. And upon this occasion also was he the more enraged against the^.
And Kingdoms and Commonwealths are sometimes embroyled and shaken asunder by
discord happening about Religion. In the days of Hildebrand, who raised a
notorious schism in the West Church, a Popish Bishop (alleged by Auentine)
says as follows. All right is confounded, and laws are perished; Auent
annal. Boior. l. 2. page 547.
there is no faith among men, no peace, no humanity, no shame, no security,
no government, no rest from evils: All the world is in an uproar and together
by the ears, Cities and Countries are in arms, Otho. Frising. chron. l. 6. c.
36. p. 127.
etc. Otho Frising. (a credible historian) reports: that the Christian world
was inuolued in so many miseries, embroyled with such mischief, oppressed with
so great perils, and consumed with so lamentable destruction, arising from
Ecclesiastical tyranny and discord: that nothing could be added to the
present calamity, and the horrible confusion of the times might well have been
compared to the darkness of Egypt. And our countreyman Thomas Walsingham in
his Chronicle says, Tho. Walsingh. hist. Angl. in Henric. 4. p. 420.
that two hundred thousand people were slain in the garboile which followed
upon the schism of Popes.

And besides the former evils of contention, these which follow are not to be
forgotten. First, Religion and faith, which of all other things should be most
certain and indubitate, whiles it is questioned begins to be doubted off:
and discord in Religion nourishes certain seeds of Atheism. Secondly, as
plants which are often removed, cannot take root and prosper; so points of
faith and piety, being removed out of their old standing, or bended this way
and that way, begin to lose their reverence and stability in the souls of men.
Thirdly, as in building, so in contention, one opponent gainsaying another,
plucketh down that which by a common labor and consent has great need to be
builded up. Fourthly and lastly, as it is impossible to follow guides whose
backs are each to other, and their faces look a contrary way: so Gods
people, whose right is to be led by their spiritual guides, in one beaten path
of faith and godliness, are with peril of their salvation distracted, (not
knowing what to do) when their leaders call them contrary ways.

In regard of these and many other the like effects, it were greatly to be
desired, that unity and concord, the chief badge and ensign of true
Christians, Ioh. 13.35. and the maintainer of the safety and prosperity of
the Church, might by some godly means or other, be established in the
Christian world.

There is in these our days a grievous division, and a wall of partition among
the Christians of the Western Region. The Pontificians of the one party, and
the reformed Churches of the other, are in hostility: and it cannot be denied,
but that the same threatens peril (...) Church; to wit, That the Popes
judgment is infallible: That he is Lord over the whole Church, etc. That the
public Service of the Church does best edify in an unknown language: That
lay men may not without Papal license read the holy Scripture, etc. The
Oecumenicall Council of Ephesus Council. Ephesians. edit. Peltan. to. 4. cap. 10.
, writes in this manner to the Emperors, Theodosius and Valentinian: Your
majesty's desiring that piety may be confirmed, have enjoined the holy Synod
to make a more exact proof of the doctrines propounded, etc. Hereby it
appears, that in those days, not only particular Bishops and Popes, but the
whole body and state of the Clergy were so far subject to Princes, as that
these had external authority to enjoin and command them to serve Christ
Jesus in their callings.

3. Many of our adversaries opinions are improbable, unreasonable, and absurd.
The Scripture (says Cardinal Cusanus Cusan. Epist. 2. ad Bohem. page 834.
) has no greater authority to bind or absolve the faithful, then the Church
will. The definition of the Pope (says Gretsar) is as authentical as the
sacred Scripture Grets. def. Bellarm. de Scriptu. p. 1457.
. Fornication in the Clergy (says Pighius) is a smaller offense then marriage
Pigh. contr. Ratisbon. loc. 15
. To worship images is meritorious Andrad. orthod. explic. lib. 9. page 284.
. When the Pope delivers a definitive sentence touching faith, the spirit of
God assisteth him infallibly in his conclusion, but not in his premises Stapl.
Relect. contr. 4. q. 2. notab. 4. Canus. loc. theol. l. 6. c. 8.
. He may privately think, teach, and write heresy Bosius de sig. eccles. l.
18. cap. 6. Caietan. de author. Pap. and Council. cap. 9. Bannes, Azor. Greg.
Val. Gretsar, etc.
, and yet in his Consistory he shall always sententiate and define verity.
He may be a lad of ten years old Read afterward in this book. p. 118. and
page 142. Cassand. de offic. boni viri, p. 39. De fide in Christum mortuum and
resuscitatum, de charitate Deo and proximo collocanda, controuersia nulla est.
Porro in his duobus capitibus pietatis summa consistit, etc.
, an ignorant and unlettered gull, unable to write his own name, or to
understand grammar; and yet he is the sole Authenticke Judge of controversies
in Religion, and the whole Church is obliged upon the greatest penalty, to
believe his definition. And yet in this case the Church is not governed by new
revelation.

4. Some of our adversaries (more ingenuous then their fellows) confess, that
we believe and hold the foundation, the sum of piety, or maine and vital
matter of Religion.

Now in regard of the premises, it appears that our adversaries have no just
cause to embroile and disturb the Christian world, and in hostile and
barbarous manner to deal with us for matter of doctrine: considering that if
they do not falsify our Tenet They lay to our charge, that we hold: God to be
the author of sin. That a regenerate person has not freewill. That justified
people, are not inwardly cleansed from mortal sin by grace. That Sacraments
do not confer grace. That the Church militant is a Platonicall Idea. That
every private and unlearned Christian is a judge of controversies, and an
interpreter of Scripture. That the true Church visible has no authority to
determine controversies of faith. That the Eucharist is only a figure of
Christ his presence, and an empty sign. That good works are not means of
salvation. That we yield no honor to the blessed Virgin, and other Saints, etc.
, and impose that upon us which we are free from. We maintain no public
doctrine, but such as has formerly been reputed orthodoxe and Catholic: and
is either necessarily, or at least wise with greater probability and appearance
of truth, derived from sacred Scripture, and from the Primitive Councels and
Fathers, then the adverse Tenet defended by them.

The matter then, which principally and without present hope of reconciliation
deuideth Christendom, is the pride and usurpation of the Pope. And no doubt
other doctrinall controversies are subtly kept on foot, to be a stalking
horse for this.

When these maxims and theorems ensuing be considered, let each impartial
Reader reuolue with himself what is the true cause of the discord whereof I
speak.

No Chapter, no book (of holy Scripture) is canonical, but by the Popes
authority Greg. 7. Apud Baron. tom. 11. an. 1076. Number. 33.
.

The Pope may place the (fabulous) book of Hermes and Clement his
Constitutions, among canonical Scripture Stapl. Relect. controuers. 5. quaest.
3. artic. 4. page 514.
.

The Roman Pontifex by the right of true Religion may command all men, touching
all their particular affairs and actions, and he is the Lord of all temporal
things Bosius de ruinis gentium, l. 1. c. 18.
.

He is that statue in Daniel, which shall crush in pieces all the kingdoms of
the earth Bosius de sig. eccles. l. 17. c. 3. Otho. Frising. chron. l. 6. c.
36. Romanum imperium, ferro in Daniele comparatum, pedes ex part ferreos, ex
part fictiles habuit, donec a lapide praeciso de monte sine manibus, excisum
subruetur. Quid enim aliud lapidem sine manibus excisum, quam Ecclesiam, etc?
Haec, regnum, circa finem mundi, quem pedes significant, ferreum propter
matte^, fictile propter conditionem, in ea part quae infirmior fuit percussit:
dum Rege^ orbis non tanqua^ Dominum orbis vereri, sed tanquam de limo, propter
humilem conditionem factum fictilem, gladio anathematis fe^i^e docuit. Ipsa
vero quae antea parua fuit, and humilis, in quantum montem excreuerit, iam
videri potest, etc.
.

The Pope may depose kings, (says Tho. Bosius) for just causes, and without
any cause: because they be ignauious; yea for their age, and for an injury
offered to one Abbot Bosius de sig. lib. 17. cap. 4. page 406.
.

It belongs to Romish Bishops (says our countryman Saunders) to pronounce
the King an heriticke, and to declare that his subjects are exempt from
yielding all future obedience to him: and they (Popish Bishops) are to do their
endeavors, that some other may be enthroned in his seat; and if subjects will
not proceed herein according as they ought (traitorously,) then the Pastors are
to procure by any means whatsoever (poison, gunpowder, massacre, etc.) that he
which sits in the chair of pestilence may no longer reign Sander. de visib.
Monarch. l. 2. c 4.
.

And what distaineth the king and makes him an heriticke, or worthy of this
fatal blow? Haereseos incusatur and damnatur Fredericus, quod inter alia,
Romanum Pontificem, ipsum anathematis vinculo astringere non potuisse dixerit
(says Fazellus Fazel. de reb. Sicul. l. 8. c. 2. p 443. Vide Vsperg. chron.
an. 10 12. page 241.
:) The (Emperor) Frederick is accused and condemned of heresy, because among
other sayings he affirmed, that the Roman Pope could not anathematize, (or by
his curses deprive him of his imperial dignity.)

And Papirius Masson says: The Pope being transported with vehement hatred
Maiore odio incensus, etc.
, sent into France a certain Archdeacon, with Breeues containing direful
censures to be published against Philip then King: If he would not acknowledge
himself subject to Pope Boniface, as well in things civil and temporal, as
in spiritual Papir Masson, de episc. vrb. l. 5. vita. Bonifacij. 8.
.

Thomas Saunders also says: The King ought to be deposed, if he will not blade
it for Christ, Mat. 26.25. (that is, for the Popes tyranny and lust) also if
he permit divorces, or affirm usury to be lawful, etc Sander. de vilib.
Monarch. l. 2. c 4. Pro Christo stringere, etc. Theoderic. Ni em. de schis. pa
par. l. 2. c. 7. Vsuraepalam in curia Romana exercebantur, and non reputabatur
peccatum. Torniel. annal. p. 161. A Pontif. maximo fuit dispensatum, cum
Emanuele Portugalliae Rege, vt duas successiue vxores duceret: and cum
Katherina Ferdinandi, and Elizabethae Regum Hispaniarum filia, vt successiue
duobus nuberet fratribus, Angliae Principibus.
. Or if within his own dominions, he restrain the horrible and importable
exactions and oppressions of the Pope: or if the King will not come at his call
Tho. Walsingham. hist. Anglor. in Edward. 2. page 79. Gulielm. Nubrig. hist.
Angl. l. 2 c. 16. Centum homicidia inter fines Angliae a clericis co^missa (sub
Henrico secundo, etc.) Tot millia taliu^ etc.
: Or if he do impair the immunities of the Roman Church: (that is, among the
rest, will not permit Ecclesiastical and religious persons to be lawless and
exempt from civil obedience:) Or if he violate Sanctuaries, that is, do not
tolerate thieves and villans when they run to Cardinals houses, or other
privileged places, thereby to euade the just penalty of their demerits Papir.
Masson. de Episc. vrbis l. 5 in Vrbano. 5. Scelesti homines grauissimis
facinoribus perpetratis, ad Cardinalium domos fugere soliti, legu^ nodis, and
digno supplicio eximebantur.
: Lastly, if the Emperor or King, chance to tread awry in exhibiting
complement to the Pope, it may hazard his safety. Fazellus reports as
follows Fazellus de rebus Sicul. l. 8. c. 2. page 439. Ex decreto Pontificis.
Cui cum de more, etc. (a principio non fuit sic.) Errorene lapsus, an superbia,
incertum. Altius vt par erat in Pontificis, animoinsederat, quam vt vnqua^
excidere potuerit.
: Frederick came to Rome at the Popes appointment*, To whom Gregory (as the
manner was) offered his right foot to be kissed by him. The Emperor (whether
of ignorance or pride (it is uncertain) did scarce touch the Popes knees with
his lips. This discourtesie, entered (as it was meet) so deeply into the Popes
breast, that he could never forget it, etc. And what might be the sequel
thereof, (besides the story it self) let the doctrine of Thomas Saunders
Sander. de visib. Monarch. l. 2. c. 4. Elizei gladius vltimo loco numeratur,
velut quem effugere nemo possit, etiam si gladium vel Asahelis, vel Iehu
effugerit: sic spiritualis potestatis censura euitari nullo modo potest.
resolve us, who says: Elizeus his sword is mentioned in the last place, (1.
Kin. 19.17.) as being such which no man can escape, although he have escaped
the sword of Asahel and Iehu: Even so, the censure of the spiritual power can
by no means be avoided. And Cardinal Baronius has a memorable sentence in
maintenance of a most immane and unnatural act against the Emperor. Baron.
annal. tom. 12. anno. 1106. number. 14.
When young Henry rebelled against his father, and deposed him from the Empire:
brought him (his father) to his end; and for five years after his death kept
him unburied: Who (says Baronius) can deny but that this was an eminent work
of piety? And you have no more cause to blame this son, then to accuse one
for putting bonds upon his father when he is mad, furious, and frantic, by
means of some deadly ague.

And from hence it may appear, that the proper and adequate cause of the
discord and division of the Western region of the world in matter of Religion,
is the ambition of the Roman Pontifex, and the pernicious doctrine of his
fautors and parasites Papir. Masson. de Episcopis vrbis. li. 6. in Leo. 10.
rehearses the speeches of Longolius, saying to the Pope: Te non tam quasi
Pontificem maximum, quam vt Principem Romanu^, id est, Regum omnium Regem.
, held on foot to support the Papal throne.

There be some which forbear not to censure Divines of our part, for
continuing the breach in Christendom, and maintaining controversies in
Religion. But I entreat these censors indifferently to consider. 1. That the
truth which we maintain is the common right of all Gods people as well as our
own, and that in defense thereof we pass not the bounds of our calling. 2.
Other states of men are as liable to the oppression of the Pope as the Clergy,
and as unable to bear it. 3. Let them repute with themselves, the acts both of
present and elder times. Could his excellent Majesty ( whose abundant
clemency, his very adversaries cannot dissemble Master Bria^ly Apology
praeface, page 8. We cannot without note of more then barbarous ingratitude but
acknowledge, that tender reseruednes, and ever gracious disposition, whereby
since his Highness first entry into so great opposition against us of the
state and time: We have yet nevertheless been (in respect of former times)
mildly forborne or but sparingly dealt withal, etc.
) be permitted within his own dominions, after the most hateful and
mischievous treason that ever was named upon earth, to impose an oath of civil
obedience and external loyalty upon his own subjects? And with what
impudency, spite and folly, did the Romists oppose his just and necessary
proceeding in this case?

But ascend we to former ages: were the States of this Realm, able or willing
to endure the grievous and continual pillage and oppression of the Pope in
this kingdom? Surely, they complain in Matthew Paris in these terms: Satius
nobis mori, etc. It were more desirable for us to die, then to live in this
oppression. And England is become as a vineyard, which the wild boar (the
Pope) has rooted up. Rex Angliae Vasallus Papae. Math. Paris. pa. 844.
Our Lord the Pope has devoured us with his ravenous jaws, etc.

(...) next to God we all live and breathe. Lam. 4.20.) You are a father and
friend to the Clergy, over which God and his Majesty has placed you, and I
my self have my particular station in your Diocese, and exercise my function
under your Episcopie. In regard whereof, I think my self obliged, both to
acknowledge your favors, and to select your Lordship to be my Patron. And if
this my service may prove in any measure profitable to the Church, whereof I am
a member, and grateful to you and to the rest of my superiors, I shall think
I have labored to purpose. Otherwise I must accuse my self of being over
busy, and acknowledge with Saint Ambrose Offic. l. 1. c. 2.
: That tacere nosse quam loqui difficilius est: It is more difficile to know
when to be silent, then to speak. And thus presuming no further, I rest,

Your Lordships in my best service, Francis White.

The Epistle to the Reader.
SInce the deceasse of my Brother D. White, there is published against him a
libelling and despitefull Treatise, entitled, White dyed black.

The Author thereof (being a Romish Priest) undertakes to demonstrate, that
the Doctor in his book called the way to the Church, has committed many foul
and wilful abuses; and in particular: corrupts Authors, delivers manifest
and confessed untruths: and in his disputing uses many loose and absurd
illations.

And to the persuading hereof, he proceeds as follows.

1. In the Epistles prefixed to his book, and in sundry passages besides, he
largely and loudly accuses the Doctor, declameth and thundreth against him,
with a whole volue of loose words: and boasts and florisheth before he come
to the fight, of an absolute conquest and victory over him and his work. The
facing and verbal ostentation of this Romist, is so impudent, that it puts
down the Giant of Gath. 1. Sam. 17. (Only his force and stature is meaner,
his joints and limbs are feebler, and his armor is lighter.)

When a certain mercenary soldier did with many bold and impure reproaches
exclaim against Great Alexander: Plutarch. Apothegm.
Memnon the General of Darius his army, lent him a blow with his lance:
saying, that he had hired him to fight against Alexander, and not to rail at
him. And howsoever the verbal clamors of this Romist are much applauded by his
fautors, yet indeed they rather deserve stripes, Pro. 19.29. then praises: and
are naught else but windy and worthless stuff, of no more force to make a
conquest of the Doctor and his cause: then the prating of the soldier was to
disparkle the invincible army of Alexander the Great.

2. In his progress about the matter it self: This Adversary does not
confute, either the whole or any one continuate part of the Doctors work, as
it lies in order, but makes a rapsodie, and selecteth here and there
instances and materials, which seem aduantageous to his purpose. And as the
Amalekites, not daring to affront the maine host of the Israelites, preyed
upon straglers, and such as were feeble and hindmost in the company. Deuteronomy.
25.18. So this Champion dissembleth, and passes over the maine body and firm
testimonies and arguments of every question, and fasteneth his nails upon the
more feeble Justin. collo. cu^ Tryph. Soletis seu muscae aduolare ad
exulcerata, si qua inter plurima recte dicta exciderit vel vnum quippiam quod
vobis displicet, aut non satis intellig^^is.
and less principal branches.

3. This Adversary having without all modesty, taxed my Brother of
corruption, untruth, etc. does himself perpetually commit the same offenses.

In the front of his book he affixeth a select sentence out of Augustine Aug.
lib. 2. cont. Petil. Don. c. 51. Cathedra tibi quid fecit Ecclesiae Romans in qua
Petrus sedit, and in qua Anastasius hodie sedet.
, to make the Reader believe, that this Father is a witness for the Monarchy
of the Pope: But he pareth off one clause thereof Vel Ecclesiae
Hierosolomitanae in qua Iacobus sedit, and in qua hodie Johannes sedet, quibus
nos in Catholica vnitatate connectimur.
, which being added, shows that this great Doctor gave equal authority to
the Church of Jerusalem and the Roman: and made the Patriarchs of these two
Seas, colleagues and compeeres.

And throughout his work, he scarce frames one sufficient or tolerable
illation and consequent Read part. 3. of this book in the beginning.
: and he peruerteth the meaning of all Authors Observe in the first part of
this book, in sundry paragraphs his abusiue dealing with authors, etc
which he produces. And, which is a certain argument of his cowardice and bad
cause: In the most points he dissembleth the proposition and assertion which
the Doctor delivers, and whereunto he coupleth his testimonies and illations:
And in place thereof, substitutes another proposition or sentence, that so he
may have color to say what he lists. When Diogenes Diog. La^^tius lib. 6.
vita. Philos.
beheld a wild and unskillful archer, he ran to the mark, thinking to stand
there in greatest safety: and if the Reader repair to the true point and
state of every question, he shall perceive that this obiecter in most of his
exceptions, roueth at a contrary mark, and fights against a scarre crow or
Chimera of his own devising.

4. This Romist pretends that the allectiue or impulsive cause, which
awakened his sleepie pen, and impelled him to writing, was the evil deportment
of the Doctor in his book: But his manner of proceeding, to wit, his
insinuations (among which this is notorious, that he dedicateth his book to
the University of Cambridge) his derision, declaiming, calumniation, etc. and
then his slender and empty disputing, being only popular and not theological
or scholasticke (and in no sort fitting these acute and judicious persons whom
he presumed in his preface to make his Peers and Censors,) do solemnly
proclaim, that the essential reason of diuulging his Treatise, was to salve
the credit of his Popish cause, with his own party: and having observed the
evil success of his compartner A. D. (who opposed the matter,) he labors
by popular and plausible pretexts to eleuate the esteem of the Doctors
writings: which had wrought impression upon many, and were likely to prevail
further. Hier. Prooem. l. 12. in Esa. Nullus tam imperitus scriptor est, qui
non inueniat lectorem similem sui. Laert. in vita Diog. l. 6.


This Cretensian is not ignorant, that vain and instable minds (whereof there
are great plenty) do greedily attend and affect that which is like unto
themselves: and perhaps he has read, how when the Philosopher spoke soberly to
the people, they gave him no audience, but playing the minstrell, multitudes
flocked about him: all so superstitious Romists, are prone to credit the worst,
concerning all them which are adverse to them: and the most of them are
inuenomed with hatred against us. And our answer for our selves is not admitted
to be heard or read by them Septim. decretal. lib. 5. tit. 4. c. 6.
: And thereupon to be accused by any of their own party, is to their
proselytes a conviction of us. And it fares with them as Tertullian Tertul. de
spectac. c. 2.
said of the Gentiles: Linguam ad maleloquium, and aures ad receptaculum
maleloquij: Their tongues are bent to evil speaking, and their ears are open
to entertain evil saying. And I may charge this adversary, as S. August.
Aduers. leg. and proph. l. 2. c. 4.
did a Manichee, that he is one of that number, who stoned the messengers that
were sent unto them, Math. 21.35. Non ictibus saxeis, sed maledictionibus
duris: not with knocks of stones (which present times, and protection of
gracious Princes permit not) but with hard and grievous words. He is according
to the manner of the Seminary, extremely slanderous Plutarch. de discr. adul.
and amic. Medius princeps parasitorum Alexandri magni, suis praecepit, vt
audacter calumnijs incesserent: Quia etsi vulnus sanauerit qui sauciatus est,
cicatrix tamen manet.
: and without any knowledge, witness, or probability of the things objected,
cries Beelzebub, Samaritan, glutton, etc.

Howsoever, we may not desist from reproouing error, because of the reproach of
men, Esaias 51.7. And the great Apostle passed before us through good report and
evil. 2. Cor. 6.8. And Cyprian Cypr. Ep. 55. Si id enitimur and elaboramus, vt
possimus Deo placere, conuicia and maledicta humana debemus contemnere.
complained in his days of such as traveled to Rome against him, cum
mendaciorum merce, with a packet of lies: and Cyril Cyr. in council. Ephesin.
says, It is not possible to escape the venime of evil speakers, if a man be
never so unblameable: But yet as Cyprian Ep. 55.
says: Non qui audit, sed qui facit conuicium miser est: He only is miserable
that utters slander, and not they which are reproched. And (with Chrysostom
Chrysostom. 1. Cor. hom. 43.
) We marvel not if a serpent spit venime at us when he is pricked: and we more
honor our valiant Captains, when they return with dyed garments from the
conquest of their enemies. That certain dishonest and malicious things (says
Cyprian Ep. 52.
) are bruited of him, I would not have thee marvel; seeing thou know that
this is perpetually, the devils work to tear in pieces Gods servants with
lies: and to conspurcate and vilify their glorious name, with false opinions,
etc.

5. This Popish Priest has turned himself into many shapes, to make sour
appear sweet, darkness light, and evil good: and he applies the best
complements of fraud and art which are in him, to extenuate the worth of his
adversary and his cause; and to exalt and blandish his own: Yet as a
pot-sheard covered with silver. Pro. 26. and as dung mixed with perfume Creg.
Na^.
so is the burden and substance of his work. And I shall not wrong him in
applying that sentence of Augustine Cont. faust. Manich. l. 13. c. 6.
, to his tripartite work: Puerile ludibrium, muliebre iocamentum, aniculare
deliramentum, continens initium truncum, medium putridum and finem ruinosum: It
is a childish toy, a womanish trifle, and an old wives dotage: containing a
blockish first part, a rotten middle, and a ruinous conclusion.

If God had ordained my Brother longer life, himself had been best able (if
this Treatise had come forth) to have defended his own work, and to have put
this Alyen to flight: But the divine providence (which all things obey)
disposing otherwise: and he being now translated out of the Church Militant
into the Church Triumphant; his own travels are ended, and his warfare is
accomplished: And resisting and reproving his Adversaries in this world, must
either cease, or be supplied by others.

Now had the Adversary proceeded in this matter with any moderation, I would
not have interposed my self, nor presumed in this ripe and lettered age to
have come in public, neither had it needed. The defense of the faith and
doctrine of the Church of England, depends not upon such private men's labors,
but is supported by firmer pillars and more solid bases. But the insolency of
this Romist, was so abusiue and intolerable: (presuming no doubt the Doctor
being deceassed, he should never be called to a reckoning) that many deemed it
unworthy for me, to suffer a dog to piss upon the dead ashes of my well
deserving Brother: and an impure sycophant (having all his force in his tongue
as an adder has in his tail) to distaine and deride his just deserts.

And being now engaged in this business, I entreat the Reader to consider
these few things following.

1. That the verity of doctrine, and the cause beeweene our Adversaries and
us, depends not upon gaudie and audacious speeches of either side, but upon
substance and weight of things; and therefore he must not measure the truth of
the cause by painted and glorious words: but penetrate into the matter it
self. For as they which behold enterludes, do not esteem those Actors to be
Kings and great Worthies which play the parts and utter the speeches of such:
knowing that these things do only serve the scene: so it happens in our
Adversaries proceedings, when they style themselves Catholics, and their
Adversaries heretics, nouellists, etc. And enrobe themselves with the habit of
Antiquity, succession, universality and the rest: here is a very stage play.
Thersites acts Achilles his part, and a Cobbler bears Hercules club.

2. Take notice that I have purposely and with premeditation abstained from
replying to sundry opprobrious and abusiue passages of this Adversary: not for
want of matter to reply; but partly for that it irketh me to use such demainor,
as the indignity of his abuses require: partly taking counsel from Saint
Hierom, who says: It avails not the cause, Ad Pammach and Ocean. de origin
error.
to remaligne them which have wronged us, or to requite our Adversaries with
the law of like.

3. I have added to sundry passages of this Treatise, observations concerning
the matters in question between the Adversaries and us: partly to make my
labor more profitable to the Reader, which otherwise would for the more part
have been taken up in altercation and word-bate; and partly to notify to the
Reader the state of the question and true Tenet of each side: (which our
Adversaries continually obscure and dissemble, placing a Chimera and
counterfeit in stead thereof.)

4. I have placed in the margent of my book the words of many Authors, whose
testimonies I produce: partly to abbreuiate the work in the text, partly to
take away just occasion of quarrel from the Adversary, about translation or
other falsification; and also to benefit such persons as want the books of the
said Authors, and to offer others a present view of that which I affirm.

5. In sundry questions I omit very weighty arguments and documents belonging
to our cause, by reason the same are obuious in our worthy writers, and are
better and more fully handled and proposed by them, then they could have been
by me.

6. If it seem good to this Popish Priest to reply, it shall be just for him
to proceed according to the state of the question delivered by me, and not to
reply (as he has done in this book) upon an imaginary Tenet. And I further
presume that in regard of his own reputation, (which is already impaired by
this demainor) he will not trifle out the time in banding words, or collecting
pretended contradictions, or perverting assertions besides their meaning: Or
snatch here and there, (as a dog lappeth Nilus) or divorce and disioyne one
parcel of my sentences from another: But seeing that I have proposed in each
question perspicuous and distinct matter for him to reply upon, which he cannot
mistake, (unless he intend to raise a smoke, and thereby to shelter himself:)
that he will accordingly descend to the examination and reproving of that which
is disliked by him, and maintained by me.

And now referring these my labors to the judgment and conscience of each
discreet and impartial Reader: and submitting my doctrine and writing to the
Church of England, whose obedient son I profess my self to be: I will
descend to the particular examination of the Adversaries proceeding.

Thine in all the offices of Charity and truth, FRANCIS WHITE.

Answer to T. W. P. his Epistle dedicatorie to the most Celebrious and famous
University of Cambridge.
T. W. P. INgenious and learned Academians, I do not present this my labor
unto you, entreating hereby your patronage thereof. For how can I expect so
great a favor, since most of you dissent from me in that Religion which is
here maintained? Neither as holding this poor work, for any art therein,
worthy your judicious view. For I am not only conscious to my self of mine
own weakness, but do also greatly admire your piercing and clear eyed
judgments. To you then I exhibit it, as appealing to the Mother (such is my
confidence in your impartial and even censures) as judge between her son
and my self.

Answ. Saint Augustine truly said Sup. Psalm. 103.
: Paries dealbatus hypocrisis, foris tectorium, intus lutum. As in a mud wall
which is whited over, the outward crust is fair and the inside dirt, so is
hypocrisy and faigning. If this Romist had dealt plainly, he should have
dedicated his book to the septem Dormients Antonin sum. hist. p. 2. tit. 16..
20.
seven sleepers, (for fancies are fittest for dreamers) and not to the waking
and judicious Academians: their spectacles are too true for his false eyes. But
as Bargemen look one way, and make their stroke another: so this Cretusian
intending to gull his own superstitious fautors, places the Academians in the
front of his book. But it is scarce credible, that a deceiuer which utters
only counterfeit coin, has an intention to come to the touchstone. And the
piercing and clear eyed judgment of learned Academians, is too even and
sincere a model for a Romist to be measured by.

Poeta cum primum ad scribendum appulit animum,
Id sibi negotium credidit solum dari
Populo vt placerent quas fecisset fabulas.
T.W. For whereas my designed Adversary at this present (to whom your
University has first given his education for literature, and since has
graced him with the inuestiture of Doctorship) in answer to a Catholic Treatis
(first penned by one of my fellow laborers in the vineyard of Christ) has
written a most virulent and scandalous book, intituling it the Way to the true
Church. The which book was found so full of corruptions, untruths, and other
such base matter, that it was holden in the opinion of many great and learned
Priests, rather worthy of contempt then answer.

Answ. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. 35. ad 150. episc.
aptly compares seducers to the fish Sepia, which muddeth the waters with a
certain black matter like unto ink, that so it may escape the sight of the
fisher. T. W. P. does imitate this fish, and endeavors to make that muddie
and black which is transparent.

D. White by his literature and pains, and by verity of a good cause,
discovered the weakness and falsehood of the Romish superstition. The blow
which he has given the Popish cause, offends and grieueth the fautors
thereof: and they having unluckily succeeded in their reply about the matter,
T. W. P. does now assay to salve, and color things with bravery and boldness
of words, and will make the world believe, if they please to hearken to him,
that light is darkness, and white is black. But now to the matter.

T. W. By one of my fellow laborers in the vineyard of Christ, etc.

Answ. Your fellow and you labor in the vineyard of Christ like those workmen
of which Solomon speaks: Cant. 2.15. The foxes, the little foxes, which
spoil the vineyard. And whereas you reproach the Doctors book, instyling it
virulent and scandalous, I say with S. Basil, that things wholesome and good,
appear contrary to corrupt judgments Basil. Epist. 75.
: Et quibus os putet, omnia quae offeruntur putida fiunt, oris non elementi
vitio Espenc. com. in Tit. 1.
: To such as have a rotten mouth, each thing which is offered seems to have a
rotten taste, etc.

T. W. It was holden in the opinion of many great and learned Priests, etc.

Answ. Mulus mulum scabit, and they which forsake the law praise the wicked.
Pro. 28.4. And you receive honor one of another, which God gives you not. Ioh.
5.44. But howsoever you judge of your selves, you are indeed like the
Cantharides, whereof Epiphanius speaks Lib. 3. haeres. 79.
, Forma auricolores, venenum eiaculantes, Of a color like gold, but casting
forth mortiferous poison. Quibus verbosa lingua est, cor vero obtenebratum
Cyril. lib. 7. cont. Julian.
: Which have a gaudie tongue full of words, but a black and darkened heart.

T. W. The Doctors book was holden worthy of contempt, etc.

Answ. Hucksters who intend to utter deceitful wares, will not stick to
disgrace better merchandise. But if the Doctors book be so mean and
contemptible, how happens it that it puts you to your shifts? and causes
you to fly to the black art for weapons against it? And yet you have still
the worst, and must sit down with loss: Et dum vis esse praedo, factus es
praeda Aug. sup. Psalm. 38.
, Whiles you seek to rob another of his credit, your self are made a prey.

T. W. Master White not only in the preface of his book, but also in diverse
places of his second work, vaunteth much of his sincere dealing: saying, my
Adversary cannot present the Reader with one conclusion, one doctrine, one
quotation, one line or letter, to make him really see wherein I have failed.
This idle venditation of ingenuitie and upright dealing, has awakened my
sleepie pen, and given birth to this Treatise: wherein I undertake to make good
that the very ground and burden of his first book is mere corruptions and
untruths, and other such impostures, in the euicting whereof I am so secure,
that I willingly make you Judges, etc.

Answ. D. White being conscious to himself of his upright meaning, professes
accordingly, that he wittingly maintained nothing but the truth. Yet he neither
assumeth to himself, nor any man else presumes of him, that he failed in no
sentence, quotation, line or letter. This is over swelling to be spoken of a
greater man then D. White. Saint Augustine himself says Proem. l. 3. de
Trinit.
: In omnibus literis meis, etc. In all my writings I do not only desire a
pious Reader, but an ingenuous corrector. And the Doctor in the preface of his
second work utters this confession: I acknowledge my self to be a man which
may err, etc. They may find in such a multitude, possibly, some to prove that
the diligentest writer may be ouerseene; but the substance they cannot
discredit. And in that place which you object, page 129. my Brother speaks
only of the Reply against his first book, compiled by A.D. and says that
this Jesuit was not able in that Reply to present the Reader, with any line,
conclusion, etc. And whereas you affirm that the ground and burden of the
Doctors book, is corruptions, etc. and in euicting thereof you are so secure,
etc. 1. I marvel that you leave the substance, ground and burden of the book
untouched, and do only carpe and snatch here and there at certain parcels. 2.
Your grand security of euicting, etc. is either in words only, and you are
compelled according to the saying of Tacitus, to succor your cause with
audacious protestation, or else that is verified of you which Nazianzene says
Orat. 7. p. 149.
: (...), Audacity is the offspring of ignorance. But if your security be so
firm, I entreat you that we may understand the bases and principles thereof.
Sure I and you are hitherto well dusted, and setting words aside, you have
performed nothing, which may hold you from plain running out of the field.

T.W. It is certainly reported, that desire of praise a windy Meteor, etc.
first invited Master White to support forsooth with his learned hand, the
threatening and falling pillar of his new Church, etc.

Answ. This report was not hastily to have been believed or published, Solet
enim fama mentiri August. Epist. 106.
: Fame uses to ouerreach (like unto you.) The true motive of D. White his
entering into opposition with you is delivered by him self Epist. de did of his
second book.
, in these words: The condition of the place where sometimes I lived,
transported with much superstition, and being importuned with Romish Priests
and their books, and sometimes their libels set upon the Church doors, drew
upon me a necessity of doing what I was able. This was the impulsive cause of
my Brothers writing, which you should rather have taken notice of, then
despitefully to have forged a fabulous motive out of your nurcery of Tales. But
say what you please: Doctor White entering into the number of writers, furnished
with three languages, with much reading and variety of learning, gained good
respect and won reputation: your self obtruding your delamatorie and verbal
papers upon the world, must expect after a while to have the same consecrated
to Vulcane, or spent in baser use.

And whereas you prophecy the fall of our Church, as many of your brood have
done before you Harding. Greg. Val. 3. d. 1. q. 1. punct. 7.. 23. Saunder. de
visib. Monarch. Epist. ad Pium 5. Nec parua spe ducor propediem fore, etc
: assuredly you will be deceived (as your Progenitors the Gentiles Aug. Psalm.
70. Ad certum tempus sunt Christiani, postea redibunt idola, etc.
were in the like.) And although we doubt not, but that your good will and
machinations shall ever be ready to further and contriue the ruin of our
Church and State: (for, Cui poterit vester animus conferri, cui viperae, cui
aspidi Chrysostom. hom. 7. Romans
? etc. To what monster can we fitly compare your malicious minds Maldonat. co^.
Ioh. cap. 4 Qui Catholici sunt, maiore odio Caluinistas caeterosque omnes
hereticos prosequuntur, quam gentiles, etc.
? to what viper? to what aspe? etc.) Yet it is well with us, that malitia non
habet tantas vires, quantos conatus Aug. cont. Don.
: Your malice is sundry ways bounded and controlled; and our Church is like to
endure, ad senectam, and senium and vsque in finem seculi: to elder days and
old age, and the very end of the world: as S. Augustine Sup. Psalm. 70.
in the like case prophesied against the Gentiles.

T.W. I doubt not but by the assistance of him; Qui in veritate educet
iudicium, Esa. 42. and by the ensuing discovery of his calumnious forgeries, so
to prick the swollen bladder of his pride, as that all his frothy ostentation
shall resolve to nothing, and that his writings like new found wels, being
commonly in account only for a year or two, shall for ever afterward remain
neglected and contemned.

Answ. Your presumption has deceived you, and your hope is proved like the
spiders web. For since the time that the terrible noise of your paper shot was
heard, the Doctors book has received a new impression: and even as white when
it is compared with black, becomes more amiable; so your black mouth has
added esteem to your Adversary. Yea like as perfume being bruised is more
odoriferous, so the Orthodox way to the Church being more exactly tried and
examined by means of your opposition, is become more acceptable and of better
report.

T. W. I hold it not inconvenient to give some touch of that opprobrious tongue
of his, etc.

Answ. The Adage is well known, Clodius de pudicitia: A horrell declaiming of
chastity. No people under the Sun may worse complain of opprobrious tongues
then Romists. You spare no state, no age, no sex: Your tongues are your own,
and are set on fire from hell. Yet your selves cannot endure to be reproved
for your most palpable wickedness. D. White lived in those parts where you
daily exercised your trade of deceiving, and he beheld and felt your
deportment, which (howsoever you glory) was scarce such as can endure the
tribunal whither you appeal.

T.W. And now illustrious Academians, etc. make particular trial of the chief
grounds of our Catholic Religion, and look back into the continual practice
of Christ's Church since it first being; and assure your selves we shall not be
found superstitious and blind, etc. For how can they be blind who behold the
articles of their faith with the eyes of all Antiquity? etc.

Answ. The Academians have always done as you require, and thereby find you
guilty of Nouellisme. But with what face do you call the Academians to
antiquity, when you daily corrupt their ancient monuments? and both forge and
bring in counterfeits; and reject and censure authenticke records, and dally
with the Fathers as children do with their toys?

Pammelius has foisted into Cyprian a new sentence to prove supremacy Cypr. de
unit. Eccles. n. 4. vid. B. Bilson. Christ. subject. page 65. Goulart. auoot.
sup. Cyprian.
And the Roman edition of the first four Councels, has removed out of the
first Nicene Council certain words Poss^mn. ^p p^^ verb. Nicen. Council In the
6. Canon, Antiqua consuetudo seruetar, per Egyptum, Liby^m, and Pentapolim, vt
Alexandrious Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quia and vrbis Romae
Epis. parilis mos est: The Romans edition has exchanged these last words into:
talis Episcopi Romans consuetudo est.
which formerly were authenticke in all your own editions. How many spurious
and degenerous impes has Bignaeus patched into his new tomes of old Fathers?
And because Gelasius condemns the heresy of Transubstantiation, you will
suffer his works to have no being Vid. Posseuin. Apparat. verb. Gelasius.
. And in like sort you deal with Epiphanius Epistle about images: and with
Basils lesser questions, and with sundry other. Neither will you endure any
general Council if it make against you; as appears by the Council of
Chalcedon, session 16. and by the Council of Constance, which although it were
confirmed by the Pope (as Caietan affirms Ca^etan. opus. de author. Papae,
and Council. ca. 8. Concilij Constantiensis decreta a Papa Martino confirmantur.
) yet you reject the same in certain articles.

And because you say that you behold all the articles of faith with the eyes of
Antiquity; let us entreat you to show us these articles in Antiquity: The
authority of the Pope is greater then the authority of a Council: and the
last resolution of faith is into the Popes sentence: and his definition is as
authentical as the Scripture: He is Lord and Prince over the whole Church, etc.

Read to us out of Antiquity, that the Latin vulgar translation of Scripture
is authentical, and not the Original: That Church Service is to be used in an
unknown tongue: show us your amputation of the Eucharist; your doctrine of the
merit of condignitie; auricular confession according to your fashion: The
physical efficiencie of the elements and words of Sacraments; Adoration of
crosses, and images with Latria, etc. Our Adversaries have a gift to see that
in Antiquity, the contrary whereof the ancients themselves saw: and these men
with bodily eyes can behold invisible things, Hist. Angl. l. 2. c. 21. Obtinuit
tale donum a Deo vt daemones haberet conspicabiles.
like on Ketellus who (according to William Nubrigensis) obtained a gift to see
devils.

T. W. Examine it by the rules of Gods sacred word, and for the true sense of
the written word, recurre to the joint expositions of the Primitive Fathers,
etc.

Answ. 1. Your Doctors teach that we must receive your popish faith without
examination Stapl. Rel. c. 4. q. 1. ar. 1. p. 430. and 435.
: and that the resolution of our faith is into the authority of your Church
and Pope, and not into the word of God Ibid. p. 434.
. 2. None can use the rule of the Scripture but Romists (according to your
Tenet,) and therefore you mock the Academians when you refer them to the
trial of faith by Scripture. 3. Of sundry parts of holy Scripture, there is no
common exposition delivered by the Fathers Read the Commentaries of Tolet.
upon Luke, John, Romans, Psalm, 32. etc.
. 4. The texts of Scripture, Math. 16. and Ioh. 21.15. which you make the
foundation of Papal supremacy, are diversely expounded by the Fathers, yea by
sundry Papists. Show us this exposition of the text, Pasce ones, feed my
sheep, Bellarm. Recognit.
that is according to Bellarm. bear rule over my sheep in a royal or kingly
manner, in all, or in two of the Fathers.

T. W. Remember that the most remarkable Protestants for learning, do confess
that those Doctors are Patrons of our faith.

Answ. The notorious and impudent falsehood of this assertion is manifested by
me in the second part of this book.

T. W. Be never persuaded, that since it is granted that the Roman Church was
once the true Church, and the time of her revolt cannot be known, that the
daughter of Babylon could ever so vnespiedly become a Babilonian strumpet.

Answ. Firmil. ap. Cypr. Ep. 75. Just indignor, ad tam apertam and manifesta^
Stephani stultitiam, qui sic de suo loco gloriatur, and se successorem Petri
contendit, etc. Vid Council. Affrican. c. 101. and Can. 9. Vid. Council. Chalced.
sess. 16. Vid. 6. Sinod. Constanti. c. 36.
1. There were tares sown by the envious man in the field, and yet they were
not espied until they grew up. Math. 13.25.26. And diseases and old age seize
many times on bodies in an insensible manner. Yet the errors of the Roman
Synagogue, and the usurpation of the Pope, were espied and resisted; and for a
time suppressed, and afterward by strength of faction and by corruption of
times they prevailed. The Africans resist the Popes incroching; and the time
when the Roman Pontifex became universal is expressed in the story.
Adoration of images, communion in one kind, the precise number of seven
Sacraments, the article of Transubstantiation, the Latin translation, and
Apocriphal Scriptures made authentical, etc. The time of the decreeing and
making these errors authentical, is reported in the Church story.

T.W. Divide not your selves from that most conspicuous Church of Christ which
has been promised that in all ages it should most gloriously appear to the
eye of the world: lest so in lieu thereof, as for the last refuge you be forced
to forge a mathematical and airie Church, consisting of certain imaginary
inuisibilists, impugned by the Fathers, since its being consists merely of
not being.

Answ. The holy Scripture foretells such a Church as shall be conspicuous in
virtue and grace, Tom. 4. Council. Surij. Lateran. Council. sub Iulio 2. Vidimus
vim, rapina^, adulteria, incestus, omne^ denique scelerum pestem, ita sacra
prophanaque miscere omnia: ita in sanctam nauiculam impetum facere, vt pene
scelerum sluctibus illa latus dederit, and propemersa and pessundata sit. Vid.
Ioh. Sarisbur. Policrat. l. 6. cap. 24. Et Stapl. Rel. cont. 1. q. 5. ar. 5.
page 158.
and in preaching the Gospel and holding forth the light of verity, to such
as have ears and eyes of faith to hear and discern. But you tender us a
Babylonian strumpet swelling in pride and ambition, and detestable for avarice,
treachery and wickedness. And indeed this visibilitie we detest. But it shall
appear hereafter in this Treatise Vid. part. 1. Chap. 3.. 2. page 90. etc. Aug
cont. Faust. manch. lib. 5. cap. 2.
, that we maintain a perpetual visible Church, and differ from you about the
manner of the visibilitie only: and your reproach of mathematical and airie
is calumnious and vain, and concerns not us.

T. W. Suffer not an heteroclite sectary who rejects all regular, ordinary
and mediate vocation, (like another Melchisedech, borne without father and
mother) to plant in your souls a new kind of religion never hard of before,
etc.

Answ. Desertor arguis militem: your self a runagate and exorbitant, reproach a
soldier, who had his settled standing by lawful vocation in the Church whereof
he was a member. There is no vocation of Pastors in the world so corrupt and
mangled as is the Roman: (as shall be manifested hereafter in fit place Part.
1. Chap. 3. page 115.
) and yet all their frame of religion is builded upon this rotten pillar.

T. W. Till a libidinous Monk by mutual breach of vows had yoked himself
with a lapsed Nun, etc.

Answ. 1. Luther in this case did no more then some of your Church have
counseled others to do Aeneas Syluius. Epist. 307. Credimus te vti non insulso
consilio, si cum neque as continere, coniugium quaeris. Quamuis id primo
cogitandum fuerit, antequam initiareris sacris ordinibus: sed non sumus dij
omnes, qui futura a prospicere valeamus. Quando huc ventum est vt legi carnis
resistere nequeas, melius est nubere quam vri.
: and then was commonly practiced among your selves Onuph. in vita Alexandr. 6.
. Caesar Borgia son to Pope Alexander the 6. (this chaste Pope had sons)
being a Cardinal and sacred person, did first murder his elder brother, and
then forsook his priestly order and married with the Niece of the French King.
And see other examples in the margent Bergom. supplem. chron. l. 12. anno.
1191. Celestinus, and Henricum coranauit, atque ei Consta^tiam Monacham in
matrimonium collocauit. Theoderic. Niem. deschism Pap. l. 1. c. 33. Batillus
Vrbani nepos quandam nobilem monialem professam and inclusam, de monasterio
violenter rapuit and violauit, etc. Nec propterea per Vrbanum arguebatur, sed
cu^ diceretur ei quod nepos suus Batillus viueret inhoneste, fertur
respondisse, inuenis est: licet tunc annum quadragessimu^ peregisset.
. Now can you epsy a moate in Luther, and not perceive a beam in your selves?

T. W. Finally relinquish and abandon that supreme sovereignty of the private
revealing spirit, etc.

Answ. The spirit whereupon we build our faith is public both in regard of the
object and matter believed, which is the Catholic and Orthodoxe doctrine of
the Prophets, Apostles, and primitive Church: And also in regard of the manner
whereby we receive the same doctrine: which is, by the public ministry of
the Church wherein we live: and by the public preaching of the worthiest
Pastors of the Catholic Church in former ages. But the spirit of your Church
must needs be private, both because it receives a traditionary word unknown
to former ages, and has by humane authority enlarged the object of faith: and
also because it resolves faith into one man's definition, who is no Prophet nor
son of a Prophet, and for the more part an unlettered and unsanctified
creature (as shall further appear in this Treatise Page 142.
.)

T. W. And thus worthy Academians, leaving you to the censure of your unworthy
son, etc.

Answ. You are of his mystery Eudo de stella vid. Willel. Nubrig. hist. Angl.
lib. 1. c. 19.
, who accustomed to feed his guests with fantastical dishes: or with the
shadow of meat without any substance; for you persuade your fautors that you
have delivered weighty matter not unworthy the view of those profound
Academians, whose wisdom and learning is eminent, and honorable throughout
the Christian world: and yet in truth you present them only with windy
stuff, meet for such as the Prophet Hos. speaks of, saying: Ephraim feeds
upon the wind, Hosea 12.1. And Saint Basil: Epist. 107.
Solo rore aluntur cicadae. Grasshoppers are fed with nothing but with dew.

In candidissimum Doctorem defunctum, melos threnothryambeuticum.
EN hic effigies albi Doctoris, amicti
Vndique vestitu niueo, pietate, nitore
Innocuae vitae, candenti lumine verae
Virtutis, vultusque animique albedine summa.
Quem solae tres lanificae potuere sorores
Obscurare alius candorem non maculauit:
Fucatus color vllus. Inexorabile fatum,
Nec plane albatum potuit nigrare colorem.
Nam virtus candet post funus: amictus and Amicti stolis albis stabant in
conspectu Agni, etc. Apocalyp. c. 7. ^. 9.13.14. and chap. 3. v. 4.5. etc. 6.
v. 11.
alba,
Vest hic, sidereo terras mutauit olympo.
Prior ex lacte Iunonis. Coel. Rhodigin. p. 238. Describitur and apud Ouidium.
l. 1. Met. Aristot. numerat illam inter meteora apparentia. Posterior ista ex
lacteo scriptorum rore candidissi. Doctor. qui in coelum ascendit, etc. Necipse
immerito via appellatur lactea, qui lacteum illum scripsit librum, qui
inscribitur, Lactea ad veram Ecclesiam Via, etc.
Altera candescit coelo via lactea: mortis
Non valuit nubes hanc denigrare secundam.
-- Sic, vndique candidus, ille
Dulcia defecta modulatur carmina lingua,
Funeris ipse sui cantator, cygnus. --
FRANCIS WHITE Doctoris nepos, defleuit.

In T. W. fuco suo denigrantem candidissimum Doctorem, qui a germano suo in
natiuam denuo reductus est albedinem.
FVcator, quis sit, luci haud satis est, amarulentam
Pennam saginans stygeo veneno,
Dente arido corrodit mordicus, vndique albicantem
Famam, nitentem maculans colorem.
Sarcina, quisquis at es, plenum chaos and calumniarum,
Non candidatum potis es nigrare,
Vndique quem niueus decorauit amictus, atque lucens
Albedo, vultus, animique candor:
Albescens pietas: niueus color innocentiaeque:
Virtutis albens, lucidumque lumen.
Nec roseum fucus vultum tuus inquinauit istum,
Fusca aut nigredo nubilauit vlla,
Ni vis vt hic sit olor niger, atra auis illa rara: dirae
Aut mortis, inquis, denigrasse nubem.
At non crudeles Parcae, potuere prorsus istum
Turpare cygnum morte succinentem.
Nam candet virtus post funus: amictus atque coelo,
Isthic stola Apoc. c. 7. v. 9.13.14. etc. 3. v. 4.5. etc. 6. v. 11.
alba, despicit caduca,
Lacteam and ipsa viam est emensa Non immerito candissimus Doctor appellatur
galaxia: qui lacteum illum s^^ipsit librum qui inscribitur, Lactea ad vera^
Ecclesiam Via, etc.
galaxia. At fuisset
Mirum nec istud, candidum colorem
Nigrasse: assuetum hoc fucantibus; at reducere istum
Rursus nigrorem in pristinum nitorem,
Hic labor, hoc opus est, hoc mirum, and inusitatum: At alter
En frater istud praestitit superstes.
Frustra igitur probris hoc conspuis albicans ligustrum,
Cuius nitorem nebula sorores
Fatiferae nulla potuere operire, nec colorem
Posthac nigredo Coelicum inquinabit.
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Franciscus White, Authoris filius, Art. magist. and Coll. Trinit. in Academia
Cantabrig. Socius.

CHAP. I.
Paragraph. 2. Wherein T. W. P. charge D. White with corrupting the Rhemists
concerning the merit of works.
T. W. P. NOw I will come to M. Whites deprauatio^s, etc. D. Wh. Way to the
Church, Digress. 35. n. 6.
And to begin with one, which as it contains in it self many foul and
strange corruptions, so the injury thereby offered, is not to one, but to many;
and those, for their learning and virtue, men of worthiest memory, to wit, the
English Doctors of Rhemes.

Answer. The Authors of the Rhemish translation and notes of the new Testament,
were Gregory Martin, Bristow, and Cardinal Allen Posseuin select. biblioth. l.
2. c. 12.
: who are therefore extolled for virtue and learning by you, because they were
corrumpendae veritatis artifices Cyprian. de unit. Eccles.
, artisans of your-owne mystery, etc.

T.W. If we believe M. White, the Rhemists affirm, that our works of their
very nature deserve eternal life, the reward whereof, is a thing equally and
justly answering to the time and weight of the work, rather then a free gift:
so that God should be unjust if he gave it not. But this brazen faced Minister,
in alleging their words, has committed a double corruption: First, in
omitting the word grace, the true words being, Works proceeding of grace, merit
heaven. Secondly, by inserting in stead of the word grace, the word nature, the
which was not so much as dreamed of by the Rhemists, or by any Catholic
author. Yea to defend, that works of their own nature do merit, were to renew
the Pelagian heresy.

Answer. 1. D. White at the place objected Page 238.
, names not the Rhemists within his text: neither produces he any one
literal sentence of his authors, placed in the margent: but collecteth into a
sum the doctrine of Andradius Andrad. orth. expl. lib 6. Rhem. annot. 1 Cor.
3. v. 18. and ^. b. 6 v. 10.
(whom he cites as well as the Rhemists) and of other Pontificians: as
appears by the words prefixed to his quotation, You hear what is commonly
said.

2. He imposes upon no Papists, that they maintain, good works of nature, or
proceeding from nature, do merit; but that, good works of grace, do of their
very nature, merit, etc.

It is the heresy of Pelagius (as you say) that moral actions of natural and
unregenerate persons do merit [in condignitie,] yet many of your Doctors say,
they merit in congruitie Scot. ^. d. ^8 q. v^^^ Durand. 2. d. ^8 q. 6. Adria^
Quolib 7. q 4. ^^es. d 17. q. vnic ar. 2 concl. 4. Genebr com P^ 67. v. 13
C^ietan opu ^ to. 3 tr 11 c 1. 9 nisi ex qua da cong^uit^te, qua congrauit
homini recte vtenti libero atbi rio, in ijs quae Dersunt, Deum largiri, etc.
Vega pro council. l. 5. c. 15. Caietan 10. 3. opusc. tr. 11. c 9. Vis Spiritus
sancti habitantis i^ homine, non est impar ad acquirendam vita^ aeternam and ad
efficiendu^ quod operibus cius in nobis debeatur vita aete^^a.
. But that good works of regenerate persons, of their very nature, and as they
be such, are meritorious, is maintained by Andradius, by the Rhemists, and many
other pontificians.

The Rhemists say: Scot. ^. d. ^8 q. v^^^ Durand. 2. d. ^8 q. 6. Adria^ Quolib
7. q 4. ^^es. d 17. q. vnic ar. 2 concl. 4. Genebr com P^ 67. v. 13 C^ietan opu
^ to. 3 tr 11 c 1. 9 nisi ex qua da cong^uit^te, qua congrauit homini recte
vtenti libero atbi rio, in ijs quae Dersunt, Deum largiri, etc. Vega pro
council. l. 5. c. 15. Caietan 10. 3. opusc. tr. 11. c 9. Vis Spiritus sancti
habitantis i^ homine, non est impar ad acquirendam vita^ aeternam and ad
efficiendu^ quod operibus cius in nobis debeatur vita aete^^a.
The value of our works arises from the grace of adoption, which makes that
those actions, which of their nature be not meritorious in themselves, are
worthy of heaven.

Vasques the Jesuit says, Vas. q. 1. 2. part. 2. disp. 214. ca. 4. Opera
iustorum ex sola ingenita dignitate, meritoria sunt. Ib. ca. 6. n. 39 Ex natura
sua, hoc ipso quod facta sunt, ab homine iusto ex auxilio gratiae Dei, esse
condigna vita aeterna.
Works of their inbred dignity deserve, etc. and ex natura operis sic facti
Ib. disp. 222. ca. 3.
, by the nature of the work thus wrought. (Where you have the very form of
speech used by my brother.) And Suarez: Suar. 3. Thom. p. 1. disp. 41.. 3.
They have an intrinsecall preportion with the reward. Rhem annot. Romans 8.
verse. 18.
Vasques affirms, that it is the tenet of the best learned in the Popish
school, that works of grace are meritorious of their very nature and
intrinsecall existence, without any new imputation of Christ's merit, or
addition and supply of Gods promise, besides their first production. And for
confirmation hereof, he produces Thomas, Caietan, and sundry other authors Th.
Aqu. 1.2. q. 114. at. 3. Caietan. ib. Conrad ib. Fra. Romeus de lib. and
necess. operum. verit. 22. Richard 2. d. 27. ar. 3. ad. 9. Driedo de red. genesis
hum. tr. 2. ca 2. p. 3. at 3 prop. 6. Lindan. panopl. Euang l. 3. c 20.
Clictou. unpr. ar. Luth. ca. 3. Iodoc. Tiletan. apol. council. Trid. tit. de
bon. oper. sup. ca. 11. sess. 6. q. 4.
.

Forasmuch therefore, as D. White imposes upon you no other tenet, concerning
the merit of works, but that which is embraced by your greatest Doctors: it
was rude and uncivil for T.W. to reproach him with the foul terms of brazen
faced Minister, etc.

T.W. M. White charge the Rhemists with holding that the reward of works is
a thing equally and justly answering the time and weight of his travels and
works, rather then a free gift. I find most of these words, but many of them
in several lines, and uttered upon several occasions, all which to join and
chain together in one continued line or sentence, and thereby to make the
author speak contrary to himself, is a thing easy to perform, but the
performance is wicked, shameless, execrable, etc.

Answer. Is it wicked and shameless, from two premises verbally found in the
Rhemists, to collect a right conclusion, and to deliver the same as their
doctrine?

The Rhemists have two propositions, from whence the assertion and conclusion
wherewith my brother charge them, is inferred. As I thus declare.

The Rhemists affirm, The reward of good works is such a reward, as (...) in
Greek, and merces in Latin import Rhem. annot. 1. Cor. 3. n 2. and Math. 5.
n. 2.
.

But (...) in Greek, and merces in Latin (as the same Rhemists say Rhem. 1.
Cor. 3.8. and Heb. 6 10 and Math. 5.2. and Revel 22.4. and 2. Tim. 4.4.
) is a very stipend, hire and wages, such as Paul speaks of 1. Tim. 5.18.
saying, The labourer is worthy of his hire: a thing equally and justly
answering the time and weight of his work, rather then a free gift.

Therefore the Rhemists hold, as D. White charge them, that the reward of
good works is a thing equally and justly answering the time and weight of the
work, rather then a free gift.

T. W. But give this liberty, of omitting, and inserting, and coupling, to the
Atheist, which your self M. White have assumed, and you shall find strange
positions maintained by him. For example, the Psalmist speaking of your self,
and other such like, says: The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.
Now kindly allow him to blot out the word fool, as you more then foolishly did
the word grace, and to insert the word wise man, as you according to the
wisdom of the world, did the word nature, and then observe how easily he will
prove from the Scriptures, that there is no God. But thus knowingly and
deliberatly to corrupt, to the dishonor of your own, and Catholic religion,
is to me an argument most conuincing, that you are one of those fools, who
said in his heart, there is no God.

Answ. A Philosopher observes, that every thing which is weak, uses to be
clamorous Seneca l. 1. de ira. Inualidum omne natura est querulum.
. And thus it fares with you. Otherwise, what has your adversary done, to
cause such a gust of folly to come from you? The abuse committed, is only your
own, who subtly have perverted that which D. White rightly conceived. And
therefore as the Echo Basil. ser. in iracund. Conuicium simile est echo in
solitudine, quod reuertitur ad conuiciatorem.
returns back to the place from whence it came: so these bolts (Psalm. 11.2.)
which you have shot, to wit, the fool has said, etc. must return again to
your own quiver, or rest in your bosom, until you can find a more just
occasion to vent them.

Paragr. 3. Whether Cardinal Bellarmine be corrupted concerning Justification.
T.W. In the very first page of his Preface to the Reader, (so loath, it seemed,
he was to lose any time) he shows us one trick, somewhat like unto the
former. Where, by the way, I must advertise him, that I hold him a man herein
impoliticke and incautelous, that would not suffer the very face or front of
his treatise to pass unblemished: since first he rather should have coueted to
win the ear of credulity, with pleasing insinuations of truth; and then
(the judgment of the reader being once possessed) after to have vented forth
his more impure dregs. For we are taught, John 2. Every man at the first
sets forth good wine, and afterward that which is worse.

Answ. S. Hierom has a saying, Hieron. cont. Ruffin. l. 3.
Caueas in alterum dicere, quod in testatim detorqueri potest: Be wary to
utter that against another, which will presently be retorted upon your self.
Could you so well observe what was expedient for another, and be so obliuious
in performing for your self? But it is commonly seen, that they which are
prone to advise others, are blind in guiding themselves, according to the
sentence of Euripides: (...),
(...).
Surely there was never any lame and anhelous jade, which has more stumbled in
his first setting out, then your self have done in the entrance of your book:
which as I have discovered in the last section, so I will further manifest in
every paragraph of your first Chapter.

T.W. M. White to intimate to his reader, how much the Catholics do disualue
the passion of Christ, thus writes: The Church of Rome teaches, that
justification is wrought by the habit of our own inherent righteousness, D
Wh. Way to the Church, Preface, pa. 1.
and not by Christ's. Thus he peremptorily, without any reservation, affirms,
that we reject the righteousness of Christ, to concur to our justification.
To the proving hereof, he produces a testimony of Bellarmine: Our own
inherent justice is the formal cause of absolute justification, Bellar. de
iu^ti^. l. 2. c. 2.
and not the justice of Christ imputed unto us. In the producing this
testimony, M. White has committed a double fraud: first, he concealeth the
latter part of the sentence, which shows how we ascribe our justification to
Christ: secondly, whereas Bellarmine excludes Christ's merits from being the
formal cause, M. White alleges it to prove, that it is no cause thereof at
all.

Answ. Had you in this and sundry other of your exceptions, used S. Hilarie his
rule, which is, The understanding of sayings must be received from things
precedent and subsequent in the discourse, Hilar. de Trin l. 9. intelligentia
dictorum, ex praecedentibus and consequentibus expectetur.
you would have troubled your self less in quarelling without any cause. The
point affirmed by D. White, is, There is a real difference between the Church
of Rome and us, in the question of justification, and the maine difference is
concerning the formal cause. The Church of Rome maintains, that the
justification of a sinner is done by the habit of our own inherent
righteousness (to wit, formally) and not by Christ's. And for confirmation
hereof, he produces Bellarmine saying, Our own inherent righteousness is the
formal cause of absolute justification, and not Christ's justice imputed.

My brother intended to charge Bellarmine no further, but only with excluding
Christ's merits from being an essential and formal cause of justification; and
with making it only an efficient and external cause thereof, according to
Scotus: Scot. 4. d. 15. q. 1. ar. 2. Passio Christi non delet culpam nostra^,
nisi vt causa meritoria, and per consequens vt causa secunda, quae non est de
essentia rei. Al Hal. 4. q. 17. m. 4. ar. 1. Bonau. 4 d. 17. ar 1. q. 1. Th Aq.
4. d. 17. q 1.
The passion of Christ does not wipe out our fault, but only as a meritorious
cause, and by consequent as a second cause, which is not of the being of the
thing.

T.W. If Christ's passion did concur to justification, as a formal cause,
then it should really inhere in us, even according to Philosophy, which it
does not.

Answ. The formal cause, is either taken properly for an inward cause,
informing the subject, which it does constitute and denominate, and every such
formal cause is inherent: or else it signifies logically the next and
immediate actual cause or reason of things, giving them their distinction and
kind: Zabarel. Forma accipitur improprie pro qualibet causa quae definitionem
rei constituit. Timpler. metaph. l. 3. c. 2. q. 8.
whether the same be inherent, assistant, or any way by relation applied or
united to the subject. And thus the immediate cause of the eclipse of the
Sun, to wit, the interposition of the body of the Moon between our sight
and the Sun beams, is called the formal cause of the eclipse. In like
manner, the formal cause of liberty and bondage, is not any thing inherent in
the bond or free, but an external relation, etc.

Our adversaries themselves affirm, that the formal cause of redemption is
extrinsecall Vega pro Co^. l. 7. c. 23. Redemptio cum sit quid extrinsecum,
conuenit Christo formaliter, sicut pretium captiui dicitur illius redemptio.
, to wit, the oblation of Christ upon the cross, Heb. 10.10. Ephesians. 1.7. And D.
Stapleton Stapl. de iustif l. 6. c. 8.
, with sundry other pontificians Vasq. 1. 2 p. 2. d. 204. c 1 etc 5. Qui citat
multos.
, make the free favor of God for the merit of Christ, the formal cause of
remission of sins.

And in the same manner, may the satisfaction of Christ imputed or applied, be
the formal cause of justification, without any opposition to Philosophy. For
if justification were an entitie compounded of matter and form, or of subject
and accident, like things natural or artificial; then, as our adversaries
object Hos. confess. Petr. c. 71. D. Soto de not. and gra. l. 2. c. 20. Becan.
de iustif. Calu. c. 2. pa. 204. Ruard Tapper. art. 8. de iustif.
, it must have a form inherent: but being only a relative action of God
toward his creature, it admits no formal cause inexisting, or properly so
called, more then creation Vasqu Deus vere est and dicitur Creator, non tamen a
forma intrinseca, sed extrinseca. Caietan. opusc. to. 3. tr. 11. c 9.
Infantibus baptizatis debetur aeterna vita merito duntaxat Christi.
, redemption, reconciliation, etc.

Paragr. 4. Wherein D. White is accused of corrupting Bellarmine, about merit
of works.
T. W. Way to the Chapter Digress. 35. n. 15. pa. 235.
M. White having affirmed, that many Catholics condemn all merit of works,
alleges certain words of Bellarmine to that purpose, saying: By reason of
the uncertainty of man's own righteousness, and for fear of vainglorie, it
is our safest way to repose our whole confidence in the sole mercy and
goodness of God. But if all Bellarmines contexture had been produced, and the
subject of his whole disputation considered, it would have appeared, that he
maintains positiuely the merit of works, and deposes the contrary to that
whereunto he is produced. Which being so, D. White deals herein perfect
Minister-like, etc.

Answ. D. Whites assertion, whereunto he produces sundry testimonies of
Papists, is this: Howsoever our adversaries contend for their merits, yet the
learned and most judicious among them, disavow them, teaching people at the
way-gate to renounce them.

This position has two branches: First, the most learned and judicious Papists
disavow the merit of works, he means according to the tenet thereof, by
diverse pontificians, since the late Trident Council Read the end of this
Chap. Obseru. 2. concerning merit.


Secondly, the most learned and judicious among them, teach people, at the time
of their departure out of this life, to renounce them, in respect of reposing
the hope of salvation in them.

My brother produced Bellarmine, to prove this second branch; and therefore the
P. P. to manifest his Popish sincerity, and to make way to a slander, wilfully
omitted and concealed the words [teaching people at their way-gate to renounce
them] whereunto the saying of Bellarmine was referred: and foisteth in a
cogging sentence of his own, which is, In proof that the Catholic Doctors
condemn all merit of works, he alleges the foresaid Cardinal, etc. But
this shuffling will not serve your turn: Dolis apud ignorantes locus est,
scientibus vero, dolum intendere non est aliud quam risum mouere Ruffin. hist.
Eccles. l. 1 c. 11.
: There is place for guile with the ignorant, but to seek to put tricks of
deceit upon the understanding, is to move laughter.

T.W. What impuden^ie is it in M. White to produce Bellarmine, as denying the
doctrine of merit of works, when the subject of this very book (from whence
these words are taken, and also of diverse other books in that Tome) is only
to prove that works do merit?

Answ. It is one thing to disavow merits in regard of placing hope of salvation
in them, in our way-gate or time of temptation and trial; and another, to
disallow them altogether. D. White charge Bellarmine with disavowing merits
in the former sort; and the P.P. accuses him of saying, that the said author
disalloweth and condemns merits generally.

But yet further, because you minister so just occasion of enquiring into
Bellarmines opinion concerning merit of works, I will be bold to require a
solution of you, in these two or three doubts.

First, whether is it not possible for Bellarmine to defend merit of works in
terms, and yet in substance of matter to deny the same? Vasques your Jesuit
Vasq. 1. 2. p. 2. d. 214. c. 1. n. 1. contingere potest vt si veram caulam and
rationem meriti non assignemus, verbis solum ab haereticis dissidentes, reipsa
cum ijs conue niamus: quod sane ali quibus Catholicis in hac controuersia
accidisse, inferius patebit, etc.
observes that this has happened to sundry Catholics.

Secondly, when Bellarmine affirms, This is it we mean in saying, good
works are meritorious; that God is not only delighted with good works, but
conciliated or induced thereby to benefit them which work well Bellar. de
iusti^ l. 5. c 2.
. What difference is there between this assertion and ours Read the end of
this Chap. Obseru. 1. of merit.
? Also saying in another place Bellar. de iustif. l. 5. c. 14. Cu^ opera nostra
bona, si per se considerentur, sint temporalia, and vilia, and nullo modo
aequalia precio supernaturali, etc.
, Seeing our works of themselves, considered only according to their nature,
be temporary, vile, and in no sort equal to a supernatural and eternal
reward, surely there must of necessity be added unto them a dignity beyond
their own, that the reward of eternal life may be rendered unto them. Whether
is not this assertion the very same which Vasques affirms to agree in
substance with ours, and in deed, to overthrow the merit of condignitie Vasq.
1. 2. d. 214. c. 1. and deinceps, c. 5.
?

For thus I reason out of Bellarmine and Vasques: Every merit of justice and
condignitie, requires an equality between the work and the reward. Bellar.
de iustif. l 5. c. 14. etc. 17. Ita vt in opere bono, etc. sit quaedam
proportio and aequalitas ad praemium vitae aeternae, etc. Vasq. 1. 2. d. 214. c
5. n. 29.
But Bellarmine affirms, that good works of themselves without Gods promise,
are temporal, vile, and not equal to the reward. And Vasques says, that Gods
promise being extrinsecal, increases not the dignity of the work, neither
adds any further equality with the reward then it had before, but only
obliges God in fidelity to keep his promise Vasq. ib. c. 5. n. 24. 26. etc.
etc. 6. Immota omnino action nostra secundum omnes circumstantias, etc. non
potest effici magis bona ex solo verbo Dei promittentis, etc. qui promitteret
equu^ pro obsequio exigui valoris, etc.
. Neither does it salve this matter that Bellarmine says, there is a certain
equality and proportion Bellar. de iustif. l. 1. c. 21.
between the work and reward: for himself Ibid. l. 5. c. 19. in fine.
elsewhere, and other of his fellows Vasq. ib. d. 215. c 4. n. 27. Sixth.
Senens. biblioth. l. ^. ann 199. Du^and. 2 did. 27. q 2. Quod dicitur de
gratia, quod aequatur gloriae, in virtute, quia est eius seminarium, patet quod
metaphorice dicitur, etc.
acknowledge, that every proportion causes not equality. And a figurative
equality (such indeed as Bellarmines is) can produce no more but an improper
kind of merit. To wit, like as when a father promises a reward to his child,
upon condition of doing that duty whereunto he is already bound Iansen
concord. Euang. c. 39. Si quis proponat patrem, munere aliquo promisso, silium
ad feruens literarum studium prouocante^. etc. Vega opusc. q. 5 and q. 6. Erit
tantum dispositio quaedam ad habendum illud munus. pa. 809.
, and the child in much imperfection, yet with a willing mind performs so
much of this his duty as he is able, he deserves no reward in justice,
neither performs any thing in justice equal to the reward promised; but
obtains the reward by the liberality and fidelity of his father.

Thirdly, it seems that Bellarmine limpeth and halteth between his own
party and us, when he affirms, that it is most safe to repose all our
confidence in the sole bounty and mercy of God Bellar. de iustif. l. 5. c. 7.
Tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere, etc. Vega opusc. quaest. 4. Stapl. de iustif. l. 10 c 14.
. For otherwise, why does his fellow Vasques lash and censure his doctrine, but
for that he perceives some inclination and concord thereof with us Vasq. 1. 2.
p. 2. d. 21. 3. c. 7. n. 37. etc.
?

Paragr. 5. Touching the testimony of Tho. Aquinas, Romans 3. l. 4. and Gal. 3.
l. 4.
T.W. Thomas Aquinas in the places alleged, speaks only of works
ceremonial or moral, wrought by the power of nature: M. White produces him
as though he taught, that works proceeding of grace, could not justify.

Answ. Th. Aq. com. Gal. 3 l. 4. Opera non sunt causa, quod aliquis sit iustus
apud Deum, sed potius lunt executiones and manifestationes iustitiae. Ib.
Jacob. 2 dicitur, Nonne Abraham ex operibus iustificatus est?
Although Thomas in the beginning of his Commentary mentions such works as
be performed by the power of nature, yet afterward he enlarges his discourse,
and speaks also of works wrought by the power of grace. For he treats of
such works as are the manifestation and execution of justice; and of such as
Saint James mentions chap. 2. saying, Was not Abraham justified by works?
But these were works of grace. And therefore Thomas in the places alleged by
D. White, excludes from justification, works done in the state of grace.

Paragr. 6. Wherein D. White is accused of corrupting S. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. l.
19. c. 27.
T. W. S. Augustines testimony truly alleged, is, This our justice, though it
be true, by reason of the end of the true good, whereunto it is referred, yet
it is such in this life, as that it rather consists of the remission of our
sins, then of the perfection of virtues. Here first our Minister adds the
word all, for greater swelling and fullness of speech, which is not in S.
Augustine.

Answ. Aug. de ciu Dei l. 19. c. 27. Ipsa nostra iustitia quamuis vera sit
propter very boni finem ad que^ refertur: tanta tamen est in hac vita, vt
potius remissione peccatorum constet quam perfectione virtutum.
Your self have changed this Fathers words: for he says, Ipsa nostra iustitia,
our very justice it self: that is, our purest justice, our whole justice, and
every part thereof, which is fully equipollent to all our justice, and rather
more emphaticall: as if one should say, Our very life is miserable; he
intends, that all our life, and every passage and degree thereof is such: and
you say, Ista nostra iustitia, this our justice, etc.

T. W. Secondly, he leaves out a parcel of the same sentence, (to wit,
although our justice be true, by reason of the end of the true good, whereunto
it is referred) in which S. Augustine acknowledges the very Catholic
doctrine of justification, to wit, that our justice is true justice; against
which, this very place is urged.

Answ. D. White produces this testimony to prove that sin cleaves to the
works of the godly, and blemisheth them in part See Aug. cont Julian. l. 2. in
Hilario.
: and therefore, that they may be fully just, they have need of remission of
sin adherent.

And if you be not transported with affection, you cannot accuse my brother for
alleging it to this end: because Stapl. de iustif. l. 6. c. 8.
D. Stapleton and other of your own party, have produced it to the like
purpose Cassand. consult. art. 6. 10. Lo. Viues schol. in Aug. de ciuit. Dei.
l. 19. c. 27. Vega pro council. l. 15. c. 20. mentions some Papists who have
used this place of Aug. as before.
: and the place of it self does effectually prove so much. Now presupposing
the perpetual concomitance of remission of sins with our justice, we
acknowledge, according to the holy Scripture, Ephesians. 4.24. and S. Augustine, that
the righteousness of regeneration is true justice, not only in comparison of
wickedness, but according to the rule of virtue Aug. cont. 2. epist. Pelag l.
3. c. 7. etc. 10 Iustitia secundum quam iustus ex fide viuit, est vera
iustitia, regula virtutum. Calvin. instit. l 3. c. 15.. 7.
.

But this euinceth not, that the same is able to justify man, according to S.
Paul his acceptance of justification, Romans 4. First, because it is less in
quantity then the moral law of God requires Read afterward Obseru. 2.. 1.
concerning iustif. the end of this chap. where you shall find this afterward
confirmed.
. Secondly, because it is, by adherence of sinfulness, so far contaminate in
quality, that it has always need of pardon, and new imputation of Christ's
merits, both to supply the defect, and to remit the adherent impuritie.
Thirdly, because Christ has not bestowed or appointed it to that end. Gal.
3.21.

T. W. He falsely translateth for his own advantage, perfectione virtutum, by
perfection of justice.

Answ. Your self have translated, tanta, so great, a word noting the quantity
and perfection of our justice, by talis, such, a word signifying the quality:
and so whereas S. Augustine means, that man's righteousness is so small in
quality, that therefore it consists rather in remission of sins then
perfection of justice; you will have it to be only such, as has remission of
venial sins going with it.

But forasmuch as the word virtue, according to your own Doctors, notes both
the habit and the act Bellar. de amiss gratiae l. 1. c. 1. Stapl. de iustif. l.
5. prolog. 3. See Durand. 2. d. 26. q. 1. Ruard. n. 2. de iustif. Ab ipsa
virtute sola ratione differens.
, and your inherent justice contains no more; I know no cause why in
translation, these two words may not be used as synonimies. It is reported of
Domitian the Emperor, that he used to sit in his chamber, and catch flies
Sueton. in Domitian. c. 3. Tenebras and secreta captauit, and muscas figebat.
. This Priest might well have been his companion, who wanting better
emploiment, occupies himself in these petite cauils.

And now for a conclusion of this section, I desire the Reader to observe, that
whereas this clamorous P. P. in the first chapter of his book has made five
assaults against D. White, and inserted into each of them, many refuse and
abusiue reproaches: That in regard of the matter, he is fully answered, and his
first encounter is wholly defeated. Joseph. Scaliger. cont. Serrar. de sect.
And concerning his railing, I will say no more, but that as dogs use to piss
in the fairest places of the house; so it is no news to hear Popish Priests
to revile them which are of worthy desert in Gods Church.

Observation 1. Touching remission of sins in justification: Wherein is showed,
that some of our adversaries overthrow the true definition thereof delivered in
the Scripture and primitive Fathers.
is a free condonation of the crime and guilt of sin, for the merit of Christ.

Heb. 8.12. Ierem. 31.34. it is expressed by (...), (...)
I will be merciful: (...) Psalm. 130.4.
and the Hebrew word used for remission of sins, comes of a root,
signifying, to pardon, forgive, to be favorable, and propitious. Moses prays
to God for the pardon of the peoples sin, in this manner, Numb. 14.18.19. The
Lord is long suffering and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, (...) her iniquity is absolved: or God is made propitious for
the iniquity committed by her, and now pardoned.
etc. pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, from Egypt unto
this day. Read Dan. 9.9. Esa. 40.2. and Psalm. 51.9. David prays, Hide thy
face from my sins. Esa. 43.25. I will not remember thy sin. Job 7.21. Why
do thou not pardon my transgressio^ (...) pass by.
? etc. Esa. 38.17. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. And Act. 13.38.
Through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins; and by him, all
that believe, are justified (that is, absolved Stapl. Antid. Act. 13.38.
Andrad. orth. expl. l 6. pa 462. ^ol. 2.13. (...). 2. Chron. 29.10. Numb. 30.5.
Deuteronomy 21.8. Psalm. 78.38.
) etc. And remission of sins is resembled to the free forgiving of a debt,
Mat. 18.27. to the making of bondmen and debtors free in the year of Iubily,
Esa. 61.2. Luke 4.18.19. and the act of it is called, not imputation, Psalm.
32.2.

The Fathers also teach, that remission of sin is a free condonation.
Augustine: What is it for God to become propitious to iniquity? it is to be
pardoning and granting forgiveness Aug. Psalm. 64.
. Bernard: It is sufficient for me, to all justice, only to have him
propitious whom I have offended: all the sin which he has decreed not to
impute unto me, is as though it were not Bernard. in Cant. ser. 23.
. Augustine, Sin is unloosed by indulgence Aug. contra Julian l. 6. and de
nupt. and concupisc l. 1. c. 32. Chrysostom. ex var. in Math. ho. 18. and in Psalm.
50. hom. 2. and de poenit. hom. 6. Greg. Naz. ad Vital. Iren. contra haer. l.
5. page 583. Just. orth. quaest. q. 108. Cypr de laps. n 23. 24. Tertul. de
orat. c. 7. Athan. orat. 3. contra Arian. Cyril. l. 2. sup. Leuit. Gregor. M.
expos. 4. Psalm. poenit. August. in Psalm. 118. Bernard. de inter. Dom.
.

Remission of sins makes men good trees Aug. de verb. Domini, ser. 12.
. Bernard: Sins are not only pardoned, but the gift of sanctity is
conferred Bernard Cant ser 37.
. And Chrysostom: Delivering from sin, he ingrafteth righteousness, yea he
extinguisheth sin, and suffers it not to be Chrysostom. de poenit. hom. 3.
Cyril. sup. Ioh. l 9 c. 5. Gregor. m. moral. l. 32. c. 1. and sup. Psalm poenit.
4. v. 1.
. And like as when Naaman was healed, 2. King. 5. his leprosy was removed, and
his flesh restored to his natural health and beauty; so when God remitteth
sin, he remoueth the guilt by free pardon, and conferreth grace, to the
destroying of sin, and healing the soul Whitak. de pecc. orig. l. 3. c. 3.
Remiss. pec. facit, vt sanctitas in nobis inchetur. Chem. exam. conc Trid. p.
1. de iustif.
, Psalm. 103.3. Mich. 7.19. (...) signif. opprimere and deijcere, etc. Ribera
com. in Mich.


We are free from the absurd opinion wherewith our adversaries charge us, to
wit, that we hold, when sins are pardoned, God does not change the mind of
the sinner, neither destroy the blot of sin, but the same remaining in the
soul in the like manner it did before condonation, is only taken away by a not
imputation of the guilt Vasqu. 1.2. d. 202. c 4 n. 22. iuxta sensum
haereticoru^, etc. peccata nostra radi and non eradicari, tegi and non tolli:
nihil aliud esse quam peccata nostra in nobis reuera manner, atque eodem modo
post iustif. sicut antea nos manner iniustos peccatores. Bellar. Becan. and
alij, etc. Bell. com. Psalm. 31. v. 2. Dicunt haeretici, hanc remissionem
peccatorum, non esse remissionem peccatorum veram, sed imputatitiam. etc.
Sander. de visib. monarch. l. 1. c. 4.
: for we believe, as I have delivered before, using a twofold explication.

First, the destruction and abolition of the sin remitted, is a work of
sanctification, and not of justification, strictly taken, according to S. Paul,
Romans 4.

Secondly, according to the nature of the sin, so is the extirpation or
destruction thereof.

Whenever foul, enormous, and mortal sins, 1. Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.6. 1. Ioh.
3.8. which Tertullian calls grauiora and exitiosa Tertul. de idol c. 1. Aug.
Euchir c. 64. and sup. Ioh. tr. 71.
, more grievous and exitious, are pardoned by Gods mercy, the same are
abolished and cease to be: yea ordinarily before the Lord forgiueth them, a
sinner begins to detest and forsake them. Prou. 28.13. Esa. 1.16. 2. Ioh.
1.6.7. and 3.6.

But habitual concupiscence, and delicta quotidianae incursionis Tertul. de
pud. c. 19.
, many smaller offenses, and delinquences of daily incursion, which by reason
of our frailty, we can never be free from in this life, 1. Ioh. 1.8. remain
in just persons, and the Lord forgiues them upon these conditions.

First, that his children be humbled because of them, Romans 7.24.

Secondly, that they so far repress and mortify them, as that they lead them
not to foul and wilful offenses.

Thirdly, that by confession, prayer, alms deeds, Aug. tr. 5. sup. epist Ioh.
and cont. Crescon. l. 2. c. 12 and de perf. just. ad rat. 16.
exhibiting mercy and forgiveness to others, and other deeds of piety and
charity, they crave at Gods hand the forgiveness of them. Prou. 16.6. Math.
6.14. and 7.7. Act. 10.2.4. 1. Ioh. 1.9. Iam. 5.17. Math. 6.17. 1. Pet. 4.8.
Read hereafter obs. 1. of the meant of works.


If men forsake not damnable crimes, 1. Cor. 6.9.10. 1. Ioh. 3.8. they shall
never be forgiven, Ezech. 18.13.21. 1. Ioh. 1.6. And no sins may be esteemed
so small, as that we neglect the means of procuring pardon for them.



Vasques the Jesuit says, Vasq. 1. 2. p. ^. d. 204. c. 3. Vera ratio
iustitiae inhaerentis, nulla ratione explicari potest, etc. nisi asseramus ea
sola tanquam contraria forma SINE FAVORE ET CONDONATIONE DEI remitti and deleri
totam rationem maculae ET OFFENSAE. He alleges for this opinion, Thom. Aq.
Caietan. Sotus. Ruard. Tapper. Trid. Council. etc.
Even as the true reason of inherent justice can by no means be explicated,
unless we say, that that which is in us wants no favor and new acceptance
of God, to make us just and holy before him: so also the same cannot be
defended, unless we affirm, that thereby, as by a contrary form, the whole
blot and offense of sin is taken away without any favor or condonation of
God.

The said author confirms his opinion by these two arguments especially.

Bellar. de pec. l. 5. c. 19. and de iustif. l. 2 c 16 and de purgator. l 1. c.
10. Suar. 10. 4. d. 8.. 3. n. 11. Andrad. orth. expl l. 6. Stapl. de iustif. l.
5. c. 1. and l. 6. c. 8.
) then inherent justice were not a sufficient and perfect form.

Stapl. de iustif. l. 5. c. 1. Misericordia Dei sieve favor Dei, propter
Christum.
: and granting this, the justification of a sinner must have two forms: one of
remission of sins; the other of inward cleansing and sanctification. But this
is contrary to the Trident Council, affirming that justification has but one
form Bellar. de iustif l. 2. c. 2. Council. Trid sess. 6. c 7. Apertissimis
verbis dixit, vni came esse formalem causam iustif.
. And it differs very little from the doctrine of the Protestants Vasqu. 12. d.
202. c. 1. Haec opinio a sententia Chemnitij parum differt.
. For in the principal, it is one with it, to wit, in that it holds that a
justified person does next and immediately receive the remission of sins for
the merit of Christ Stapl. Antid. Euang. Math. 20. v. 28. Homo impius Deo
reconciliatur and iustificatur, seu ex impio fit iustus, per gratuitam pecc.
remist. precio sanguinis Christi sibi concessam.
imputed. And the smaller difference between the sides, to wit, whether
inhere^t justice may be admitted a part of justification, might be qualified by
some such modification as Vega Vega pro council. Trid. l. 15. c. 5.
propounds to Calvin, saying, If at all times when one is justified, he is
also sanctified, what offense is it to allow one common word (namely
Justification Beza annot. Tit. 3 v. 7. Iustif. nomen large accipio, vt
complectitur quicquid a Christo consequimur, tam per imputationem, tam per
Spiritus in nobis sanctificationem. Sic accipitur iustif. verbum, Romans 8.30.
Beza in quaest. Interdum nomine iustificationis intelligitur etiam
sanctificatio, quia haec duo prorsus cohaerent.
) to express and contain both these parts?

I am not ignorant that many other Papists admit condonation; but Vasques
charge that opinion with having affinity with ours, and affirms and
proves, that it is repugnant to the Trident Council.

Observation 2. Concerning Justification.
The Popish faith of justification, is supported with three positions, whereof
neither is true.

Section 1. Wherein the first pillar of Roman justification is examined.
Our adversaries maintain, that inherent justice in all regenerate persons, is
in this life absolute and perfect Bellar. de iustif l. c. 3.
; and the most famous in their school, teach, that it is so, without any
further mercy and favor of God, besides the first production thereof Vasq.
1.2. p. ^. d. 204. n. 11. Ostendam talem esse iustitiam nostram in haerentem,
vt suapte natura, absque vllo fauore, nos iustos reddat. lb. c. 3. n. 32.
Concilium Trid. ostendit nostram iustitiam inhaerentem, esse veram and
perfectam iustitiam, quae virtute sua purgat a peccato. lb. d. 208. n. 25.
Suapte natura ita pellit maculam ipsam, vt nulla indigeat condonatione Dei.
Soto de not. and great. l. 2. 20. Vega pro Council. Trid. l. 15. c. 12. Ruard.
Tapper. art. 8. de iustif. Haec iustitia, etc. far potest Dei seuerum
iudicium, eique opponi, etc. opera iustorum nulla ratione reprehendi possunt
seuerissime discussa.
. And this is a necessary principle, whereupon the frame of their
justification depends. For seeing no effect exceeds the cause, from whence
it proceeds, if inherent justice be defective and imperfect, then the formal
effects thereof Bellar. de iustif l. 2. c. 16.
, to wit, the expulsion of sin, to make a man just, acceptable to God, and
heir of heaven, must be imperfect Andrad orth. expl l. 6. sceleru^ venia
imperfecta, etc.
: and such virtues as proceed from the habit of that imperfect justice, can
never merit, nor satisfy in condignitie.

But that inherent justice is imperfect, appears by sayings of holy
Scripture, testimony of primitive Fathers, and confession of some learned
Papists.

2. The Scripture teaches, that a just man's righteousness is defective,
imperfect, and mixed with uncleanness. Romans 7.18. Job 9.20. Esa. 64.6.

And howsoever the Jesuits Bellar. de iustif l. 4 c. 20.
shake off these testimonies, yet the same in former times were understood by
learned Papists and other Doctors, as we expound them.

Gerson alleges the place of Esa. 64.6. saying, Who can glory that he has a
clean heart? who can say, I am innocent and pure? Whereas Esaias himself with
the rest becoming vile in his own eyes, pronounces in a lowly confession, All
our righteousness is as the rags of a menstruous woman, and as the clothes of
leapers, defiled with mattery filth Gerson p. 3. de consol. theol. l. 4. prosa
1. and p. 4. tr de sig. Sunt foeditates quasi pannus menstruatae, aut sicut
panniculi leprosorum, qui per continuam saniem defluen tem sordida^tur.
. Bernard: What can all our justice be before the Lord? shall it not, according
to the Prophet, be accounted as a menstruous garment? and if it be strictly
judged, all our justice will be found iniust, and having less then it ought.
What shall we say then of our sins, when our righteousness is not able to
answer for it self Bern. fest. om Sanct. ser. 1. Adrian 4. de sac. Euchar. q.
2. resp pa. 60. col. 2. Read the place in obs. of merit. Clictou: in canon.
super illud, non aestimatur meriti, etc.
? And in another place, De verb. Esa. ser. 5. Adrian. in 4 de sacr. ^uchar.
Iugiter super pannum bonae vitae, etc. stillamus saniem diuersorum criminum.
Our mean justice, if it be any, is peradventure upright, but not pure,
unless we value our selves above our fathers, who no less truly then humbly
have confessed, All our righteousness is as the cloth of a menstruous woman:
and how can that be pure justice, wherein sin is not as yet wanting? And in
the same manner Caietan Enchir. Colon. de sacr. Eucha. Defecerant sacrificia
laudis post lapsum, and vt Esaias ait, Facti sumus vt immundi omnes, etc.
, and the Enchiridion of Colen Caietan. com. 2. Cor. 5. Iustitia Christi est
meritum Christi etc. quod dicitur Dei quia est apud diuinum tribunal vera
iustitia ad differentiam iustitiarum nostrarum, quae apud diuinum tribunal,
sunt velut PANNVS MENSTRVATAE.
, expound that place of Esaias.

The place of Job, chap. 9.20. is expounded by Gregory, of the imperfection
and uncleanness of our works, saying, All our justice is manifestly proved to
be injustice, if it be narrowly judged Greg moral. l. 9. c. 14.
. And how much soever we travel in good works, we never attain true
cleanness, but only imitate it Ib ca. 28. Quousque poena corruptionis
astringimur, quamlibet rectis operibus insudemus, veram munditia^ nequaquam
apprehendimus, sed imitamur. Quanto ad illu^ (Deum) verius per bona opera
surgimus tanto subtilius vitae nostrae sordes agnoscimus, quibus ab eius
iustitia discordamus.
.

Secondly, whereas inherent justice consists principally of faith, hope and
charity Bellar. de iustif. l. 2. c. 7.
; if these virtues be imperfect, then all our righteousness wants
perfection. But that the same are imperfect, appears first by the Scripture,
exhorting just persons to increase in these virtues, Luke 17.5. Ephesians. 4.15.
Iam. 1.4. 2. Pet. 3.18. and reproving such as having the same in verity,
wanted degrees of perfection, Math. 14.31. Reu. 2.19.20. Job 38.1. with Job
40.5. Secondly, inherent justice proceeds from an efficient cause, having
imperfection and uncleanness, to wit, from the will and powers of man. For
although divine grace be one efficient thereof, yet (as our adversaries teach
Becan. de praedest Cath. c 3. Bellar. de iustif. l. 5. c. 5. Stapl. Antid.
Euang Ioh. 15. pa. 356. Greg. Val. to. 2 d. 8. q. 3. p. 4. Chemel. var. disp.
p. 2. disc. 5.. 1. Vasqu. 1. 2. d. 211. c. 4. n. 25. etc. 7. n 50. Lindan
panopl. l. 3. c. 17. Voluntas humana Christi auxilio coelesti adiuta, vere est
boni operis non sine gratia facti causa.
) it is but a cause in part, and the free will of man is another cause, actiuely
producing the same. But the will and all the powers of just persons are
regenerate only in part, and have much of the old Adam remaining in them, Ephesians.
4.22. Romans 7.18. Gal. 5.17. and thereupon they must needs infuse some
uncleanness into the effects produced by them. And S. Augustine affirms
thus, saying, That the children of God are so led by the Spirit of God, as that
they have also motions of their own spirit, whereby they fail Aug. enchir. c.
64 l. 3, cont. 2. epist. Pelag. ca. 7 Haec est nostra in ipsa perigrina tione
iustitia, vt ad illam perfectionem, plenitudmemque iustitiae, etc. nunc ipsius
cursus rectitudine and perfectione tendamus. Read Aug. de nupt. and concup. l
1. c. 7. Basil. cited by Iac. Graph. decis. aur. p. 1. l. 2. c. 52.
. And even as one having a lame leg, although he walk the right way to his
iourneys end, and shun all bypath as far as his knowledge can direct him,
yet halteth as he goes, Genesis 32.31. so the remainder of weakness and
sinfulness of the old man, has an influence into the spiritual motion of the
just, which although it prevail not so much as to pervert the substance of
their just action, yet it makes them feeble and imperfect in their holy ways.



Augustine says, Aug. ep. 106.
Poor am I and miserable, and being as yet congealed in the uncleanness of
the earthly image, do in earthly affections and terrene actions, more resemble
the first Adam then the second. And again, Aug. sup. Psalm. 38. Chrysostom. in Gal.
6. Sicut aurum videtur quidem splendidum, priusquam mittatur in fornacem, ve.
um vbi traditum fuerit igni, tum vero ce^to dignoscitur, eo quod adulterinum
est, ab eo quod est sinceru^ separato: sic and nostra opera, vbi diligenter
examinaueris, tu^ euidenter retegentur, vide by musque nosipsos multis
criminibus obnoxios.
Being renewed by faith and hope, how many old things do we? for we are so
clothed with Christ, as that we carry some of the rags of the old Adam about
us.

S. Augustine and all his scholars affirm, that the good works of just
persons are imperfect in this life, and have not the purity which the law of
God requires.

Augustine: Aug. de pec. mer. and remis. l. 2. c. 15. and de perf. just resp.
ad. 15. and ep. 29. and co^. 2. ep. Pelag. l. 3. c. 7.
No man loves God so much, as the unchangeable rule of verity requires, and
that which is less is sin. And the righteousness of this life is inchoate
De pecc. mer. l. 2. c 7.
, according to the measure of our infirmity a certain smaller justice Cont.
2. epist. Pelag. l. 3. c. 7. and de spir. and lit. c. 36. and cont. Faust.
Manich. l. 22. c. 27.
. The same is called true, because it is unfeigned De pecc. mer. l. 2. c. 13.
. Yet not altogether fair, but by comparison Bernard. Cant. ser. 38.
. Called perfect, because by the uprightness of a direct course, it moves
toward perfection, wanting damnable crimes Aug. de perf. just. ad. 16.
. Unfeigned, but not pure Bern. de verb. Esa. ser. 2.
. Such as needs Gods eye to look upon it, affectu pietatis, non iudicio
veritatis, by the compassion of fatherly piety, and not by the judgment of
verity Bernar. in. dedic. eccles. ser. 5.
. And the cavil which modern Papists use, Andrad. orth. expl. l. 6. pa. 532.
saying, The righteousness of just persons is called imperfect and impure, in
respect of the purity of the divine nature, or of the glorious state of the
heavenly Saints, is censured by S. Hierom, saying: No flesh shall be justified
in thy sight; he speaks not in comparison, as old and new heretics teach
Hieron. l. 3. in Ierem. c. 13.
.

Also the Fathers generally affirm, that the good deeds of just men, after
they be wrought, have need of mercy Aug. confess. l. 9. c. 13. de Trin l. 13.
c. 20.
, and must be presented to God with prayer Greg. Moral. l. 9. c. 14.
, and be excused by his mercy Ib. l. 5. c. 7.
, and they cannot go with safety to Gods tribunal without mercy Hieron. in
Ierem. l. ^. c. 30.
: and they must borrow weight from the bowels of the Lord Bernard. in Cant.
ser. 61.
, and receive supply of that which is less, from him Bern. in Epiphan. ser. 1.
. And Isiodore says, Isiodor. l. sent. c. 27. Ipsa iustitia qua quisque iustus
est, Deo iustificante iustificatur, alioqui apud Deu^, ipsa peccatum est.
At the bar of the Judge, the righteousness of a just person is not secure:
and the very justice of the righteous must be justified by God, otherwise
before him it is sin. And Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. ho. 80.
The repentance of man alone, could not wipe away sin, but that it is mixed
with the mercy of God. And Hugo Victorinus: God by his grace bestows upon
man faith, which faith again by grace he reputeth for perfection, even as if
it were perfect Hug de sanct. victor. elucid. in Romans 4. q. 101.
.



D. Stapleton teaches, that the justice of regenerate persons, Stapl. de
iustif. l. 6. c. 8. Iustitia bonorum operum infide, est vera coram Deo
iustitia, vtcunque mixta peccatis and imperfecta, tum quoad vniuersa peccat^,
tum quoad modum implendi, etc. Quicquid ad plenam and perfectam adimpletionem
mandata praetermittendo, and frequenter venialiter peccando, sieve propter
imperfectionem in modo implendi, id totum Christi misericordia and gratia
indulget, facitque indulgendo, vt perinde simus coram Deo iusti, vt si vniuersa
ad amussim mandata, eademque perfectissime fecissemus.
needs the mercy and indulgence of God to forgive the imperfection and
defect in the measure of fulfilling the law. And Cardinal Hosius says: Were
it not for the intercession of the mercy of Christ, who gave himself for us
an oblation and sacrifice for sin, and but that he appears before the face
of God for us, a woe would be due to our most commendable life, if without his
mercy it were to be discussed in judgment Hos. confess. c. 73.
. And Pighius: We were all cast away, were it not, that Gods mercy succoreth
us, forgiving daily that which is less, defective, exorbitant, and going
astray on our part Pigh. Ratisb. disp. de iustif. c. 2.
.

Section 2. Concerning habitual concupiscence.
Another pillar of Popish justification, is, that radical concupiscence,
Radicalis concupiscentia. Al. Hal. q 38. m. 2.
together with the first suggestions, agitation and rebellion of the same, is
not sin Trid. Council. ^ess. 5. de pecc. orig. Bellar. de pecc. l. 5. c. 7.
Non est peccatum non solum quia non impucatur, sed quia imputari non potest.
Non est very nominis pecc. ipsa titillatio and incitatio cum delectatione
coniuncto, nisi consensum me^tis obtineat. Stapl. de iustif. l. 3. c. ^. Becan.
de just. bon. op. c. 1. Gr. Val. to. 2. d. 6 q. 12. p. 1. B. Medin. 1.2. q. 72.
ar. 1.
. For if the same be sin, then it follows, first, that just persons are
always sinners, having continually need of remission and not imputation of
sin. Secondly, if concupiscence be sin, forasmuch as the same works in
all the actions of man, it will distill into the same, sinfulness, and thereby
distaine, impair, and attenuate them, so far, as that they cannot attain to
that height and strain of perfection, whereby they shall be able to justify
before God, and to satisfy and merit.

Objection. Concupiscence may be only venial, and then it cannot hinder or
impair the perfection of justice.

Answ. Granting the same to be a sin, it cannot be venial by nature Bellar.
de amiss. great. and pecc. l. 1. ca. 3. Venialia ex natura and ratione peccati.
, because it is a transgression of the last commandment, in the proper object
of the same Aug. de verb. apost. sermon. 5. Si concupiscis quidem, quod lex
vetat, cum dicit, Non concupisces.
. Ro^. 7.7. And that sin cannot be venial by nature, which caused the
Apostle to cry out, Oh wretched man that I am, etc. Romans 7.24.

And if it be only venial by indulgence, and not imputation, Veram and reale^.
this cannot hinder the physical or real influence thereof into man's habites
and actions, more then the not imputation of original sin stops the
propagation of the uncleanness thereof into the posterity. Also, admitting
the same in just persons to be venial; yet it has so frequent and perpetual
motions, that such a multitude of irregular cogitations and desires which the
same produces, will equal some mortal sins: even as many lesser crannies
in a ship, equal one big one Aug. ep. 108. Quid interest ad naufragium, vtrum
vno graui fluctu, nauis obruatur, etc.
; and many small grains of sand, make a heavy burden Aug. sup. Ioh. tr. 13.
Minutae sunt guttae, quae flumina imple^t: minuta sunt grana arenae, sed si
multa arena imponatur, premit. atque opprimit.
. And the perpetual conjunction and concomitance, yea mixture of these sins
with the purest motions and holiest actions of just persons, cause the same
always to have need of remission, by reason whereof they cannot justify,
merit, satisfy, etc.

Ob. But the holy Scripture and primitive Fathers manifestly teach, Adam. Sasb.
com. Romans 7. Non videtur posse pertinere ad personam hominis nondu^ renouati,
quod dicitur, Iam non ego operor illud, etc. Condelector legi Dei, etc. Denique
quod ex doctrina coepta in hoc 7. cap. intulit in 8. c. nihil ergo damnationis
est ijs, etc.
that habitual concupiscence and the motions thereof, are not sin.

Ans. First, the Scripture does as expressly make it sin, as the same does
theft, adultery, false witness, prohibiting and condemning it by a special
commandment, Exodus 20.17. Romans 7.7. And that the Apostle, Romans 7. speaks of
habitual concupiscence, appears by the actions which he ascribes unto it,
teaching, that in himself it lusted against the spirit, and rebelled against
the law of the mind, and yet in regard of his consent, was inuoluntarie, and
resisted him, v. 20. and also it was such, from which he could never be freed
so long as he continued in this life. And the same Apostle calls it by the
name of sin five times, Romans 6. Gloss. ordin. Romans 6. Peccatum, id est, fomes
pecc. nihil aliud est quam concupiscentia. Adam. Sasb. Peccatum, id est, somes
five habitualis concupiscentia, quae inest nobis ex peccato Adae.
and six times, Romans 7. and thrice, Romans 8. it has the definition of sin,
for it is repugnant to the divine law, Romans 7.7.23. 1. Ioh. 3.4. It has the
quality of sin, and is hateful to God and good men, Romans 7.15. It is the
very root of the evil tree, and grand stem which brings forth evil
fruits, Mat. 7.18. the mother of all sin; and whatsoever ignorance,
unbelief, injustice, and wickedness is committed by man, proceed from it,
Mat. 15.19. Gal. 5.19. Iam. 2.14, 15. Aug. de verb. ap. ser. 6. Quicquid est
pecc. in dictis, in factis, in cogitationibus, non oriuntur nisi ex mala
cupiditate.


Secondly, S. Augustine, whose judgment in this matter is a breuiarie of the
faith of the primitive Church, expressly teaches, that it is sin; and this
not only in appellation, but in verity, saying: Aug. contra Julian l. 5 c. 3.
Even as the cecitie of the heart, which God remoueth by illumination, is both
a sin, and the punishment of sin, and the cause of sin: so the
concupiscence of the flesh, against which the good Spirit strives, is a sin,
by reason there is in it disobedience against the dominion of the mind; and a
punishment of sin, because it is rendered to him which was disobedient: and a
cause of sin. And in another place, Aug. in Ioh. 11 41.
This unreasonable and brutish anger would not arise, unless there were sin
in the members.

The same Father calls it, a culpable quality De perf. iustit. ad. 12.
, a brutish motion De pecc. mer. and rem. l. 6. c. 16.
, an evil and naughty sin Contra Julian. l. 6. c. 5.
, no small iniquity Ib. c. 8.
. He says, it is prohibited by the moral law De Spit. and lit. c. 4. etc. 36.
de perf just. ad. 11. de verb. apost. ser. 4. and 5. epist. 200. l. 1. de nupt.
and concup. c. 29.
, and is unlawful, lascivious, and filthy L. 5. hom h. 42.
. Before baptism, it is mortal sin, even original sin it self De nupt.
and concup. per totum. and cont 2 epist. Pelag. and cont. Iul. l. 3. and de
pec. mer. l. 2. Soto de not. and great. l. 1. c. 8. Bonau. 2. d. 30. ar. 2. q.
1. Hugo. Elucid. Romans q. 104.
. And after baptism, it is taken away in regard of guiltiness Aug. de
praedest. c. 13. and de nupt. and concup. l. 1. c. 25. and 28. and l 2. c. 34.
, and remains in act De nupt and concup. l. 1. c. 32. cont. Julian. l. 2. in
principio.
. And after baptism, it must be purged by remission Cont. 2. ep. Pelag l. 1.
c. 14.
.

And whereas this Father says in one place, De nupt. and concup. l 1. c. 25.
Concupiscence in persons regenerate, is no sin: the answer is, that he
simply denies it not to be sin, but only that it is not imputed as mortal
sin to such as resist it Ib. l. 2 c. 3 4.
, and because it reigns not De cor. and gra. c. 12.
, nor makes them iniust persons who resist it De nupt. and concup. l. 2. c. 24.
, and is no crime In Ioh. tr. 41. and enchir. c. 65.
, and intrudeth it self upon just persons, as an importunate guest, against
their wills: and lastly, because it is daily wasting, and tending to
destruction, and not being.

And verily, until of late time, the best learned and godliest in the Church,
taught that it was sin. Isiodore Isiodor. de diff spir. l. 2. c. 27.
says, It is a filthy motion of the soul, in the affection of unclean lust.
And Hugo: Hug. Elucid. Romans q. 171.
It is manifest that the law prohibiteth the first motions of concupiscence.
And Strabus the author of the ordinary Gloss, affirms the same Gloss.
ordin. Romans 7. cited by All. Hal. p. 3. q. 38. m. 2.
: and Ferus Ferus com. Ioh 13 taxed by Dom. Sotho.
and Caietan Caietan. com Romans 7. appellatur pecc causaliter, tum formaliter.
say it is sin.

Thirdly, let the absurdities be considered, whereinto our adversaries fall by
denying Concupiscence to be sin.

First, they grant that it is prohibited by divine law, and repugnant to the
same Bellar. de pec. l. 5. c. 10. and 12. Stapl. de iustif. l. 3. c. 2.
.

Secondly, they acknowledge, it is hateful to God, an iniquity, and vicious
quality, a thing neither good nor indifferent.

Thirdly, they place it among natural defects Stapl ib esse quandam
iniquitatem and obliquitatem, non solum contra dominatum mentis, sed contra
legem D^^: ideoque eam Deo displicere, nec tamen in renatis esse vere ac
proprie pecc. Ib. Nec esse rem bonam nec indifferentem. Ruard. Tap. expl.
artic. 2. act. Fatemurhanc carnis and voluntatis, ad malum pronitatem, esse
obliquitatem, and deuiationem a lege and regula, secundum quam natura instituta
est ad Dei imaginem, etc.
.

But if it be an vnsinfull defect of nature, then it is not prohibited by the
moral law, more then blindness and death. And if it be hateful to God and
good men, and prohibited by divine law, then it must needs be sin, 1. Ioh.
3.4. For whereas Bellarmine makes answer, that Even as the devil is no sin,
Bellar. de pecc. orig. l. 5. c. 10. Ruard. Tapper. explic. artic. 2. at. page
67.
although he resist the law of God: so concupiscence may resist divine law, and
be no sin: I answer, that we reason in this manner: Every vicious quality and
action thereof resisting the law of God, is a sin. Habitual concupiscence is
a vicious quality, and the first motions thereof are vicious actions resisting
the law of God. Therefore it is sin.

Section 3. Wherein the third pillar of Popish justification, to wit, the
distinction of venial and mortal sin is examined.
Our adversaries also piece out their justification, by the distinction of
venial and mortal sins. The sum whereof is:

First, that venial sin is not simply sin, but imperfectly and
analogically Tho. Aqu. Quodli. 4. ar. 22. Non habet rationem perfecti pecc.
Bellar. de iustif. l. 4. c. 14. Peccata venialia, non esse pecc. simpliciter,
sed imperfecte, and secundum quid. De amiss gratiae, l. 1. c. 11. Azor. instit.
mor p. 1. l. 4. c 8. Iac. de Graph. decis. aur. p. 1. l. 1. c. 6. Suar. to. 2.
d. 4.. 9. Non est proprie offensa and iniuria, sed valde analogice. Hae leaves
offensae, non sunt magni valoris aut momenti.
. No transgression, but pretergression of divine law, besides it, but not
against it Bellar. supra. Victorin. tr. de pecc. mortal. Altissodor. sum. l. 2.
tr. 27. c. 2. q. 3. Alex. Hal. p. 2. q. 18. m. 6. Bonau. 2. d. 42. ar. 2. q. 1.
. Some of them maintain, that God is not offended with venial sin Bonau.
ib. q. 2. ad. vlt.
. And they generally call such sins, light, saying, that God in justice
cannot punish them with more then a temporal punishment Azor. p. 1. inst. mor.
l. 4. c. 8. Bellar. de iustif. l. 5. c. 5.
; and they are pardoned without repentance Bonau. 4. d. 16. ar. 3. q. 2.
, even by the outward sprinkling of holy water, when one thinks not of them
Iac. Graph. decis. aur. p. 1. l. 1. c. 6. n. 10. Si nullatenus excitetur ad
seruorem, nec memoriam habeat venialium, tamen obtinebit per illam aspersionem
veniam.
.

Secondly, with great presumption they place many foul sins in the rank of
venial, as the examples following declare:

If one in his rage and fury blaspheme God, not having had a precedent
deliberate intent, he sins only venially Hauar. manual. c. 12. n. 84. lac.
Graph decis. p. 1. l. 1. c. 6. n. 17.
. Parents cursing their children, without deliberation Nauar. ib. c. 23 n. 117.
. Children disobeying their parents, when the same proceeds not of contempt,
but of negligence or sensuality, is venial Iac. Graph. ib. l. 2. c. 56. n.
15. Siluest. sum. v. filius, q. 22. Nauar. c. 14. n. 12.
. Scurrilous and filthy speaking, in jest only Lesseus de just. and iure. l
4. c. 4. dubitat. 13. n 97.
. Men's wearing of women's apparel in vanity of mind; painting of the face,
etc. are venial Less. ib. dub. 14 n. 109. 110. 114. Hauat. c. 23. n. 20.
. And drunkenness is ranked among venials, by Bonauenture Bonau. 4. d. 16. ar.
3. q. 1.
.

To fast, pray, give alms, go to the Church, for vaineglorie, are venial Tho.
Aq. 2.2. q. 2 o. Tol. instr. sac. de pecc. mortal. c 7. Siluest. verb. vana
gloria. Nauar. etc.
. And Azorius the Jesuit affirms, that the sins which one commits
against his own good, are for the more part all of them venial. As when one
offends by vain and idle thoughts, by choleric answers, and excessive
prating, spending the time in idleness, governing his estate badly, consuming
his goods wastfully, or possessing the same couetously, eating and drinking
intemperatly, exceeding in apparel, confessing his sins negligently, and
rehearsing his matters slothfully; preferring his own wit, strength and
beauty before all others: these and the like are venial Azor. instit. moral.
p. 1. l. 4. c. 9. n. 8. pa. 238. Iac. Graph. decis. l. 2. c. 52. n. 13.
.

By this reckoning of their own making, the Papists wipe out of the debt-booke
of sins, the greatest part thereof, and are more iniust then the unrighteous
steward, bidding the man wipe out fifty measures, who ought an hundred, Luke
16.6. But how can one be sure Greg. Val. to. 2. d. 6. q. 18. p. 3. Ex
Scripturis diuinis, qua^uis de multis pecc. constet, quod sinr mortalia, tamen
vix de vllis express satis videtur constare, quod sint tantum venalia.
that the Lord will approve this reckoning? and where are infallible grounds,
whereupon men's souls must rest in matter of so great moment? And are not the
bold assertions of Popish Casuists and Schoolmen, herein as uncertain as the
determinations of blind Pharisees concerning the like matters? Math. 23.16.

The holy Scripture reports many examples of grievous judgments inflicted by
God upon smaller offenses then these, which our adversaries pronounce to be
venial Aug. Enchir. c. 79. Leuissima putarentur, nisi in Scripturis
demonstratentur opinione grauiora. Quis enim dicentem fratri suo fatue, reum
gehennae putaret, nisi veritas diceret? Math. 5. Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 42.
, Genesis 19.26. Leuit. 10.2. 2. Sam. 6.7. And our Savior teaches, that of every
idle word, men shall give account at the day of judgment, Math. 12.36. And the
primitive Fathers earnestly exhort to beware of accounting any sins light or
small Basil. quaest. paru. q. 4. Aug. ep 108. and l. 50. hom. 42. and in Ioh.
11.13. Chrysostom. sup. Gala. c. 1.
. Yea sundry learned Papists condemn this distinction, (as the same is now
used by the Gers. to. 3. de vit. spir. lect. 1. coral. 1. Roffens. cited by
Vega. pro conc. l. 14 c. 15. Almai. mor. tit. 3. c. 20.
modern) to wit, Gerson, Roffensis, Almaine, etc.

Observation 3. Touching Popish justification.
The Trident doctrine concerning justification, is not Catholic in the Church
of Rome it self.

1. Peter Lombard Magist. 3. d. 19 he lived anno 1147.
the master of the Popish school, teaches, that we may be said to be
justified by the death of Christ, in the same manner that the Israelites were
healed in the wilderness by beholding the brazen serpent, Ioh. 3.14.15. and
this is plainly our belief.

In the year 1195. it appears by a decretall of Pope Innocent the third
Decret. tit. 42. c. maio. de bapt. Ruard. Tapper. de iustif. art. 8. in cap.
maiora. Innocentius 3. quasi problema vtrinque disputabile proponit, etc.
Adrian. 4. sent. de sacr. bapt. q. 3. ad oppos.
, that many Doctors of those times believed, that sins were remitted in
baptism without the infusion of habitual grace; and according to this
opinion, justification is only remission of sins.

And afterward, about the year 1305. Pope Clement the fifth, affirms, Clem.
l. 1. de sum. Trin. Council. Viennens. Tanquam probabiliotem. See Guide. Carmel.
sum. de haeres. generat. c. 8.
that many Doctors did in those days hold the former opinion: and he decreed
the contrary, touching the infusion of habitual grace in baptism, not as an
article of faith, but as the more probable opinion.

2. Andreas Vega reports Vega pro council l. 7. c. 24.
, that in former ages there was much contention about the formal cause of
justification; and he says, It seemed unto diverse; that a sinner was not made
just by any created justice, as one is made white by the quality of
whiteness: but that one is in like manner made just and beloved of God, as he
is beloved of another, by the love he bears him, and not by infusion.

3. Sundry famour Papists of later times have maintained the faith of the
Protestants, touching the formal cause of justification, namely, Clingius loc.
com. l. 5. ca. 42. Deus iustos nos reputat, propter solam fidem in Christum.
Pigh. cont. Ratisb. l. 2. Ferus com. Ioh. 13. taxed by Dominicus Sotho. Cassand
consult artic. 4. de iustitia, id est merito and satisfactione Christi nobis
imputata, hoc est, nobis, acsi propria esset attributa, scripturae satis aperte
loquu^tur, etc. Card. Contaren l. de iustif. Ego prorsus existimo pie and
Christian dici, quod debeamus niti, tanquam re stabili quae sustentat nos,
iustitia Christi nobis donata, non autem sanctitate and gratia nobis
inhaerente. Hac sola, certa, stabili nobis nitendum est: and ob eam solam
credere nos iustificari coram Deo, id est, iustos haberi.
Clingius, Pighius, Ferus, the Doctors of Colen in their Antididagma,
Cassander, Contarenus, etc.

4. Howsoever the Jesuits in school propugne against us this speculation of
Trent justification, yet is not the same radical in their hearts: for in
practice and temptation, when men seriously look about them for their souls
health, and are approaching Gods judgment seat, they cast away this proud
conceit of perfection of justice, and wholly repair to the mercy of God, and
merits of Christ.

Anselme says: Anselm. meditat.
My life being narrowly sifted, terrifies me. It appears all of it unto me,
to be either sin or barrenness; and if there seem to be any fruit, it is
either fained, imperfect or corrupted, etc. And then he flies to Jesus and his
merits, comforting his soul in them, saying: What is Jesus, but only a
Savior? be thou, O Jesus, by thy self, a Savior unto me. And the same
Anselme: Cited by Hosius confess. c. 73
Oh God, I set my Lord Jesus between thee and my sins; I offer thee his
merit in stead of mine own which I should have, but yet do want it.

And Bernard: Bern. in Cant. fer. 61. Read Stella Luc. 7.
Where can weaklings find safe and firm security, but in the wounds of our
Savior? etc. I have sinned, my conscience is unquiet, I will remember the
wounds of my Lord, and what is wanting in my self, I will borrow it from the
mercies of my Savior.

Yea Pope Hildebrand himself, the great key-bearer of heaven, (who relating
his Papal privileges, says, If the Roman Pontifex have any personal
defects, yet undoubtedly he is sanctified by the merits of the blessed Peter)
Baron. an. 1076 n. 33.
notwithstanding in his adversity he reposeth himself upon Christ Jesus
only, saying, I find my self so far surcharged with the ponderous weight of
mine own actions, that there remains no hope of salvation for me, but in the
sole mercy of Jesus Christ Greg. 7. ap. Baron. to. 11. an. 1075. n. 7.
.

Certain observations concerning Good works and Merit.
Observation 1. Touching Works: wherein is contained the Protestants faith
concerning the reward and effects of the same.
1. We believe and maintain, that good works are necessary to salvation
Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae testatur, bona opera necessaria esse Christiano
ad salutem. Rainold. apol. these. pa. 263. Whitak. de Eccles. fol. 301. Pet.
Matt. com. Romans 2. Beza quaest. part. 1. Piscat. anal. Math. 25.
. 1. Ioh. 1.6.7. Romans 8.13. Math. 5.20. and Math. 6.21. Even as walking in the
way, is a necessary action and means to bring a traveler to the end of his
journey, Ephesians. 5.10. And this is the constant doctrine of holy Scripture, and
of Aug. de spir. and lit c. 14. Hieron, ad Celan. ep. 14. Ambros. com. Tit. 2.
Gaud. Brixian. ad Genesis de vil. iniq Leo de Epiphan. sermon. 2. Clem. Al Strom. l.
5. Greg. Naz orat. 40. Theod Exodus quaest. 63. Cyprian. ep. 14.
all the Catholic Church.

2. Good works have many excellent effects and uses in sundry passages of our
salvation; whereof these are principal:

First, they are part of the matter, actions and fruits of repentance, Ezech.
18.21. 1. Cor. 5.7. Ephesians. 4.22.24. and they dispose Bez. annot. Math. 5. v.
20. and quaest. part. 1. opusc. pa. ^69. and cont. Illiric. demonstr.
Existimandum est, praeparari, disponi, and aperiri corda nostra, etc. Chem.
exam. p. 1. pa. 171. 172.
and qualify our persons, that we may receive and enjoy the benefit of
remission of sins, 1. Ioh. 1.7.

Secondly, they are the matter of our obedience, Romans 6.13. and thankfulness,
Psalm. 118.19. and of our love toward God, Ioh. 14.21. the means whereby we
glorify God and edify others, and provoke them to virtue, 1. Pet. 2.12. Heb.
10.24. Chrysostom. hom. 18. in Romans Aug. 50. hom. h^^.


Thirdly, they are signs of our election, justification, and redemption, 2.
Pet. 1.10. 1. Ioh. 3.24. Ioh. 8.39. supporters of our faith and confidence in
Christ, 1. Ioh. 3.19. Chrysostom. in Math hom. 16.
helps and furtherances to our prayers, Act. 10.4. Esa. 58.9. yea certain
inferior advocates Cypr. de op. and eleemos. Deprecationes solae, parum apud
Deum valent, nisi factorum and operum accessione farciantur. Aug. cont. 2. ep.
Pelag. l. 4. c. 7. Eleemosynis and orationibus impetrantibus. Fulg ep. 2. de
stat. vid. vt agnoscamus bona opera, LOCVM ORATIONIS HABERE apud Deum.
Chrysostom. in Genes. hom. 5. Hilar. in Math. can. 4. Charitas, etc. Errorum
nostrorum ambitiosa ad Deum; patrona est.
and intercessors to God for mercy and forgiveness; and for the release or
mitigation of temporal punishment, and for many spiritual and worldly
benefits, 1. Ioh. 3.22. Pro. 16.6. Dan. 4.24. And even as foul and enormous
sins cry to God for vengeance, Genesis 18.20. so virtues supplicate for mercy and
deliverance, Esa. 65.24. In the old law, besides propitiatory sacrifices,
there were sacrificia impetra^tia Pined. com. Job. 1.5.
, Job 42 8. Ezr. 6.10. in the room whereof succeed spiritual sacrifices of
Christians, consisting of pious and charitable deeds, Heb. 13.6. Revel. 1.6.
Romans 12.1. 1. Pet. 2.9. and these have the effect and use of impetration, Ioh.
9.31. 2 Ioh. 3.22.

Fourthly, just persons endued with virtue, are the object of Gods love and
friendship, Ioh. 14.21. 2. Chron. 20.7. and he dwells with such, 2. Cor.
6.16. 1. Cor. 3.17. blessing and protecting them, Genesis 22.16.17. and as Isaac
smelling the sweet savor of Jacobs raiment, began to pronounce a blessing upon
him, Genesis 27.27. so the Lord is rich in mercy and blessings toward those, in
whom is found the savor of grace and virtue, Psalm. 84.11.

Fifthly, although we ascribe the whole virtue of purging sin, Aug. ^nchir. c.
7^.
in the article of justification, to the blood of Christ only, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
Apoc. 1.5. yet in the doctrine of sanctification, we ascribe power of cleansing
and purging sin to virtue and good works, according to the manner following:
S. James says, Cleanse your hands you sinners, chapter 4.8. and S. John, Every one
that has this hope, purifieth himself, 1. Ioh. 3.3. and Esaias, Wash you, make
you clean, Esa 1.16. and Solomon, There is a generation that are pure in their
own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthynes, Prou. 30.12.

And the manner hereof is, that whereas there be four sorts and means of
purging sin: first, by the way of redemption and remission, this is done by
Christ only. Secondly, by immediate application of Christ in our
justification; and this is peculiar to faith alone Tol. com. Rom 3 an 17. ^des
immediatius and distinctius, in eum fer^u^ enius virtute iustif^^mur, sicut a
pectus aene^ serpentis Vega de iustif. ^8 c 1. Adam Sasboth com Esa. 1.
, Ioh. 3.4 15. Thirdly, by infusing the grace of regeneration and habit of
sanctification; this is the work of the holy Ghost as the principal cause,
and of the word and sacraments as the isntrumental, Ioh. 15.3. Ephesians. 5.26. Ioh.
3.3. Fourthly, there is a purging and cleansing of sin necessary to
saluauation, which stands in the mortifying and repressing of concupiscence,
and subiecting of the powers to the regiment of grace; and also in renouncing
and expelling of sin by the contrary actions of virtue, Col. 3.5.12. Works
of light, expel the deeds of darkness, and the lively actions of virtue
purify the soul, according to the Apostle, 1. Pet. 1.22. You have purified
your souls in obeying the truth. Prou. 16.6. Altisiodo^. sum l 4 tr. 6. ca 4.
Hesich. in Leuit. li 4. c. 14. Haec opera necessaria habet, quae virtutibus and
actionis studio valiant delere peccatum. Cornel ad apid. com. Romans 12. verse. 1.
n. 85. Est moruficat. viua quaedam mors: facit enim mori concupiscentia^
carnis, dum eas truncat per viuos continentiae, abstinentiae, and poenitentiae
actus.


Sixthly, we teach, that the Lord of his bounty and goodness rewards all
the works and good deeds of just persons with rewards spiritual and
temporal, 1. Tim. 4.8. and that in rewarding, he observes a proportion
according to the number and measure of good works, Fulg de fid. ad Petr c. 3.
Hieron in Esa. c. 24. l 8 Tertul. Scorp. c. 6. Chrysostom hom de praem. sanctor.
Bernard. ser 9. qui habitat. Beza quaest p. 1.
2. Cor. 9.6. Math. 19.28.29. Dan 12.3. But this reward is not an hire and
stipend properly so called, Romans 6.23. but a reward of bounty or liberality,
such as a father after his promise, bestows upon his son, for performing
that duty which he is otherwise bound unto, and is only beneficial to
himself. Disp. Ra^isb. c 2. Velut si liberalis benig^ nusque herus, etc
Propositis praemijs liberalibus inuitet, etc vnum illud respiciens vt bonos
faciat, etc Basil. in Psalm. 114. (...).


And such reward is free: first, because the Lord has freely, without any
desert of man, prepared it. Secondly, because himself by grace, as the
principal efficient, produces in men the virtues which he rewards Caietan.
opusc. to. 3 tr. 11. c 6. Omnis bona operatio voluntaria hominis debetur Deo,
and quanto potioribus and pluribus bonis operibus pollet homo tanto plus Deo
debet, quia ipse Deus operatur in nobis velle and perficere.
. Thirdly, the work being produced, he adds further worth and value to it,
by a new imputation of Christ his merits, Heb. 13.15. 1. Pet. 2.5. Reu. 8.3.
Romans 8.34. Heb. 9.24. Fourthly, he detaineth not the reward promised because of
the imperfection and blemish of our good deeds, but freely forgiueth our wants,
and beholds only the goodness of the virtue, without the defect. Fifthly, in
the act of rewarding, God conferreth more then we are able to expect or desire:
and when the reward is actually conferred, it exceeds the outward promise, 1.
Cor. 2.9. and the hope and expectation of the receiver, Ephesians. 3.20. Caietan
opus. to. 3. tr. 11. ca.
Lastly, the justice of God in rewarding, is rather called justice, by an
improper form of speaking, that by this name the hope of the just may be
confirmed, then because it partakes the definition and form of distributive
and commutatiue justice, according to the rules of moral Philosophy, or
according to any other proper kind of civil or humane justice. Aug. de temp.
sermon. 40. Chrysostom. 2. Cor. hom. 23. Deus, hoc in mercedem imputat, non quod just
nobis debeat, sed quod misericors est and pius. Anselm. prosolog. c. 10. Iustus
es, O Deus, non quia nobis reddis debitum, sed quia facis quod decet te sum
bonum. Cling. loc. com. l. 1. ca. 14. Quia finito ad finitum nulla est
proportio, sed omnia opera nostra sunt finita, gratia autem, iustificatio and
vita aeterna quid infinitum: ergo nihil debet Deus operibus nostris, semper
gratis dat, etc.


Obseru. 2. Concerning merit of works: wherein is showed, that many learned
Papists have impugned the doctrine of merit.
1. Many learned Papists in former days have condemned the present doctrine of
merit, maintained by Papists. Dionysius Cistertiensis says, Dionys. Cister. 3.
sent. q. 3. ar. 3. c. 6. cited by Vasq.
Good works of precept, because they be commanded, are not meritorious of life
eternal. Ferus says, Ferus com. Math. l. 3 c. 20. Ge^s. tom 4 tr. de sig.
Signum malum est, offerre Deo opera sua, quasi dignu^ aliquid habeant ex
persona operantis, and non potius sint foeditates, quasi pannus menstruatae,
aut sicut panniculi leprosorum qui per continuam saniem defluentem sordidantur.
Reward is due to works, of grace, but not of debt: and the sufferings of this
life are not worthy of the future glory: and whosoever desires to enjoy the
favor of God, must not mention merit. And Pighius affirms, that Cont.
Ratisb. l. 2.
there is no real difference between him and us in this question.

2. Many Schoolmen and Papists reject the merit of condignitie, holding that
good works do merit only in congruitie Greg. Arim. 1. d. 7. q. 1. ^. 1. Dura.
d. 1. d. 17. and 2. d. 27 Marsi^^us. The. Walden. Burge^s^s. Eckius. See Vega
opusc. q. 5.
. But the merit of congruitie is indeed no merit, but only in name Bellar. de
iust^. l. ^. c. 22. B. Medin. 1. 2. q. 114. art. 10. Cai^tan. 1. 2. q. 114.
art. 10. Becan. de iustif. Cath. c. 3. Gabr. 2. d. 27. q. vnic. art. 1. not. 3.
Adrian. in. 4. de sacram. euchar. Sunt merita nostra, velut baculus arundineus,
etc. and quasi pannus menst^uatae, sunt omnes iustitiae nost^ae, etc. Gr. Arim.
1. d. 17. q. 1. Volens per hoc, Aug. innuere, quod cu^ vita aeterna datur
justice, non ta^ redditur qua^ donatur. Cling. loc. com. l. 1. c. 22. Docemus
opera esse meritoria iust^tiae, ex gratia, id est, immerita misericordia,
scilicet fauore ^olum Dei non merito and dignitate operum.
: to wit, when a reward or benefit is bestowed, neither for the dignity of
the work, or worthiness of the doer, or for any equality between the work
and reward, but only upon the liberality of the donar. And this opinion is
the same with ours.

3. Although many Papists in word maintain the merit of condignitie, yet
(according to Jesuit Vasques) they do in deed destroy the same merit: and
these also in substance agree with us Vasqu. 1. 2. p. r. d. 14. c. 1.
Contingere potest vt si veram rationem meriti non assignemus, verbis solum ab
haereticis dissidentes, reipsa cum ijs conueniamus, quod aliq^ibus Catholicis
in hac controuersia accidisse pat^bit. Scotus. G. Arim. Gabriel. Occham.
Alphonsus Castro. Guil. Paris. Bruliser. Antididag. Colon. Council. Colon.
Council. Senonen^. Holcot. Vega, Hosius, Victoria, Canus, Ioh. Bunderius etc.
.

Holcot says, that Holcot. in Sap. 3. lect. 35. Cling. loc. com. lib. 1. cap.
19. Condignum meritum non est ex part operum, sed gratiae Dei quae promisit
meritum hoc operibus: ita vt condignitas illa meriti respicit gratiam, non opus
operatum, etc.
one assisted by grace, may condignely merit life eternal, is understood two
ways: one, so, as that there is as much worth in the substance of the merit,
as may deserve life eternal. The other, that it is worth so much, only by the
position of some law; as when a small piece of copper, by the ordinance of the
Prince, is made worth a loaf of bread. Good works are not condignely worthy
of life eternal, by the substance of the work, but by grace only (according
to the latter kind of worthiness.)

Brulifer: B^uli ^^^^ent. d. 17. cited by Hosius confess. c. 73. Aegid. Conick.
Jesuit. de sacram. to. 2. disp. 10. dub. 2. n. 1^. Quod nostra opera tam
immensum praemium merentur, magis prouenire ex munificentia Dei, quam dignitate
operum.
An action wrought by charity, is only worthy of life eternal, by the
passive acceptance of God, and not by the nature of the work it self.

Alphonsus Castro: Alph. Castro. c. haer. verb. meritum.
Works of grace, of themselves are unworthy of glory, and we by them could
have had no right to eternal glory.

Andreas Vega: Vega opusc. q. 5.
We place no greater right in the works of just men, in respect of
blessedness, when we say they be condignely meritorious of the same, but that
it pleases God of his liberality to confer beatitude upon us and our deeds.

With these agree Cardinal Hosius Hos. con. Brent l. 5. Nullum a Sanctis exire
porest opus, quod si in se ce^seatur. confusionem iustam non mereatur: docemus
igitur mercedem regni coelestis datam ni operibus nostris, verum non propter
eorum, quatenus a nobis proficiscuntur dignitatem, sed propter Christum, cuius
manuum opera sunt.
; and the learned Chumel seems to teach the same, where he says, Merit is the
means of blessedness, by the way of impetration Chumel. q. var. p. 3. pa. 339.
. And merit of impetration, is no more but merit of congruitie Bella. de lib.
concor. mend. 8. Meritum impetrationis, quod scholastici Meritum de congruo
nominare solent.
.

Observation 3. Touching other Schoolemens opinion concerning Merit.
But the doctrine of merit, as the same is maintained by many great Schoolmen
and Papists, is very absurd and wicked.

Vasq. 1. 2. p. 2. d. 114. ^. 4. 7. Fra. Romeus, Ca^etan. Sotus, Conrad. D^^e
lo, C^preolus, Clictoueus, Lindan. Tile^an.
1. Vasques the Jesuit, and before him, all the Papists quoted in the margent,
affirm, that good works wrought by divine grace, are of themselves condignely
worthy of life eternal, without any further promise, comp^ct, or savor of
God: and look how the deeds of mortal sin are of themselves, without Gods
threatening, worthy of eternal punishment; so good works of their own nature,
without any promise, are worthy of eternal life.

2. There accrueth no increase of dignity to the works of just persons by the
merits or person of Christ, which otherwise they might not have had from the
same grace bestowed liberally by God without Christ. Vasq. 1.2. p. 2. d. 214. c
5. n. 31. etc. 7. per totum.


3. Gods promise being added to the works of just persons, does in no sort
belong to the reason of merit, but without the same they are of themselves both
worthy and meritorious. Vasq. ib. c. 8.


4. Good works do as truly and equally merit glory, as mortal sins
damnation Vasq ib. c. 5. n. 31. Coster. enchir. c. 7. Maldon. com. Ezech 18. v.
20.
: and Altisiodore says, they do it much more powerfully Altis. sum. li. 3. tr.
16. quaest. 2. Bona opera magis sunt bona quam mala opera, and multo fortius
merentur vitam aeternam ex condigno.
.

5. Good works have this force in them, that they make us formally worthy of
life eternal, which Christ's merits do not: and Christ is worthy for them to
impetrate whatsoever he requesteth Vasq. ib. d. 222 c. 3. n. 32. Merita in
nobis hanc vim habent, vt reddant nos formaliter dignos vita aeterna: merita
autem Christi, non reddunt nos dignos formaliter, sed CHRISTVS DIGNVS EST QVI
PROPTER ILLA IMPETRET, QVICQVID ipse pro nobis petit.
.

6. They teach, that God should be unjust, if he rendered not heaven in
recompense of good works Rhem. annotat. Heb. 6. n. 4. Ruard. Tap. art. 8 de
iustif.
.

7. After a man is reconciled to God, his salvation is a work of Gods justice
Tol. com. tom. 5. v. 10. Amicos and reconciliatos, saluare per Christum, iam
non morientem sed viuentem, opus est ad iustitiam pertinens, etc. Rhem. 2. Tim.
4. n. 4.
. For grace to merit, is bestowed by Christ, but afterward we never crave of
God that he would bestow eternal life upon our meritorious deeds for Christ's
sake, but only that he will give us grace whereby we may be enabled to merit
Vasq. ib. Nunquam petimus a Deo per merita Christi, vt nostris dignis operibus
and meritorijs reddatur merces aeternae vitae, sed vt per Christum detur nobis
gratia qua possimus digne mercedem hanc promereri.
. According to this opinion, God uses no favor in setting the crown of
glory upon the head of his children, but only an act of justice. Psalm. 103.4.

8. God rewards in manner aforesaid, not only good works commanded, but
works of counsel and voluntary devotion, and the fulfilling the Popes will,
by taking arms against Emperors and Kings Sigon. de reg. Ital. l. 18. Praemia
salutis eternae omnibus pollicebatur, qui crucem aduersus F^edericum acrem
Ecclesiae hostem sumpsissent, ac multos ad eam sumendam accendit.
, spoiling and destroying the enemies of the Popish Church, and such like.

Observation 4. The ancient Fathers using the word Merit, what they mean.
The Fathers using the word meritum and mereri, did not speak properly:
therefore our adversaries cannot maintain their merit of condignitie, being
merit in a proper signification, by their authority.

1. Saint Augustine uses the word merit, in the matter of justification and
remission of sins, wherein the Papists confess Bellar de justice. l. 5. c 12.
, that merit properly taken, can have no place. His words are: Remission of
sins is not without some merit, because faith does impetrate the same Aug.
com. 2. ep. 105.
. And Origin: To confess sin, meriteth remission of sin Origin. Leuit hom
3.
. And Hierom: Hieron. l 2. cont. Pelag.
They which humbly confess their sins, by their humility do merit the
clemency of our Savior.

2. The word merit in the Fathers, does commonly signify to obtain, procure,
impetrate, etc. Augustine: The magi or wise men, Math. 2. merited to see the
star Aug. de temp. ser. 35.
. And Gregory: S. Paul when he was traveling to extinguish Christ his name
upon earth, merited to hear his words from heaven Greg. m. moral. l. 9. c. 17.
. And Ambrose: The Church merited the coming of Christ Ambros. de poen. l. 1.
c. 15.
.

3. Our adversaries themselves confess the abusiue acceptance of the word
merit in the Fathers. Vega: I am not ignorant that the name of merit is used by
the Fathers where there is indeed no merit either of congruitie or condignitie
Vega pro council. l. 8. c. 6.
.

CHAP. II.
Paragraph. 1. Whether S. Hierom be corrupted concerning reading the Scripture.
Section 1.
T.W. IT being a certain truth, that from Scriptures, evil understood,
proceed most heresies. M. White (a faithful friend thereof) well knowing by
daily experience, that no one thing in truth is more auailable, either for the
first beginning or propagation of heresy, then general liberty granted to
the vulgar people of reading and expounding the Scripture; does hereupon much
labor, in proof of his supposed necessity thereof, etc.

Answ. In this assertion are contained four particulars: First, most heresies
proceed from Scriptures evil understood. This position is questionable: for
many heresies proceed from other causes, as well as from Scriptures evil
understood, to wit, from Philosophy Tertul. cont. Marc. l. 5. c. 19. Omnes
baereses ex subtiloquentiae viribus and Philosophicis regulis constant. De
praescrip. c. 7. De praescrip. c. 7. Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 25. Chrysostom. prolog.
in 1. Cor. Hieron. in Esa. l. 9. c. 28. and in Ierem. l. 1. c. 2. and contra
Pelag. ad Cresiphon.
, Col. 2.8. and from traditions of men, Mark. 7.8. and from ignorance of holy
Scripture, Math. 22.29. Saint Augustine says, that all heretics do not read
the Scriptures Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l 7. c 9.
. And S. Hierom: The questions of heretics and Gentiles are the same, because
they follow not the authority of the Scriptures, but the sense of humane
reason Hieron. in Hos c. 7.
. And the same Father produces heretics maintaining errors in the dialect of
our Papists: We are the sons of those wise men who from the beginning have
delivered unto us the Apostolic doctrine: the children of the ancient, etc.
Hieron. l. 7. Esa. c. 19.


2. T.W. No one thing is more available for the first beginning or propagation
of heresy, then general liberty granted to the vulgar of reading the
Scriptures, etc.

Answ. Leaving out the word expounding, which is your addition, and no part of
D. White his assertion; this position is false. For Philosophy, Tradition, and
neglecting the Scriptures, Espenc. com. Tit. ca. 1. digr. 2. pa. 105. Quasi
vero haere^es ex Scripturarum studio, ac non potius ex neglectu and ignorantia
nascantur?
are more available to cause heresies, then the general liberty of reading
the Scriptures, which is only an occasion by accident, 2. Pet. 3.16. and no
cause of heresy. Chrysostom says: From hence arise innumerable evils, that
the Scriptures are not known: Hinc erumpit multa illa haeresium pernicies:
hence breaks out, that manifold mischief of heresies, from hence ensues
dissolute life Chrysostom. arg. ep. ad Romans
, etc. And Gregory and Bernard say, In this deep of holy reading, both the
lamb may wade and the Elephant swim Bern. sermon. paru. s. 64. Greg. in ep. ad
Leand. praefix. moral. Chrysostom. 1 Cor. hom. 6. Qui salutem consequi volunt,
Scripturis vacent.
And S. Augustine: Holy Scripture, like a familiar friend, without any
colorable deceit, speaks to the heart both of the learned and unlearned Aug.
ad Volus. ep. 3. Greg. Romans ep. praefix. moral. sup. Job. ad Leandr. ca. 4.
Diuinus sermo, ficut mysterijs prudentes exercet, sic plerumque superficie
simplices refouet. Habet in publico vnde paruulos nutriat, seruat in secreto,
vnde mentes sublimium in admirationem suspendat. Quasi quidam quippe est
fluuius, planus and altus, in quo and agnus ambulet and elephas natet.
.

3. T.W. Because heresies arise from the Scriptures evil understood, therefore
the general reading of them must not be permitted.

Answ. 1. If for evils which happen by occasion and accident, that which is
good shall be removed and taken away August. contra Faust. Manich. lib. 22.
cap. 97. Neque medicinae vitium est, si vel insani scipsos, vel maligni alios,
ferramentis medicinalibus perimunt.
; man who is prone to abuse all things, must have the use of nothing in this
world. Igne quid vtilius? etc. There is nothing more profitable then fire, yet
it is possible for negligent or malicious persons to consume the house by it.

2. I would gladly understand, why the reading of the Scripture by lay men,
does rather occasion heresy, then the reading thereof by Bishops and Priests;
or why the reading thereof in a known language should rather do this, then
reading the Latin translation, or the original text? The most pernicious
heresies, which hitherto have imbroiled the Church, received their original
from Priests; as appears in Arius Tripar hist. l. 1 c. 12. Arius in ordine
presbyteroru^ erat, etc.
, Nestorius, etc. No man, says Hierom, can frame an heresy, but he that is of
excellent gifts Hieron. ^up. Hos. c. 10.
, etc. And Gerson and Aeneas Siluius produce the same Father saying, There
never happens any notorious evil in the Church, but Priests are the cause
thereof Gers. de defect viror. eccl. n. 48. Aen. Silu. hist. Austr. 852.
.

3. Stupid ignorance and gross infidelity, Ephesians. 4.18.19. 1. Cor. 14.20. Heb.
5.13.14. following upon the taking away of the Scriptures from the people, even
as darkness succeeds the removing of light, are to be prevented and avoided
as carefully as heresy.

4. T.W. D. White a friend of heresy, maintains general liberty of reading
and expounding the Scripture.

Answ. 1. There is not any word in all my brothers discourse, of liberty to be
granted to the vulgar, of expounding the Scripture. In plain places the
Scriptures expound themselves: and as Augustine says, rather require an hearer
or reader, then an expositor Aug. in Ioh. tr. 50.
. And for that which is more difficult, the common people have the ministry
of the Church, and daily recourse to their Pastors, and tracts and expositions
of Scripture, collected by the learned: and they are permitted by our doctrine
to rely in nothing upon their own private spirit, as this Popish Priest
obiecteth.

2. If D. White be a friend to heresy, because he maintains the translation
and reading of holy Scriptures in a known tongue, then Moses, and Christ, and
the Apostle Paul, and all the primitive Fathers were fautors of heresy,
because these in general exhorted the people to read the Scripture, Deuteronomy.
6.7. etc. Josh. 1.8. Ioh. 5.39. 2. Tim. 3.15. Revel. 1.3. That man, says
Augustine, which fears God, does diligently enquire his will in the holy
Scripture Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 1.
. Theophylact delivers this compendium of the doctrine of the Fathers: Say not,
that it belongs only to religious men to read the Scriptures, for it is the
duty of every Christian, and most of all of such as deal in worldly affairs,
because they being as it were shaken with a tempest, have greater need of
spiritual succor Theophylact. c^m Ephesians. 6. Aug. de Temp. ser. 55. Non solum
vobis ^ufficiat, quod in Ecclesia lectiones diuinas auditis, sed etiam in
domibus vestris, aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes requirite and libenter
audite.
.

T.W. M. White grossly abuses S. Hierom in these words: Hierom writes of Paula
a gentlewoman, how she set her maids to learn the Scripture; and many of his
writings are directed to women, commending their labor in the Scripture, and
encouraged them thereunto, etc. But what is this to us, who allow not only
religious women, such as these were, whom M. White fraudulently calls Paulaes
maids; but even the Lattie to read the scripture, supposing they be humble,
discreet, and virtuous: and having such a master by them as S. Hierom was to
teach them? etc.

Would not any man think this Minister distracted, thus producing that against
us, which confounds himself? Do not these religious women in reading the
Scripture, require S. Hierom a Priest to be their master? And does not he
profess to teach them, not what he had learned himself from any imaginary
spirit, but from the famous Doctors of the Church? Yea, does he not plainly
and humbly acknowledge his doubting and ignorance in his explication thereof:
None of which I am sure is Orthodoxall with Protestants.

Answ. I will pass by your declamation, of distracted minister, etc. and
fulfill the common byword: Give lofers leave to talk. The truth is, you are
taken in a crampe, and cannot tell which way to turn your self. For Espenc.
com. in Tit. 2. pa. 257. Hieronymus, tantus alioqui mulierum ad Scripturae
studium and lectione^ hortator, etc. Hieron. in Psalm. 86. Dominus narrabit, and
quomodo narrabit? non verbo, sed Scriptura. In cuius Scriptura? in populorum,
etc. Dominus narrabit, in Scripturis populorum, in Scripturis sanctis. Quae
Scriptura populis omnibus legitur, hoc est, vt omnes intelligant, non vt pauci
intelligetent, sed omnes. Hieron. ep. 27.
S. Hierome and all the Fathers, do so expressly maintain our doctrine
concerning the general reading of holy Scripture, that you are unable to put
by the matter, so much as with a specious gloss. And therefore you bawle
against the Moon: and then fetch in by head and shoulders an extrauagant
discourse about S. Hierom, indeed to divert the Reader from the point in
question, and to lead him a woolgathering after your fables.

But as touching the present matter of Paula, her reading the Scripture: 1. It
is certain, that she being a lay woman, did ordinarily read the Scripture by
S. Hieroms persuasion: who says in the same Epistle; that by her continual
reading, she had the Scriptures without book, Ib. Scripturas sanctas memoriter
tenebat.
and by the sentences thereof she fenced her breast, as with the armor of God
against all manner of vices, etc.

2. This woman imposed a daily task of reading the Scriptures upon the
Sisters, and women conuersing with her, whereof diverse were her maids, as
appears by S. Hieroms words, in the end of the Epitaph placed in the margent
Ipsa assidere lectulo, etc. omnium ancillarum praeuenire officia.
.

3. This Father, in other parts of his writings most plainly requires, and
commends the reading of holy Scripture by all sorts of lay people, even by
little children.

In an Epistle to Leta Epist 7.
, (a married wife, and no Nun) he instructs this Matrone, concerning the
education of a child her little daughter, and says as follows: Let the
child be deaf in hearing instruments and minstrelsie: but cause her to render
every day a task of the flowers of holy Scripture. Let her not be sought for
in the preasse of secular people, but in the closet of the Scripture, asking
counsel of the Prophets and Apostles, concerning spiritual nuptials. Let her
first learn the Psalter, and with those heavenly songs auoke her self from
light sonnets. Then let her be taught to govern her life out of Salomons
Proverbs: and repair to Job for examples of virtue and patience. Let her then
come to the Evangelists, and never lay their books forth of her hands. She
must with these drink in the Acts of the Apostles, imbitat.
and having enriched the cellar of her breast with this substance, then let her
conne the Prophets without book, and commit to memory the five books of
Moises, the Kings, Chronicles, and volumes of Esdras. And then at the last
without any peril, she may learn the Canticles. But let her be cautelous in
Apocriphall books, and if she read them, understand that they are not those
Authors whose names they carry, and that many things faulty are mixed in them,
and it is no small wisdom to find gold among dross.

The like exhortations to read the Scriptures, are found in his Epistles, to
Saluina Epist. 9.
; to Furia Epist 10.
, to Dematriadis Epist 8.
, to Celantia Ep. 14.
. And instructing Gaudentius about the education of Pacatula an infant Ep. 12.
, he says: When the rude and toothlesse girl shall come to seven years age,
let her learn the Psalter without book, and make Salomons books, the
Gospels, the Apostles, and Prophets, the treasury of her heart. And lastly,
this Father commands lay persons to have the word of Christ, not only
sufficiently, Hieron com. 3. cap. epist. ad Coloss.
but in abundance, so as they may be able to teach and admonish one another.

T. VV. S. Hierom allowed Paula to read the Scripture, being a religious Nun,
discreet, humble, etc. and having S. Hierom her master, who expounded not the
Scripture by a private spirit, etc. Roman Catholics give the same liberty to
lay persons equally qualified.

Answ. 1. This Father does not only permit and tolerate, but inioyne the
reading of the Scriptures not only to Nuns, but to children of seven years
old, and to all kinds of lay persons Arbor. Theos. to. 1. l. 8. c. 11. Sacrae
literae olim verlae erant in vulgarem linguam, and eas Hieronymus in Dalmaticam
linguam verti^.
, as I have proved before.

2. The Protestants require the same helps of expounding Scripture, and the
same humility and reverence in the reading thereof, which S. Hierom mentions.

3. Whereas this T. W. and before him Bellarmine, Bellar. de verb Dei. l 2. c.
15. Videmus concedilectionem eiusmodi librorum ijs, qui cum fructu vti possunt,
id est, ijs qui facultatem ab ordinario obtinuerint. Gretsar. def.
Gretsar, and other Controuersars give out, that their Church grants
liberty of reading the Scriptures in vulgar translations, to such lay persons
as are able to do the same with profit: the truth is, that they condemn all
reading of Scriptures translated, by the people; and this appears by their
doctrine and practice. Their doctrine is delivered by Stapleton and others in
this manners. 1. The general permission of reading the Scripture, is impious,
and pernicious Stapl. rel. c. 5. q. 3 ar. 4 Peers. A^ala de trad. p. 1. Bellar.
Ledesm. P. Soto. Hosius.
. 2. God requires no lay person to read the Scripture, neither is the same
necessary or profitable to spiritual education, but a thing merely
indifferent, and of delight only Stapl. ib. ar. 4. explic articuli.
. 3. The Scripture translated into a vulgar tongue, is not authentical, or a
rule of faith Arbor. the osoph. tom. 1. l. 8. c. 11. Qui sacras literas in
vulgatem linguam transferunt, sunt ipsi haeresium fontes and seminaria.
. 4. They which translate Scripture, are the seminary and causes of heresy
Stapl. ib. page 531.
.

And touching their practice, let these particulars be observed.

1. In Countries wholly papisticall, no vulgar translations are permitted:
neither any parcels, Epitomies, or Summaries of the Bible, or of the Stories
thereof: nor any Prayer books in the vulgar tongue, having in them any
Psalms, or Canticles taken out of the Bible. See the decree of Pope Clement 8.
and the Spanish expurgatorie Index, in the margent Asor. instit. mor. p. prim.
l. 8. c. 26. Quaeres an permittantur conscripti vulgari lingua, precationum
horariarum libelli, in quibus continentur Psalmi and Cantica ex Biblijs
excerpta? Resp. In Indice Hispanie^si regula 6. and 7. omnes huiusmodi libri
conscripti lingua vernacula prohibentur. Et in Indice nouissime edito, iussu
sanctissimi Domini nostri Clement. 8 obseru. circa regulam 4 prohibentur sacrae
Scripturae parts, tam noui quam veteris Testamenti. Et insuper summaria and
etiam compendia historica Bibliorum, and librorum sacrae Scripturae, quocunque
vulgari idiomate conscripta, and quidem inuiolate praecipitur obseruandum.
.

2. Whereas in former times, it was permitted in the Index of Books
prohibited, set forth by the authority of the Trent Council, Regula 4. To
Bishops and Inquisitors, by the advice of the Confessor and Parish Priest, of
such lay persons as desired it, to grant license of reading Popish vulgar
translations: Now the said liberty of permission is quite taken away by a later
Index of Pope Clement the 8. and Inquisitors may grant no such licenses as
before Index Clement 8. circa reg. 4. Trid. animaduertendum est, circa supra
scriptam quartam regulam Indicis, felicis Rectoris Pij Papae 4. nullam per hanc
impressionem and editionem de nouo, tribui facultatem Episcopis vel
inquisitoribus, aut regularium superioribus concedendi licentiam, emendi,
legendi, aut retinendi Biblia vulgari lingua edita cum hactenus mandato aut vsu
sanctae Romans Eccles. and vniuersalis inquisitionis, sublata ijs fuerit facultas
concedendi huiusmodi licentias.
.

Thus our adversaries may tell their friends a tale of a permission, to
discreet and humble persons, to read the Scripture translated: But their
mother Church of Rome, both disgraceth the vulgar translations composed by her
own Disciples Posseuin. appar. sac to. 1. verbo Biblia. Versio Italica, Versio
Gallica: ex Caluiniana versione, plura extemporarie in multis locis, desumpta
fuerunt, etc.
, and will tolerate vulgar translations no further then thus: to wit, where the
same cannot be hindered, the people by conuiuence or toleration, are rather
permitted to read their own vulgar translations, then to use ours Index
Hispan. reg. 6. Prohibentur Biblia, vulgari lingua, cum omnibus suis partibus
(ac si dicat, Biblia and eorum parts. Asor. l. 8. c. 26.)
: And their governors, like Cato and the Emperor Adrian Spartian. vita Adrian.
, (who pronounced it expedient to set certain Countries at liberty, because
they were unable to hold them in subjection:) give their people leave to do
that which they cannot hinder Stapl. rel. c. 5. q. 3. ar. 4. pa. 535. propter
corruptas haereticorum translationes, etc.
.

Paragr. 1. Sect. 2. Wherein is examined, whether S. Hierome was a Papist in 17
points, rehearsed by this T. W. out of the Epitaph of Paula. Ephesians. 27.
T. W. If it do not plainly appear, by sundry points of religion mentioned in
this Epistle, that S. Hierome, S. Paula, and the Bishops, Priests and people of
those times, were of the same religion or belief, which Catholics now
profess, and Protestants now impugn: Then let me be enrolled in the black
bill of lying Ministers, or coupled in brotherhood with White, as a legitimate
son of the father of lies.

Answ. Concerning your audacious assertion, I tell you, as Archidamus the
Lacedemonian did his son: Aut add viribus, vel deem velocitati: you should
either have seconded this loud challenge with force of matter, or else not have
run your self out of breath in making toward your adversary, who was
always likely to turn upon you Hostibus haud tergo, sed forti pectore notus.
, and then be able to perform nothing but shout and beat the air. And
touching your wish, of being enrolled in the black bill, etc. the truth is,
that you are billed already, and planted in a Station, then which there is
none fitter for you: to wit, in the service of Antichrist, where falsehood has
such pre-eminence, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. that as Irenaeus reported long since of the
Valentinians: None is perfect among them, but he which uttered gross lies
Iren. cont. haer. l. 1. c. 15.
: so among you, he that can most subtly and impudently deface the truth,
deserves best.

But for the matter it self, you affirm, that S. Hierom and all the Bishops
and Priests of those times were Papists, and Cardinal Bellarmine says, That
Christ and Peter were Papists Bellar. de eccles l. 4 c. 5.
: and how maintain you this assertion? The sum of your ostension in
general, may be reduced to this or the like argument:

They are of the same Religion which maintain and practice some opinions, and
outward exercises of Religion in common. S. Hierom maintained and practiced
some opinions and outward exercises of religion in common with the Papists.
Ergo: He was of the same religion which Catholics now profess, and
Protestants impugn.

To this I answer, that both the propositions are false. And to the Mayor I
say: that they which are of contrary religions, may have diverse materials,
both in doctrine and practice common among them.

The Pharisees and Papists agree in sundry materials; to wit, unwritten verities
Petr. Galatin. de arcan. Cath. verit. l. 1. c. 1.
. Mark 7. Math. 15. Blind obedience Talmud. Quid debeo facere and sac^am? H. si
md. harm. Euang. Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. l. 2. v. Traditio
, babbling prayers Epiphan. haer. l. 1. c. 16.
, Math. 6.7. fained continency, counterfeit fasting, external afflicting of
the body Hier in Esa. l. 3 c. 8 Joseph. an^q l 13. c. 21. Dr^. de sect. l. 2.
Epiph haer l. 1.16 (...) page 20. (...). pa. 20.
, etc.

The Apostles for a certain time used circumcision, and sundry of the Legals
in common with the Jews, Act. 16.13. and 20.16. and 21.26.

2. The assumption also is untrue: for there is no specificall and formal
agreement between S. Hierom and the Papists in any of their opinions or
practices, wherein they disagree with us, but only a genericall agreement at
the most, which is no more then the agreement between a man and a beast. And
for the ostension hereof, I will join issue with the adversary in those 17.
Articles, which he has produced out of the 27. Epist. of Hierom.

T. W. S. Hierom does wholly agree with us Catholics, in the Article of
worshipping and invocation of Saints. His words are: Farewell oh Paula (he
speaks to her being defunct) and help with thy prayers the old age of him
that worshippeth thee: Thy faith and works do join thee with Christ being
present, thou shall obtain more easily what thou ask. These words of
Hierom are alleged by the P. F. to prove Popish adoration and invocation of
Saints departed.

Answ. Concerning adoration of Saints departed. Veneration and honor of Saints
departed, the Protestant Churches maintain and practice, 1. We worthily esteem
of their persons, and recognize their excellency and glory. 2. We give them
honor by commemoration, and imitation of their faith and virtues. 3. When they
depart this life, we afford their bodies a decent burial. Psalm. 112.6. Ios.
1.2. Prou. 10.7. Job. 8.39. Iam. 5.10. Act. 8.2. Justin. Martyr. apol. 2. Iren.
l. 3. c. 20. Basil. orat. in 40. Martyr. Ambros. ser. 39. Aug de ciu. Dei, l 8.
c. 27.
And some of our learned Adversaries seem to require no other veneration of
Saints but this Peers. de trad. p. 3. cum parts honoris sint, de sanctis recte
sen tire, eos and res ip sorum venerari, viua ipsorum exempla venerari, Deu^ in
ipsis laudare, and ipsos in Deo, etc.
.

But the Jesuits maintain the adoration of Saints departed, with sacred and
religious worship Asor. instit. mor. p. 2 l. 5. c 16. Sacris honoribus and
religioso cultu: eius nomine and inuocatione, altaria esse erigenda, templa
aedificanda, festos dies celebrandos, eius imaginem ad venerationem in ecclesia
ponendo, eius reliquias pretiosis capsulis, etc. missae sacrificia in eius
honorem and laudem Deo offerenda, and diuina officia, ei persoluendo. P. Emil.
de gest. Francor. l. 5. Tho. Becket martyrij laudem cruenta morte nactus est.
Defuncti memoriam sacrauit Alexander, araeque illius nomini dicatae.
, erecting altars, building temples Aug de Ciuit. D^^ lib. 22. c. 10. Nos
M^rtyrib^s no^ ^^^^la sicut dijs, sed memorias sicut hominibus mo^tuis, quoru^
apud Deum spiritus viuunt, ^^bricamus, etc. Durand. Ration. diu. l. 4. c 35. Ad
lat^^am pertine^t templa and altaria. ^^erdotia, sacrificia, ^estiuitates,
ceremoniae, and huius modi, quae soli Deo exhibenda sunt. iuxta illud, Dominem
Deu^ tuum. adorabis, etc.
, placing their images in Churches to be adored, enclosing their Relikes in
Caskets, and proposing them to be worshipped, offering up Masses in the honor
of them, and worshipping them by Church service and Canonical hours. And they
teach, that the adoration belonging to them, is after a sort divine,
approaching so near to divine worship, as that it is exercised by the same
materials and sacred Rites Suar. 3. Tho. ^. 1. d. 52.. 3. Adoratio sanctis
exhibita est quod^m modo d^^^^a. Certum est, h^nc cultum sanctoru^ valde
conianct^ esse, cum ca^tu diuin^ and ^acris ad religionem Dei spectantibus
perfici.
.

Our P. P. would patronize all this superstition with the sentence of Hierom,
saying; That he honors Paula deceased (Cultoris tui.) Every honor and
worship is not such a Papists require; and therefore to reason from honor in
general to a certain kind thereof, is to mock the reader. We acknowledge on
both parts, that Saints are to be honored, we differ in the manner; to wit,
whether they be to be honored with adoration, or such a kind of worship as is
in a manner divine, or with sacred Rites appertaining to Gods religion Casland.
consult art. 21. Vulgi imperitia, diuinos honores sanctis attribuit, vt cum
templa, arae, sacrificia, acerdotia, vota, festi dies, non tantum memoriae, sed
honori, and cultui Sanctorum consecrata putantur etc.
, and formerly rehearsed: S. Hierom is so far from the practice hereof, that
he affirms: We do not worship and adore the Relikes of Saints, etc. nor the
Sun, Moon, Archangels, or any other name spoken of in this world, or in the
next: but we honor the Relics of Martirs, and adore him whose Martirs they
be Hieron. ad Ripar. ep. 55. Non colimus and adoramus, etc. Vid. Arbor.
theosoph l. 1. ca 37. Chrysostom. hom. 7. de Natiuit. Machab.
. And against Vigilantius; Who at any time adored Martirs L. cont. Vigilant.
Quis aliquando. Martyrs adorauit?
? And with him consent the faithful Christians of the primitive Church, who
being traduced of superstition for adoring Martyrs deceased, affirm, that they
adored Christ Jesus only, and exhibited no more to Martyrs but the honor of
love Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 4. c. 15. (...). Cyril. Alex. lib. 6. contra
Julian. Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 21.
.

Sect. 2. Of the same Article: Whether Hierom be a Papist in Invocation of
Saints.
For the understanding of S. Hieroms meaning it must be considered, that the
words produced from Paula her Epitaph, are rhetorical and tropicall Aug. de
doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 5. Cauendum ne figuratam orationem ad literam accipias.
, used in a laudatiue and panagyricke Oration Isidor. orig. l. 6. c. 7.
Panagyricum est licentiosum genus dicendi in laudibus, in cuius compositione,
homines multis mendacijs vtuntur.
, and therefore may not be set upon the rack, to enforce so much as the bare
letter will sound; but must receive their sense from the truth of the thing,
and not from the sentence of words.

When God speaks by the Prophet, Hear O ye mountains. Mich. 6.2. and
David, Psalm. 114. What ayleth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest, etc. And when
Eusebius says: Thee Oh piety and humanity do I adore Eusebius. vit. Constable. l.
5.
, Will any man be so unreasonable, as of a Rhetorical Apostrophe, or
Prosopopeia, to infer a literal sense?

Our Adversaries have sundry hymns and prayers directed to the Image of the
Cross Fest. invent. cruc. O crux splendidior cunctis astris, mundo celebris,
hominibus multum amabilis, sanctior vniuersis. Salua praesentem cateruam in
tuis laudibus congregatam. Offic. diur. ad vsum Romans O crucis victoria and
admirabile signum: in coelesti curia fac nos captare triumphum. Ib. 2. Noctur.
antiph.
, whereof this is one Offic. Romans in fest. exalt. Crucis. and in Dom. passione.
.

All hail Oh Cross, our only hope; in this time of the Passion:
Increase justice in the godly, and give pardon to the guilty.
Now when we charge them with praying to Images, by this and other such like
examples: they tell us Suar. to. 1. 3. Tho. d. 52.. 4. Per tropum and
prosopope^an explicanda est Bella^ de imag. c 24.
, that such prayers are to be expounded by a Prosopopeia; but in all
construction it is far more probable, that S. Hieroms speech should be an
Apostrophe. But I answer further. 1. S. Hierom at no time by way of doctrine,
maintained invocation of Saints: and he doubted whether Saints departed could
hear our prayers Hieron ep. 3. Quicquid dixe to quia ille non audi^, mutum
videtur, cum quo loqui non possumus de eo loqui non desinamus, etc.
. And pregnant occasion being offered by Vigilantius Hieron. l. con. Vigil.
, and he being challenged to declare his mind, never contests his adversary
concerning invocation of Saints, but only maintains their intercession for
us, which Protestants admit in general Bellar. de beat. sanct l. c 20 Dicunt
Protestants, Sanctos pro nobis orare in genere. Rainol. de i^^ol. Eccles. ^om.
l. ^. c. 3. Gecolampad. ad sermon Chrysostom. de invent. and Maxim. Martyr. M^lancth
loc. com, Manlij. ^ol. 151. Brent. ad ca. 16. Luc. Aug sup. Psalm. 85 ad finem
.

2. Being granted that Hierom requested the prayers of Paula defunct, either in
general, or so far as she understood his wants, this will not euince Popish
invocation. For it is one thing to request and ask a benefit, duty, or
favor, which one may do of his equal or inferior, Job. 19.16.17. and another
to invoke and request by prayer.

Invocation is a religious action, and proper service of God. Romans 10.14. a
sacrifice. Hebr. 13.15. distinguished by a Greek and Hebrew name, never
applied in Scripture to any creature Aug l de cura pro mort. c 13. and 14 and
15.
: the life and force of it, is, the inward cry, and secret request of the
heart, Romans 8.26. 1. Sam. 1.13. Psalm. 25.1. and 19.14. and 10.17. which no
creature immediately discerns, but God alone. Math. 6.4. 2. King. 8.39 Cling.
loc. com. li 4 c. 42. Est Deus speculum, in quo vident Sancti in coelo nostras
orationes. Est Christus verbum Dei, quod hoc reuelat Sanctis.
. And that the Saints by revelation understand and know our prayers, (...).
is either false, or at least uncertain: And the requesting another to pray
for us, as S. Paul did the Romans, Chap. 15.30. the Ephesians, Chap. 6.18. The
Philippians and other Churches, Col. 4.3.12. 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. Philem. v. 22. is
not religious invocation, such as our Adversaries perform to the Virgin Marie,
and other Saints in their devotion. For they use formal prayers, and do as
devoutly and religiously invoke Saints as the Lord himself Antonin. sum.
hist. p. 3. tit. 23. c 6. Ecclesiam intrauit genua flectens, cord sanctum
Petrum rogauit vt scelus suum ignosceret.. 5. reatum suu^ confitens Deo, and
beato Petro. Math. Paris. in Rich. 1. Nunc saluatorem mundi, nunc matrem eius
virginem gloriosam, nunc simul omnes electos Dei inuocabam, licet specialiter
per intercessionem pijssimi, sanctissimique Nicholai, sperarem consequi
petitionis effectum. page 177. Willernus sermon. gratiar. actionis in fine. lib.
sup. sente^t. Francisce pater inclyte, etc. menti meae quantis viribus
inspirasti non occurrit: fui erga te saepe ingratus, sed parce filio tuo, ad te
modo confugienti, quem exoro attentius, me vt semper velis habere commissum,
etc. Cassand. consult. ar. 21. Non defuerunt viri celebres, (Gabr. Biel) qui
assererent id quod Hester Assuero promisit, se petenti dimidium regni daturum:
in Maria completum esse, in quam Deus regni sui quod iudicio and misericordia
constat, dimidium, hoc est, misericordiam transtulerit, altera sibi regni part
retenta.
. They make a difference between their apprehension of God in their prayers,
and of the Saints: but the matter, gesture, and devotion of prayer is all one.
And in their Saint invocation they kneel down, eleuating their eyes to
heaven, uncovering their heads, and prostrating their bodies and souls, with
sighs and groans they say: Oh blessed Apostle Paul, I beseech thee to deliver
me from the Angel of Satan, and from the wrath to come, and conduct me to
heaven. And to Stephen; Oh the first Martyr and Leuit of Christ, Oh holy
Stephen, I fly to thee, I invoke thee, I humbly and devoutly beseech thee,
etc. And S. Bernard Bernard. sermon. 2. Aduent. Vide Bern. sermon. 4. sup. Missus
est. Gabr. Biel. Can. Miss. lect. 32. A. Aduocatum habere vis, ad ipsum, and
Mariam recurre.
prays to the Virgin Marie in this form: n Let thy abundant charity cover
the multitude of our sins, and thy glorious fruitfulness confer to us
foecunditie of Merits: our Lady, our Mediatrix, our Advocate, reconcile us to
thy son. Bonauenture says; Oh Virgin, be thou to me a strength against my
sins that I go not to hell, increase daily in me the flame of charity:
warm my soul with thy love, pluck me forth of the kennell of vice; take away
the filth of my sin, thou which art whiter then snow, and together with thy
Son grant my request, making me a Citizen of heaven Bonauent. P^alter.
minus. read the whole. Offic. Rom ab octa ^. Pent. vsque ad adu. salve Regina.
matter misericordiae, vita, dulce do, and spes nostra, ad te clamamus exules
silij Adam: ad te suspiramus gem^ntes, etc. eia aduocata nostra etc.
.

Also in their prayers, they offer up the merits of Saints to God, with the
same form of words they do the merits of Christ, saying to Thomas Becket: Oh
God, who have granted us to celebrate the translation of blessed Thomas, we
humbly beseech thee, that by his merits and prayers we may be translated from
vice to virtue, and from prison to thy kingdom Missal. Satisb fest. Th.
Becket. Anton. sum. hist p. 3. tit. 23. c 4 3. 7. de virtute and meriti sancti
Dominic. considens, etc. Ib c 7. 13. Sencti Thomae meritis se recommendantes
^per^e sunt au^es eorum. Biel. can. Miss. lect 30 l. n. Ob secro te p^jssime
Domine Jesus Christ, vt per merita bea^^ssinae virginis, etc. and omnium
Sanctorum etc. doceas me, etc. Offic. paruum b. Mar. ad Matut. Precibus and
meritis B. Mariae perducat nos Dominus ad regnum coelorum, etc. Leo Hostiens.
l. 2. c. 27. Benedicti meritis and open. etc. Legend. aurea, in sanct. Aegidio.
.

Let our adversaries now produce examples out of S. Hierom, proving such a
form of Saint invocation, and exhibition of merits to God, and we will
acknowledge they speak to the matter.

But they only corrade a few broken and uncertain speeches, whereof some are
figurative: other, wishes and requests, limited by ifs and ands; as, hear Oh
Constantines soul, (...), if thou have sense, or notion of these things Greg.
Naz cont. Julian. or. 1. Gr. Naz. or. funebr. Gorgon.
; or private devotions and conceits of some particular persons; or bastard
sentences foysted into the writings of Fathers by Hucksters of their own
fellowship: and from hence infer a Catholic doctrine and article of Faith
Trid. Council. sest. 25.
, according to their modern fashion concerning invocation of Saints.

But if antiquity favor them, and this their devotion be Catholic; why do
they not produce some public definition of the Primitive Church? or prove
their practice out of the doctrinall Treatises of the ancient Fathers touching
invocation and prayer Tertul. lib. de orat. Cyprian in Dom. orat.
? or out of authentical Records, wherein the ancient form of Christian
service, and religious exercises of the prime Christians are expressly related
Justin. Martyr apol. 2. Tertul. apol. c. 39.
? Justin Martyr and Tertullian have reported the same: and Eusebius in his
Story, sets down verbatim a long prayer used by Polycarpe Bishop of
Smyrna, at the time of his martyrdom: wherein, if invocation of Saints had
been reputed any part of Christian devotion in those days, he would
undoubtedly in so great peril and at his death, have recommended himself to
God by the prayers and merits of Saints: But his form of prayer is
Protestantlike, tendered to God himself only by the mediation of Christ
Eusebius. hist. lib. 4. cap. 15. (...), etc. page 38.
.

And the elder Fathers deliver certain Maxims touching prayer, which
overthrow Saint invocation. Tertullian says Tertul. de orat c. 12.
; Such prayers are to be vpbraided with vanity, which are made without any
authority of the Lords or Apostles Commandment, and must rather be accounted
superstition then religion. And Cyprian Cyprian. de orat Dom.
, To pray in other manner then Christ has taught us, is not only ignorance,
but sin: for it is written; you reject the commandment of God, that you may
establish your Traditions. And he teaches, that the sum and general matter
of all lawful prayer, is contained in the Lords prayer, and every prayer is
unlawful which is not leuelled by that form. But Popish Saint invocation,
has neither document or example from the Lord or his Apostles; is not regulate
by the Lords prayer, was altogether unknown in the old Testament Pigh cont.
Ratisb. l. 13. Horant. loc. Cath. l. 3. c. 21. Suar. 1. in 3. Th. q. 52. d.
41.. 1. Salmeron. 1. Tim. 2. d. 8.
, is not commanded in the Gospel Horant. loc. Cath. l. 3 c. 21.
, nor used in the Apostles days Peers. Aial. detrad. p. 3. de cultu Sanctor.
.

Article. 2. Of S. Hieroms Popery; Hieron. ep. 27 Ipsumque propriu^ Augelum,
qui custos fuit and comes admirabilis foeminae.
every one has an Angel Guardian or keeper.
That every just person, such as Paula was, has a particular Angel guardian,
is no article of Popish faith, but only of probable opinion among Papists
themselves. Caietan says, that many Angels attend one just person Caietan.
com. Math. 18. Sixth. Senens. biblioth. l. 6. an. 77.
. And Molina the Jesuit says; That men are guarded by Gods Angels, is a
matter of Faith, but that every one has his peculiar Angel to guard him, is
not of says, but the common opinion of Saints and Doctors Lud. Molin 1. Tho.
q. 113. disp vnica.
. And some learned Protestants affirm; That every elect person has a
special Angel to be his keeper Zanch. de op. creat. l. 3. c. 15. Cuique
electo ordinary, certum propriumque Angelum, qui perpetuus sit eius custos and
comes, etc.
: and therefore this is no point of difference in our religions. But the
Papists teach diverse things about the custody of good Angels, which our
Adversary will not easily maintain out of S. Hierom: To wit, that when a just
person is in Purgatory, his good Angel repaires thither, and does visit and
comfort him: reporting unto him the Masses and prayers which are offered for
him in the world, and willing him thereupon to rest secure in the hope of his
deliverance Serrar. Jesuit. com. in Tob. c. 12. q. 22.
. And Becanus the Jesuit Becan. de offic Angel c. 10.
, together with many Schoolmen before him Al. Hal. p. 2. q. 41. m. 4. ar. 4.
Th. A q. 2. d. 11. q. 3. ad 5. and par. 1 q. 113. ar. 4 ad 3.
maintain, that Antichrist shall have a good Angel to be his Guardian.

Article 3. Pilgrimage to holy places.
Sundry persons in the Primitive Church traveled to Jerusalem and the holy
Land: Some to visit their friends, and to behold the places and sacred
monuments of the Bible; other to gain better understanding of the Story
Hieron. praefat in Paraleip. Sanctam Scripturam Iucidius intuebitur qui Iudaeam
oculis comtempla. tus sit. Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c 9. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. hom.
66. Paulin. ep. 11. ad Sever. Niceph. hist. l. 5. c. 10. Alexander
proficiscitur Hierosolyma (...).
, or to delight their minds with such things as they had heard and read, or to
confirm their belief: Some also desired to worship in that place where
Christ's feet had walked Hieron. ad Marcel. ep. 17. ad Demetriad. ep. 154.
: and some in those days were superstitious, attributing more sanctity to
that place then to other, Ioh. 4.21. against whom Gregory Nissene indicted his
Oration Greg. Nissen. orat. de ijs qui adeunt Hierosolyma.
.

But what is this for the palliating of the superstition and covetousness of
Popish pilgrimages to the holy Land, but especially to Rome at the year of
Jubilee Extra. com. de poenit. and remiss.
, and to the shrines and Idols of the Virgin Marie Tursellin. Jesuit hist. de
Dom. Lauret. Espenc com. Tit. 1. page 133. Vt mirentur boni viri, illa, de
Papae conscientia, aut etiam alicuius boni viri, posse procedere. Bergom.
supplem. chron lib. 13 anno 1227. bonis temporalibus Pontifici deficientibus,
ipse delatis per vrbem, supplicando, Apostolorum capitibus, populum ad
commiserationem in ipsum permouit. Papir. Masson de episc. vrb. lib. 5. in
Bonifacio 8. Johannes Villauencentius refert, toto illo anno, 200000 millia
praeter ciues Romae vixisse, seque testem facit, auri and diuitiarum, quas
Pontifex illo anno congessit, etc. and lib. 6. in Bonifacio 9. A quinquagesimo
anno, ad tricesimum, Vrbanus sextus Iubilaeum reduxerat, sieve rogatus in
gratiam Romanorum, sieve spe quaestus. Et in Alexandro 6. Iubilaeum publicari
iubet, ingensque hominum numerus, pietatis causa Romam confluxit, AMPLASQVE
OPES attulit.
and other Saints for satisfaction and merit; devised and maintained to enrich
the Popes coffers, and cozening and pilling of the Christian world, and feeding
the Roman Harpies?

Paulus Iouius a Popish Bishop, calls Popes pardons (annexed to these
pilgrimages,) The instruments of the Pope to gather in money Iou illustr. vir.
vita Leo. 10. l. 4 Indulgentias vetera Pontificum ad parandam pecuniam
instrumenta. Vide Theod. Niem. de schism. Pap. lib. 1. cap. 68.
. And Cranzius says Illis sunt auri fodicae.
, They were the Popes gold mines. And sundry Popish Authors complain of the
horrible wickedness and villainies occasioned by these pilgrimages and pardons
Polydor. Virgil. de invent. l. 8 c. 1. Platina in Bonifacio 9. Auentin. annal.
l 7. Maximam fenestram ad nequitiam patesecerunt: plerique ansa hinc accepta
inimicos suos tollebant. Vincent. Hispan. Homines and mulieres peregrinando
frangunt sibi collum, and efficiuntur peiores: quia aliquando vadunt castae,
and redeunt meretrices. Verger. de idol. Lauret. page 64. Lambert. Scaf. hist.
German. Peregrinationem Hierosolomitanam aggressus sum, zelo Dei, vtinam
secundum scientiam.
.

Lastly, although S. Hierom was a fautor of traveling to the holy Land, for
some of the reasons formerly related: yet his doctrine is sound concerning the
matter in substance: for writing to Paulinus, he says; The kingdom of heaven
is alike open to them which are in Britain, and those which are at Jerusalem:
neither think thou that any thing is wanting to thy faith because thou have
not visited Jerusalem Hieron. epist. 13.
.

Article 4. Touching the Adoration of the Cross.
S. Hierom reports not (as our Adversary says T.W. page 24. adoration of
the Cross.
) that Paula adored the Cross Hieron. ep. 27 prostrata ante crucem, etc.
Cernere se oculis fidei, etc.
, but that prostrating her self before the Cross, she beheld Christ with the
eyes of her faith, as he was crucified by the Jews, and adored him. And it is
acknowledged by Bellarmine that Paula adored not the Cross Bellarm. de imag.
l. 2. c. 24.
. And it appears by the Primitive Fathers, that there was no Popish adoration
of the Cross used in their days: for S. Ambrose speaks thus; Helen (the
mother of great Constantine) adored the heavenly King, and not the wooden
Cross, for this were an Heathenish error and vanity of impious people Llamas
sum. eccles. 3. part. ca. 3. Tenemur viuificae crucis vexillum adorare, etc.
adoratione latriae.
.

Ambros. orat. funebr. de obitu Theodofij. Cyril. contra Julian. l. 6. Minutius
Foelix. in Octau. l. 8. Arnobij.
Article 5. Signing the body with the sign of the Cross.
The signing of the body with the sign of the Cross, as it was aunciently
used by the prime Christians to these ends, 1. To profess that they were not
ashamed of Christ crucified, nor of the persecutions and crosses which befell
them for his sake. 2. That they hoped for salvation and redemption by Christ
Jesus crucified, whom the Jews and Gentiles despised, our Divines acknowledge
to be lawful Canon. eccles. of the Church of England. an. 1603. can 30.
Hospinian. de orig. templ. l. 2. c. 20. In primordio Ecclesiae pius and
sanctus, etc. D. Fulk de success. eccl. cont. Stapl. page 443.
. But the Papists not contenting themselves with the lawful use thereof, have
sundry ways abused the same. 1. They make it an instrument of miracles, after
that the gift of miracles was ceased in the Church Legend. aur. in S. Francis:
Allatam sibi aquam signo crucis edito benedixit, and mox in optimum vinum
conuersa est.
. 2. They ascribe unto it a virtue to sanctify men's persons, and the creatures
of God; to expel and repel devils, to deliver from dangers and evils Bellarm.
de imag. l. 2. c. 30. Duran. de rit. eccles. cath l. 2. c. 45. Bos. de sign.
eccles. l. 2. c. 8.
, and to perform some of these effects by force of the very outward deed, or
ex opere operato Bellar ib. existimo, etc. ex opere operato valere signum
crucis contra diabolum. Will. Nubrigens. hist. Angl l. 2. c. 22. de quodam
Ketello, etc. P. Cluniacensis ep. 1. c. 1. Quod dicunt crucem Domini non
adorandam. Durand. Rational. l. 5. c. 2. Dionyl Carthus. de fest exalt. crucis.
Tantam in cruce confidentiam habent fideles, vt eius signatione, se ab
aduersitatibus tueri, and bonis firmari, and a daemonibus protegi credant and
sperent.
.

In regard of these abuses our Church observes not, so common an use of the
sign of the Cross as was in former ages: Nevertheless, we condemn not the
same sign in regard of it self, but use it in the Sacrament of Baptism, and
abstain from the more frequent use of it, because you have so foully abused it
to superstition: and we follow herein the rule of Canon Law, warranted by the
Scripture and Primitive Church Gratian d. 63 c quia. and de consecr. d. ^. c.
si quis. 2. Kin. 18.4. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l. 10. c. 8. Council. Elibert. c. 35.
Council. Carthag. 3. c. 30. Council. Antisiodor. c. 3.
.

Article 6. Kissing and reuerencing of Relikes.
Paula kisseth the Sepulcher and stone of Christ his Resurrection, in token of
her rejoicing for the benefit of her Redemption, whereof she was put in mind by
those Monuments. But why do you charge the Protestants with condemning this?
we only reprove, 1. Such adoration of Relikes, as Saint Hierom himself and
Augustine condemed Hieron ep. 53 ad Ripar. Aug. de mor. eccles. cath l. 1. c.
34.
. 2. The attributing of supernatural effects to Monuments and Relikes, which
they have not by any ordinance of God. 3. To place confidence and merit in
these things without any divine authority; and to cause people to gad and
wander to this or that place, that they may receive benefit by them. 4. We most
of all condemn the impostures and covetousness of the Romanists, who in stead
of true Relikes brought in counfeits Vide Wolph. memorab. to. 2. an. 1525. p.
233. and page 785. Espenc. com. Tit. 1. pa. 129. Baron. an. 1008. n. 1. Glab.
l. 3. c. 6 Dicitur virgae Mosis inuenisse partem, ad cuius rei famam
conuenerunt quique fideles, ex Gallia, Italia, and transmarinis regionibus, etc
Baro. an. 1100. n 10. The lance is found wherewith Christ's side was pierced.
Sigo. de reg. Ital. l. 7. A brazen Serpent made of the same brass which Moses
his Serpent was, at Millan in Saint Ambrose his Church. Bergom supplem. chron.
lib. 10. anno 592. Tunica inconsutilis Domini nostri, etc. ea tempestate
inuenta fuit etc.
, and then for filthy lucre bartered and made Portsale of these Relikes,
abusing herein the ignorance and superstition of fond people.

Article 7. Tormenting of Devils at the Sepulcher of Saints.
When it pleases the Lord to show his power, and to work miracles Hieron.
contra Vigilant. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. 26. and l. 22. c. 8. Chrysostom. ad
pop. Antioch. hom. 66. and 2. Cor. hom. 26. in fine.
in any place, or by any means, as seems good unto himself, we admire his
power, and praise his goodness: and we are not ignorant how God has used dead
bones as an instrument of life. 2. King. 13.21. And concerning these things, a
most reverend Bishop of our Church has written in this manner Iuel reply. art.
1. page 39. Chemnit. exam. Trid. Council. p. 4. de reliq. sanctor. Hospin. de
orig. templ. l. 2 c. 7. Wolph. com. 2. Reg. 13. in fine.
: Almighty God, for the testimony of his doctrine and truth, has oftentimes
wrought great miracles, even by the dead carkases of his Saints, in witness
that they had been his Messengers, and the instruments of his will: but as
they were godly inducements at the first to lead people unto the truth, so
afterward they became snares, to lead the same people into errors.

Article 8. Building of Monasteries, and professing monastical life.
Here the P. P. like a Spider, would weaue the long thread, and loose Cobwebs
of his Abbeys, Priories, and Nunneries, and the infinite swarms of his
religious Orders from the example of Paula and Saint Hierom. But his Monks and
Friars are not of the kindred with the ancient; and setting aside the name
only and some few generalities, they agree in the same manner together as the
Pharisees did with Abraham, whose offspring they boasted themselves to be, Ioh.
8.39.

Saint Hieroms Monks lived in solitary places Hieron. ad Paulin. ep. 13. Si
cupis esse quod diceris Monachus, quid facis in vrb. etc. Azor. inst. mor. p.
1. l. 12. c. 19.
, and got their living with the labor of their hands Hieron. vita Hilarion.
Aug. l. de oper. Monach. c. 28.
. They were lay people and no Priests Hieron. ad Heliodor. ep. 3.
, neither possessed they lands, either in private or common Id. ad Eustoch. ep.
22.
. Some of our Adversaries more ingenuous then their fellows, say; They were
entangled with no vows Polydor. de Invent l. 7 c. 1. Nullom voto^u^ vinculum.
, they used no disguised apparel Antonin. sum. hist p. 3 tit. 23. c. 1.. 2.
Dominico and ordini suo B. virgo Maria, habitum gestandum ostendit and colorem.
, neither did these undertake the satisfaction and expiation of other men's
sins Ib. c. 2. 2. Dominicus ex magna charitate, tres sibi disciplinas, cum
cathena ferrea quotidie sibi dabat vsque ad sanguinis effasionem: vnam pro
peccatoribus in seculo degentibus, etc. secundam pro hijs qui in purgatorio,
etc. tertiam pro suis peccatis, quae ta^ modica and leuia erant vt pro eis
satisfaceret, etc.
, but only embraced a retired life: many of them to the end that being
sequestered from worldly affairs, they might have liberty to serve God more
freely: others that they might be trained up in godliness and good learning,
and fitted to the public service of the Church Ambros. l. 10. ep. 82.
. Nuns and Laics continually read the holy Scripture Aug. epist. 76. Hiero.
ad Rust. ep. 4. and ep. 22. and ep. 27. and ep. 13. Polydor. de Invent. l. 7.
c. 1.
, neither were they so absolutely tied to that state of life, but that if they
could not contain and live chastely, they might go abroad into the world and
marry, (although they were then censured and reproved of inconstancy Epiphan.
l. 2. haer. 41. in fine. Hieron. ep. 8. and ep. 47.
:) and it seems by the words of Athanasius Athanas. ep. ad Dracont. (...).
pa. 739.
and Augustine Aug. de haeres. haer. 41.
, that some of those Monks lived in wedlock.

But come we now to Popish Monks; they lead their lives in Cities and
frequented habitations, enjoying riches and possessions in abundance Gers. de
defect. vir. eccl. n. 61. Abbates and Monachi, sunt plus officiales fisci quam
Christi, totis nisibus militantes mundo, etc.
. They are absolute Lords of Manors, Castles, Parkes, and of all manner of
worldly goods. They are clothed in rich array, and fare deliciouslie every day,
and their whole life is a vacancie from labor and care. Let me be judged a
liar (says Bernard Bern. apol. ad Willel. Abbat.
) if I have not seen an Abbot ride with sixty horse. And the same Bernard
Bern. ep. 42. in fine. ad Henric. Senonens. Archiepiscopum.
; Labor, living secret, and voluntary poverty, are the ensigns of true
Monks: but your eyes behold every thing which is lofty; your feet run to
each common meeting; your tongues are heard in every council, and your hands
despoyle and ravish every patrimony.

There was never such an hypocrisy harbored in the world as this of Popish
monastical life Lamb. Scafnab. Germ. Frater eius Henricus, etc. instinctu
daemonis monast. came vitam professus est.
, for they vow poverty, and yet in wealth and prosperity exceed Kings: vowing
obedience, they neither give unto God the things which are Gods, nor to Caesar
those duties which are Caesar's. They vow chastity, and yet the greater part of
them rot away in filthiness Gers. de def. vir eccles. number. 65. Claustra
monialium facta sunt quasi prostibula meretricum. Iouian. Pontan de bell.
Neopol. etc. Vestalium monasteria ita amatoribus patent, vt instar lupanariorum
sint. Honor. Aug. Dial. de praedest. and lib. arb. in immunditiei sorde
computrescunt.
.

Article 9. Voluntary poverty.
Feigned sanctity is a double iniquity Aug. sup. Psalm. 63.
: and this voluntary poverty so much extolled in Popery, is the foulest
hypocrisy that ever the sun shoane upon. All the wealth upon earth suffices
not the Popish faction, and you may sooner satisfy hell then the Romish
Clergy; and yet they find seduced fautors, who yield a credulous ear to
their problem of voluntary poverty.

Matthew Paris Math. Paris in Henric 3. p. 592.
treating of the begging Friars, who by vow undertook the strictest form of
poverty, says; In England they builded Mansions, whose towers were equal to
Kings Palaces. These are the men which hoard up inualuable treasure in
sumptuous aedifices, and lofty walled buildings, etc. They hang upon rich men
whom they know to abound in wealth, etc.

Aeneas Syluius says Epist. 165. descriptio Viennae.
; The four Orders of Mendicants inhabit there, free from all beggerie.

Papirius Masson Papir. Masson de episc vrb. l. 6. in Clem. 5. Religiosi quam
professi videntur paupertate^, prae cunctis mortalibus exosam habent.
, Poverty which religious Orders seem to profess, is more hateful to them
then to any other Order of men.

The wealth and covetousness of Popes has exceeded all measure. It is
reported of Pope John the 22. that at his death he left behind him twenty five
millions or tuns of gold Paraleipom. Viperg. an. 1328 Pap. Masson. in Ioh. 22.
Johannes Pontif. congestis in numerato decies septies centenis florenorum
aureorum millibu^, etc. Vide P^atin. in Ioh 23 Henric. Token. Canonic.
Magdeburg. Silua loc com.
. Clement the fifth died, seized of an infinite mass of treasure, which he
bequeathed to his kindred Papir. Masion de episc. vrb. l. 6. in Clem. 5.
. And Sixtus Quintus of late years, left behind him in ready coin fifty
hundred thousand pounds Cicarel. vita Sixti 5.
.

Nevertheless, our Romish Emissaries do in the mean time speak largely in
commendation of poverty; affirming, that to give away all one has to
charitable uses, to wit, to Abbeys and Massemongers Bellarm. de Monach l. 2. c.
4^. Possessiones donatae ecclesijs and monasterijs, quid aliud sunt, quam
elecmosynae? Math. Patis. in Richard 1. Hugo Cestrensis episcopus, omnia quae
possid^bat in auto and argento, and gemmis, and vasis pretiosis, domibus
religiosis and pauperibus erogauit.
, is a work of supererogation Tho. Aqu. opusc. q 19 c. 6. Alex Hal. par. 4. q.
30. and 4. 31. Azor. instit. mor. par. 1. l. 13. ca. 1.
.

But although it be a duty pleasing God to depart with all one has, when the
Lord himself, either by express commandment, Math. 19.21. or by his calling
and providence, offering a just occasion, Heb. 10.34. enioyneth us to do it:
yet the presumptuous doing hereof without any such calling is unlawful, and
many times little differs from theeuerie in the giver and receiver. The same
is contrary to the rule of the Scripture, 2. Cor. 8.13.14. It depriues people
of ability to perform those duties, for which they shall eternally be
rewarded, Math. 25.35. and of the blessing spoken of, Act 20.35. and it agrees
with the hypocrisy condemned, Math. 15.5. And in the Primitive Church it was
censured by diverse of the Fathers, as a practice of Heretics Epiphan. haeres.
61. Aug. de haeres. haer. 40. Baron. to. 5. an. 440. n. 8. Ambros. offic. l. 1.
c. 30.
.

And whereas this P.P. endeuoreth to confirm his superstition from the example
of Paula, (as some other of his rank have done before him Al. ^lal. p. 4. q.
^1. m. 2 ar. 1. Re^p.
) I find in S. Hierom, 1. that Paula made provision for her children before
she entered into this liberal course of giving away her goods Hieron. ep. 27.
Nulla sic amauit filios, quibus a^tequa^ proficisceretur cuncta largita est.
. 2. Hierom taxes her for being over profuse in bestowing Ib. Cum in largiendo
esset profusior, arguebam, etc.
, and advises her not to be too lavish, lest exhausting the stock of her
liberality, she disabled her self from doing the good which she most desired.

Article 10. Wearing of haire-cloath, and lying upon the ground in stead of a
bed.
The wearing of haire-cloath, and lying upon the ground, are things indifferent
Pareus com. Genesis 37.34. Hic gestus adiaphorus quidem per se, nec improbatus.
etc.
, frequent in the Old Testament, 2. Sam. 3.31. 2. King. 19.1. Job 16.15. Dan.
9.3. but have not any example in the New.

Epiphanius condemns the open wearing of haire-cloath as indecent, and
disagreeing with the manner of the Catholic Church Epiphan. l. 3. haeres. 80.
(...).
, and there is no necessity of the doing hereof. Howsoever these things being
in their kind indifferent, (when they are lawfully used) are not condemned by
us: only the vile hypocrisy Gers. p. 1. sermon de vita Cler. Saepe mentiuntur
hae vestes, dum aliud monstrant extra, aliud tegunt intra: exterius
sanctitatem, interius vilitatem etc.
and miserable superstition, which after the days of the ancient Fathers
oppressed the Church, has caused the Protestants less to esteem these
exercises, rather maintaining the substantial actions of mortification, Romans
8.13. Joel. 2.13. 1. Pet. 2.11. Tit. 2.12. Luke 9.23. Iere. 4.4. then these
bodily exercises, 1. Tim. 4.8. And surely after that, the Church forgetting the
admonitions of holy Scripture, Math. 6.16. Col. 2.21.23. began to describe
mortification rather by corporal exercises then spiritual actions, there
oppressed the same an vmbragious heap of superstition: and in stead of true
godliness, people doted after prodigious vestures and habits, reposed
confidence in Friars stinking Coules Breuiar. Romans de consecr. cucul. Monach.
orat Deum vt vestem illam ita benedicat and sanctificet, vt sit arma sortia ad
tegendum pect. and tutum munimen contra spiritum aeris, and ignita tela
inimici, etc. Antonin. sum. hist. par. 3. tit. 23. c. 2.. 1. Math. Paris. in
Henric. 3. de Richard. episc. Cestrensi. page 840. Antonin. sum. hist. p. 3.
tit. 24. c. 2. 6. Crebro pius pater (Franciscus) quasi seminudus, a populo
relictus est: eo quod tunicas eius per particulas cum cultellis inciderent
easque deuote contra diuersa pericula, pro salutis remedio reportarent.
. And the brutish Friars, Dominick and Francis, contemning hair cloth as
mean, began to wear shirts of Male next their skin, chains of Iron, and
halters Antonin. ib. c. 2. 1.
; and they whipped and displed themselves like Baals Priests Id. ib. tit. 23.
c. 2 1. Vincent. spec. hist. l. 30. c 112. Surius tom. 5. Octobr. pa. 850. in S
Dominic. loricato.
, and lay naked in the snow Sur. to. 5. in vita Francis. c. 5 pa. 589.
, and wallowed in the dunghill with swine Math. Paris. in Henric. 3. pa. 328.
, and the shameful superstition of these beasts, was (indeed) preferred before
Christ Jesus and his Apostles doctrine Anton. hist. p. 3. tit 23. c. 1.. 1. Per
hunc (Paulum) itur ad Christum, facilius per hunc. Nec mireris etc. quia
doctrina Pauli, sicut and caeterorum Apostolorum, erat doctrina inducens ad
fidem and obseruantiam praeceptorum: doctrina Dominici ad obseruantiam
consiliorum, and ^deo facilius per ipsum itur ad Christum, etc. vid.
.

Article 11. Abstinence from flesh, wine, and dainty meat upon devotion.
The whole substance of Popish fasting Lesseus. de instit. and i^re. l. 4. ca
2.. dub. 2 Substantia ieiunij solum in duobus sita est: in abstinentaia ciborum
vetitorum and abstinentia secundae refectionis. Caietan sum. verb. ieiunium.
Tota vis ieiunij consistit in prorogatione inediae vsque ad horam tardiorem.
Llamas sum. eccles. par. 3. c. 5.. 19. Ieiunium quod a Christianis obseruatur,
cum modo ieiunandi and assignation^ dieru^ est mere iuris canon.
, consists of abstinence from certain kinds of meat, prohibited by the
Roman Church, and in forbearing a second standing meal.

In Popish fasting it is lawful to eat one large meal, and if the same be
excessive, it overthrows not the merit of fasting Less. de just. and iur. l.
4 c. 2. du. 2. excessus cibi no^ tollit ieiunium quo^d meritu^. Tolet. instr.
Sacerd l. 6. ca. 2. Quamuis quis multum excedat, non ob id soluitur iciunium.
. Also, a beauer and drinking at evening is permitted Azor par. 1. instit. mor.
l. 7. c. 8. Tolet. instr. sacerd. l. 6. c. 2. Nauar. manual. ca. 21. n. 27.
Caietan in sum. Llamas sum.
, wherein one may receive food of any kind belonging to the day, if he exceed
not in measure Caietan. sum. verb. ieiunium. Ad hoc videtur serotinum
ientaculum reductum, vt non referat quid quisque sumat, si modum non excedat.
: and between dinner and drinking one may take food in a small quantity
Caietan. ibid. Videntur omnes hij pluries comedere and non frangere ieiunium.
. Wine and strong drink are permitted in Popish fasts, both at meal, and at
any time of the day as often as one will Azor p. 1. instit. mor. l. 7. c. 8.
Omnes communi consensu testantur, id quod in potum sumitur, vinum, etc. non
soluere ieiunium. Llamas sum. par. 3 c. 5.. 24. Potus nunquam frangit ieiunium,
neque mane neque vespere, etiamsi sit vini.
. And there be diverse occasions whereupon people may be excused from fasting:
and among the rest, a great Casuist of Spain Llamas ib.. 21. pa. 389. Caietan.
sum. verb. ieiun Si vir ieiunando non potest debitum vxori reddere, non tenetur
ieiunare: and similiter si vxor non potest se gratam viro seruare, si
macilenta, pallida, etc.
delivers these which follow: If a man have made himself weary in digging
or breaking into a house that he might rob it, or in killing his neighbor, or
in multiplying unchaste actions, or traveling a long way to visit his
Concubine, and by these and the like means finds himself unable to fast,
he is not bound unto the same.

And in sundry cases one may procure another to fast for him Tolet. instr.
sacerd. l. 3. c. 11. Azor. p. 1. mor. l. 7. c. 21. Gratian. did. 28: c.
presbyt. and de poenit. did 3 ca. de poenit.
: neither is it needful in Popish fasting to conioyne with abstinence from
meat, prayers, almsdeeds, or any exercise of religion Azor. p. 1. instit.
mor. l 7. c. 20. Sixth. Senens. bibl l. 6. annot. 106.
; and they which fast, may go to meal at ten, eleven, or twelve a clock in
the forenoone Nauar. ench. c. 21. Iac. de Graph. decis. aur. par. 1. l. 2. c.
37.
.

Bernard describing the manner of fasting, exercised in Monasteries in his
days, says Bern. ep. ad Guil. Abbat. Altisiodor. sum. l. 3. tr. 7. c. 5. q.
5. Cum multi pisces sint aeque delicati, vel magis quam carnes: cur permisit
ecclesia esum piscium, and prohibuit esum carnium? Resp. pro peccato Adae, non
fuit aqua maledicta, and ideo non prohibetur ^sus piscium, quia viunnt in aqua:
sed terra fuit maledicta, etc.
; (at meal) One dish is served in after another, and in place of flesh goodly
fishes are served double upon the board. When one is satiate with one sort,
then succeeds another service, and every mess is so daintily cooked, that
after a man has fed upon four or five dishes, the stomach is provoked by
variety to further appetite. In an Oration uttered at the Synod of Treuirs,
the Author says Tom. 4. Council. Sur. Synod. Treuit. an. 1548 oration D. Pelargi.
: They preach Christ fasting in the wilderness, and themselves live
sumptuously after the rule of the Epicure, dining in his garden, etc.

Lindan a gross Papist, among many other things says; The fasts of
Catholics are (mere gluttony) and Epicure like Lindan. pano. l 3. ca. 10.
and 11. vide page 121.
. A shadow of true fasting is only found in the Catholic Church. Our fastings
swim with wine, and ouerflow with abundance: and by variety of fish exceed
the daintiness of flesh, and seem to be a very mockery with God.

Between these fasts and such as are commended in holy Scripture, and were
practiced by Saint Hierom, by Paula, and other of the ancient, I wonder what
concord our Adversary can espy?

Saint Hierom and Paula commended by him, fasted freely of their own election,
(in regard of time and manner) compelled by no laws of Roman Church Caietan
com. Act. 13 Habes in primitiua ecclesia spontanea ieiunia.
: Their abstinence was from fish, wine, and all dainties, as well as from flesh
Hieron. ep. 27. Vino. and liquamine, and pisci bus, and melle, and reliquis
quae gustui suauia sunt, etc.
; and with bodily abstinence they conjoined prayer, repentance, deeds of
charity, reading holy Scripture, inward mortification Hieron. cont. louinian.
l 2. and sup. Joel. c. 1.
, etc. But our Adversaries teach, That drinking of Wine, taking of Electuaries,
Conserues Siluest. sum. verb. ieiun. n. 20. Potus vini, and electuar a, etc. ex
sensualitate sumpta non fran gunt ieiunium.
, and other delicates, even after a sensual manner, break not their fasting.

Now for the conclusion of this Section, I advise T. W. P. once again to
reuiew S. Hierom, before he presume to make the fasting commended by him, a
sampler of his Romish hypocrisy.

Article 12. Keeping set hours of Prayer; as in the morning, at the third, the
sixth, the ninth, euensong, and midnight.
Our Adversary would hence extract his Popish Canonical hours: but neither
the number, (for Popish hours are seven Azor. p. 1. mor. instit. l. 10. c. 1.
Epiphan. haer. 80. in fine, has but two or three hours: and Hierom 6.
) nor the the time, neither yet the form and matter of the service agree.

Midnight is none of the Roman hours; and the matter of Paula her service,
were prayers, thanksgiuings, and Psalms, taken out of the holy Scripture Hier.
ib. Psalm. terium cantabant, etc.
, used in a known tongue, and joined with understanding and inward devotion.
But our Romists Canonical hours consist (very much) of invocation of Saints
and Angels, of superstitious blessing of Creatures; Hymns and chauntings in
the honor of the Virgin Marie; and the parcels of Scripture used in their
service, are miserably and ineptly perverted to superstition. Also this service
is performed in an unknown tongue, which many times the Priests themselves
understand not Catharin. annot. con. Caieta. cited by Sixtus Senens. l. 6.
bibl. an. 263.
: and according to their doctrine it is not material, whether any person
present understand a word of it or not Iac. Graph. decis. aur. p. 1. l. 2 c.
52. n. 15.
. Neither is inward devotion necessary to the substance of this service, but
only for greater perfection Ib. c. 53. n. 16. qui caret deuotione non peccat.
: nor yet any particular attendance to the words Bellar. de bon. oper. l. 1. c.
18. Tolet. instr sac. l. 2 c. 13. Less. de just. and iur. l. 2. c. 37. d. 2.
, or actual attention to the matter in hand, or to the end in general: but
only an attention virtual, which is, that one going to Mattins or Euensong,
purpose to fulfill the commandment of the Church Azor. p 1. inst mor. l. 10.
c. 10. Naua Man. c. 25 Siluest. sum. v. hora. n 14. Iac. Graph. ib. c. 52. n.
4. and 8. Vide Bellarm. Tolet. Lesseus. Nauar. etc.
; and admit that in rehearsing these Orisons one pronounce the words softly,
that others can scarce hear, or in false orthography, or wherrie them over as
one troales an empty cart; and if the mind wander and be distracted, yea, if
one whisper with another; and salute comers in, or subscribe his name; yet
entertaining no wilful cogitation repugnant to the general end of serving God
Azor. ib. c. 11. Iac Graph. ib. n. 8 and 18. Durand. 4. d. 15. q. 12. n 6.
Paluda. 4 d. 15. Antonio. 3 tit. 13. c. 4. 8. Angel. v. hora. Tabien. v. hora.
Siluest. v. hora. Ioh. Medina, de orat. q. 15. and many later Casuists.
Caietan. opufc. to 2. tr. 4. Clericus obligatus ad horas, si praeter
intentionem euaga tur, excusatur ab intention. Dum cantatur Kyrie (in Missa)
potest licite sacerdos, dicere horas canonicas.
: This external work of babble and lip-labor, is divine worship; and does
impetrate, satisfy and merit for themselves and others.

Also the Papists concerning the time of canonical hours, turn night into
day, and one hour into another: midnight Euensong is said at Sun setting
Azor. ib c 9. Tolet ib. l. 2. c. 13. Nauar. Siluest. etc.
; the Mattins of the next day may be rehearsed over night Tolet. ib. l. 2. c.
13.
. And if a Priest post over all the canonical hours by nine of the clock in
the forenoone, because he would go to pastime, and sport himself the rest of
the day, he commits no mortal sin Iac. Graph. decis. p. 1. l. 2. c. 53.
n. 19.
.

Thus the superstition of Popish canonical hours agrees with the practice of
Hierom and Paula, like the croaking of Frogs in a marrish with David's harp.

Article 13. The difference of little and great sins.
We acknowledge the same difference of greater and lesser sins which this
Father did, and subscribe to his doctrine concerning the same, delivered in his
Epistle to Gelantia Hiero. ep. 14. Cyprian. ep. 52. n. 10. Alia est
Philosophorum and Stoicorum ratio, quia dicunt omnia pec cata paria esse. Aug.
cont. mendac. ad Consent. cap. 15. Orig. in Ezech. hom. 9. Hieron. l. 2. con.
Iouinian. Chrysostom. hom. de praem. sanct. and gehe^na maloru^. Ambros. com. Romans 4.
, where he says; It was the error of the Stoickes to deny the difference of
sins, and to equal a escape or small thing done amiss to a heinous crime. We
believe there is great diversity of sins, because we read the same; and yet
we judge, that it is very safe to beware of small sins as if they were
great, etc. Neither do I know whether we may call any sin small, seeing it
is committed with a certain contempt of God. And he is most prudent who
respects not so much the quantity of the thing commanded, as the dignity of
the commander.

All the Protestants in substance of matter, acknowledge a difference of
venial and mortal sin in persons regenerate, and many of them admit the
terms and form of speech The Luthera^s Pet. Mart. com. Romans 6. D. Field of
the Church, l 3. c 32 We deny not the distinction of venial and mortal sin.
. But in the sense and exposition of this distinction, we differ from the
Papists, 1. by denying that any sins are venial by nature, or by the moral
law Chemnit. loc. com. p. 2. de iustif. Sola doctrina fidei mo^strat discrimen
pec. mortalis and venialis. etc. fons erroris apud scholasticos, quod fine
respectu fidei ex sola lege discrimen inter mortale and veniale pecc.
constituerunt. Aug. enchir. c. 70. de quotidianis, leuibus, breuibusque
peccatis, etc. De Symbolo ad Catechum. l. 1. c. 6. to. 9. Non dico vobis, quia
sine peccato hic viuetis, sed sunt venialia, sine quibus vita ista non est. De
Temp. sermon. 56. Sicut sine minutis pec. nullus vnquam aut fuit, aut esse
poterit, ita sine capitalibus criminibus, lonante and auxiliante Deo,
omnimodis, esse possumus and debemus.
, and that in persons iniust or not regenerate, though there be a difference of
offenses, yet there is not such a difference, as for any of their sins to be
by nature venial.

2. In persons regenerate diverse sins are venial by indulgence, and such as
God in his mercy (revealed in the covenant of grace) imputes not to just
persons, so far, as therefore to esteem them worthy of his eternal wrath,
and unworthy of his grace. Prou. 20 9. Iam. 3.2. Romans 7.17.23.24.

Foul and grievous sins in such persons are mortal. 1. Cor. 6.9.16. Ezech.
18.21. and continue so until they be forsaken, Ezech. 18.21. and are
obliterated by repentance.

Gen 9 21. and 18. 12.15. and 19.8. and 27.19. Exodus 4.10.14. and 32.19. 2.
Chron. 19.2. and 35.22. Job 40.5. Mat. 16.22
But offenses of ignorance, forgetfulness, inconsideration, and whereunto there
is not an advised consent; and such as in regard of their matter, are not
repugnant to the maine offices prescribed by the commandments of God: and
notwithstanding which, the heart principally adhaereth unto God, and which stop
or quench not the graceful operation of Faith, Hope and Charity, toward
their maine object: these are venial by indulgence, and compatible with grace,
as has formerly been said.

Article 14. The unlearned reading the Scriptures, having a learned man for
their master.
The Protestants require the same humility and sobriety in reading the holy
Scriptures, which Saint Hierom and other of the Fathers did Calu. com. in Act.
8. v. 31.
. And our people have learned Pastors and other helps, to instruct them in the
use of this profitable and godly duty Aug. de temp. ser. 56. Ib. ser. 55 Si
Scripturas diuinas aut ipsi non legimus, aut legentes alios non libenter
audimus, ipsa nobis medicamenta conuertuntur in vulnera, etc.
. But the Papists under pretext of sobriety, starve the people, Amos 8.11. and
deprive them of reading the Scripture, unless in such places where they cannot
effect their purpose, as I have formerly proved from their own words.

Article 15. The learned confessing their doubting and ignorance, in the
explication of the Scripture.
As a thief when he would rob the house, puts out the light; so our
Adversaries endeavor to deprive the household of faith of the light of holy
Scripture, Psalm. 119.104. And to this end they amplify the difficulty thereof
Bellar. de verb Dei, l. 3. c. 1. Greg. Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 7. Mulhusinus
de fide.
, and deny the same being translated into any vulgar language to be the rule
of faith Stapl. Rel. c. 5. q. 3. ar. 4. pa. 5; 1.
, and in stead thereof, they bring in Traditions, and old wives fables Gers. de
sign. Ruinae eccles. sig. 8. Fabulae and non sanae doctrinae sunt. etc. quae
non in reuelatione Spiritus sancti, sed secundum traditionem hominum consistunt.
. But we rather believe the Lord himself, and the Primitive Fathers teaching
us, that the holy Scriptures are a light, 2. Pet. 1.19. giving understanding to
the simple, Pro. 1.4. and making the foolish wise to salvation. 2. Tim. 3.15.
And that every thing concerning faith and good life, is found in plain
sentences of the Scripture Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
. And such things are so manifest, that they rather require an hearer then an
expositor Aug. in Ioh. tr. 5.
: and all necessary things are manifest in the Scripture Chrysostom. hom. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
: And although the profoundnesse of Gods word exercises our study, yet it
denies us not understanding Aug. de verb. Apost. ser. 13.
.

And for the better inabling of the faithful, to be conversant in reading holy
Scripture to their edification, God has ordained a public school and visible
ministry in his Church, Ephe. 4.12. which when it performs his duty
aright, is duly to be heard, and people must receive the sense of holy
Scripture from the same, and not from any private spirit. Mal. 2.7. 2. Cor.
5.20. Heb. 13.17.

Article 16. Bishops and Priests singing, and carrying Candles in the day time
at the burial of the dead.
In the prime age of the Church, the Fathers taxed Gentiles for setting up
lights in the day time Tertul. apol. c. 35. etc. 36. Nec lucernis die^
infringimus, etc lucernas meridie vanas proferre.
: and about the 300 year, a Synod prohibited Christians to burn Tapers in the
Cemiterie in the day time Council. Eliber can. 34 35.
. And Vigilantius, a Priest of Barcilo in Spain, accuses the use thereof as
an Heathenish custom.

Neither can it be denied, but the ceremony of using Tapers and Lamps at
burials, was practiced by the Heathen Plin hist. not. l. 16. c 37. Virgil 11.
Aeneid. in funere Pallantis. C. Tacit. hist. l. 3. in funere Germanici. Sueton.
in Calig c. 13.
. Notwithstanding, some of the Fathers after the 300. year, that they might
more easily draw the Gentiles to Christianity, did tolerate Hieron. cont.
Vigil. and Erasmus in schol. apparet hanc consuetudinem eo seculo, magis
toleratam fuisse quam comprobatam.
and admit Greg. Nissen. vita Greg. Thaumaturg. Theod. Euang. ver. l. 8. de
Martyr. Prosp Aq. de promiss. 3. pro. 38. Eusebius. de praepar. Euang. l 43. c. 7.
Phil. Beroald. in aur. Asin. l. 11.
(with an alteration of the end and manner) this, and some other ceremonies of
the Gentiles Greg. m. Registr. l. 10. ep. 71 Duris mentibus omnia abscindere,
impossibi le esse non dubium est, etc. Theodorit. con. Graecos, c. 8. in fine.
in Christian Religion Chem. exam. Trid. Council. de reliq. Sanct. pa. 9.
: Wherein no doubt, their intention was godly, to wit, to use their Christian
liberty in matters adiaphorous, and not morally evil, according to the
Apostles rule, Tit. 1.16. Romans 14.14. and to amoue a present offense and
occasion, which hindered Gentiles from receiving the Christian faith, to wit;
the difference of outward ceremonies and customs Aug. ad Ianuar. ep. 119. c.
19. Gerson. part. 3 de vit. spir. lect. 2.
.

But in succeeding ages, when the Gentiles were converted, and the Church
needed not further to accomodate it self to the weakness of the Heathen, and
that things at first admitted by way of toleration, should rather have now
been removed and worn out: superstious persons contrary to this, make daily
addition and increase, borrowing more and more from the superstition of Jews
and Gentiles, until at length they overwhelmed Christianity with an
intolerable burden of ceremonies, making the easy yoke of Christ's Gospel
heavier then the state of Jews and Gentiles r: and by this means they
obscured Gods truth, and only made people ceremonious, whereas they should
have been pious.

Article 17. Church Service sung and used in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Syrian.
That Service should be used in the Syrian language, seems repugnant to the
Popish Tenet; which is, that there be only three holy languages, wherein God
delights to hear the public prayers and devotions of his Church Bellar. de
verb Dei, l. 2. c. 15.
. But the Apostolical rule and precept, was to pray with understanding, and in
a known language, 1. Cor. 14. And the Primitive Fathers say; Let every one in
their own native speech pray to God, and extol him with praise Origin. cont.
Cells. l. 8.
. And blessed is the people which understands his melody Aug. sup. Psalm. 99.
. And let us understand our singings, and not power out praises without
understanding Ibid.
. And when you pray to God with Psalms and Hymns, let that be cogitated in
your hearts, which is pronounced with your voice Aug ep 109.
. Tongues (says Chrysostom) are unprofitable, so long as they be not
understood Chrysostom. hom. 35 in 1. Cor.
. And Ambrose Ambros. com in 1. Cor. 14.
, What benefit can he reap who is ignorant of the thing he speaks? A
certain lay man living in the darkness of Papistrie, propounded this question
to a learned Priest, whether the prayers which he understood not were
profitable in the same measure, as those which were said by Priests; and he
received answer: That even as a precious stone is of equal value in the hand
of one who knows not the price thereof, as in a skillful Lapidarie his hand:
so Prayers are of equal virtue, being said with no understanding, as with
knowledge Anton. sum. hist. p. 3. tit. 23. c. 9.. 5. Stapl. promptuar. Cath.
part. 1. Dominic. Palma^u^.
. By which similitude it appears, that Papists esteem prayers to be
acceptable to God for the very external work, and that the Lord respects
people for their vain repetitions, and much babble. Math. 6.7.

And thus much for Saint Hierom, about whom our Adversary made an excursion,
thinking to advantage his Popish cause: but setting aside his verbal and
windy declamations, upon which some of his followers will perhaps hungerly
feed, he has gained nothing, but is repelled like the Echo.

Et in era succus
Corporis omnis abit, vox tantum atque ossa supersunt.
Paragr. 2. Cyril of Alexandria, concerning Lay peoples reading of holy
Scripture.
T. W. Cyril affirms, that Christ and his Apostles propounded the heavenly
preaching unto all, calling unto their doctrine men and women of the baser
sort: but he mentions not the Scripture, or women meddling therewith. Our
black White has only invented it to prove himself a true Apostata.

Answ. By the name of heavenly preaching, Cyril understands the doctrine of
the Gospel Cyril. Al. cont. Julian. l. 6.
, which being first preached by lively voice, was afterward by the will of
Christ committed to writing Iren. cont. haeres. l. 3. c 1.
. And this holy Father maintains the general reading of this heavenly
doctrine, contained in the Scripture by all sorts of people, saying:

The Scripture was therefore indicted in a plain and familiar style, that it
may be understood of small and great, exceeding the capacity of none Cyril.
cont. Iul. l 7. pa. 160.
. And speaking of Children, he says; Boys or young Lads trained up in holy
Scriptures, are made most religious Ibid. pa 162.
: And whosoever is conversant in reading holy Scripture, is made better by it,
and becomes profitable to others Ibid.
. And in another place L. 9. in in Leuit.
, Divine reading, daily prayer and the word of doctrine, are the nutriment of
the soul: And, nothing is difficult to them who are conversant in the
Scripture as they ought L. 9. cont. Julian.
. The Scripture is able to make such as are trained up in it, wise, approved,
and of sufficient understanding L. 7. cont. Julian. pa. 150.
. The beauty of verity and the exact knowledge of truth, and all manner of
good instruction, whereby one is made complete, conspicuous and glorious in
virtue and good works, are contained in holy Scripture Ibid. pa. 160.
.

And from these illustrious sentences of Cyrill, with whom consent other
Fathers, it appears, that the Protestants faith concerning general reading
of holy Scripture, and the perfection and perspicuitie thereof in matters
necessary to salvation, is the doctrine of the Catholic Primitive Church,
from which the Papists are departed: and so the reproach of Apostata unworthily
imputed to D. White, meritoriouslie seiseth upon this P.P. and his Compeers,
from whom no borith or Fullers soap can cleanse the foul stain of wilful
Apostasy. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.

CHAP. III.
Paragr. 1. Whether the Church may err? A place of Vincentius Lirinensis
examined.
T. W. P. WE will take into our consideration his corrupt proceeding,
concerning the supposed general erring of the whole Church: not remembering
that in regard of Christ's solicitude, care, and affection to his Spouse, it is
said, Cant. 1. My beloved is a cluster of Cypres unto me in the vineyards of
Engaddi, etc.

Answ. 1. Understanding the name of the Catholic Church properly, Hebr. 12.23.
Gal. 4.26. 1. Cor. 12.12. Ephe. 1.22. and according to the Article of the
Creed, as it is expounded by Saint Augustine Aug enchirid. c. 56. etc. 61. and
sup. Psalm 56. and sup. Psalm. 90. Prosp. ad Psalm. 106. Ecclesia Catholica in
electis suis, praecognitis a Deo, filijs promissionis, membris corporis Christi
etc. Ad Psalm. 126. De tota Ecclesia intelligendum est, quae est Jerusalem in
ommu^ compage Sanctorum, etc.
, Dr. White never supposed any general erring of the whole Church, Ioh. 14.16.
and 16.13.

2. The whole multitude of believers of any one particular age of the Church,
since the Apostles never erred generally in the maine object of faith, or
primitive articles of Religion Aqu. 2.2. q. 2. ar. 5. Fidei obiectum per se,
etc. per accidens and secundario, etc. Aug. contra Julian. l. 1. c. 2 and
enchir. c. 20. Altercat. synag. and eccles. ca. 3. Vinea sanctae ecclesiae,
etc. nunquam tantis spinis inhorruit, quin etiam flores, licet raros haberet,
etc.
. Math. 16.18. and 28.20. Ephe. 4.11. Esa. 59.21.

3. The Church representative Bellar. de eccles. l. 3. c. 14. Ad Episcopos qui
sunt ecclesia repraesentatiue, etc. Eckius enchirid. loc. de ecclesia. Praelati
ecclesiae dicuntur Ecclesia, quia repraesentanteam, etc.
lawfully assembled in a general Council, or a particular national Church
cannot fall into pernicious error about any weighty matter of faith, so long
as making the sacred tables of Gods written word their guide and rule of faith,
they piously observe the lawful and needful means of searching out the
truth. Math. 18.20. 1. Tim. 3.15. Ioh. 7.17.

But our Adversaries take the Church Catholic in a notion of their own
coining; to wit, for the Pope and Prelates of the Roman Church Catech. Trid.
sup. artic. Credo Ecclesiam Cath. Bellar. de eccles. l 3 c. 2. Greg. Val. to.
3. d. 1. q. 1. punct 7.. 22.
: and also they extend the possibility of not erring to all matters of
Religion whatsoever, primarie or inferior Bellar. de ecclesia. l. 3. c. 14.
Bannes 2. 2. q 1. ar. 10. Suar. def. fid. Cath. con. sect. Angl. l. l. 1. c. 4.
Dicendum non posse ecclesiam incidere in haeresim, verumetiam nec posse errare
sieve per ignorantiam, sieve quocunque alio modo, in aliquo dogmate, in quo
tanquam in veritate a Deo reuelata, vniuersa ecclesia, conspirat, docet, and
proponit.
; affirming that their present Pope and Church have infallibility of right
judgment, free from error in all their public doctrine and sentences,
concerning faith and good manners.

And thus the state of the question between the Papists and us, is not,
whether the Catholic Church may err; but first, whether the Pope or Roman
Prelates usurping Cassand. de offic. boni viri. Nam and in euangelio seruus
infidelis, super familiam Dei co^stitutus legitur: and Christus de
Hierosolymitanis queritur, Luc. 12. quod occiderint prophetas, and lapidauerint
eos, qui ad se missi fuerant.
over the visible Church, may err? Secondly, whether the ordinary Pastors of
the Christian Church, in the ages succeeding the Apostles, may at any time
generally err in their public doctrine, about matters belonging to the
secondarie object of faith.

We maintain the affirmative in both these questions, grounding our selves
upon the arguments following.

1. The Jewish Church was called and planted by God himself, and was his
Spouse. Hos. 2.19. his household and flock. Psalm. 95.7. and endowed with great
privileges. Romans 9.4. Isa. 59.21. yet the high Priests and other Pastors of
the Church greeuouslie erred. 2. King. 16.11. 2. Chron. 36.14.16. Esa. 56.10.
Iere. 5.1. Math. 26.59.

2. There be diverse predictions in the New Testament, concerning the apostasy
and falling away of Pastors of the Church from the whole truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
1. Tim. 4.1.

3. The Roman Church is forewarned in particular, to beware of apostasy and
infidelity, which admonition proves the possibility of her fall and error
Stapl. Antid. apostol. To. 11. verse. 22. Bellarm. de iustif. l. 3. c. 12.
. Romans 11.20.

4. Sundry Churches planted by the Apostles, and being at the first glorious
lights, did afterward degenerate and turn into darkness; to wit, the Church
of Antioch, planted and watered by the Apostle Peter; Ephesus by S. John,
Corinth by S. Paul, etc.

5. Experience has made it manifest, that the Roman Church and Popes may
err; to wit, the example of the Council of Constance, which decreed expreslie
against the holy Scripture in the matter of the Eucharist, to be administered to
the people in one kind S^ss. 13. Conc^l. Con^tant. ^^c t Ch^^st^s, post Coe^^m
inst^^e^t, and ^^is diser^^ulis ad ^^mstrauerit, sub vtraque specie, etc tamen
hoc non obstante, etc.
: And the example of Liberius Athana. ep. ad Sol vit agentes. Hieron. catalan
Fortunat Matiu. in Liberio. Council Basil. re^p. Synod. to 4 Surij, pa. 145.
Fueru^^ babiti vt echuiti and publica^, vt leg^tur de Anasta ^o and Liberio.
Sozem hist l. 4. ^4. Alph Ca^ro ^on^ haeres. (...) 4. Antonin (...).
, Honorius, Anastasius (...) ^ncol (...) Hono^^ ^o^ ^st negan^^^m qui^ s^m^^m
P^^^^ex ^e^^ tic^^ ^ile possit.
, etc. which apparently professed haereticall doctrine. Also some learned
Papists confess, that errors and abuses have crept into the Church of Rome
Castand. cons. at. 26. page 304.
.

6. By reason the illumination of all Gods children, (except the first builders
of the faith, Ephe. 2.20.) is in this life inchoate and imperfect, 1. Cor.
13.9.12. Hebr. 5. 2. Romans 7. Galat. 5. Act. 14.15. etc. And many things in
Religion and the holy Scriptures are difficult Hieron to 3. ep. ^d Aug. In
Scripturarum expositione, quaevel obscurissimae sunt.
. 2. Pet. 3.16 It is possible for the Church since the Apostles, being not
guided by Revelation, but only finding out the truth by ordinary means, to
err or be deceived in matters of faith, not primarie and fundamental.

7. In some ages the guides and Pastors of the Church are more negligent and
unskillful Sabellic. Aenead. 9. l 1. in Ioh. 9. Mirum est quanta bonarum artium
obliuio, per id tempus, mortalium animis, obrepserit, vt ne in Pontifi^ibus
quidem caeterisque Principibus quicquam elucesceret quod vitam iunare postet,
etc.
: and by reason of external calamities, arising from heresy, schism, and
persecution of Tyrants, which in those ages disturb and oppress the Christian
state: the helps of knowledge and learning, and means of searching out the
truth, may then be smaller and less sufficient. And as the Sun, although at
no time it lose the whole light, yet at certain seasons it shines less
gloriously: so the fullness of truth is not always equally found in the
Church, but some obscurity of error may take place in it.

8. The Arguments used by our Adversaries, to prove the freedom of the Roman
Church from error, euict not.

Object. 1. The Church is the ground and pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15. But the
ground and pillar of truth cannot err Bellar. de eccles. l. 3. c. 14.
Apostolus vocans Ecclesiam, Columnam veritatis, vult significare vetitatem
fidei, quoad nos, niti ecclesiae authoritate, and verum esse quicquid ecclesia
probat, falsum quicquid illa improbat.
.

Answ. 1. If the Apostles words be understood of the Church particular;
Ephesine, Roman, Corinthian, etc. the^ they prove no more, but yt the Church
by office is appointed by God to be the ground and pillar of truth: and so long
as it adhereth to sacred Scripture and the means of truth, and performs the
office imposed, it actuallie teaches saving truth. But otherwise, as it
follows not; A Judge in the Commonwealth is a pillar of justice, ergo he
cannot be iniust: so it is not a good illation, The Church is the pillar of
truth, ergo, it cannot err.

2. But if the Apostles words be referred to the Universal Catholic Church,
containing the Apostles and sacred Writers: then the Church in regard of those
Columns, is an absolute ground and pillar of all revealed truth; but those
great Columns, Gala. 2.9. being taken away, the future Church is a ground and
pillar of truth, respectively only, and so far as it propounds their
doctrine.

3. If we understand this saying of Saint Paul, concerning the Church general
in any one age since the Apostles, then the same is respectively the ground and
pillar of truth, to wit, of saving truth; and the pillar of truth according to
the imperfection of this life, which admits error in secondarie articles, or
about the object of faith by accident; Et ratione firmissimorum suorum Aug. ep.
48. Aug. sup. Psalm. 93 Sicut stellas in coelo non extinguit nox^sic me^ tes
fidelium, inhaerentes firmamento scripturae Dei, non vincit iniquitas, etc.
Basil. in ep 67. Cecidit vir columna and firmamentu^ ecclesiae.
, the ground and pillar of truth, in respect of the firmest members thereof,
and such of the faithful as adhere to the firmament of the Scriptures.

4. The Roman Church by virtue of this Scripture, can have no greater
immunitie from error then other particular Churches.

Object. 2. Ioh. 14.16. and Ioh. 16.13. Our Savior promises to abide with his
Church for ever, and to lead the same into all truth.

Answ. 1. Our Savior principally, and according to the perfect fulfilling of
this promise, speaks of the Apostles, and first divine Witnesses, for they
alone were by inspiration led into all truth.

2. But secondarily, and by a proportional acco^modation, this promise
belongs to the elect, and firm members of the Church of every age Aeneas
Sylu. de gest. council. Basil. Semper in ecclesia sunt, viri aliqui boni, qui
licet humanae fragilitati subditi sunt, virtutis tamen perfectae, perfecto
funguntur munere, etc.
, Ioh. 17.20. Math. 28.20. and is fulfilled in them according to such a measure
of truth and manner of leading them thereunto, as is necessary to salvation;
and not according to the highest measure or amplitude of the grace of truth:
for then they should neither err, nor yet be ignorant, either singly or
jointly of any truth revealed whatsoever; the contrary whereunto our
Adversaries acknowledge.

3. This promise in respect of particular Churches, to wit, the Ephesine,
Roman, etc. is conditional, Romans 11.21. Ioh. 14.23. and 15.7. 1. Ioh.
2.22.24. and 3.24. And the wickedness of men may hinder the fulfilling thereof
toward them, Ier. 18.9.10. Romans 9.6. even as the wickedness of the Israelites,
and of Judas, deprived them of the benefit of the promises made, Exodus 3.17.
Luke 22.30.

T. W. The Church cannot err in regard of Christ's solicitude, care, and
affection. Cant. 1.14.

Answ. 1. Christ's solicitude and care over the Church, being according to the
necessity thereof in this life, and his own free disposition delivers not
the same from all error; as appears by the Primitive Fathers, whom our
Adversaries confess Bannes in 1. p. Th. q. 1. ar. 8. Can. loc. l. 7. c. 3.
Greg. Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1.. 45. Stapl. Rel. c. 6. q. 4. page 626. Nich.
Carbo introd. l. 4. c. 19. Villauinc. de rat. stud. theol. l. 4. c. 6. obs. 1.
to err in many things, notwithstanding the care which Christ had of them.

The care and solicitude of Christ, delivers his true church and firm members
thereof, from all damnable error, but not from all error; and it frees them so
far as is needful to their salvation, but not simply.

2. Although Christ preserve his true Church, yet the Pope may go to hell
Great. d. 40. c. si Papa. Vincen. Lyrin. co^. proph. nouit, c. 4.
; and the promises of Christ concerning the preservation of the Church, are not
entayled upon Popes, but upon that Church which hears his voice, and seeks
to do his will. Ioh. 7.17.

T. W. That the universal Church may err, M. White labors to prove from
the testimony of Vincentius Lirinensis, saying; Not only some portion of the
Church, but the whole Church it self is blotted with some new contagion.

Here our Doctor abuses his Reader two ways: one in concealing the word
conetur: Vincentius says, What if heresy endeavor to commaculate any part of
the Church? and secondly, in leaving out quid si, what if; and so delivering
the Fathers words in an absolute and categoricall enuntiation, which are spoken
only of a supposall and hypothetically; like as if a man did say; Diverse folk
of Suffolk report, that Master White is extremely given to his belly and to
Epicurisme, upon this supposall, if M. White be extremely given, etc.

Answ. That which is delivered by Vincentius hypotheticallie in the fourth
Chapter, is presently after in the sixth chapter affirmed categoricallie: Quando
Arrianorum vene number, non iam portiunculam quandam, sed paene totum orbem
contaminauerat: adeo vt prope cunctis Lacini sermonis Episcopis, partim vi,
partim frande corruptis, caligo quaedam mentibus offunderetur. Hieron. sup.
Psalm 133. ante 20 annos omnes ecclesias has haeretici possidebant
The poison of the Arrians had now defiled, not a portion, but in a manner the
whole world: so far, as that welnigh all the Latin Bishops being deceived,
partly by violence, and partly by fraud, had a certain blindness cast before
their eyes. And it is to be noted, that the Roman Pope Liberius, was included
in the number of these Latin Bishops Platin. in Liberio. Imperatoris beneficio
motus cum haereticis, in rebus omnibus (vt quidam volunt) sentiens. Pontifex
tametsi cum Arrianis sentiebat. Martin. Polon. chron. an. 353. Imperator,
conuocato concilio cum haereticis Arrianis, etc. Felicem de papatu, quia erat
Catholicus, eiecit: and Liberium reuocauit, quia sibi and Arrianis consenserat.
Marian. Scotus, anno 355. chron. l. 2. aetat. 6. Anastas. Biblioth. in Liberio.
Luithprand. in Liberio. Bergom. supplem. chron. anno 352.
: and so there was not only an endeavor to corrupt the Church, but an actual
corruption thereof in the principal Pastors, of which the Roman Pontifex was
one.

T. W. If a man do say, What if diverse folk of Suffolk report, that Master
White is extremely given to his belly and to Epicurisme? etc.

Answ. Although (as Pliny speaks) there be no lie so shameless but may have
an author; yet I am persuaded that this Architect, Act. 13.10. has forged this
calumny out of his own spirit, and that he may say with the Spider, Ego nulli
debeo, I am beholding to no body for it: and resolve it into test meipso,
like unto him, Ioh. 8.44. Who when he speaks a lie, he speaks it of his
own. Or perhaps this P. P. mistakes himself, thinking Doctor White by reason
he dwelt near the place At Barnham, within two miles of Thetford.
, to have been allied to a certain Romish Priest; to wit; the Prior of
Thetford: of whom Matthew Paris in his Chronicle reports as follows Math.
Paris. in Henric. 3. pa. 727.
: The Prior of Thetford entertained his brother Bernard, a Soldier, and
Guiscard a gun-bellied Priest Guiscardum clericum monstruosum.
into his Priorie, and with them twain night and day he continued eating and
drinking, And when the Soldier was laid up or departed, Guyscard, whose belly
was like a great tankard, and his carkase a waine load Cuius cadau^^ plaustrum
oneraret.
, abode still with him, and swallowed up all the victuals of the Monks into
the gulf and charybdis of his maw In charybdem vteri, omnia monachorum
victualia immersit.
. Hereupon there growing a quarrel between the Prior and his Monks, and they
falling to words; a certain Monk in his fury drew forth his knife, and
sheathed the same in the Priors belly, slaying him in the very Church.

Surely this Prior who suffered martyrdom for his belly, is the gull and
Epicure which the Suffolk people spoke of to this P. P. and he receiving the
report with his harvest ears, has applied the Story to another man. Read
also in the margent Aeneas Sylu. l. 2. de dict. and fact. Alphons. n. 26.
Presbyterum aiunt Montis calui. qui Viennae imminet, cum ad merid^^ v^que
bibislet, d^^m^e v^que ad occ^^^^ Salis ^o^^sse: ^^pr^^tum (...) ecclesian
(...), o^^re altar ^a, sacerdotalia vestimenta sumere, campanaque plebem
citare, vt qui Missam celebrare instituisset. Interrogatus cur tam sero rem
diuinam ageret, versum ad occidentem, quem putabat orientem esse, respondisse
fertur, Imo vero subdubito, an tam mane celebrare liceat, ante exortum solemn
etc.
the Story related by Aeneas Syluius of the Germane Priest, who used dail^ ^o
b^e drunk in the morning, ^^d g^^^g to sl^^pe, when ^e^ waked at Sun^e (...)
that it was Sun rising.

But good Si^ you ^^e in a wrong box, when you se^k for gluttony in a frugall
and painful Student, whose meat and drink was to swallow books: you should
rather have gone to the eatnall Masse-mongers enstiled by Gerson Gers. de
Temper. in cib. and pot. Quanta mala eueniunt ex commessationibus
ecclesiasticorum crebris and superfluis, quis enarret? Torte Iacobi, Vinum
theologorum.
, Presbyteri epulones To. 4. ser. 2. Adu.
, but especially to the good fellows your Archdeacon Clemangis describes,
saying Nich. Clemang. de cor. stat. eccles.
; That Priests live according to the Epicures law, and not after Christ's: they
spend their whole time in Tauerns and Taphouses, bowsing, gulling, dining,
feasting, and gaming Crapulati and inebriati, pugnant, clamant, tumultuantur,
etc. Conrad. Cling. loc. com. l. 3. c. 52. Vbi iam plus abundant aequales
baustus, nisi in domibus Episcoporum and sacerdotum? Vnde Esa. 5. Vae qui
consurgitis mane, ad ebrietatem sectandam, etc.
, and being surfeited and drunk, they fight and shout, and make vprores with
impure lips, blaspheming God and the Saints: and at length are brought to
rest in the arms of their Harlots, from whence they return back to the
Divine altar. Sicque tandem compositi ex meretricum suarum complexibus, ad
diuinum altar veniunt. Synod. Treuir. to. 4. Council. Sur. pa. 824. Student
rebus a literis and religione alienis, venationibus, aucupijs, aleae ventri,
denique and veneri, vt nihil aliud dicam. Papir. Masson de episc. Vrb. l. 6. in
Paulo 3. Quas non nisi furtim antea voluptates sequebatur, Pontifex designatus,
etsi fere 65. aetatis annum impleuerat, vltro complexus est: abdicataque maxima
rerum cura, hilaritati and genio, conuiuijsque and amplis and assiduis, etiam
in villa agitandis, omni deinceps vita indulsit. Haec narramus quod sic gesta
sunt.
.

Paragr. 2. A place of the Rhemists annot. 2 Thessalonians. 2. about the inuisibility
of the Church.
T. W. Master White maintaining a mathematical, aerie, and invisible Church,
strengthens his cause with the supposed confession of the Rhemists Rhem. 2.
These 2. an. 6.
: but if their whole speech be set down, they maintain that the Church shall
be at no time latent and invisible, no not in the greatest persecutions and
times of Antichrist.

Answ. Master White maintains not that the Church shall at any time be wholly
invisible, neither produces he the Rhemists to avouch this, Engelbert. Abb. l.
de ortu and fin. Romans imp. c. 21. Cum corpus ecclesiae factum fuerit acephalum,
and per consequens membra singula, sine motu and sensu, quantum ad vnitatem and
firmitatem fidei, tunc locum and effectum habebit aduentus Antichristi.
but to prove by their confession, that the external government of the Church
may come to decay (for a time) and the outward exercise of Religion be
suspended: and the Church become in part, or respectively invisible.

And this they affirm, saying; for the few days of Antichrists reign, the
external state of the Roman Church, and public intercourse of the faithful
with the same, may cease; and the honor, obedience, and communion of
Christians therewith, be in heart and secret.

And the Reader is to observe, that whereas my Brother delivers three
positions, concerning the manner of the Churches inuisibility maintained by
him; and produces the Rhemists, only to prove one of the three; to wit, the
second; the Popish Priest abuses him, as if he alleged them for the whole.

Paragr. 3. Whether S. Augustine be corrupted, touching the Churches
inuisibilitie.
T.W. M. White alleges Augustine (The Church may be so obscured, Aug. de
bapt. l. 6. c. 4.
that the members thereof shall not know one another) to prove the
inuisibilitie of the Church: whereas this Father does not at all speak thereof
in that place.

Answ. D. White having alleged diverse plain testimonies of this Father, to
prove that the Church may be unknown to the world: this Popish Priest omitteth
all the pregnant places, and fasteneth upon one which is obscurer then the
rest: and yet, even this place, duly considered, proves that for which it was
produced.

Saint Augustine in the place alleged Secundum intimam and supereminentem
Spiritus sancti gratiam.
, speaks of the society of good Christians, which are such indeed, according
to the inward and most eminent grace of the holy Spirit: and he places the
Church, truly and properly called, in them; and says, of wicked persons, that
although they seem to be in the Church, yet they appertain not to the holy
Church C. 3. quos non pertinere ad sanctam ecclesiam Dei quamuis intus esse
videantur.
: And then after other speeches, he adds; that Saints which are conjoined in
charity, may one of them not know another bodily. Now from hence I infer two
assertions.

1. That wicked persons are not any part of the Catholic Church properly taken
Greg. m. mor. in Job. l. 28. c. 6. Intra mensuras ecclesiae sunt omnes electi,
extra has mensuras omnes reprobi, etiamsi intra fidei limits esse videantur.
Bernard. Cantic. sermon. 68.
.

2. That seeing godly people which are true members of the Catholic Church,
may be unknown to their fellows, who are united to them in charity, even
when they converse with them: therefore much more in the time of heresy and
persecution, may they lie like Wheat under chafe, unknown to the world, who
have not the eyes of faith to discern them.

But this Father, in other places Aug ep. 48. Aliquando obscuratur and
obnubilatur multitudine scandalorum: operitur fluctibus. Ep. 80. Sed
obscurabitur and luna non dabit lucem, etc. Ecclesia non apparebit impijs
persecutoribus vltra modum saeuientibus.
treating of the Militant Church, as it consists of good and bad, affirms;
that it may be covered, obscured, obnubilate, and ouerflowed with floods and
clouds, and not appear because of the rage of persecutors: which is as much as
the Protestants maintain D. Fulk against Rhem. Coloss. 1.. 1. The meetings of
Christians were as obscure in times of persecution before Constantine, as they
have been since the tyranny of Antichrist usurped the Church.
touching the inuisibility of the Church.

An Observation, Concerning the visibilitie and inuisibilitie of the Church.
Our Adversary in sundry passages of this Treatise Preface. You are forced to
forge a mathematical and airie Church, consisting of certain imaginary
inuisibilities. Part. 1. c. 3. paragr. 2. and 3. part. 2. untruth 18. the
Protestants imaginary Church consisting of ayry supposals. part. 3. parag. 3.
, hatefully depraueth our doctrine, concerning the visibilitie and inuisibility
of the Church; but in the setting down thereof he obiecteth his own fancy,
and not our Tenet.

To whom I answer: First, that which Saint Augustine Aug. in Psalm. 80,
did to some of like quality, Quid impedit officinam decepti cordis fabricare
phantasma, quale voluerit? What can hinder the forge of a deceived heart, from
fashioning to it self such a fancy as it lusts?

Secondly, the sum of our doctrine touching the inuisibilitie of the Church,
is contained in these three positions, whereunto our learned Adversaries for
the greater part assent.

First, taking the Catholic Church according to the full latitude; to wit, as
it contains the whole society of Saints, both triumphant in heaven, and
militant in earth Aug. enchit. c. 56. Quae tota hic accipienda est, non solum
ex part, quae peregrinatur in terris etc. verum ex illa quae in coelis. Aug.
in Psalm. 56. Nec eadem, quae nunc est in hominibus, qui praesente^ agunt vitam,
sed ad ea^ pertinentibus, qui fuerunt ante nos. Aug. de ciuit. Dei, l 20. c. 9.
Aug. in Psalm. 90. Corpus huius capitis ecclesia est, quae non hoc loco, etc.
nec quae hoc tempore, sed ab ipso Abel, totus populus sanctorum, etc.
: we affirm the same to be invisible, for neither is Christ Jesus the head
thereof visible to us, Act. 1.9. Nor yet the principal and fundamental
members thereof, the Prophets and Apostles: and the form and constitution of
the whole Church, and the connection of the Militant part thereof with the
triumphant, and the bonds thereof, are spiritual and invisible.

Secondly, that portion of the Catholic Church of Christ upon earth Aug.
contra Crescon. c. 21. Gloss. ord. 2. Tim. 2. v. 19.
, which is effectually called and united to Christ, and to the Church
triumphant, in virtue, as well as in profession; and in which the Spirit of
Christ is operative by influence of grace and salvation, Ephe. 5.23. considered
as it is such, is invisible; because the election of God, the operation of the
holy Spirit, and faith, which constitute the same, are spiritual Bannes 2. 2.
q. 1 ar. 10. vnio cum Christo and eius ecclesia, fit per cognitionem
supernaturalem and amore^. p. 83.
, 2. Tim. 2.19. Ioh. 1.47.

Thirdly, in the time of some persecutions raised by Tyrants and Heretics, the
true Church is disgraced, and reputed of the wicked (whose number may be great)
to be a malignant company, and none can know it to be the true Church, but such
as have faith, (which may be very rare, Luke 18.8.) Also the Church by violence
of persecution, may be enforced to fly and hide it self, Apoc. 12. and
exercise Religion in secret.

Touching the visibility of the Church, we believe as follows Iuel. des. pa.
361. the general and outward Church of God is visible. Herbrand. disp. theol.
d. 42. n. 34. Aeneas Sylu. de gest. Basil. Council. pa. 9. Cum in ecclesia
contineantur omnes, qui Christiano censentur nomine, etc.
: First, The Militant Church of any one age since Christ, taken generally as it
contains all Christians, Math. 13.47. is visible, and such as by sense and
common reason is known and distinguished from Jews and Heathens. Thus Pliny
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 30 hist. Tertul. apol c. 2.
an Infidel, in his Epistle to Traian, was able to describe the Christians,
and to distinguish them by their serving of Jesus with certain religious
rites, etc.

2. It is the precept of Christ, and there ought to be always in the world a
godly visible Church, professing entirely true faith and religion, according as
the same was once delivered to the Saints. Math. 5.6. Romans 10.6. 1. Tim.
6.13.14. and in many ages of the world there is such a Church performing the
same in the most points of faith.

Thirdly, in the general Militant Church, there are always found the
substance and essential parts of Christian faith and true religion, and there
be evermore some Pastors and people more or less Alterc. Synag. and eccles.
ca. 3. Emicuit in hac aetate, quasi scintillua quae dam lucis, in sanctis viris
paucissimis: quia vinea sanctae ecclesiae, etc. ab agricola summo plantara,
nunquam tantis spinis inhorruit, quin etiam flores etsi raros haberet, etc.
, who outwardly teach the primitive and necessary Articles of Faith and
Religion. And for the more part, there be also some within the compass of the
general Church, which condemn and reprove the gross errors, that false
Prophets and Hypocrites bring in. Catal. test. ver. Acts and monuments, from
Edw. 3. to Edward 6. Centu. Magdeb. Wolp. memor. Morn. mist. iniq
And all these are in some manner visible: the former by an ordinary standing
in some part of the Church: the latter are many times disgraced, persecuted,
and expelled out of that society, which outwardly carries the reputation of
true religion: but yet they are in some sort visible, either to their friends
or to their enemies. And where they may be suffered, they teach the truth
openly; but when they are persecuted, or lie in prison, they profess and
manifest their religion at their martyrdom, judgment, or otherwise as they
can, etc.

The difference between the Papists and us in this present question is, 1.
concerning the being and existing of the Church, (for the visibility depends
upon the existing.) 2. concerning the manner of the visibility.

1. Touching the being of the Church: they contend that there is in all ages a
true Church, whose chief Pastors (in respect of outward authority) openly
teach true faith, without the mixture of any error.

We say, that there be always in the Church general some Pastors and people,
which believe and profess saving truth, in the capital and fundamental
Articles of Religion; but there be not at all times in the same such as teach
the truth, without errors in all points. And the same Pastors who teach truth
of Religion in substance, may in sundry other points be infected with error, as
appears by the example of Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, etc. Also the best
Pastors may be reproved, disgraced, and persecuted Athanas. trip. hist. l. 4
Chryso. trip. hist. l. 10. c. 13. Eustath. Antiochenus trip. hist. l. 2. c. 24.
Bellar. de cult. sanct. l. 3. c. 6. Templa saepe ab haereticis occupabantur,
cum Catholici in cryptis and desertis versabantur.
; and yet they cease not to be public Pastors, and visible by such a manner
of visibilitie, as is sufficient for the gathering and preserving the elect.

2. Concerning the perpetual visibilitie of the Church, we affirm, that the
means of visibilitie of the true Church, are actions and exercises of
Religion, and outward worship of Christ, according to the rule of his word: and
whenever there be any Pastors in the world, which either in an open view of
the world in general, or in the presence of any part thereof, do exercise
these actions: This is sufficient to make the Church visible Bannes 2. 2. q. 1.
ar. 10. Nostro proposito satis suerit, quod etia^ tempore Achab, licet pauci
essent fideles and ab conditi, tamen ad ecclesiam non censebantur perti^^ere
nisi quatonus lidem suam exterius prositebantur, saltem aliquibus sacrisicijs,
indicijs religiosae mentis, and sic per se visibilis erat and manifestia
ecclesia in illis.
.

But the Papists place the visibilitie of the Church in a visible Monarch and
head the Pope, and in the public profession of Religion, in a subordination to
his regiment. And they make the visibilitie of the Church a royal, pompous,
and glorious visibilitie, such as is the visibilitie of earthly Monarchies and
Kingdoms: and they teach, that hereby the Church may be sensibly known and
differenced, even by natural all men, from other societies Bellarm. de eccles.
l. 3. c. 2. etc. 15. Bos. de sign. l. 3. c. 8. and l. 16. c. 1. and l. 20. c.
6. Coster. ench^rid loc. de eccles. Rhem. Act. 11. annot. 3. Greg. Val. to. 3.
d. 1. q. 1. p. 4. and 7. Hos. cont. Brent. l. 3. page 155. Bosius de Ruin.
gent. l. 6. c. 5. and 6. Tantus splendour ecclesiae reginae, vt omnes prouinciae
and diuites plebis, eius vultum deprecentur, etc.
.

And thus the state of the question in the Controversy of the Churches
visibilitie between us, is, first, Not whether there be always a visible
Christian Church, wherein some Pastors teach saving truth in the capital
Articles of Religion, and by their actions of professing, and teaching the
same, are visible to as many as use the means, and have a desire to know the
truth taught by them; for this we acknowledge: but secondly, whether the true
Church of Christ on earth, in whose communion all people must live that come to
salvation, be an outward visible Monarchy, consisting of the Roman Pope, and
Bishops, and Pastors and people subject to them: exercising the worship of
Christ by glorious ceremonies, and external actions of Religion, and such a
state as a natural man by common reason and sense may know, and thereunto
adioyne himself, being assured that it is the house of the living God, and the
ground and pillar of truth.

Section 2. Wherein is examined an Argument used against us by the Papists,
about the perpetual being and visibility of the Church.
Our Adversaries object this or the like Argument against us.

The true Church of Christ continues always, and being a light of the world
standing upon a Candlestick, it continues always visible: but the
Protestants church began lately in Germany and other parts; therefore the same
is not the true Church.

Answ. First, I declare the Mayor. As the Moon Philo. Carpath in C^ntic. Lunae
con. paratur ecclesia.
abides always, but has degrees of light: so the Church abides always in
one or other degree and measure of truth, but it abides not always in ye same
fulness of truth.

Secondly, I answer the assumption; that the Church began in Germany no
otherwise, then health begins to be in the body, which was oppressed with
sickness, and is made whole. In respect of doctrine essential to salvation,
the Church in the firmest members was the same before Luther D. Car^iton
consens ^e Script (...) pa. 13. Vera doctrina, in iud^mentalibus, ab ecclesiae
exordio ad M. Lutheri tempora, integra sempe^ in medijs tenebris lucebat. Vide
Z^nch. in confess art. 19. page 157. Non ab ecclesia Romans simpliciter, and in
omnibus deficimus, sed in illis duntaxat rebus, in quibus ipsa defecit ab
Apostolica, atque adeo a seipsa, veteri and puta ecclesia. Neque alio
decessimus animo, quam vt si correcta, ad priorem ecclesiae formam redeat, nos
quo que ad illam reuertamur, and communionem in suis caetibus cum illa habeamus.
, and it began to be in Germany only according to a greater measure of truth,
and according to a freedom from corruptions, which formerly oppressed it: It
is the same with all good Christians which lived in the world before it, and
succeeds the sound and firm members of the general visible church, in whom
was the life of true Religion in the substantial matters of faith and
godliness. But having shaken off their errors Cassand. de offic. bon. viri.
Non inficior Rom ecclesiam a prisco suo decore and splendore, non parum
diuersam, multisque morbis and vitijs deformatam, etc. Permulti ijque
illustres, in ea societate sunt, immo regnum and gubernationem obtinent, qui ad
Christi ecclesiam minime pertinent, atque adeo Christi eiusque doctrinae hosts
sunt, and tanquam alieni in ea tyrannidem exercent.
, it differs from them in manner and quality, as a man who was deceived in
sundry things, when he becomes wiser, differs from himself as he was
ignorant. And as a sick body when it is healed, and a Commonwealth after it
has reformed disorders, are in substance the same, but differ in quality and
goodness: so the Protestant Churches have purged sundry corruptions Cassand.
de offic. boni viri. Non diffiteor postremis hijsce temporibus, vna cum
ignorantia, auaritia, and ambitione, superstitiosos nonnullos cultus, and ritus
in ecclesiam irrepsisse. Quis membro vitio vertat, si reliquo corpore
laborante, and sui curam negligente, ipsum sui curam suscipiat?
, and perfected that which was defective, but are the same in kind with all the
good Christians which lived before them: and succeed them of the general
visible church, in whom was the life of faith and religion.

Paragr. 4. Concerning a testimony of Doctor Stapleton, out of his doctrinall
principles, about the marks of the Church.
T.W. To prove that we absolutely embrace the marks of the Church delivered by
the Protestants, etc. he produces D. Stapleton, Stapl. princip. doctrine. l.
1. c. 22
writing: The preaching of the Gospel is the proper and very clear note of
the Catholic Church, so it be done by lawful Ministers. But it is evident by
a latter part of that sentence, purposely omitted by Master White, that D.
Stapleton does allow the preaching of the Gospel by lawful Pastors, so far
only to be a note of the Church, as it is included in the Catholic note of
succession, and no otherwise, etc.

Answ. This accusation is builded upon a false report of D. White his speech
and meaning; his words are: Way to the Ch di ress. 18, page 105.
These men (Divines of Colen, Villa-Vincentius, Hosius, Stapleton, etc.) think
the teaching of the true Faith, is not possibly all the marks of the Church,
but none of them says as the Jesuit does, it is no good mark; They say the
contrary, it is a mark indeed, a chief mark, a proper and very clear note
of the Church, a note engraven, and perpetually cleaving to it, etc.

Here my Brother charge neither D. Stapleton, nor the rest with making the
preaching of the Gospel an absolute and sole mark of the Church Stapl.
Relect. c. 1. q. 4. ar. 5. Non est Scriptura, nota ecclesiae simpliciter, etc.
, but acknowledges that they conioyne succession and other notes to this, and
charge them only with affirming that true doctrine is a note.

And this is the common opinion of our Adversaries, as appears by Cardinal
Hosius, saying Hos. contra Brent. l. 5 Non ergo P^a Soto, vel quisquam
Catholicus negat has esse notas ecclesiae.
: There is no Catholic which denies true doctrine and right administration of
the Sacraments to be notes of the Church.

Objection. Stapleton makes true doctrine a note of the Church so far as it is
included in the Catholic note of succession, etc.

Answ. 1. This opposes not D. White, who only affirms that Stapleton and
others make true doctrine, a note of the Church, not questioning the manner how
they make it so.

Secondly, but whereas the P.P. affirms that true doctrine is no note of the
Church, unless it be joined with personal succession: I answer, 1. That the
Roman Church wants this personal succession Read my observations
following, touching the notes of the Church.
, whereof it glories so confidently.

Secondly, this manner of succession, implying the Popes supremacy, and the
external regiment of the Church, according to the present Popish form, has
no first ordinance and beginning from the Apostles or Primitive Church; and the
true Church in the best ages thereof consisted without it: therefore ^osius de
sig. eccles. l. 3. c. 9. Apparet nihil ab ecclesia nostra ^redi eoru^ quae sunt
aeternae veritatis, neque pro temporum, locorum, atque hominum va^ie ^ate
vati^ri possunt, quod non sit ex ipsis sacris biblijs haustu^, iuxta antiquoru^
patrum declarationes.
the same can be no condition or means, to make true doctrine a note of the
Church.

Paragra. 5. Gregory Valence, touching the marks of the Church.
T. W. In proof of the Protestants marks of the church, to wit, truth of
doctrine, and administration of Sacraments, Master White alleges Valentia,
saying Greg. Val. to. 3 d. 1. q. 1. p. 7.. 18
; Among whomsoever the truth of doctrine and Sacraments are holden, thereby it
is known the Church is there. For the true displaying of this base iugling
Minister, etc. 1. That which Gregory Valence says of the persons of which the
Church consists, Master White applies to the marks by which it is known:
secondly, he translateth, Ex ijs constare veram ecclesiam, of those persons the
Church consists, thereby it is known the Church is there.

Answ. This place is alleged only Way to the Ch.. 32 n. 3. pa. 137.
to prove, that Gregory Valence is of opinion, that where the preaching of
the word, and Sacraments are found, there the Church is known to be, and not
(as you ouer-reach) to prove they are the proper notes to discern the Church:
for he thus speaks; I am sure all Papists will grant, that succession,
universality, etc. are no marks at all, but when they concur with true
Faith: whereas they say expressly, that among whomsoever the truth of Doctrine
and Sacraments are holden, thereby it is known the Church is there.

Now Gregory Valence in terms affirms thus much, saying Greg Val. to. 3 d.
1. q. 1. p 5 n. 25 Fatemur, si successio legitima pastorum and doctorum absque
veritate doctrinae staret, non ex illa satis posse veram ecclesia^ demonstrari.
; We confess, that if lawful succession of Pastors and teachers should hold
without verity of doctrine, that then the Church could not sufficiently be
proved thereby. And in the words produced by my Brother; The true Church cannot
be without verity of doctrine, and with whom these are altogether sound, of
those persons the Church Consists.

From whence arises this Argument against the Popish marks: For as much as
that only is the true church, with whom verity of doctrine and right
administration of the Sacraments is found, and with whomsoever these are sound,
of those the Church consists: no man can be assured of any society, that the
same is the true Church, until he know whether they have true doctrine, and
right administration of Sacraments. And thus, the very Touchstone of the
Church, and all other notes thereof, is true doctrine, which is the thing the
Protestants say.

And as for the translation about which you are so loud, there depends
nothing upon it, and therefore it was sufficient to deliver the sense of the
Jesuits speech. And your hateful language, crying, base iugling Minister,
etc. beseems your conscience and faith, of whom is verified that of our
Savior, Math. 12.34. O generation of Vipers, how can you being evil speak
good things? etc.

Paragr. 6. Bellarmine concerning the marks of the Church.
T. W. Master white alleges Cardinal Bellarmine Bellar. de Ecc. l. 4. c. 3.
, saying: The Catholic notes, (succession, antiquity, etc.) make it not
evidently true that it is the Church, but evidently probable: But Bellarmines
words are, they make it evidently credible. Between these two there is this
difference: if an hundred grave persons affirm such a thing, this testimony
makes the matter evidently credible; but if two or three of one side should
affirm, and as many of the other deny, then it were but evidently probable.

Answ. In your instance the latter speech is so far from being evidently
probable, that it is very doubtful and uncertain: for when the two Harlots,
1. King. 3.23. affirmed before Solomon; the one that the child was hers, and
the other the contrary: if these persons had been more in number, and of each
side worthy of credit, would their contradictions contesting each other, have
been evidently credible of either part? No verily, every wise man would have
suspected, and been perplexed in his thoughts about the same.

Also, the difference between credible and probable, about which you cavil,
is not formal M^^^ ^ialect ^. 2. c^. Probabile (...) duplex, alte^^^ per ^e,
quod ex le me^etur fidem etc.
and constant: probable is the genus of credible, and evidently credible is no
more but a degree of probability.

But to the matter it self. This speech of your Cardinal Bellar. de Eccl.
(...). c 3.
being well considered, overthrows your Popish marks: for notes of the Church
must be proprieties, and infallible signs of the true Church, such as one
beholding, cannot be deceived in the thing whereof they be marks Read the
obser. following of the notes of the Church.
. But that which is evidently credible, to wit, so apparent to sense and common
reason, as may persuade a prudent person to assent unto it, is possible to be
false. For example: It was evidently credible to Isaac, that Esau must be his
heir: to Jobs friends, and to himself, that he should dye a miserable man: to
Jonas and the Mariners, that he should have perished in the Sea: yet were none
of these things true.

Lastly, it is according to the definition of evident Gre. Val to. 3. d. 1. q.
1. p. 4. Potest aliquid esse euidens, quia sensu percipitur, etc. Bellarm. de
iustif. l. 3. c 2. Sixth. Senens. bibl l. 6. an 210.
made by the Papists, evidently credible, that after the words of Consecration,
there remains the matter and substance of the Elements; for all the senses
(whose apprehension in their proper object fails not Aristo. de gen animal. c.
10. and 8. phys. 3. and de generat. and corrupt. c. 3. 3. Cic. Academ. 2.
Sensuum ita clara and certa indicia sunt, etc.
) discern it to be so: yet if we believe the Tridentiue sentence Trid. Council.
sess. 13. c. 2.
, our senses are deceived, and there be only empty forms without their own
native substance in the Sacrament.

An Observation, concerning the notes of the Church in general.
As by our earthly Parents we receive natural life and being, and after our
birth, have Nurses and foster-fathers to educate and bring us up: so we are
first begotten to a spiritual life, and afterward increased and continued in
the same, by the ministry of the Church, Ephe. 4.11.13. Faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10.17. Et fiunt non nascuntur Christiani Tertul. apol. c. 17.
Hieron. ad Letam. ep. 7.
, People are not borne Christians, but made such. And God has placed the
means of the calling and salvation of all men in the Church, as in a rich
depositorie Iren. cont. haer. l. 3. c. 4.
: The Church is the house of the living God, 1. Tim. 3. 15. And the faithful
are his household, Ephe. 2.19. And the Church is the Mother of Abraham's
children. Galat. 4.26. And God adds unto the same such as are saved. Act.
2.47. To life and salvation (says Augustine Aug. de unit. eccles. c. 16. Iren.
l. 3. c 40. Cyprian. ep. 52. n. 16.
) no man comes but he which has Christ his head; and none have Christ their
head but such as be in his body, the Church, Ephe. 5.23.

But to the end we may be brought or come to the Church, the same must
necessarily be known; and the notes and marks of the Church are means to
demonstrate and make it known. Whereupon, both we and our Adversaries Bellar.
de eccles. l 4. c. 1. Controuersia de notis ecclesiae vtilissima est, etc. nec
haeretici negant, and si in hac controuersia conueniremus, reliquae omnes
facile componerentur.
agree in this, that the knowledge of the marks of the Church is a most
profitable part of Christian science.

Section 1. Concerning the notion and general description of the notes of the
Church.
By notes our Adversaries understand, Certain outward signs and properties,
diverse from the essence, whereby the true Church is known and differenced from
all other societies, humane or religious Bellar. de eccles. l. 4. c. 3. Habet
plurimas notas testimonia, and signa quae tam discernunt ab omni falsa
religione, paganorum, Iudaeoru^ baereticorum. Stapl. Rel. c 1. q. 4. a^. 5.
Quemadmodum distinguunt hominem a bruto parunli per externa lineamenta
corporis, and figuram. etc. sic ecclesia ab imperitis fidelibus, and ab
infidelibus per externam faciem, etc. pa. 113.
.

In the marks of the Church they require these conditions: 1. That they be
proper and not common, or such as false Churches may easily pretend to
challenge Bellar. de eccles. l. 4. c. 3. Gre. Val. 50.3. d. 1. q. 2. p. 7.
. Secondly, Evident and better known then the Church it self. And by evident
they understand that which is manifest to sense Greg. Val. ib. q. 1. p. 4.
^uidens censeri solet illud quod ita sufficienter mouet hominis intellectum, vt
in libera hominis potestate non s^ dissentire: estque vel per se notum vt
principia: vel quia ex notis percipitur, vel quia sensu, etc. Suar. def. fid.
Cath. cont. sect. Angl. l. 1. c. 8. Quia sensibus se exhibet, vt euidenter
credibilem, etc.
or common reason, by which any Infidel or unlearned person by his natural
prudence, may infallibly without other means know the Church, and such as by
which all doubt is taken away about the question which is the Church Hos
confess. c. ^0. Notae quibus omnis de ecclesia, penes quos sit dubitatio tolli
potest: vt (...) notis a quibusuis agnosci possit ecclesia: ita sunt propriae
vt eas nequaquam vsurpare possint haeretici. Stapl. Rel. c. 1 q. 4. ar. 5. pa.
114. Notae debent ita conspicuae esse, vt nec ab aduersarijs facile praetexi
queant, nec vllo modo controuersae aut dubiae sunt.
. 3. Inseparable and at all times belonging to the Church Coster. enchir. loc
de ecclesia. page 75.
.

Section 2. Concerning the notes of the Church, the Protestants teach as
follows.
First, the notes of the Church are of two sorts: some essential Whitak. de
eccles. q. 5. c. 1. Beza l de notis eccl. to. 3. opusc.
, which constitute and give being to the church, and prove and demonstrate the
same, as the cause or proper accident shows the effect and subject to which it
appertains. And by these marks believers only, and men skillful know the
Church Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 4. ar. 2. notab. 3. and 4. and ib. ar. 5. Ref 7.
Ecclesia Christi a sapientibus cognoscitur per sanam doctrinam.
.

Secondly, besides the former notes, the Church has external and sensible
actions and accidents Iunius contra Bell. de eccl. c. 16 Quod internu^. rei nota
non est. Bannes 2.2. q. 1. ar. 10. Si praedicationem possumus vbique sensibil
ter agnoscere, poterimus etia^ ecclesiam.
, such as unbelievers may behold, and take knowledge of. 1. Corin. 14.24. And
by the view thereof, as the first means, be brought to a confused knowledge of
the Church, and from thence by further enquitie and labor, come to the
distinct understanding of the same.

Thirdly, in many ages and states thereof, the true Church has visible notes,
which for that time being, are signs thereof: yet the same are separable, and
at other times not found therein. Of this kind was the working of miracles, and
sundry other gifts of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 12. etc. Also the admirable
sanctity, patience, fortitude, and virtues of holy Martyrs and other Saints,
which made manifest even to the Heathens, that the religion of those Christians
was divine. Iustine Martyr Justin apol. 2. Eusebius hist. eccl. l. 4 c. 8.
a Philosopher, was hereby converted to Christ. And Chrysostom Chrysostom. imperf.
Math hom. 49.
speaking hereof, says; In former times good Christians were made known
sundry ways: it was manifested by miraculous signs, who were good Christians
and bad, by the manners of people, etc.

In like manner, universality, succession of Pastors, the name of Catholic,
communion with some Churches, as the Roman, Ephesian, etc. were in the days
of the Fathers notes of truth ^^en. l. 3. c. (...) 4 c. 69. Tertul. l. de (...)
^ont. (...) l 6.
. Eusebius speaking of the state of the Church, about the year 170. says
(...) 72. (...) c 4. (...). ep ad (...). ^^st. ^. 4 c. 21. (...). pa. 41.
; In every one of the successions of the Churches, the faith held even as the
law and the Prophets, and the Lord preached.

But as a purple robe, though in ancient time it was proper to the Emperor,
and the ensign of his Imperial dignity; yet in our days it ceasseth to be
so: even so it happened to many accidental notes of the Church. So that we do
not a little marvel, why our adversaries gleane so many testimonies of Fathers,
and farce their writings with them: Seeing the nature and use of these things
is changed, and that which in the ages of those holy Fathers was a mark of
truth, is in our days the veil of error. The time was, when sheep clothing
was the note of a true Shepherd, and a scarlet robe of just Judge: and thus we
grant, that universality, local succession, and the name of Catholic, were
accidental notes of the Church in the days of the good Fathers, wherein
godliness and truth were arrayed with these vestures: but as it falls out
sometimes, that Thieves and Harlots wear the apparel of true men and honest
Matrones, and some of the Soldiers who crucified Christ ware his unseamed
coat; so the things which have formerly been ensigns of verity, may in
future times become the cloak of iniquity.

Fourthly, the difference between our Adversaries and us in this question, is;
we both admit outward and sensible marks of the Church Iunius. cont. Bell. l.
de eccles. c. 16.
, and the Protestants acknowledge, that the true Church has sensible notes
whereby it may be known and distinguished; and also that at some times common
and separable accidents are so conjoined with that which is essential, as that
they serve for tokens, (as has been declared.)

But whereas they make external accidents, to wit, universality, personal
succession, names and titles, etc. inseparable properties and marks
infallible, we refuse this, and in stead thereof place proprieties and actions,
flowing from the being of the Church.

Also, they require such notes of the Church, as immediately make people know
the same, and lead natural men by sense and common reason to the true Church:
we such as notify the Church immediately by the doctrine.

Saint Augustine against the Manichees, says Aug. de vtil. cred. c 13.
; A man cannot know any thing by signs, unless he understand that whose
signs they be. And indeed if the Church were gold and silver, or a bodily
substance, then as Stapleton says Stapl. Rel c. 1. q. 4. ^r. 5. Refu. 7
; Like as a man besides his reason and inward form, has outward shape and
stature, whereby externally he is differenced from other creatures: so the
Church by external accidents might always be known. But the same being of
another nature, a body mystical, and not natural; like unto a wise man or a
good man, not like a natural man: an object of our knowledge Cyril. Alex. in
Esa. l. 1. c. 2. Sion intelligibilis, supra omne^ creaturam aspectabile^
euolat, etc. Mons intelligibilis, etc.
enabled by faith to understand: hence it follows, that as we cannot know a
wise man or good man, until we do in some measure conceive what goodness and
wisdom are: or supernatural verity, but by the luster of divine truth; so by
carnal tokens and accidents it is impossible to know the true Church, until
we understand the thing which makes the same such, and have effects and tokens
emanant from the very form thereof Stapl. Antid. euang. in Math. ca. 5. verse.
14. Sicut Christus vt pro vero filio Dei agnosceretur, non nisi oculis fidei
videri potuit, sed vt homo in terris conuersatus, ea^ ab impijs Iudaeis, quae a
pijs cernebatur: sic ecclesia vt pro vera sponsa and columna veritatis, ac
matre sidelium agnoscatur, non nisi oculis fidei videtur, sed vt est hominum
collecta congregatio, per totum orbem diffusa, Christi nomen profitentium,
catenus non a credentibus tantum, sed and ab incredulis and impijs cernitur,
etc.
. And the persuasion which is produced by humane motives, is not knowledge of
faith, but opinion: And the means which cause no other assent or persuasion
but this, are far from being infallible marks and demonstratiue characters,
such as our Adversaries would have their notes of the Church.

If they object against this which I have delivered, that even as at the first
planting of the Christian Church, God appointed certain outward testimonies of
truth; to wit, miracles and other visible gifts, etc. whereby ignorant persons
before they came to understand the doctrine might be certain that those
teachers had the truth; even so in future ages, he has for the help of the
unskillful appointed visible testimonies, whereby people may be brought to
know the true Church without penetrating into the doctrine: Our answer is, that
he has appointed no such means, but having once sufficiently confirmed his
divine truth by miracles, and the Apostles teaching Aug. sup. Psalm. 125. Vbi
impletum est quod significabatur, miraculum ablatum est.
, he does only give us that truth contained in the Scripture, and the
external preaching and profession thereof by the ministry of some part of
the Church, to be the outward means of bringing men to faith and salvation.

A brief Recapitulation of the former discourse.
First, something is required to the constitution or being of the true Church;
to wit, the doctrine of faith, obedience, and the invocation of Christ Jesus
according to the truth revealed by the Prophets and Apostles, in the primarie
parts and articles thereof, Ephe. 2.20. And this doctrine which gives being to
the Church, is called a note of the Church by some of our Divines Whitak. de
eccles. q. 5. c. 1. and 3. Bez. de not. eccl. Daneus com. 2. Tim. praefat.
, and by diverse Papists Hos. confess. c. 20. and cont. Brent l. 5. Sunt quidem
haec ecclesiae signa. Coster. enchir. l. de eccles. Notae istae sunt duplices:
vna ab origin sumitur, etc.
, because by the same the true Church is known and differenced by all those
who are able to penetrate into the doctrine.

Secondly, something is required to the manifesting of the Church openly to
others, that they may be added thereunto and saved: for how can any one come
to that which in no sort he knows?

Thirdly, to unbelievers and unskillful persons, the true Church at the first,
is manifested only by a confused oftension: such as does not declare the same
unto them as true, but only as a society professing a form of Christian
Religion, distinct from others, and offering to demonstrate to such as will
hear it, the truth of salvation.

Fourthly, after one is in this sort brought to the church, then upon the use
of means, by the cooperation of divine grace, understanding the truth
professed by the Church, he begins to assent and believe: and before any one
can attain the distinct notion of the Church as true, he must in some degree
or other penetrate into the doctrine and faith thereof.

So the difference between the Papists and us, concerning the general
doctrine of the notes of the Church is: They require sensible marks, whereby
without any penetration into doctrine, or consideration of the principles of
faith, one may know by the view of outward signs, that such a society is the
true Church, even as in the Apostles age any unskillful person might by the
miracles wrought by our Savior and the Apostles, Aug. in Ioh. tr. 35. Lumen
and alia demonstrat and seipsum. Stapl. Rel c. 4. q. 3. ar. 2. Pers. Aialu de
Trad. p. 2. pa. 11. Stapl. prompt. Cath. p. 3. sub hebdom. 4. pass. Omnis lux,
tam seipsam demonstrat quam alia, etc.
know in general that they taught divine truth. But the notes which we
require, are the outward proposing of the doctrine, and exercising of the
Religion it self in such a manner, that the people may take knowledge thereof
and come unto it; and then by evidence of the thing it self be convicted in
conscience that the same is divine; and so believing the same to know, that
they which teach and profess it are the true Church. As a man by a certain
obscure glimmering espieth a light a far off, and so coming to the place
where it is, beholds the light it self and those which bear it, and
distinguishes them from others.

Section 3. Concerning the Popish notes of the Church.
Touching the particular notes of the Church maintained by our Adversaries, I
affirm two things. 1. That the general description of notes made by
themselves, and formerly rehearsed by me, agrees not unto them. 2. They have
not indeed those notes which they challenge, and so eagerly contend for.

Proposition 1. The description of notes made by Papists, agrees not to their
notes.
The Papists describing the notes of the Church in general, teach that they
must be evident, proper, and inseparable: But succession, unity, sanctity, and
universality, as themselves define them are not so; ergo, after their own
description they be no notes. I will prove the Assumption by each of the four
notes which I have named, and which our Adversaries make their chiefest notes.

1. Succession, as it is defined by Papists, can be no note of the true Church.
Succession is two fold: First, Personal; secondly, both of Persons and Faith.
Personal succession alone is common, and the Greek Church is able to derive it
self from the Apostle Andrew Niceph Patriarch. Constantinop. chronolog, cited
by Bellar. de eccle l 4 c. 8. Stapl. princip. doctrine l. 13. c. 6. Vide Horant.
loc. Cath. l. 6. c. 7.
: And notwithstanding personal succession, our Adversaries deny the same to be
a true Church. Also the Scripture teaches, that Wolves and false Prophets may
succeed good Pastors. Act. 20.29. And the Fathers say Greg. Nazian orat. in
laud. Athanas. (...). page 100.
, That as darkness succeeds light, sickness health, a tempest calmness,
and falsehood truth; so false Shepherds may occupy the seats and rooms of
good: And Caiphas in our Saviors time sat in the room of Aaron. Whereupon
Irenaeus and Tertullian, commending the succession when it was good, yet allow
the same no further then it has conjoined with it, The gracious gift of
verity, and wholesome word of divine truth Iren. l. 4. c. 43. and 44. Tertul.
de prascript. c. 32. etc. 37.
. And our Adversaries are now come home to us and acknowledge this Bellar. de
eccles. l 4. c. 8. Greg. Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1 p 7.. 25 Stapl Rel. c. 1. q. 4.
ar. 2. Successio de qua hic agitur, nec locorum tantum est, nec personarum, sed
etiam verae atque sanae doctrinae. Hol cont. Brent. l. 5. page 233. Gre^s. def.
Bellar de verbo Dei, l 4. c. 9. Horant loc. Cathol. li. 6. ca. 7. Non
argumentamur a perpetua successione prouinciarum, sed a doctrina quae habita
est, cum in ijs regionibus ea legitima successio vigeret, etc.
.

Mixed succession, consisting both of faith and doctrine, can be no note of the
true Church, because the principal part of it, namely doctrine, wherein
consists the life of succession, is obscure and doubtful (according to our
adversaries Tenet Bellarm. Stapleton. Greg. Valence.
) and vulgar persons cannot judge of it; also Heretics and false Churches may
challenge it Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q 4. ar. 5. Nota deben^ ita esse conspicuae, vt
nec ab aduersarijs ^acile praetexi queant, nec vllo modo controuersae au^
dubiae.
. And Cardinal Bellarmine perceiving thus much, confesses that the Argument
taken from succession is used by them, not so much to prove the true Church, as
by the defect thereof, to show there is no true Church with them that want it
Bellar. de eccles. l. 4. c. 8. Argumentum a successione, etc. adferri praecipue
ad probandum non esse ecclesiam, vbi non est haec successio: ex quo tamen non
colligitur, ibi necessario esse ecclesiam vbi est successio.
.

2. Unity, according to the Popish description thereof, is no note of the
Church.
Popish Unity stands principally herein, that people embrace the same faith
and manner of worship with the high Priest of Rome Durand. 4. d. 24. q. 5.
Propter hoc stat vnitas ecclesiae, quod omnia membra sunt sub vno capite.
; and submit their conscience and practice to his cathedral determination. But
this kind of unity is deficient in one of the conditions belonging to the
notes of the Church; namely, it is separable: First, it was unknown to the
Apostolical Church. Mat. 20.25 Luke 22.24. Gal. 2.7.9. Act. 8.14.

Secondly, the Primitive Church for the space of the first 300. years
acknowledged it not, as these examples prove. First, Cyprian, Firmilianus, and
all the African Bishops and Churches refuse the determination and the tradition
of the Roman Popes, Cornelius and Stephen Cypr. ep. 41. and 52. and 72. and
74. Firmil. ad Cypr. ep. 75.
, and make them their companions and equals: They style the Pope their
Colleague, their good Brother, their fellow Priest Scripsimus ad Cornelium
collegam nostrum. Te oportet vt bonum fratrem and vnanimem sacerdotem.
, They rebuke him with much bitterness Cur tantum Stephani fratris obstinata
durities. Bellarm. de Pontif. l. 4. c. 7. Vocat eum superbum, imperitum, and
prauae mentis.
: They tax him for obtruding unwritten verities Epist. 74. vnde ista traditio,
etc.
, and for claiming superiority over them Cypr. ep. 72. and ep. 75.
, and making himself the successor of Peter Stephanus per successionem,
cathedram Petri habere se praedicat. Episcopatus sui loco gloriatur and se
successorem Petri gloriatur, etc.
: and they affirm, that every Bishop over his own flock is equal to him
Habet in ecclesiae administratione voluntatis suae liberum arbitrium
vnusquisque praepositus, etc. Lib. de unit. eccles.
.

Secondly, all the Bishops of the East refuse the Popes determination in matter
of ceremony, and challenge as much prerogative from the Apostle John, as the
Roman Bishops did from S. Peter Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 23. Basil. epist. 8. ad
Eusebius.
. Aeneas Syluius Pius 2. epist. ad Martin. Mayer. Ep. 288. pa. 802. Quemadmodum
factum videmus ante Concilium Nicenum, dum sibi quisque viuebat, and paruus
respectus habebatur ad ecclesiam Romanam.
, a famous Papist, who was afterward himself a Pope, affirms; that before
the Nicene Council, small regard was had to the Roman Church. This manner of
unity therefore and subordination to the Pope, is no note of the church,
because it is separable, and was not found in the Church for the first 300.
years.

3. Romish sanctity no note.
Sanctity of the Church according to Bellarmine Bellar. de eccl. l. 4. c. 11.
, stands in the holiness of doctrine, which contains nothing false and
contrary to faith, and nothing unjust and repugnant to good manners; according
to Stapleton and Gr. Vale^ce Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 3. ar. 5. Greg Val. to. 3. d.
1. q 1. p. 7.
; the Church is called holy, because it professes sanctify, and imbraceth an
holy religion, having in it some principal members, just, and free from
mortal sin.

But here want two properties of their notes: 1. Sanctity described in this
manner, is not evident nor easy to be known, and before one can know it, he
must have recourse to the doctrine. 2. It is not proper, either in regard of
claim or possession, Heretics and Schismatickes do challenge the same
Epiphanius and Augustine. in Apostolici.
, and in the outward exercise thereof (whereof unlearned persons are only able
to judge) they have sundry times excelled the Orthodoxe Tertul. l. cont.
Psych. Chrysostom. imperf. Math. hom. 49. Vincent. Lyrin. cont. haer. c. 16. and 23.
and 24. Theod. catalog. haeret in Nouat. Seuerus hist. s. l. 2. of Priscilian.
Prorsus multa in eo, animi and corporis bona cerneres, vigilare multum, famem
and sitim far poterat, habendi minime cupidus, vtendi parcissimus.
.

4. Popish universality no note, etc.
Universality and multitude are not proper to the true Church, but common to
Heretics: Our Adversaries confess, Alchasar. Jesuit sup. Apoc. 20.7. Andrad.
del. fid. l. 2. pa. 185. Arij virus tantopere serpsit, vt Hieronymo authore,
tres tantum aut quatuor Episcopos, integram fidem seruasle fama fuerit.
that the Arrians in number exceeded ye faithful. And Bellarmine says Bellar.
de eccl. l. 4. c. 7.
, that the Church is universal, though but one Province profess the true
faith, if it consent with the former universal Church. And this consent with
the former universal Church, is a thing vneuident Suar. def. fid. Cath. cont.
sect. Angl. l. 1. c 8. In se sunt obscura quae potius credi debent, quam
videti, and ideo inepte adferuntur, vt signa visibilis ecclesiae.
to common persons. The enquiry of it is a matter of skill and learning, and
cannot be performed without examining and comparing the doctrine and religion
of former and present ages of the Church. And thus our Adversaries evident and
visible notes being looked into, prove vneuident and invisible, and must in the
end be resolved into the doctrine it self, as the Touchstone of the same.

Proposition 2. Wherein is declared, that the notes assigned by the Papists,
are not found in the Romish Church.
Amongst all their notes our Adversaries rely most upon succession Horant.
loc. Cath. l. 6. c. 6. De ecclesiae certo signo, and perpetua nota, etc. Stapl.
princ. doct l. 1. c. 22. Sander. de visib. eccles. monarc. l. 8. c. 50
, and if it be made evident that they want that, there is little regard to be
had of the rest, and therefore for breuity I will deal with them about their
note of succession only.

Succession not found in the Roman Church.
Touching Succession in general, the Papists hold, that only legitimate
Succession is a note of the Church Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 4 ar. 2. notab. 5. Non
quaeuis, sed legitima and vera successio est nota ecclesiae. Ib. notab. 1.
Successio de qua hic agitur, nec locorum tantum est, nec personarum, sed etiam
verae atque sanae doctrinae. Horant. loc. Cath. l. 6. c. 7. Non de quauis
episcoporum successione hic tractamus, sed de legitima, etc.
. But the present Roman Church wants legitimate Succession.

First, the Roman Church has not succession of true doctrine, without which
no other succession is legitimate: for the succession of true doctrine,
according to the Fathers, begins in the Apostles, and so continues by a
perpetual descent and propagation through every age, until the present times.
Saint Paul says, the Church is builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Ephe. 2.20. therefore as every building is reduced to the foundation,
so unless our Adversaries will give us a Church builded upon the Sand, they
must in their succession lead us to the Apostles.

Tertullian maintaining a current succession, such as we claim, says Tertul.
de prae^ (...) c. 6.
; We have the Apostles of our Lord the Authors. And again Ibid c 21 etc. ^7.
, We are undoubtedly to hold that which the Churches received from the
Apostles; the Apostles from Christ, and Christ from God. And Augustine Aug. de
vtil. cred. c. 8. Sequere viam Catholicae disciplinae, quae ab ip^o Christo per
Apostolos ad nos vsque manauit, and hinc ad postero^ manatura est.
; Follow thou the way of the Catholic discipline, which has descended from
Christ himself to us by the Apostles: and from hence must descend to
posterity. And if our Adversaries would confirm their faith by such a
succession, which laying the foundation in the Apostles, and then having
testimony in the first 300. years, did afterward pass by the current of
future ages, the controversy of Religion between us were at an end: but they
outfacing us with the empty title of Succession, and misalledging the
testimonies of the worthy Fathers, who in their writings commend no other
succession then that which the Protestants will freely assent unto, do in very
deed derive most of their doctrine from the puddle of their Schoolmen, and
for many of their Articles have no higher ascent then the Trident Council The
number and parts of canonical Scripture The old translation to be
authentical, etc.
: and for the rest, they cannot ascend above the 600. year.

2. Our Adversaries have not legitimate personal succession.
Legitimate personal succession is, that the Successor come into the room of
his Predecessor by a lawful vocation; and where the calling is vicious, there
the succession is rotten Bernard Qui male intrauit and non per Christum, quidni
infideliter agat and contra Christum?
. And though God in mercy preserve some remnants of truth and piety under a
faulty calling: yet succession can challenge no privilege, ratione sui,
simply, and in respect of it self, Ioh. 10.1. etc. And the canons Gratian.
cons. 1 q. 1. c. ordinat. etc per principalem. Quolibet mu ^ere interueniente
salsa dijudicatur ordinatio. Ordinationes quae interueni. ente precio, vel
precibus. vel obseq etc. c^sunt nonnulli. c. pueri ad sacros ordines. Plat.
vit. Nich. 2. Nicholaus Pontifex legem tulit, vt quisquis non canonica
electione in thronum Petri ascendit, is non apostolicus, sed apostaticus
habeatur.
of the Church pronounce all ordinations false, which are made by mediation of
money, favor, entreaty, etc.

Now the holy Scriptures and Primitive Fathers, require three things to a
lawful vocation: First, probation of the person for doctrine and manners, 1.
Tim. 3.10. Act. 6.3. Secondly, free election of worthy persons, without respect
to favor, lucre, etc. 1. Tim. 5.22. Act. 8.20. Thirdly, Ordination, which
stands in the solemn commending the person elect by prayer to God, and
designing him to his function and charge, by imposition of the hands of such as
are authorized by God and the Church hereunto. Act. 6.6. 1. Tim. 5.21. 2. Tim.
1.9.

Our Adversaries neglect the two former, being equally or more needful then
the latter Bellarm. Recog. Potest Presbyter dispensatione apostolica ordinare.
pa. 89. Gloss. de consecr. d. 5. c. manus.
, and stand altogether upon their titularie ordination, censuring the Pastors
of all other Churches as unlawful, because they want imposition of hands from
them Yea, those Protestant Bishops which were by imposition of hands ordained
by themselves, and have ever since successively ordained Bishops and
Priests, (as in the Church of England) cannot obtain their favor, to be
esteemed lawful Pastors: and yet in the mean time they themselves have
transgressed in all the parts of lawful calling, and have not feeling of their
own want. Math. 23.24.

But now to apply these things to my purpose, there can be no lawful
succession where there is a corrupt calling Azor. instit. mor. p. 2. l. 4 c. 5.
citat decretum Iulij 2. editum anno 1505. quo docet vitiolam esse electionem
Pontificis, quae fuerit simoniaca.
, (as appears by that which is said before:) but it is affirmed by our
Adversaries, that many Roman Popes and Prelates have occupied the Papal and
Episcopal Sea by a corrupt calling. And this I declare as follows.

Platina Plat. in Sylu. 3. Sabellic. Aenead 9. l. 2. Mosinoleuerat apostolicae
sedis per vim and dolum occupandae.
in the life of Syluester the third, says; The Papacy was in those days come
to that pass, as that he which by bribery and ambition (not sanctity and
learning) was able to do most, he alone obtained the dignity; good men being
either oppressed or rejected: which custom would to God our times did not
still retain.

Baronius Baron. to. 11. anno 1033. n. 6. and 8. Heu seeds apostolica, orbis
olim gloria, nunc (proh dolor) essiceris officina Simonis, terunt incudem
mallei, nummi sunt tartarci.
produces one Glaber, complaining in this manner; Alas thou Apostolic Sea,
which in the days of old wast the glory of the world, art now (O shame) become
the shop and forge of Simon Magus: and hammers continually are beating on thy
Stithy to make hellish coin. And the very same complaint is made by Pope
Nicholas the second, in Antonine Antonin. sum. hist. p. 2 tit. 16. c. 1. n ^0.
Haec apostolica seeds, etc quot per simoniacae haeresis trapezitas, repetitis
malleis, crebrisque tunsionibus subiacuerit, etc.
, of the times before him.

And all Stories report, one age after another, that Roman Popes above all the
Bishops in the world, entered corruptly into their seats. Some of them like
Julius Caesar, obtained their place by the sword and blading, as Pope Damasus
the first, at whose election 137. persons were murdered in the very Church
Ammian. Marcel. l. 27.. 2. Rufin. hist. l. 2. c. 10. Sozomen. hist. l. 6. c. 23.
. Some came in by sorcerie and compact with the devil, as Syluester the second
Plat. in Sylu. 2. Martin Polonus chron. an 1007. Naucler. genesis 34 Antonin. sum.
hist. p. 2. tit. 16. c. 1.. 18. qui citat Ioh. de columna. Fascic. temp. Factus
est Papa auxilio diaboli, cui homagium fecit etc. Ioh. Stella. Venet. in
Syluestr.
: others by bawderie and pandarisme Plat. in Iulio 1. E Lenonum and parasitorum
numero, quidam in hunc ordinem relati sunt.
: Some by subtlety and playing the Fox Platina. in Bonif. 8. and alij:
Intrauit vt vulpes, etc. Sabellic. Aenead. 9. l. 7. Pontificatum verius furatus
est, quam suffragio adeptus.
: and an innumerable company by bribery, ambition, and unlawful suit; in so
much that Genebrard Genebr. chronol. l. 4. an. 901. page 553. Theoderic. Niem.
de schism. pop. l. 2. ca. 12. Scurrae and histriones episcopi facti. Sabellic.
Aenead. 9. l. 2. Mos moleuerat, apostolicae sedis per vim, and dolum
occupandae. Picus Mirand. ep. ad Leon. de reform. mor. tr. 4. Plerique olim
Pontifices, per summum dedecus ad summum decus peruenerunt.
reports, how by the space of an hundred and fifty years, fifty Popes
together were Apostaticall. And as touching the inferior Clergy, scarce one of
them possessed his place but by corrupt means. As Sigonius Sigon. de reg.
Ital. l. 9.
speaking of Germany, says; There was scarce one who was not a Simoniacke or
Concubinarie.

Argum. 2. Papal succession has oftentimes been interrupted; and therefore
the Roman Church wants personal succession.
I prove the consequent in this manner: Succession per saltum Stapl. Rel. c.
1. q. 4. ar. 2. Solent haeretici ab Ecclesia ad Christum and Apostolos, vt
superiores prouocare, sed per saltum id faciunt. Ib. ar. 2. vera ecclesia habet
pastores and episcopos, sibi inuice^ succedentes.
, or leaping over men's heads, is not lawful succession, as our Adversaries
maintain against us: For when we say that we succeed the Apostles and
Primitive Church, because we have their faith and government: they answer, that
this succession is per saltum Rhem. 1. Tim ^. an. 3.
, and therefore insufficient. And if succession interrupted, and beginning
again were legitimate, then heresy could not overthrow succession but only
for the time present; and as soon as any Church formerly infected with
heresy, began to be orthodoxall in faith, it should recover personal
succession again: but our Adversaries will not admit this Bellar. de eccl. l.
4. c 8. Omnes ecclesiae Patri archales habuerunt per longa tempora, episcopos
manifestos haereticos, ac proinde interrupta est successio. Stapl. Rel. c. 1.
q. 1. ar. 2 Resp ad. 3.
. Lastly, if heresy euert succession, then also Schism does the like; for
according to our Adversaries Greg. Val. Bellarm. Azor. Staplet. Tolet. Bannes,
and a ij. Zabar^l. de schis page 555. Cum praesens schisma sit inueteratum, per
30 annos and vltra, censetur ^aeresis.
, schism and heresy are of like nature.

The Antecedent of the former Argument, is proved by the multitude of Schisms,
which have prevailed more in the Roman Church then in any other. Onuphrius
Onuphr. in ^^^on^e.
reckons up thirty famous schisms, whereof I will only set down two.

The first of these schisms happened in the year 1044. between Benedict the
ninth, Syluester the third, and Gregory the sixth: whereof Otho Frisingensis
Otho. Frising. hist. l 6. ^ 32. and 33. Baron. to. 11 ^n. 104. n. 2.
writes as follows; About the same time a shameful confusion of the Church
happened in the city of Rome: Three Usurpers, whereof one was called Benedict,
occupied that seat at one time: and to increase the heap of misery, they
divided the patriarchall reuennues between them, one of them having his abode
at Saint Peter: the other at Saint Marie the great; the third, which was
Benedict, sitting in the Palace of Lateran. They all led a flagitious and
filthy life Herman. con. in chron. Leo Ostiens. hist. Ca^si^. l. 11. c. ^0.
etc. 82. S^gebe^t chron. an 1045. Benedictus qui Simoniace papatu n inuaserat,
cum esset rudis literarum, alterum ad vices ecclesiastici officij exequendas
secum Papam Syluestrum, consecrari fecit, quod cum multis non placeret, tertius
superinducitur Gregorius, qui solus vices duorum impleret. Naucler. Genesis 35.
, etc.

Our Adversaries reckon Benedict the ninth the lawful Pope Baron. an. 1033. n.
6. Glaber. l 4. c. 5.
, and yet themselves affirm, that he came to his seat by faction and bribery;
and also that he was a Lad of ten years old, and a lewd and vicious beast. And
Baronius says, He committed abominable villainies Baron to. 11. an. 1034. n 3.
: And that at the length he bartered the Papacy to Gregory the sixth for 1500.
pounds Plat. vit. Bened 9 Benno Card. vit. Greg 7. ^igon. de reg. Ital. l. 8.
Naucler. Gen 35. and alij.
: And this Gregory coming in as aforesaid, is acknowledged by our Adversaries
the lawful Pope, and the line of personal succession passes from him; yet
presently after he was deposed for Simony, and Clement the second is placed in
his stead, and then the succession begins again in this Clement Baron. to 11.
an. 1045. and ann. 10 46. and ann. 1047.
: Gregory and Benedict are still alive, and at the deceasse of Clement,
Benedict occupies the papal seat again, and sits therein eight months Leo
Ostiens. chron. Cassin. l. 2 c. 82.
.

The second great schism, began about the year 1378. and it continued
according to Onuphrius and Genebrard fifty years Genebrard. chron. an. 1378.
Onuph. chron. Rom Pontif.
, and as others say forty Council. Later. sess. 6. or. Simon. Beg. episc. Modru^
per 40 ferme annos. P Emil. de gest. Franc. l. 9. Schisma Pontificu^, to tu^
prope terratu^ orbe^ concussit. Antonin. hist. p. 3. tit. 22 c. 2. Palmer.
chron. Platin. and alij. Stapl. princ. doct l. 13. c. 15. Theoderic. Niem. de
schism. pap. l. 3. c. 20. ad extipationem lugubris d^uturnique schismatis, quod
christianu^ populum diris and horre^dis calamitatibus, tanto tempore
lachrimabiliter afflixit. Bergo. supplem chron. l. 14. an. 1378.
. In the beginning of this schism, there were two Popes, the one of Italy,
the other French. Urban the sixth was the Italian Pope, and there succeeded him
Boniface the ninth, Innocent the seventh, and Gregory the twelfth. The French
Pope was Clement the sixth, who sat at Auennion in France, and he had all
France, Spain, and other great Countries following him. After his death
succeeded Benedict the thirteenth, but at length certain Cardinals in a
Council at Pisa, depose both the Italian Pope Gregory the twelfth, and the
French Benedict the thirteenth, and create Alexander the fifth Pope.
Nevertheless, the two other Popes hold their places still, and thus there are
at one time three Popes, Gregory the twelfth, Benedict the thirteenth,
Alexander the fifth. And when Alexander died, John 23. succeeded him. And all
this while our Adversaries confess Bellar. de Pont. l 4 c 14. Nec poterat
facile dijudicari, quis eorum verus and legitimus Pontifex esset, cum non
deessent singulis doctissimi patroni. Anton. sum. hist. p. 3. tit. 22. c. 2.
Emil de gest. Franc l. 9. cum vtraque causa haberer quod sequeretur, praeclara
ingenia sanctosque viros miraculo insignes, iudicio inter se dissentientes
alios ab Vrbano, alios a Clemente stetisse. Gers. de sign. ruin. eccles. fig.
1. Ad tantam ambiguitate^ ecclesia deuenit, quod ignorant ad quam partem vera
seeds Romans erat, nisi Deus forsan alicui reuelasset. Azor. inst. mor. p. 2. l.
5. c. 14. Dubij and incerti Pontifices erant. Gr. Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 7.
38.
, that it was an hard matter (indeed impossible) to know which of all these was
the lawful Pope. But at length in the Council of Constance all the three
Popes are deposed, and Martin the fifth is created anew, being immediate
Successor to no precedent Pope.

Paragr. 7. A place of Thomas, concerning the Popes authority in the Edition or
making of a new Creed.
T. W. Master White is not ashamed to affirm, that we take all authority
from the Scripture, and give it to the Church: and finally, the Churches
authority to the Pope.

Answ. It can be no shame for D. White to charge you with your own Tenet: but
it is cowardice and double dealing in you to dissemble the same.

The three imputations objected are justly laid to your charge.

First, you take all authority (quoad nos) from the Scripture Stapl. promptuar.
Cath. par. 3. feria. 5. caput ^einnij, page 10. Praedicatio verbi, non est
organum aut instrumentum sidei.
, teaching that it is not the ground or pillar of truth ^ocl. repl. co^t.
^ulling c. 2. C^n loc l. 2. c. 8. Ca^i. catec. c. 3.. 13. Bellarm. de Council.
l. 2. c. 12. Stapl. doct. princip. l. 9. c. 1. and 2. and Rel. c. 4. q. 2. page
471. Non Scripturam Apostolus sed Ecclesiam vocauit Columnam and firmamentum
fidei, etc.
, nor properly and of it self any cause or means of belief or charity
Stapl. ib. q. 1. ar. 1. Non est per se, and proprie medium ad credendum. -- Non
est obiectum fidei formale, aut aliqua pars eius. Id promp. cath. p. 3. feria
3. post caput leiunij, pa 10. Bos. de sig l. 16. c. 10. Sieve fidem spectes,
sieve charitate^, non ad libros sed ad ecclesia^ confugiendum.
, and God does not immediately speak by it Stapl. rel. c. 4. q. 1. ar. 3. p
445. and ib. q 5. ad. 6.
, neither is the holy Ghost joined with the writing of the Scripture Stapl.
def. Ecc. auth. l. 1. c. 11. n. 5.
; the Church is not subject to the Scripture Stapl. rel. c. 4. q. 1. ar. 1. pa.
431.
: and put case any person living out of the communion of the Roman Church, do
read or study the same, it is not the word of God to them, or of greater
authority then Aesops fables Hermannus defended by Hosius co^t Bre^t l. 3. Quae
pie dicta esse scis.
.

Secondly, the Papists give all authority to the present Roman Church Bellar.
de Sacram. l. 2. c. 25. Omnium dogmatum firmitas pendet ab author. praesentis
ecclesiae. Stapl. Rel. c. 5. q. 1. ar. 2. ad. 1. and 4. and q. 2. ar. 4. page
513. Grets def. Bella^ de verbo Dei, tr. de agnosc. Script. Canon.
: they make the same the only external ground and pillar of truth Stapl. Rel.
c. 4. q. 2. ad. 5.
, the sole Judge of Controversies Grets. def. Bellar. de verbo Dei l. 3. c. 16.
, the principle or first ground and foundation, from whence the Scripture in
regard of men, receives all authority Pigh. contra Ratisb. l. 3. A qua
vniuersa nobis pendet Scripturarum authoritas. Bosius de fig. l. 16 c. 10.
Scimus articulos esse veluti principia quaedam, quibus prae cunctis fides
habenda. At SCRIPTVRA NON REFERTVR INTER EIVSMODI PRINCIPIA, sed per Ecclesiam
quasi per principium quoddam probatur.
.

Thirdly, they give the Churches authority to the Pope, and no Papist in these
days can or will deny this; for besides the positive speeches of their
greatest Doctors Greg. Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 1. page 30. Ecclesiae nomine
intelligimus eius caput Romans Pontificem. Bannes. 2.2. q. 1. ar. 10.
Animaduertendum est cum Caietano, etc. quod apud D. Thomam pro eodem omnino
reputatur authoritas Ecclesiae vniuersalis, and authoritas Concilij, and
authoritas summi Pontificis. Grets. def. Bellar. de verb. Dei, l. 3. c. 10.
page 1450. Canus loc. l. 6. c. 8. in principio.
, the same assertion follows upon the maine principles of their doctrine;
which are, That the Pope is the prime subject of Ecclesiastical authority, and
that the whole authority of all the body and the members thereof, is derived
by, and from him Gr. Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 7. Bellar. de eccles. l. 3. c.
5. Est summum caput quoad influxum exteriorem doctrinae fidei and
sacramentorum. Gratian. d. 19. c. Ita Dominus. Azor. instit. mor p. 2 l. 5. c.
15. DEFINITIO FIDEI RESOLVITVR IN AVTHORITATEM PAPAE.
; and the promise of the perpetual assistance of the holy Ghost, infallible
judgment, supreme authority, and other privileges are intailed upon his
tribunal Bellar. de Pontif. l. 4. c. 3. and Recog. de Pontif. pa. 19.
.

T. W. Master Whites words are; Thomas says Tho. Aq 2. 2. q. 1 ar. 10.
, The making of a new Creed belongs to the Pope, as all other things do
which concern the whole Church. But Thomas Aquinas his words are: Noua editio
Symboli, etc. A new edition of a Creed; He means by way of unfolding,
explication, and explicit declaring of the Faith, already revealed in
Scripture or Tradition. This diabolical deprauation, and uncharitable
impudence of our Minister, etc.

Answ. In this objection two things are to be considered: First, the form of
speech; Thomas says, The making of a new Creed: whereas his words are, The
edition of a new Creed. Secondly, the matter it self, how far our
Adversaries extend the Popes authority, in making or putting forth a new Creed.

Touching the first, the same form of speech which D. White uses in relating
Thomas his doctrine about this present Controversy, is frequent in learned
Papists themselves. Viguerius Viguer. instit. Theol. de virtut fi l. c. 10.
ver. 13.
abridging this very place of Thomas, says; Potestas condendi Symbolum, etc.
The authority of making a Creed, belongs to the high Bishop of Rome. And
Gabriel Biel Gabr. 3. d. 25. q. vnic. dub. 3.
; Ex his patet, quod Ecclesia vel Papa, ordinando aut faciendo nouum Symbolum,
etc. That the Church or Pope by ordaining or making a new Creed, etc. And the
same is found in Gerson Gers. de potest. eccles. lect 11. Hic solus Symbolum
condere. Refert ex alijs.
, Bannes Banues 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 10. p. 44. (pro e^dem accipit) edere symbolum
and ordinare. Arboreus Theosoph. l 5. c. 10.
, etc. And therefore our Adversary has small reason to fly upon the Dr. with
his lewd terms of diabolical, etc.

Secondly, as touching the matter it self; some learned Papists have expressly
maintained, that the Pope may create a new Article of faith Ioh. Arbor.
theosoph. l. 5. c. 10. Abbas dicit, Papam posse neuum fidei articulum condere.
: and although our modern Papists verbally profess Stapl. Relect. c. 5 q. 1.
ar. 2. Caietan. 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 10. Bannes, Pesantius, Gr. Valenc. and alij,
ib. Azor. instit. mor. p. 2. l. 5. c 4.
, that the Pope has no further authority of making a Creed, but only by way
of explication, yet their practice is contrary.

First, the Pope Pius 4 bull. iuram. de profess. fidei, Iniunctum nobis. Azor.
instit. mor. p. 2. l. 7. c. 2. Onuphr. vita Pij 4. This Creed is rehearsed in
the Preface of Bishop Iuels works, Edition last.
, de facto, has framed a new Creed, containing a number of Articles, whereof
none are found in the holy Scripture, or were formerly contained in the ancient
Creeds.

Secondly, our Adversaries yield their Pope authority to derive matters of
Faith out of Scripture Bosius de sig. l. 3 c. 4. Nihil reuera credi ab ecclesia
quod non sit implicit saltem in Scripturis sacris: quae iubent vt traditiones
etiam teneamus.
and ancient Creeds, without arguments or premises taken from the same, by a
like art, as if an Alchymist should pretend to extract Gold out of a
pibble-stone, wherein is no Gold.

For example, whatsoever the Catholic Church, that is, the Pope and Council
definitiuely affirm, is true; but the Pope and Prelates in the second Synod of
Nice Council. Nice. 2 God created man after his own image, etc. as we have
heard, so we have seen. From these texts, and other as fit, THE NICENE DADS, by
way of explication, derive the veneratio^ of images.
, and of Constance Cone. Constable. sess. 13 can. 4. Although Jesus Christ at his
last Supper did ordain and minister to his disciples this venenerable
Sacrament under both kinds, etc. and although in the Primitive Church, yet we
decree, that it shall be received by Lay people in one kind only. Sur. to. 3.
Council. Iouer. epit. Council Licet in primitiua ecclesia.
, etc. definitiuely decreed: that ye worship of Images and the Lords Supper in
one kind, were the faith of the Scripture and the Primitive Church. The Church
therefore in decreeing these Articles, and pronouncing Anathema to such as
should refuse them, did make no new Articles or Creed, but only by way of
explication and extraction, derived the same from Scripture and Antiquity;
like as if one should form darkness out of light.

Thirdly, our learned Adversaries teach Arbor. Theosoph l. 5. c. 11. Per verbum
Dei non solum debemus intelligere quod in Euangelio conscriptum est, sed and id
omne quod postea suggerente Spiritu sancto, ab Apostolis and Patribus
orthodoxis traditum est. Stapl. promptuar. Cath. p. 1 Dom. Pentecost. Christus
in spiritu nos hodie docet, sicut olim Apostolos, etc Lindan Panopl. l. 3. c 2
Stapl. Rel. c. 4. q. 1. ar. 1 ad 4. Spiritus sanctus suggerit docendo Ecclesiam
sensum doctrinae Christi and verborum eius, DOCET AVTEM ET IPSE MVLTO PLVRA.
Nec omnes parts docendi impleuit Christus, sed adhuc docet in Ecclesia
Spiritus sanctus: nec a solo Dei verbo, sed a voce loquentis Ecclesiae pendet
fides. Bos. de sig. l. 16. c. 10. Spiritus in mente Ecclesiae insculpsit
quicquid in codices est relatum, ac multo plura.
, that the holy Ghost reuealeth sundry things more, then those which be
contained in the written or traditionary word, to the Pope and Roman Church. I
entreat this clamorous Popish Priest to give a reason, why the Pope may not
out of those revelations frame and compose a new Creed? And as famous Doctors
Gratian. d. 19. c. in Canonicis. Turrecre. sum. de eccl. p. 2. c. 9. Caietan.
de primat. c. 14. Council. Basil. resp. synodal. de Author. Council. general. pa.
143. and 145. Surius.
among the Papists, as ever their Church had any, have not long since
maintained, that the Popes decretall Epistles are of equal authority with
Canonical Scripture: and what shall hinder but that a new Creed may be
composed of the matter of such decretals, as well as to be extracted from the
Scripture and ancient Creeds?

Paragr. 8. Doctor Stapleton about the Popes authority.
T. W. Master White charge D. Stapleton Stapl praef. ad princip. doctrinal.
with saying; That the foundation of our Religion, is placed upon the authority
of the Popes teaching, etc. But Stapleton has no such saying, etc. And it is
merely forged by our calumnious Minister, thereby to suggest that we make the
Pope the foundation of our faith, which we ascribe to Christ Jesus only, and
that we bear the ignorant in hand, the Pope, to be another God, etc. D.
Stapleton only means, that the Pope is a secondarie foundation in regard of
doctrine, not essential and primitive.

Answ. 1. I find not in the 68. page, whither you refer us, this testimony
of Dr. Stapleton alleged by my Brother. But touching the matter in substance,
both Stapleton and all other Pontificians do at this present make the Pope the
foundation of the Church, expounding our Saviors words, Math. 16. Upon this
Rock, that is, upon the person of Peter, and his Successor the Pope, I will
build my Church Stapl. Rel. c. 3. q. 1. ar 1. concl. 3. Personam Petri
intelligit. Et prompt. Cath. in fest. Petri and Pauli. Iansen. harm. Euang. c.
66. Maldon. com. Math. 16. Victoria Relect. 2. de potest. eccles. sect. 2.
Caietan. Bellarm. Suares, Greg. Val. Bannes, Azor. Gretser. etc. Canus loc. l.
6. c. 8. in principio.
; and whosoever is the foundation of the Church, is the foundation of Religion.
Ecclesiastical authority (the prime subject whereof is the Pope) is the basis
and foundation of all Orthodoxe religion: says Stapleton in his Preface to his
doctrinall principles. And Cardinal Bellarmine Bellar. de Pontif. To. in
praef. Stapl. doctrine. princip. epist. dedic. Petrae and fundamento ecclesiae.
Ibid. epist. dedic Haec authoritas qua omnis fides nititur. Suar. cont. sect.
Angl. l. 1. ca 10. and 11. and l. 3. c. 10.
applies the words of Isai, Chap. 28. Behold I lay in Sion for a foundation,
etc. to the Pope.

Object. Master White endeavors to make the world believe, that D. Stapleton
and his Colleagues make the Pope a Primitive and essential foundation.

Answ. 1. Stapleton calls the Pope Primarium fundamentum Stapl. prompt. Cath.
par. 2. in fest. apost. Petri and Pauli. Primarium and fundame^tale quoddam in
suo genere, quale Christus est in alio genere, etc. Caput and fundam. ecclesiae
ministeriale, mediante Christo and per participationem. pa. 137. Stapl. Rel. c.
3. q 1. ar. 1. pa. 304.
, a primarie or principal foundation: And Bellarmine teaches Bellarm. de
Pontif. Praefat.
: That the whole frame of the visible Church does so lean upon him, that if he
be taken away, the same falls: and he is summum caput Bellar. de ecclesia, l.
3. c. 5. Gratian. d. 19. c. Ita Dominus. Stapl. doctr. princip. l. 6. ca. 1.
, the supreme head of the Militant Church, in regard of influence of the
doctrine of faith and Sacraments.

Bosius says Bos. de sig. l. 16. c. 1. Idem ambobus regnum, etc. faciens
iustitiam, vna cum Christo, etc.
; He has the same kingdom with Christ, and sits for ever in the visible
Church upon the Throne of David. And he is as truly a visible King and Monarch
of the Church, as Christ is invisible.

Secondly, whereas the Papist quarrelleth Doctor White, for charging his sect
with making the Pope another God: we object no more then we find in their own
writings.

Cardinal Iacobasius Dominic. Jacob. de Council. pa. 663. edit. Romans 1538.
Dicitur corporalis in orb Deus.
says, The Pope is esteemed a corporal God in the world. Blondus Blond l. 3.
instaurat. Romae omnes Principes orbis terrarum, Pontificem vt Deum summum
honorant and colunt.
, All the Princes of the earth honor and worship the Pope as a great God.
Steuchus De Donat. Constable. pa. 141.
, Great Constantine yielded him divine honor. Auentine Auentin. annal Bo^or.
l. 7.
, Roman Popes affect domination and divinity, and to be feared more then God.
The gloss of the Canon law Extra Ioh. 22. Cum inter.
, calls the Pope, our Lord God: and Gerson Gerson. post tract. de unit.
eccles. ^ddit 4. n. 4. Cassand de offic boni viri. Pontificem Roma^um quem
Papam dicimus, tantum non Deum faciunt, ci^que authoritatem, non modo super
ecclesiam, sed supra ipsam Scriptura diuina^ esserunt, etc.
; In imitation of Lucifer they will be adored and worshipped as Gods, neither
do they think themselves subject to any, but are as the sons of Belial
which have cast off the yoke, not enduring whatsoever they do, that any
should ask them why they do so.

An Archbishop Lat. Council. sub Leon. 10. sess. 10. orat. Steph. Archiepiscopi.
preaching on a time to the Pope, said; All power is given you both in heaven
and in earth. The Ambassadors of Panormum Paul. Emil. de gest. Franc. l. 7.
^azel. hist. Sicil. l. 8. c. 4.
in Sicilie, kneeling before Pope Martin, Cry unto him three times together,
Thou which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. And a
certain Bishop of the same country, supplicates to Pope Nicholas the third,
in these terms, Miserere mei fili David ^azel. ib. Bartholomaeus, Pactensis
episcop. Siculorum, etc.
. Oh son of David have mercy on me.

And Cardinal Baronius Baron. annal. romans 11.
reports, that Pope Hildebrand being a Carpenters son, and playing when he
was a child in the place where his Father wrought, he did by chance frame of
the chips and parings of wood which fell from his fathers work, the characters
and letters, by which coupled together, was expressed the saying of David,
Psalm. 72. He shall bear rule from Sea to Sea, and from the river unto the ends
of the earth.

I see no cause then why this Popish Priest should take it in snuff, to have
his Doctors charged with making the Pope a demy-God, or primitive foundation A
Eneas Sylu. de gest. Council Basil. l. 1. Panormitanus archiepisc. Papam
eccl^siae Dominu^ assenerauit.
, etc. Or why in his conclusion he should vent uncivil speeches, saying: Thus
the further we dog M. White in his allegations, etc. seeing himself like
Aesops dog ^rend. 2. c. 12. Similes Aesopi cani, qui pane^ quide^ relinquit,
in vmbram aute^ eius impetum fecit.
, catches only at shadows, and in his barking makes no difference between a
true man and a thief, 2. Sam. 16.9.

Paragr. 9. Saint Cyprian, concerning Appeals.
Pontificians labor to credit the Popes supremacy by appeals Linda. Panopl.
l. 4. c. 89. Quo Romani Pontificis prae alijs ecclesiarum episcopis,
principatus eluceat, ex ipsa episcoporu^ omnium ad ipsum appellatione, etc.
Bellar. de Pontif. l. 2. c. 21. Siluest. sum. verb. Apellatio. and alij
summiste v. Apellatio.
, saying; That he as supreme Ecclesiastical Judge over the whole world, had
authority in the Primitive Church, to entertain and call before him the
suites and controversies of all other Churches, and to hear and determine the
same in his consistory as the highest tribunal, from which there lay no
appeal, no not to the general Council Turrecrem. sum. de eccles. l. 3. c.
47. and 48. and 49. Iacobat. de council. l 10. ar 1.
.

The Protestants disprove this assertion and claim Bishop Iuel. challenge, ar.
4. page 197.
by sundry testimonies; among the which one is taken out of Cyprian, which the
Popish Priest quarrelleth in this Section.

T. W. First, Cyprian condemned the Nouatian Heretics, because of the
circumstance and manner of their fact, and not for the thing it self, to wit,
because they sailed to Rome with merchandise of lies, and endeavored to break
the unity of the Church; and because they appealed without just cause, and
after conviction.

Answ. Cyprian Cypr. ep. 55. or l. 1. ep. 3. Vide Gregor m. epist. l. 11. ep.
56. cum nouel. Justinian. 123. Si quis, etc.
both condemns the accidents and manner, and also the very act of appeal in
it self, for thus he writes; It is just that each man's fault be heard and
judged where the same is committed, and where the accusers and witnesses be
present. This speech condemns appeals to foreign places, in what fashion
soever. Then he affirms, That every Bishop within his own jurisdiction, has
a certain portion of the Lords flock, committed unto his proper care and
judgment, whereof he must yield account to God. Hence it follows, that the
Roman Bishop has nothing to do with other men's flocks, and that he cannot
be a Judge of their causes, for whose well or evil doing he is to render no
account. Read another testimony of Cyprian, placed in the margent Cypr. orat.
ad Council. Carthag de haeret. baptis. Neque quisqua^ nostrum episcopum se esse
episcoporum constituit, aut tyra^nico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem,
collegas suos adigit, quando habeat omnis episcopus pro licentia libertatis and
potestatis suae arbitrium proprium, tanquam iudicari ab alio non possit, qua^
nec ipse alteru^ iudicare. Sed expectemus vniuersi iudiciu^ Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, qui solus and vnus habet potestatem, and praeponendi nos in ecclesiae
suae gubernatione, and de actu nostro iudicandi.
.

But this notwithstanding the Popish Priest urges two things out of Cyprian,
material, as he pretends, both to confirm the matter of appeals, and also
the supremacy of the Pope.

T.W. If those Heretics censured by the Bishops of Africa appealed to Rome,
that so they might euade their present punishment, this argues, that appeals
were then in use.

Answ. Preposterous dealing of Heretics, is no Argument to prove a right. For
in the like manner Nestorius Council. Ephesin. 1. edit. Peltan. to. 3. ca. 20.
and Append. 2. ca. 2. and 4. and 11.
at the Ephesine Council, appealed to the Emperor, and to another Council,
yet there was no right for such appeals.

T. W. Cyprian calls Rome the Chair of Peter, and principal Church, from
whence priestly unity arises: And says, the Romans were they unto whom
untruth could have no access.

Answ. First, The Chair of Peter Tertul. de praescript. c. 36. Percurre
ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas, ipsae adhuc cathedrae apostolorum, suis locis
praesidentur, etc.
, had no greater jurisdiction then the other Apostles, as Cyprian himself
affirms Cyprian. de unit. eccles. Zabarel. de schism. page 561. B. Petrus non
sic administrauit, vt occuparet aliorum potestatem; immo tanquam vnus ex
Apostolis accepit partem administrationis.
, saying; The rest of the Apostles were the same with Peter, endued with equal
fellowship of honor and power. Secondly, Rome is called Peter's Chair, because
it was in those days doctrinae salutaris cathedra, the seat of wholesome
faith and doctrine Aug. ep 116. Chrysostom. ^up. Ioh. t^ 85. Cathedra Christi, eius
enim doctrinam acceperunt. Aug. sup Psalm. 1. Cathedra pestilentiae perniciosa
doctrina.
, received from Peter and other Apostles. But this prerogative was common to
other Churches.

Neither does the name of principal Church argue Monarchy and papal
Supremacy: for principal is spoken of many things, which are equal and of
the same kind Liuius lib. 4. de bell. Maced. Duae legiones, duabus principalibus
portis, signa efferre ius^ae.
: the heart and head are principal members of the body: Tygris and Euphrates
are principal rivers; James, Cephas, and John, are chief or principal
Apostles, 2. Cor. 11.5. And a Church may be called principal for sundry
reasons, whereof Popish supremacy is none. The Roman was a principal Church,
in regard it was planted or watered by Paul and Peter Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
Epiphan. haer. 27
, principal Apostles: in respect of worthy Bishops and Pastors, who lived in
the same until Cyprians age: in regard of many eminent spiritual graces
abounding in it: and lastly, because of the celebritie of the City where it
was, being the seat of the Empire.

And priestly unity arose from the Roman Church, neither only, nor as from a
Monarch over other Churches: but first by way of example, in that it was a
president of unity to others: secondly, by means of doctrine and exhortation,
whereby it persuaded neighbor and fellow Churches to unity. Lastly, whereas
Cyprian affirms, that untruth or perfidiousnesse can have no access to the
Romans: (which words some Papists Sand de visib mon a. l. 72. p. 58. Hos.
confess. Petroc. c. 28. Greg. Martyr. praef. discovery. Ioh. Driedo de eccles.
dog. l. 4. c. 3. p. 3. pa 234.
have produced in proof, that the Roman Church cannot err:

I answer, 1. That he speaks of untruth in matter of fact, and not of faith:
and therefore the place is impertinent, because our Adversaries Bellar de Pont
l. 4. c. 7. and l. 4 c. 2. Aeneas Silu. in epist. de mor. Germ. Turrecremat.
Totrensis, and alij
confess, the Roman Church may therein err. Secondly, Cyprians words are not
assertiue and positive, simply importing, that untruth could have no access to
the Romans: for then why does he so carefully premonish and inform them, that
they might not err? but he utters a charitable opinion he had of them, and
rehearses their praises, thereby exciting them to perform their duty, and to
satisfy the good conceit which he and others had of them: but the world is
changed with the Romans since those days, as it is with many other Churches.

T. W. When Master White shows me in this Epistle of Cyprian, these words
objected: The unity of Bishops is broken, when men run from their own
Bishops to the Bishop of Rome: I will publicly declaime him, The cunningest
Optician, or rather Magitian, that the whole ministry of England affords.

Answ. It is said of some, that they cannot see wood for trees; and the holy
Ghost affirms of others, that they have eyes and see not, Isaiah 6.10. Ioh.
9.3.9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10 Aug. de not. and great. c. 22. Praeuaricatorem legis diu.
lux deserit veritatis, qua desertus vtique sit caecus.
. The thing and matter from whence these words are inferred, is found in
Cyprian; and therefore the showing thereof in bare letters Aug de genesis ad lit.
l. 4. c. 5. Dum res cognoscitur, non e^le de vocabuli^ lit^gandum.
is not material. And touching your liuerie of Optician, Magitian, etc. surely
unless you be of the kindred of that Cat, whereof your Antonine speaks in
his Story Antonin. sum. hist. tit. 23. c. 2. Viderunt mulieres cattum, qui
habebat grossos oculos and flammantes: Non compatuit, foeda post se relinquens
vestigia.
, I see no reason why you should not pass from one matter to another, without
leaving a stink behind you. But howsoever, perusing your Stories of the Roman
Clergy, we observe sundry Popes, Priests, and Monks, to have been notorious
Magitians Syluest. 2. chron. Mart. Polani. Platina, and alij. Hildebrand. See
Benno Card. Antonin. hist p. 2. tit. 16. c. 7.. 4. Palumbus, etc. erat
Nigromanticus and in malesicijs potens. Will. Malmesbur. de gest. Reg. Anglor.
Palumbus, suburbanus Presbyter, erat is Necromanticis artibus instructus, etc.
Magicas figuras excitare, daemones territare, and ad quodlibet officium
impellere.
: but to find one such in the English ministry, I think it will not be
easy for you, though your education be in a nursery of tales Papir. Masson. de
episc. Vib. in Ioh. 21. Nihil cupidius audiebat quam rumores, etc. Tacit. vit.
Agrip.
, and your self have Cats or Lamia her eyes.

Paragr. 10. Master White challenged for abusing the Rhemists, concerning the
authority of the Church.
T. W. Our fraudulent Doctor labors much to induce his credulous Readers to
believe, that we hold, that the church can at her pleasure make that Scripture
which is not, and unmake that which once is Scripture.

Answ. You are a traveler, and coming out of the I Will of Candie, Tit. 1.12.
cannot proceed in your intended voyage of defacing your Adversary, unless
falsehood be your foundation.

Doctor White labors neither much nor little, to induce his Reader to
believe that you teach, the Church can at her pleasure make or unmake
Scripture: but his words are Digress. 19.
; The Papists have a principle among them, that the Scriptures receive all
their authority from the Church, meaning thereby, they are not known to be
true, neither are Christians bound to receive them without the attestation of
the Church.

At this you quarrel, saying:

T.W. He curtaileth their sentence, concealing such their words as do limit the
Churches authority therein. And wherein they do acknowledge an infallible
truth of the Scripture, before any approbation of the Church.

Answ. The question was only concerning the external authority of the
Scriptures, and not about their secret and intrinsecal verity, and therefore my
Brother was to produce so much as concerned this question, and not the r^st,
being impertinent unto the matter in hand.

T. W. The Rhemists only say, that the truth of the Scriptures cannot be made
known unto us, without the attestation of the Church, and this is all which
Master White can collect from this testimony, which we willingly grant.

Answ. You do not only teach that the Scriptures must be made known unto us,
by the attestation of the Church, (which being rightly expounded we freely
acknowledge:) but you affirm Bellar de Sacra^ l. 2. c. 25. To^^ fides
Christiana, and omnium dogmatum fi^micas, pendet ab authoritate prae^entis
ecclesiae.
, that people are not bound either at the first Espenc. com. 2. Tim. 3. Gremium
maternum prima fuit schola sacrarum literarum.
to receive the^ as divine, or afterward to reverence and believe them as the
word of God, but for the attestation of the Church.

The Prophets themselves (says Stapleton Stapl. def. Eccl. auth. cont.
Whitaker. l. 1. c 1^. 12.
) being now taken away, we are not to believe their prophesies left unto us in
writing to be of God, unless the Church do confirm it.

Where first of all by the Church, you understand the present Roman Church
Bellar. de Sacram l. ^. c. 25.
.

Secondly, by attestation of the Church, you mean that the same, as an
immediate divine witness Gres. def. Bellar. de verb. Dei, tract. de agnosc.
Script. Can. Testificatio ecclesiae est immediate a Christo. Stapl. dupl. l. 1.
c. 9.. 13. Deus per ecclesiam loquens, non aliter loquitur quam si immediate
per visiones, aut somnia, aut quouis alio supernaturali modo nobis loqueretur.
Stapl. prompt. Cath. p. ^. in die Ascens. Princip. doctrine. l. 8. c. 8. and 10.
, by it own testimony, without any proof taken from the Scriptures themselves
or primitive Church, imparteth and conferreth external authority to the
Scripture, and makes the same Canonical in respect of men.

For example: even as the two Gospels of Mark and Luke, although they were
endited by divine inspiration, and thereupon in themselves were always divine,
in actu primo, 2. Tim. 3.16. yet they became not Canonical, and of sacred
authority, in actu secundo, until the Apostles had approved and given
testimony unto them Eusebius. hist. l 2. c. 15. Hieron. catal. script. in Marco.
: The same kind of authorizing Stapl. def. auth eccles. contra Whitak. l 1. c.
4. Apostolorum successores, eandem testificandi potestatem habere, Scriptura
docet. Great def. Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 3. c. 2. Quemadmodum si quis viuente
Paulo, etc.
and attestation concerning all the Scriptures, do the Papists give to their
present Pope and Roman Church.

And yet further then this, you also hold that the Church, to wit, the Roman
Pope, affirming and teaching that God is one in essence, and three in person,
and that Christ is God and man, or any other article of faith, is simply to be
believed, for himself, and not because he demonstrates these Articles from the
holy Scripture Stapl Rel. c 4. q. 1. ar. 1. Neque ecclesiae propter verbum Dei
creditur, etc. Ib. Ecclesiae Dei absolute and simpliciter non sub condition
credimus. Stapl. prompt. Cath. p. 2. in die Ascensionis, page 60. and p. 1.
Dom. 6. post Pascha.
.

And even as the faithful in the days of the Apostles, believed the doctrine
they preached and wrote, for their own authority merely, and as they were the
witnesses of Christ; even so God has made the Pope an authentical witness of
divine truth Tom. 4 Council. Surij. Papae authoritas Petro non minor. Horant.
loc. Cathol. l 2. c. 7. Talis est persuasio ecclesiae quae rations non
requitit, etc.
, whom all persons must believe, because of his own word. And even as the
Romans and other Churches believed Paul, teaching them, that Christ makes
intercession at the right hand of God, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
etc. although he produced no former Scripture to confirm the same: even so the
faithful in our days, must with the same assurance of faith, believe the Pope
and Trent Council, teaching, Purgatory, transubstantiation, adoration of
Images, or any other such like doctrine. And thus your Churches attestation in
pretext of words, imports no danger but in reality, is like a Snake in a
fair meadow, and as insensible poison in a potion, a most pernicious doctrine:
the sum whereof is; that with the same assurance of faith, one believes the
Creation of the world, and Resurrection of the dead, because of the authority
of the scriptures; even so with like assurance for the testimony of the Pope,
and second Nicene Council, he is to believe the adoration of Images, or any
other matter the Pope shall define, if it be never so absurd and wicked.

Paragr. 11. Touching Cardinal Cusanus.
T. W. Doctor White in his thirteenth Digression, alleges Cardinal Cusanus,
affirming Cusan. epist. 2 and 3. and 7.
, that the sense of the Scripture is changeable, admitting diverse and contrary
expositions, according to the Churches judgment.

But the Cardinal speaks not this concerning principal and fundamental
points of Religion, but only of such materials and actions, as according to
the different commandment of God and the Church, are at some times good and
meritorious, (as Abraham to slay his son) and sometimes wicked and
demeritorious, (as when the King of Edom did sacrifice his son, 2. Kin. 3.27.)
and the Popish Priest makes instance in wedlock, and generation of children
in the prime ages of the world, and chastity and single life in the latter
ages thereof: And so his meaning is, that the Church at diverse times,
delivers contrary expositions of holy Scripture in those places only,
wherein the matter it self is variable.

Answ. Cusanus his words and meaning are more evident, then that they can be
smoothed with this gloss, any more then a potsherd covered over with Silver
dross, be changed into good plate.

First, the occasion of his speech is; to confute the Bohemians Cusan epist. 2.
ad Bohem. de vsu com. Dices fortasse, ecclesia hodie^na non ambulat in ritu
communionis, sicut ante, etc. Certe hoc t^n^ moueat, quod diuersis temporibus,
alius, and alius ritus sacrifitiorum and etia^ sacramentoru^, stante veritate
inuenitur, Scripturalque esse ad tempus adaptatas and vary intellectas, ita vt
vno tempore, s^cundum currentem vniuersalem ritum exponerentur, mutato ritu
iterum sententia mutaretur, p. 833. etia^si hodie alia fuerit interpretatio
eccl. eiusde^ praecepti Euangelici, quam aliquando; tamen hic sensus nunc in
vsu currens, ad regimen ecclesiae, inspiratus, vti tempori congruus, vt salutis
via debet acceptari, sicut de baptismi forma Apostolorum tempore, vbi in
Christi nomine, and alio sequenti, vbi in Trinitatis nomine, etc.
, who held that the Eucharist was to be ministered in both kinds, because
Christ our Lord administered in this manner, and commanded, saying; Drink ye
all of this. Cusanus answers, It is a foolish Argument to reason from the
example of Christ and the Primitive Church, for the Scriptures are fitted to
the time, and diversely understood; so that one time according to the current
rite (of the Church) they are expounded one way, and when that rite of the
Church changes, then their sense is changed. As if he should say; It was the
sense of the Scripture, that people should communicate in both kinds, so long
as the church used to do so: but now that the Church which is directed by the
infallible inspiration of God Christus occulta inspiratione, quae singulis
temporibus congruunt, etc. suggerit. Dicetis forsan, praecepta Christi quomodo
mutabuntur authoritate ecclesiae, vt sint tunc obligatoria quando ecclesiae
placuerit? Dico nulla esse Christi praecepta, quam per ecclesiam pro talibus
acceptata, etc. Et non est haec mutatio, tanquam a minori authoritate, quam
Christi praecipientis dependens, quoniam Ecclesia quae est corpus Christi, and
eius Spiritu vegetatur, non aliud agit quam Christus vult.
, has changed this manner of communion from both kinds to one, the meaning of
the Scripture is changed, and people must follow the practice and commandment
of the Church, and think the same to be the meaning of the Scripture.

Secondly, the Cardinal gives instance Scriptutam sieve praeceptum, sine
consilium contineat. Scripturam in verbis praeceptiuis etc. Ep. 2. page 835.
Iudicamus Deum per praecepta aliquando dat^, non aliud praecipere velle, quam
quod ecclesia, iuxta temporis conditiones, rationabile iudicauerit verbo vel
opere.
, not in things mutable by circumstance, but he names the precepts and
counsels of the Gospel, the rites of sacrifices and Sacraments, the degrees of
wedlock, etc.

Thirdly, in these and the like matters he gives the Church authority, to
exchange the manner of Christ's doing, and to expound his precepts in other
sense then the primitive Church did Etiamsi body alia fuerit interpretatio
ecclesiae, eiusdem praecepti Euangelici quam aliquando: tamen hic sensus nunc
in vsu, ad regimen ecclesiae inspiratus, vt tempori congruus, debet accepta^i
.

Fourthly, he renders these reasons of his assertion, 1. The Church is
divinely inspired, and Christ concurreth with the same in all her precepts and
expositions. 2. There is no less power in the Church then in Christ Potestas
non minor in ecclesia quam in Christo.
. The Church is superior, and over the letter of the Scripture. 4. The right
understanding of Scripture goes with the practice Epist. 7. Nec mirum si
praxis ecclesiae vno tempore interpretatur Scripturam vno modo, and alio
tempore alio modo: intellectus enim currit cum praxi. Intellectus, enim qui cum
praxi concurrit, est spiritus viuisicans.
.

And many other great Papists in substance of doctrine affirm the same. The
Jesuits of Colen said Jesuit. Colon. con Monhem.
The scriptures are a nose of Wax. And Pighius Pigh. controuers. Ratisb. loc.
3. and Hierarch. l. 1. c. 2. Canil. op. catech. page 44. Censur. Colon. page
117.
, They are a leaden rule and nose of Wax. And Mulhusinus a modern Jesuit
Mulhusin. de fide, disp. 2. page 21. Colloq Wormat. Lindan. Panopl. praefat. ad
lector. Quae ob facilem ipsius in varias sententiarum formas flexum, recte naso
fuit assimilata cereo.
; The Scriptures for the more part are hard, obscure, and ambiguous, like a
nose of Wax and Lesbian rule, which may by wicked persons be drawn this way
or that way. And how reverently the Jesuits esteem of the Scriptures, let
Gretsars speech testify Grets. def. Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 4.
, saying; Do you think there would have been more Heresies and Sects, if there
had been no Scripture at all? Sure I rather think there would have been
fewer. And when Bellarmine and Gretsar say Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 4.
Etiamsi Scriptura dicat, libros Prophetaru^ and Apostolorum esse diuinos, tamen
non certo credam, nisi prius credidero, Scripturam quae hoc dicit esse diuinam.
Nam in Alchorano Mahumeti passim legimus, ipsum Alchoranum de coelo a Deo
missum, and tamen non ei credimus. Gretsar. ibid. def. l. 4. c 4.
; That a man is not to believe the Scriptures to be divine, because the
Scripture it self says so: more then one is to believe the Alchoran to be of
God; because in sundry places thereof we read, that it was sent from heaven
by God. Can we be persuaded, that these men in their hearts give any reverence
to the Scripture? Surely Balaam the false Prophet believed God, when he spoke
to him by his Ass, Number. 22. 27 34. And shall not Christians believe him when
he speaks by the Scripture Aug. ep. 3. Ad cor loquitur indoctorum atque
doctorum. 1. Cor. 9.8. Gal. 4 30. 1. Tim. 5.28.
? And has God set impressions of his Majesty and truth in all his creatures,
so that not only the heavens show forth his handy works, Psalm. 19.1. but the
very Ant manifests his divine power? Prou. 6.6. Basil. ep. 168. Ambro. Hexam l.
6. c 4. Aug. de genesis ad lit. l. 3. c. 14. Plin. l. 11. c. 30.
And is there nothing in the sacred Scripture being the lively word of God,
Hebr. 4.12. and the immediate work of the holy Ghost, 2. Tim. 3.16. wherein a
Christian man living out of the Roman Beehiue, can know or discern the same
to be of God, and by often reading and meditation thereof, espy more verity
and divine force in it, then in the Turkish Alchoran?

The Papist in the conclusion of this Paragraph, speaks of a ring, etc. but I
suppose that the names of all godly persons which will ever believe this
doctrine of Bellarmine and Cusanus, may be stamped in a less compass then a
ring: and the spur-blinde Disciples of the Seminary Doctors, which despising
the clear light of truth, embrace this buzzardly stuff, deserve more justly
to wander in the circle and labyrinth of their own folly. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
then Ethelbert Guil. Malmesbur. de gest. reg. Anglor. l. 2. Ego Ethelbertus
peccator, etc.
and eighteen persons besides, who (as William Malmesburie the Monk
reports) daunced by the space of a whole year, not ceasing night or day,
because they had disquieted one Sir Robert a Priest, while he was saying
Mass, in the honor of S. Magnes.

Paragr. 12. Concerning the gloss of the Canon law, did, 40. Cap. Non Nos:
about the Popes deeds.
In the beginning of this Section the Popish Priest taxes Master White for
implacable hatred against the Roman Church and Pope: but the matter which
indeed offends him, is the discovery of the enormous wickedness of his holy
seeming Father, made by M. White out of the Records and Stories of Papists.

And concerning this matter, let these things following be considered.

First, the crimes and enormous deeds, objected by Protestants against the
Popes and other Romists, are found in the public Stories and Monuments of our
Adversaries themselves Papir. Masson. de episc. Vrb. l. 6 in Paul. 3. Quod si
Pontifices no lunt turpia aut nefaria de se narrari, nihil eiusmodi faciant:
aut cum fecerint, non putent ea ipsa ita latere, vt and sciri, and posteris
narrari nequeant.
: whereas on the contrary they distaine the worthiest and most eminent persons
of our state and Church, with horrible blasphemies and loud lies, testified by
no credible author or witness, but forged and suggested by themselves Sander.
de schism. Britan. Parsons Philopater. Bosius de sig. eccles. l. 9. c. 3. and
l. 12. c. 3. etc. 20. Stapl. prompt. Cath. in fest. Simon. and Iud. page 215.
Lecta est in tribunali Londinensi scedula per quendam verbi ministrum, iudici
regio, sed per errorem porrecta, etc. in qua quidem mulieri narrabat, quam
ardenter in illam, dum concionaretur exarserit, quam libenter oculos ad eius
formam adiecerit, quam illa venusta and altera Helena visa fuerit, and id genus
amores suos, tali persona, loco, and spiritu dignos, multis verbis praedicabat
atque ad libidinem prouocabat, etc.
.

Secondly, the Papists themselves give occasion why we publish the vicious
abominations of their holy Fathers, whilst partly by intolerable venditation
of sanctity, they endeavor to make the ignorant believe, that their thorns and
thistles bring forth figs and grapes; and partly by calumnious reports, and
the aggravating of personal actions in some of our Religion, to the injury and
abuse of the whole Church, they extort from us a true report of their Churches
wickedness: And speaking what they lust, they do according to the law of
like, hear what they lust not Lingua abusus futili, inuitus audit, qui volens
dixit male. Plutarch. l. de cap. ex hist. vtil. ex Sophocle.
.

T. W. I charge you M. White with much foul demeinor: first, because you cite
that which is taken out of the gloss of Gratian, as if it were the Canon law,
the same being of incomparable less authority: secondly, because that which
is spoken of the Pope when the fact is doubtful, in which case the gloss
requires no more in the behalf of the Pope, then which every Christian in
charity is to perform to a common person; namely, to abstain temerarious
censure, and to interpret doubfull actions in the better part: you apply to
actions wherein both the fact and the right are manifest.

Answ. First, it is a venial offense, to call the gloss which delivers the
sense and meaning of the law, and by your selves is printed with the text
Posseuin. Appar. v. Glost. iuris Canon.
, and whereby many weighty cases, both in matter of conscience and of strife
are decided Iac Graph. decis. aur. and other Casuists commonly resolve their
decisions into the Gloss. Gabr. 4. d. 16. q. 3. not. 6.
and authorized Bellar. Recog. de Po^tif. pa. 23. cites the Gloss of the
decretals for his famous distinction of direct and indirect, in the question of
the Popes temporal jurisdiction
, by the name of the Canon law Scot. 4. d. 17. q. 1.
. No small part of he Christian world was lately governed by the text and
glosses of the Canon law, and do you now cast them to the Moales and to the
Batts? Esa. 2.20. A Fox when he is hunted forsakes the wood, but yet comes
back again thither, and makes it his chief harbor, etc.

Secondly, concerning the matter of the testimony it self, your new gloss
salueth not the old. Gratians text has these words D. 40. c. Non nos. Extr.
Ioh. 22. c. sanct. Rom gloss.
: We may not doubt the Pope to be holy, whom the height of so great dignity
does extol; in whom if meritorious deeds be wanting of his own, yet those
are sufficient which are imparted unto him from the predecessor of his Sea:
According whereunto Pope Gregory the seventh in his Dictates Baron. annal to.
11. an. 1076. n. 33. Gers. p. 1. de potest. eccl. lect. 10. Absque mendacio
Papa nequissimus dici potest sanctissimus. Theoderic. Niem. de schism. pop. l.
2. ca. 9 and ca. 32. Papa non potest peccare simoniace, dicebant curiales.
, affirms, that the Roman Pontifex canonically elected, is undoubtedly
sanctified by the merits of blessed Peter. John Teutonicus in his gloss,
expounds this assertion of Gratian, and desiring to maintain the sanctity
and honor of the purpled priest: first, requires men to judge charitably of
the Popes deeds, and to presume the same holy so long as the case is doubtful,
(and here indeed is your point) but then he proceeds and solueth the doubt
proposed, (which was, What if it be manifest concerning the Pope, that he has
committed adultery or homicide Quid si de ipso constet, quod adulterium
co^misit aut homicidium? Turrecrem. sup. decret. par. 1. d. 40. dictio Quis
raritatem notat, non impossibilitatem.
?) saying, The Popes deeds are excused even as the homicide of Sampson, the
theft of the Hebrews, and the Adultery of Jacob: That is, they are excused by
a special privilege or dispensation: and that this is his meaning, appears
by the reference he makes to a text in the Decretalles Decretal. 4. tit. 19.
de diuort. c. 8. Gaudemus, nec vlli vnquam licuit in simul plures vxores
habere, nisi cui diuina reuelatione concessum: per quam sicut Jacob a mendacio,
Israelitae a furto, and Sampson ab homicidio, sic and Patriarchae, and alij
viri iusti. etc.
, where it is affirmed, touching Sampson, Jacob, and the Israelites, that they
were allowed by divine revelation to perpetrate the things they did, and from
hence I reason: The gloss affirms, that the Popes deeds are so excused, as
the adultery of Jacob, the murder of Sampson, and the theft of the Israelites
were excused.

But according to the Canon Law, all these were excused by an indulgence and
privilege, granted by divine revelation Grets. de potest. eccles. l. 12.
Adulatio negat Papam simoniam posse committere. Theoderic. Niem. de schism.
Papar. lib. 2. cap. 9. and cap. 32. Papa non potest peccare simoniace. dicebant
Curiales.
, and not only by the judgment of charity, as this Popish Priest pretends.

Paragr. 13. Concerning the Popes authority, wherein the Popish Priest
pretends Bellarmine Bellarm. de Pontif. l. 4. c. 7.
to be corrupted.
The modern Papists teach, that the Roman Pope cannot err iudicially in his
public decrees of Faith, and general precepts of manners Bellarm. ib. l. 4 c.
2. Stapleton. Grets. Greg. Val. Bosius, etc.
. But many of the former Papists Gerson. Almain. Adrian. Tho. Walden.
Turrecremat. Alph. Castro. Conc. Constan. Council. Basil. See Canus loc. theol.
l. 6. c 1. Bellar. de Pontif. l 4. c. 2. Adrian 4. de sac^. confirm. ar. 3. ad.
2. pa ^5. Si per ecclesiam Romans intelligatur caput eius, puta Pontifex, certum
est quod possit errare, etiam in ijs quae tangunt fidem, haeresin per sua^ d
terminationem, aut decretalem assere^do: plures enim fuerunt Pont. Ro^,
haeretici. Arbor. Theosoph. l. 4. c. 32. Papa in fide errare potest, vt dicit
Innocentius nominis huius quartus Potif. ca. 1. de sum. Trin and tota mihi
aberrare via videtur, qui aliter sentit, etc.
denied this, and placed infallibility of judgment not in the Pope, but in the
general Council.

They also which hold the former opinion, differ; for although they say in
general that the Pope cannot err in his public decrees, yet some of them do
so explicate their assertion, that in very deed they yield the Pope no more
then what is common to other Bishops and Pastors; for they say the Pope cannot
err, when he observes the order of the Primitive Church, uses such needful
and holy means as God has appointed for finding out of the truth Viguer.
instit. theol. de fid. c. 10. v. 13. Summus Pontifex vt priuata persona errare
potest, non tamen vt est summus Pontifex, etc. Operatur autem vt summus
Pontifex, quando obseruat ritum, in Concilijs Apostolorum, and sanctorum Patrum
definitionibus obseruari solitum.
: and they further teach, that God does not assist Popes as he did Canonical
Writers Canus loc. l. 5. c. 5. Non existimandus est summus Pontifex eam habere
facultatem quae in Apostolis: sed adhibere, etc. Bannes 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 10.
Carb. introd. theol. l. 5. c. 7.
, but works immediately, or by the lawful use of the ordinary means.

But the modern Jesuits Azor. p. 2. instit. mor. l. 5. c. 5. Si absque
Concilio vllo, and diligentia rem fidei, aut morum, definiat, Spiritum sanctum
sibi peculiariter assistentem habet. Stapl. Rel. c. 4. q. 3. ar. 3. concl. 5.
and ib. q. 1. ar. 1. page 432. Docet ipsam fidem ex unction diuina. Lorin.
com. Act. 15. v. 7.
reject this opinion, saying; That the Pope is immediately assisted by divine
grace, and that he cannot err, whether he use means and diligence in
searching out the truth or not Bellar. de Pontif. l. 4. c. 2. Greg. Val. to. 3.
d. 1. q. 1. p. 1. 40. Azor. ib. c. 5. and 7. and 14. Quod si nutu suo statuat,
etc. Stapleton, supra.
. And this is now the common opinion, and must needs take place, because as
Bellarmine observes: if conditions were required to perfect and make lawful
the Popes definitions, besides his own external act of decreeing the same,
the faithful should stand doubtful, whether he had observed these conditions
or not, and so their faith would be wavering.

And yet again being past this shelfe, our Adversaries are perplexed, and more
doubts occur.

First, they cannot deny but that the Pope may privately err Azor. p. 2. l. 5.
c. 5. Greg. Val. Grets. Bannes. Bos. de sig. l. 18. c. 6. Caietan. de authorit.
Pap. and Council. ca. 9.
, and many of them acknowledge, that he may secretly in his own judgment be
an Heretic Canus loc. l. 6. c. 8. Bannes 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 10. pa. 63. Que
admodum Caiphas prophetauit, nesciens quid diceret, cum esset Pontifex illius
anni^ita summus Pontifex haereticus, quandiu sungitur officio. Pontificis,
poterit desinire veritatem, contra propriam sententiam ex instinctu Spiritus
sancti: immo summus Pontifex haereticus intelliget id quod definit, esse
contrarium propriae sententiae, and nihilominus definiet illud ordinante
Spiritu sancto, qui assistit officio summi Pontificatus. Bos. de sig. l. 2. c.
11. and l. 18 c. 6. Stapl. Antid. Euang. sup. Ioh. 11. verse. 51.
even at that time when he publicly sententiates the verity of Faith for the
whole Church: But it is improbable, that he which is ignorant of the truth, and
a secret enemy thereof, will publikly decree the same, and bind himself and
the whole Church to the professing of that, which himself in secret does not
believe. Here our learned masters seek refuge from Balaams ass, and from
Caiphas Bannes supra. Bosius de sig l. 16 c 9. Loqui potest per hominis
adumbrati simulachrum, etc. per Asinam, quod cum Balaam fecit, etc. Stapl.
prompt. Cath. p. 3. feria 5. post Dom. pass. page 220.
; But yet Bellarmine Bellar. ibid. Violentum erit, and non secundum morem
prouidentiae Dei, suauiter disponentis omnia. T.W.P. p. 146.
confesses, that this is something violent, and scarce suting with the sweet
motion of divine providence.

Secondly, the Pope is often an unlettered Idiot Alph. Castro cont. haer. l. 4
c. 4. Cum constet plures eorum adeo illiteratos esse, vt grammaticam penitus
ignorent. Platina in Iul. 1. Adeo plerique literarum ignari sunt, vt vix sciant
nomen suum Latin exprimere. Antonin. sum. hist. p. 3. tit. 22. c 6. Johannes
23 vir fuit, in temporalibus magnus, in spiritualibus nullus, atque omnino
ineptus. Sigebert. chron. an. 1045. Benedictus, etc. cum esset rudis literarum.
Theoderic. Niem. de schism. pop. l. 2. c. 13. Papir. Mass. de episc. Vib. l. 6
in Bonif. 9. Scribere, canereque vix scientem, etc.
, or a Canonist, and no Divine: from whence now proceeds his infallibility of
judgment in matters of Theology? Either he borrows the knowledge of that
truth which he defines from other men, and then they rather define then he: or
he receives by revelation a present ability: and then the Church is governed
by new revelations, which the great Cardinal Bellarmine Bellar. de verb Dei,
l. 4. c. 9. Can. loc. l. 2. c. 7. Stapl. Rel. c. 4. q. 2. page 467. Bannes 2.
2. q 1. ar. 10.
and many other of his side in words, altogether deny.

Thirdly, our Adversaries acknowledge, that the premises from whence the Pope
concludes and deriueth his sententiall conclusion of faith, may be doubtful
or only probable; and that he may err in his premises and discourse, and yet
the conclusion shall be true, yea prophetical, the spirit of Christ assisting
him only therein, and not in the premises Stapl. ib. Ecclesia in singulis
medijs non habet infallibilem and peculiarem Spiritus sancti directionem, sed
potest in illis probabili interdum, etc. Notab. 4. Doctrina eius in medijs
discursiua, in conclusione est diuina and prophetica: est infallibilis in ipsa
doctrina, in forma and ratione docendi non ita. Ad 4. Infallibilitas docentis
eccelesiae ponitur in conclusione tantum, etc. Canus loc theol l. 6. c. 8. In
Pontificijs decretis duo distinguenda sunt: vnum est intentio conclusioque
decreti: alterum quasi ratio and causa a Pontifice, reddita eius rei quam
constituerit. Atque in conclusione Pontifices summi errare nequeunt, si fidei
quaestionem ex apostolico tribunali decernant. Sin vero Pontificum rations,
necessariae non sunt ne dicam aptae, probabiles, idoneae, in hijs nihil est
immorandum, etc. Non est operaeprecium, rations ad viuum resecare, etc. Stapl.
princip. doct. l. 8. c. 14. etc. 15. In medijs ipsis and argumentis hallucinari
and aberrare poterit.
.

Now Master White handling this question of the Popes infallible judgment,
affirms; First, in general: That the Papists themselves refuse the Popes
judgment, and this assertion is true concerning many of them: (as I have
showed before) and the Popes single judgment was never holden infallible,
without a general Council concurring with him, until our days.

Secondly, Doctor White affirms of Bellarmine that he says, concerning
Cyprians withstanding of Pope Stephen: that after the Popes definition it was
free to think otherwise. Here the Popish Priest denies not, but that these
words are found in Bellarmine: but he excepteth, saying; that other words are
found in the same Author, whereby it appears, that by definition he means
not sententiall definition, but only a commandment of ye Pope.

Answ. 1. Gretsar the Jesuit Grets def. Bellar. de verb. Dei, l. 3. c. 6.
Verbum statuentes, decretum sinodale importat.
affirms, that Pope Cornelius made a decree and sententiall definition
against Cyprian and the Africans, and confirms the same by a testimony of
Eusebius Eusebius. hist. l. 7 c 2.
, translated by Rufine.

Secondly, Bellarmine Bellar. de Pontif l. 4 c. 7.
adding unto his speech (Vt Augustinus loquitur, as Augustine speaks) must be
understood and interpreted out of Saint Augustine, who affirms Aug. de bapt.
l. 2 c. 18. In qua tamen, si alij adhuc de ista quaestione, salua pace
sentirent, donec universally Concilio, vnum aliquid eliquatum, etc.
, that Cyprian and his Colleagues might as yet lawfully think otherwise then
Cornelius did, and retain their own judgment in the matter of rebaptising,
until the point were determined by a general Council. Whereby it plainly
appears, that Saint Augustine See Augustine ep. 162.
makes a general Council public judge of Controversies in the Church, and
not the Roman Pope.

Thirdly, it is certain that Cyprian reputed not the Pope to be his Ordinary,
neither regarded his definition, either imperative or sententiall, but because
of his intermedling and saucie behavior, Called him proud, unlearned, of a
blind and of a wicked mind Bellar. de Pont l. 4. c. 7.
. And therefore whereas you explicate Cyprians judgment by your own practice,
saying; Catholics grant, that it is lawful to hold or believe contrary to the
practice of what the Pope commands, so we do according to his commandment:
you tell us a Story of your own doing, which you may rather warrant by the
president of the harmless beast, an Ass Cusan. exercit l. 6. Obedientia
irrationalis, est consummata obedientia and perfectissima, scilicet quando
obeditur, sine inquisitione rationis: sicut IVMENTVM obedit Domino suo.
Climacus de discr. grad. 26. Fatius Jesuit. de mortif. c. 3. Bonauent. vit.
Francisc. c. 6. pa ^93. ap. Sur. Caeca obedientia, vt quis sit sicut corpus
exanime, quod requiescit vbi quis reposuerit, sine motu.
, which without inquisition and reason, is governed by the owner, then by the
example of Cyprian, who neither believed nor practiced according to your manner.

CHAP. IIII.
Paragraph. 1.
T.W. Master White pretends, that the Catholics do acknowledge all
sufficiency of Scripture, both for the interpreting it self, without any
needful explication of the Church, as also for it fullness, etc.

Answ. It is ordinary with you, to object that which your Adversary holds
not. The point maintained by Doctor White Digress. 12. It is not the sole thing
which must assure us.
is, That the Scripture proves it self to be the word of God, and receives
not authority (to wit, principally and totally) from the Church. And
concerning the exposition of the Scriptures by the Church: he is so far from
denying the same to be needful, that with the learned of our side D. Whitak.
de Script. q 3. c ^. Quartum Ecclesiae officium est, Scripturas expone^e and
interpretari.
he acknowledges, It is the office of the true Church to interpret the
Scriptures: And the difference between us stands not herein, that we deprive
the true church of this office, and yield the same to every private person D.
Car^lton. consen^. de Eccles. c. 12. p. 303. Populus non tradit sed tantum
^uscipit fidem.
(as you and your friends calumniate Viegas in Apoca. cap. 3. com 2 ex^get.. 2.
n. 2. Contra quam garriunt impudenter haeretici, qui, etc. Scripturae sacrae
intelligentiam, and de eius sen u controuersias, ad quemuis e lipporum grege
rabulam, tanquam ad iudicem and con^o^em, defer praesumunt contempto
vniuersae Ecclesiae iudicio, etc. Becan. de iudic. contr. number. 43. Mulierculis
permittunt libertatem interpretandi Scripturam, etc.
) but in these two points.

First, whereas you appropriate the office of interpreting the Scriptures to
the Roman Church only, we say, it is common to all true Churches.

Secondly, you give your Church and Pope infallibility of judgment in
expounding the Scriptures, either by inspiration and divine unction, as
sometimes you speak Stapl. Rel. c. 4. q 1. ar. 1. ad cauil. 4. Docet ipsam
fidem, ex unction diuina. Stapl. princ. doct l. 8 c 17. Ecclesia in suis
magistris loquitur non prout ipsi volunt, non ex ratione, and sensu humano, sed
prout Spiritus veritatis, qui manet cum ea in aeternum, dat eloqui illi: and
hic Spiritus Dei no^ recedit de ore Ecclesiae. 2. Pet. 1.21. Grets. def.
Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 4. Bosius de fig. l. 16. c 10. Sensus ille non
inhaeret literis, sed ipsi Ecclesiae.
; or by a peculiar direction and assistance of the holy Ghost, in the use of
the means, as otherwhiles they say Becan. de iudic. controuers.. 157. Stapl.
princip doct. l. 8. c. 14.
.

But concerning this question, we believe as follows.

First, Negatiuely, that in a settled Church, and ordinarily the exposition of
the holy Scripture, belongs not to any private person, because such have
Hieron epist. 103. ad Paulin. Haec a me breuiter perstricta sunt, vt
intelligeres, te in Scrituris sanctis, sine praeuio and demonstrante semitam,
non posse ingredi. Basil. quaest. compend. explic. q. 235. Aug. de vtil. cred.
c. 17.
neither received gifts nor authority, Ephe. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.29. Mal. 2.6. 2.
Tim. 2.15. and the Lord will not have blind men leaders of another. Luke 6.39.
nor every one of the household to be their own caruers, and snatch their food
at their pleasure; but he has placed over his family wise and faithful
Stewards, to give his servants their portion of meat in due season, Luke
12.42. and he requires that al things in his Church be performed in good
order, 1. Cor. 14.40.

Secondly, we maintain, that the authority and right of expounding the holy
Scripture, belongs to every true Church of Christ as fully as to the Roman.
For every true Church of Christ, is by office and calling the ground and pillar
of truth. 1. Tim. 3.15. and our Savior authorized all the Apostles and their
successors to preach the Gospel, and to expound the Scriptures, Math. 28.20.
and he bestowed the gift of interpretation upon the Church of the Corinthians
and other Churches, as abundantly, as upon the Romans, 1. Cor. 14.26.28.32.
And the Pastors of other Churches were authorized to interpret the Scriptures,
2. Tim. 2.15. 2. Tim. 4.2. And Philip interprets the Scripture, Act. 8.29.35.
And in the succeeding Churches at Alexandria Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 9. and 10.
and l 6. c. 19.
and other places, the holy Scripture was in common use. And all subordination
to the Roman Church (unless by way of asking counsel, or using advice, which
is usual among equals) touching interpretation of scripture in the prime ages
of the Church, was unheard of.

Thirdly, concerning the manner of interpretation of the holy Scripture, in it
self we maintain; That the exposition thereof ever since the Apostles age is
mediate, and depends upon the right and lawful use of those means which the
holy Scripture and the example of the primitive Church prescribes.

The Apostles and their associates were not tied to outward means, but without
study and labor, or comparing one Scripture with another, and without
collecting arguments from the text it self or other places, they conceived and
delivered the true meaning by the unction of the holy Ghost. Thus Philip
expounds the Prophet Esai to the Eunuch, Act. 8. and Peter the words of Joel
and David, Act. 2.16.25. and the faithful were bound to receive these
expositions of Scripture delivered by the Apostles in this manner, as the
undoubted sense of the holy Ghost Iren. l. 4. c. 41. Generosior fides gentium
ostenditur. sermonem Dei assequentiu^ sine instructione Scripturarum.
.

The Apostles sundry times confirmed their doctrine by the testimonies of
Scripture, for these or the like reasons: first, to maintain the honor and
authority of the written word, and to declare that God had appointed it to be a
rule of faith. Secondly, to give example to succeeding Churches and Pastors, to
build their faith and doctrine upon the same. Thirdly, to show the unity and
consent of their doctrine, with the prophetical Scripture. Fourthly, the
better to persuade the Jews and Proselytes, who believing Moses and the
Prophets, must also believe the Gospel, being confirmed by their testimony:
Nevertheless, when the Apostles delivered any doctrine of their own without
such confirmation, their authority was of it self authentical and the rule of
faith, Galat. 1.8. Heb. 2.3.4.

But when the Apostles had finished their course and added their own doctrine,
and perfected the Canon of the whole Scripture, 2. Tim. 3.16. after their
deceasse the subsequent Christian Church, was in the same manner confined to
the whole Scripture of both Testaments, as the Jewish Church before Christ was
to the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets.

Before the deceasse of the Apostles, the Church had a twofold doctrine; the
one written, the other preached by lively voice. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. But after
their departure, The bounds of the Church were the holy Scripture (...) sup.
Mat. ^^ ^^cl. sia n^n (...) ^^sta de (...) id (...) ^^pturis s^^ct^^.
, and let men teach what they say, by the Scriptures, otherwise they are to
fear a woe prepared for them, which add to the Scripture Tertul. c^^^^a (...)
; and whatsoever is besides the divine Scripture, because it is not of faith,
is sin (...) vlt.
: and set by that which seems truth to this man or that man, and enquire all
these things out of Scripture Ch^^ l. 2. Cor. l^^^. 13.
. And read us this out of the Law, the Prophets, the Psalms, or out of the
Gospels or Apostolical writings, and we will believe you Aug. de unit. ^^cl^s.
c. 6.
.

The present Church therefore has not the same authority of teaching of
faith, or expounding Scriptures, which the Apostles had: neither does any man
succeed them in the same manner of infallible authority: but first the whole
matter of faith and supernatural verity, is contained in the written word:
secondly, the exposition of the Scripture depends upon the lawful use of the
means, which the Scripture it self and the primitive Church prescribe Becan.
de ind. contr. 76. Pontifex, post ingressum in terram promissionis, non
dirimebat controuersias nisi ex scripa lege.
: in the same manner as our Adversaries acknowledge about the high Priest in
the old Law, and concerning all other but the Pope Suar. def. fid. Cath. contra
sect Angl. l. 1. c. 11. Pastores and doctores Ecclesiae, per specialiora
auxilia and dona, docentur a Spiritu sancto, quantum ad commune Ecclesiae bonum
expedit: and ideo vt plurimum no^ faciu^t id per expressas reuelationes, neque
per iudicium infallibile, sed quatenus oportet and quantum cuiusque status and
munia postulauerint. Pontifex autem max and Concilia legitima, quando
desiniunt, docent per singularem assistentiam. Grets. def. Bellar. de verbo
Dei, l. 3. c. 3.
.

And to declare this matter more fully, first we acknowledge, that the Bishops
and Pastors of the true Church have authority to expound the Scripture Gerson
de vita spir. lect. 6. Tanquam praecones and nuntij.
, which appears, in that Christ has made them Stewards of his household. 1.
Cor. 4.1. and has given unto them the keys of the kingdom of heaven Origin.
sup. Math. tr. 1. Hilar. de Trin. l. 6. Hieron ep. 3. and cont Iouin. l. 1.
Prosp. de vita contempl. l. 2. c. 2. Ambros. de sacerd. c. 1. Chrysostom. de sacerd.
l 3. Augustine. Beda. Isodor and alij.
. Math. 16.19. among which the key of knowledge is one. Luke 11.52.

Secondly, their authority is so far forth authentical, as that when they
exercise the same aright (...).
. 2. Tim. 2.15. it binds the Church and people of God, over whom the holy
Ghost has placed them, to faith and obedience of their doctrine, Mal. 2.6. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Ioh. 13.20. Heb. 13.19.

Thirdly, because all these things in the Church ought to be performed in order
Greg. Naz. (...).
. 1. Cor. 14.40. and because there is difference of the members of the Church:
and among the Pastors themselves all are not equal, either in their gifts or
public government of the Church. 1. Tim 5.19. And in all ages, both under the
law and under the Gospel, and in the primitive Church (as is testified by
Ignatius Ignat. epist ad Trallian. and ep. ad Magnes. and ep. ad Philadelph.
, Tertullian Tertul. de bapt. c. 17.
, Cyprian Cypr. ep. 55. and ep. 57.
, Eusebius Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 1. and l. 3. c 4.
, and others, who derive this form of government from the cradle of the
Apostles:) there were degrees of government among the Pastors; therefore the
exercise of this work, of interpreting the holy Scriptures in the Church of
England, is performed by the Pastors thereof respectively to their several
degrees of government Whit ak. concl vlt. pa. 17. in the end of his work de
cclesia. No^ arrogo mihi, non sumo exp^^en h^articuli authoritatem, quam
grauissimis and lapientissimis Ecclesiae praepositis. Archiepiscopis and
Episcopis relinquo: sed cognoscendi du^taz^t and iudicandi libertate^ eq^or.
Cyprian. ep. 27. Inde per temporum and successionu^ vices, Episcoporum
o^dinatio, and Ecclesiae ratio decu^rit, vt Ecclesia uper Episcopos
co^stituatur, and omnis actus Eccl. siae, per ^oldem praeposi^^^ gubernet^^.
.

Fourthly, we do not place the truth of exposition in personal authority
Aeneas Sylu. de gest. Council. B^^il. Non ego cu^^^uis Episcop^^ n^ndacium (...)
diussimi (...) pr^eponam pauperis presbyteri: habitat saepius in sordido
palliolo, quam in pictis vestibus. s pi^ntia.
, for that depends upon inward grounds, and the right use of the lawful
means; but first we yield unto our Bishops and Ecclesiastical governors, the
right of ordering and directing the means for the public interpretation of
the holy Scriptures: secondly, the authority of public expounding the same to
our whole Church, when there is just occasion to do this. Thirdly, touching
the exposition it self, it is the duty of Governors, besides their own
industry, to use the advice and help of the skillful and worthy persons in the
Church, whom God has endued with gifts to search out and manifest his truth:
even as Moses being chief Governor and ouerseer of the workmanship of the
Tabernacle, and Solomon of the Temple, did use Aoliab, Exodus 31. and Huram, 2.
Chron. 2.14. and 4.11. and other skillful workmen about the said work. Fifthly,
the means of expounding holy Scripture, are of two sorts, according to the
twofold matter of the scriptures: some are only divine, and these are in the
Scriptures themselves tren l. 3. c. 12. Oste^siones quae sunt in Scripturis,
no^ possunt ostendi nisi ex Scripturis.
; some humane, and these are taken from all helps of wisdom and learning
whatsoever.

For in the Scriptures some things are merely supernatural, and of divine
revelation; some things are taken from common reason and humane sciences ^er^^.
l. d^ re^^. car. Est quide^ de co^munibus sensibus lapere in Dei rebus, sed in
testimoniu^ very. ^^^m. Alex Stro^ l. 1. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 18.
etc. 40. c. 41. Rainol. ag. Heart. c. 6. diuis. 2. Calu. (...) 1. Cor. 1.17.
Hiper. com. Colos. 2. p. 106. Sadael. cont. Turrian. p. 283. Pet. Mart. com. 2.
Sam. 6.^13. (...) Ki^^dontius de Scriptur. and alij.
, to explicate and apply the former. John 3.8.12. To wit; there be some things
delivered in the Scriptures concerning the Stars, Job. 38.31. the Elements,
Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, etc. And there be references to the law of nature, to
Story and humane wisdom. Also diverse things being implicitly taught in the
Scripture, must be collected and derived from thence by discourse and arguing,
according to the rules of art: we do not mean that the tractation of every
thing in this kind must be received from the very Scripture; but teaching
that Scripture expoundes it self, we mean that the grounds and principles of
the exposition of such parts thereof as deliver supernatural truth, must only
be taken from the Scripture it self, and all other helps be used as ministers
and servants unto them.

Bellarmines words, in behalf of the Scripture, proving it self to be the
word of God.
Bellarmine in the place alleged by Master White Bellarm. de Sc ^pt. l 1. c.
^.
, affirms most truly there is nothing more known, nothing more certain then
the Scriptures, and it were great madness not to believe them. And in another
place Bellarm. de Script. l. 3 c. 2.
; it is better known to be true which is found in the Scriptures, then that
which is in the ancient Fathers.

T. W. The Adversary about this quotation, accuses M. white; first, for
adding these words not found in Bellarmine, other means may fail: secondly,
for making speech general, whereas the same is vtterred particularly against
the Swenkfeldians.

Answ. First, the words, Other means may fail, are Master Whites own, and
should, if the Printer had observed it, have bin set down in another character,
or with a Parenthesis; but such small ouersights cannot generally be avoided in
printing Bellar. Recog. pa. 3. Typogr.
. Secondly, although Bellarmine in that chapter dispute against the
Swenkfeldians, yet his words are general; even as when our Savior speaking in
particular to the Pharisees, and saying, Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, uses a general sentence, true in many others as well as in
those Pharisees, Math. 12.34.

Thirdly, from that which is uttered by Bellarmine, it follows against you,
that the Scriptures prove themselves to be the word of God, and are of greater
authority then the Church. For that which has nothing better known then it
self, is made known by it self: and the Church is not better known then it;
but according to Bellarmine, there is nothing better known then the scripture:
and this also is the ancient Catholic faith.

Clement of Alexandria says Clem. Alexan. orat. ad Gentes.
: The word of God is hidden to none, it shines to all men, and there is no
Cimmerian darkness therein. And Augustine Aug. de Genesis a^ lit. l. 5. c. 3.
, The Scripture speaks in such a manner, vt affabilitate paruulos nutriat,
that by it familiar speaking, it nourishes little ones. And as a familiar
friend without glosing, it speaks to the learned and unlearned Aug. epist. 3.
ad Volusian.
; and Evangelical words carry their own exposition with them Aug. de verb
Dom. in Math. hom. 23.
. And Chrysostom Chrysostom. ex vari. in Math. ho. 23.
, You have the Scriptures before your eyes, like bright lamps of
understanding, and the Scripture expounds it self, and permits not the
hearer to err Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 13.
: And Theodorite, (...) it declares and interprets it self Theodorit.
quaest. in 2. Genesis (...).
. And if there were no proper light in the Scriptures, besides the Churches
preaching, to demonstrate it self, why did the Lord command the private and
public reading thereof in the Old Testament? Deuteronomy. 17.19. and 31.11. and also
in the New Testament. Ioh. 5.39. Col. 3.18. 2. Tim. 3.15. Apoc. 2.3. And
wherefore does Saint Paul command that his Epistles should be read in the
Church? Col. 4.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. And writing to the Ephesians, says: whereby
when you read you may understand. Ephe. 3.4. To write the same things unto
you, to me is not grievous, but for you it is safe. Phil. 3.1. 2. Cor. 1.13.

Paragr. 2. Bellarmine produced in proof, that the Scriptures are the only
rule of faith.
T. W. To prove that all points in Controversy must definitiuely be determined
by the written word alone, without any respect to the Churches authority: in
the explication whereof he marches out, making Bellarmine Bellar. de verb
Dei, l. 1. c. 2.
his buckler, etc.

Answ. In this short speech you misreport in three points.

First, you say my Brother holds, that all points of Controversy must be
determined by the written word alone: you should have said, all points of
Controversy, the matter whereof is only supernatural truth. Controversy may
arise about the grammatical signification of words, about Theological
conclusions: some of the premises whereof are Philosophical, or of humane
reason: Or concerning humane Story, as the same in expounding many Prophesies,
is subordinate to the Scripture; as namely, the Persian Monarchs: the kindred
of Herod, etc. about the materials of parables and similitudes used in the
Scripture. Concerning the individual matter and circumstances of moral
actions, and many things of like nature, Master White makes not the Scripture
the only rule of these things, but of such as be merely divine and
supernatural: For of the other, the law of Nature, Reason, Humane Story,
Grammar, Logic, Philosophy, Prudence, and discretion; the laws of Superiors
are rules, besides the Scripture.

Secondly, you add, that Master White affirms all Controversies, etc. must
be definitiuely determined by the written word alone.

Answ. To prevent hereafter in you and in your fellows, impertinent discourse,
who in many points either not understanding or dissembling our meaning, fight
against your own shadows, and declining the matter in question, stuff your
paper with unnecessary probation of what we deny not: I will here deliver
what Doctor White and other Protestants teach, concerning the definitive
determination of Controversies in Religion.

An Observation concerning the Judge of Controversies.
We acknowledge that there be two kinds of Judges, which definitiuely determine
Controversies.

First, the one supreme and independent, whose sentence is infallible, from
whom there lies no appeal, and to whose sentence all other Judges must give
place. And this Judge is the holy Ghost, speaking in the Scripture, Ioh. 16.8.
Act. 15.28.

This Judge is invisible, in respect of his person, and yet he delivers an
open and visible sentence in writing, which is the holy Scripture Aug. sup
Psalm. 22. Fratres sumus, quare litigamus? non intestatus mortuus est pater,
fecit testamentum and mortuus est, etc. tamdiu contenditur de haereditate
mortuorum quamdiu testamentum proferatur in publicum: and cum testamentum
prolatum fuerit in publicum, tacent omnes vt tabulae aperiantur and recitentur.
Iudex intentus audit, aduocati silent, praecones silentium faciunt, vniuersus
populus suspensus est, vt legantur verba mortui, non sentientis in monumento.
Ille sine sensu iacet in monumento, and valent verba eius: sedet Christus in
coelo, and contradicitur testamento eius? aperi, legamus. Fratres sumus, quare
contendimus? placetur animus noster: non sine testamento nos dimisit pater
noster.
. Ioh. 12.48. Romans 2.16. And thus Chrysostom Chrysostom. to. 5. hom. de expuls.
ipsius.
and Augustine Aug. sup. Psalm. 144. Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 1. c 2. Per.
corporales literas quas cerneremus and legeremus, erudire nos voluit. Ioh.
Driedo de Eccles. dogm. l. 4. c. 4. Ipsa Euangelia tanquam instrumenta publica.
Tho. Aq. p. 3. q. 1. ar. 3. Sacra Scriptura per quam diu. voluntas nobis
innotescit.
, call the Scripture the hand of God, saying; I read his handwriting, the
same is an invincible fortress unto me. And even as the sentence of a lawful
Judge, being upon record, is authentical in the Judges absence, and after his
deceasse: and it is usual in arbitrements and sundry Controversies, to deliver
a judgment or determination in writing: so it has pleased the holy Ghost in
the written word, to deliver unto the Church a definitive sentence touching the
greatest questions of Faith and Religion, and sufficient doctrine to be
collected from thence, to determine all questions directly concerning faith.

Secondly, but besides the holy Ghost, our great and invisible Judge, the Lord
has placed in his Church subordinate Judges Aug. cont. Crescon. l. 2. c. 22.
, visible and outward delegates, whose voice and open sentence the faithful may
sensibly hear, and by whose wisdom and authority, Controversies of Religion
are debated and defined, according to to the rules appointed by Christ, Math.
18.17. Hebr. 13.17. Act. 15.27.

And these Judges are of two sorts: first, general for the whole Church;
namely, the Fathers lawfully assembled and proceeding in a general Council.
Act. 15.2. Particular, the heads and Fathers of each provincial or national
Church. And these Judges of both sorts concerning matters of faith and
supernatural verity, are bounded in their judgment to the written word of
God only Becan. de iud. contr.. 86. In concilio Apostolorum in quo controuersia
illa proposita and definita est, nullum Scripturae testimonium, etc. allatum
fuit, etc. Iren. lib. 5. ca. 20. Confugere oportet ad ecclesiam and eius sinu
edoceri, and Domini Scripturis enutriri. Plantatus enim Ecclesiae Paradisus in
hoc mundo, ab omni ergo liguo paradisi escas manducabis, ait Spiritus Dei, id
est, ab omni diuina Scriptura manducate, etc.
, Ephe. 2.20 Ambros. com. Ephesians. 2. vetus and nouum testamentum.
. out of the limits whereof they may not range Hieron. in Mich. c. 2. Histor.
tripart. l. 2. c. 5. ex Theodorit. hist. l. 1. c. 7.
.

The definition of Controversies, truly delivered by Ecclesiastical Judges,
according to this rule, is authentical and infallible; and the same has a
double authority, one internal, in respect of the matter which is contained
in the Scripture: the other external, in regard of the outward means, whereby
the truth is delivered and published by officers, deputed thereunto by God.

The Lord has placed in his Church Pastors and Teachers, Ephe. 4.11. Governors
and Rulers, Hebr. 13.17. 1. Tim. 5.17. Romans 12.8. and has made them Stewards
of his family. Tit. 1.7. a Bishop is Gods steward; and he has committed the
keys of his Church and spiritual kingdom unto them. Math. 16.19. When these
persons therefore by office and commission from God, proceed lawfully in
declaring and defining the truth: the truth thus declared and published by an
ordinance of Christ, is in two respects of more certain authority, then other
truth made known by private persons: first, because of a special promise of
assistance of grace; secondly, by reasons the means of discovering the truth,
by the joint labor and judgment of many, and those the principal members of
the Church, are more sufficient.

But if it be apparent, that Bishops and Pastors abuse their authority, or
degenerate from their calling and duty, becoming Wolves in Sheep clothing,
Math. 7. 15. Act. 20.29. blind guids and wicked Shepherds. Esa. 56.10. Ezekiel.
22.26. as it happened in the days of the Arrians, and at the second Nicene
Council, etc. then the faithful have liberty and commandment to relinquish
their judgment. Math. 16.11. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Ioh. 20.27. and to rely upon the
holy Scriptures and other helps, which God affords them. Gal. 1.8.

This doctrine, Stapleton Stapl. Triplie c 23.
and other Papists Suat. def sid. Cath. cont. sect. Angl. l. 1. c. 11. rat. 5.
do vehemently oppose; pretending, that Controversies in religion are hereby
made interminable: for unless, say they, the church have one visible Judge,
whose authority is absolute, and to whose sentence all the faithful must
subject themselves howsoever, without debating and questioning his judgment
Stapl. tripl. pa 310. Vtrum consentanea Script. loquatur non est ouium and
subditorum iudicare. Bellar. de Pont l. 4. c. 3. Non est ouium iudicare number
pastor erret.
: They which are audacious and contentious, seeming wise to themselves, will
presume to despise the Churches judgment, pretending that the same is not
according to the Scriptures: and in most Controversies they may gather matter
of objection for the maintenance of their private opinion from the Scripture
Pigh. disp c 3. Cum nihil pene sit in Scripturis tam expressum, quod non
ingeniosi hominis expositionem aliquam recipiat: quam ex alio Scripturae loco
etiam colorare possit and probabilem facere. Linda. praef. in 5. lib. panopl.
euang.
.

Answ. First, it is impossible in this life for any society religious or
humane, to prevent or keep out all abuse and inconvenience which may happen by
the wickedness of evil disposed persons. And yet this which our Adversaries
urge against us, is far less then that which ensues from their appointing
of one universal absolute Judge: for admit that he err, as possibly he may,
then the whole Church relying upon him falls into error Greg. m. l. 4 ep. 32.
Vniuersa Ecclesia a suo statu corruit, quando is qui vniuersalis appellatur
cottuit. Bellar. de Pon. l 4. c. 3. Necessario tota ecclesia errabit, si
Pontifex erret. Aeneas Sylu de gest. Council. Basil. page 19 Quid remedij. erit
si crimino sus Papa perturbet ecclesiam? si animas perdat, si peruertat exemplo
malo populos, si denique contraria fidei praedicet, haereticisque dogmatibus
subditos imbuat?
. But of the other side, where judicial authority is made dependant upon the
holy Scripture, and placed in many; though one or more chance to fail, others
embrace the truth: and although at some hard times, such as were the days of
the Arrians, contentious persons like a tempest, disturb the outward
tranquillity of the Church; yet the firm members thereof, and all the godly
and peaceably minded, do still retain the truth.

Secondly, we do not lie open to this inconvenience so much as our Adversaries
pretend; neither are they so free from it as they bear the world in hand.

There is no liberty given by our doctrine, to factious and busy persons, upon
their private conceit or probable reasons, to contest or disauow the public
judgment of the Church: But it is then only lawful to dissent, when there is
evident testimony of plain Scripture, expounded according to the general
Tenet of godly Pastors of the precedent Church, to gainesay the present
definition of Ecclesiastical Judges. And caeteris paribus, when arguments of
both sides hang as it were even in the balance, we always prefer the public
judgment of the Church before any private person. And although our Churches
maintain the general reading of the holy Scripture, yet they allow not a
presumptuous liberty for private spirits, to rack and rifle the Scriptures at
their pleasure, and to create new divinity, or to alter the constant doctrine
of the primitive Church: but concerning all weighty matters in Religion, we
require plain places of Scripture, such as cannot be perverted but the
presumption of the doers will appear: and our rule of faith is plain
Scripture, either being such in it self, or as it has heretofore been
expounded by the primitive Church, and most godly and worthy Pastors of the
Church ever since their time: and godly and peaceable Christians submit
themselves hereunto. And although there be in all ages turbulent spirits, and
some which cause division and offense, Romans 16.17. 1. Cor. 11.19. This can no
more discredit our Churches, then the sedition of Rebels and Traitors, deface
the good laws and righteous government of a just Commonwealth. And if in the
Apostles own age and presence, many Impes of Satan disquieted the flock of
Christ: yea, if our Savior and his Apostles foretell yt there will be always
such, Math. 18.7. 1. Cor. 11.19 Tertull. de praescript. haer. c. 1. and 3. and
4.
. does not a wicked spirit of partiality possess our Adversaries, when they
object that to our disgrace, which by Gods permission proceeds from the evil
one, Math. 13.25. who infesteth the Church militant to the worlds end. 1. Pet.
5.8. and whose malice in this kind, no creature or means can wholly prevent
Tertul. ib. c. 31 Arenarum sterilis foeni adulterium, ab inimico diabolo, etc.
?

But our Adversaries pretend, that their visible Judge preuents all discord and
dissension; and (as at the building of Salomons Temple) there was no noise or
sound of hammer, axe, or tool to be heard among them: and they all lie down
in the Tabernacles of peace, having changed their swords into Plowshares, and
their spears into pruning hooks.

But when we chance to read the Stories of Pope Julius the second, Leo the
ninth, John the tenth, Innocent the second, Gregory the sixth; and see the
spiritual Judge himself, the foster-father and prime fountain of unity and
concord, with a helmet of brass upon his head, and armed with a coat of male:
When we read in Platina, Sabellicus, Antonine, Onuphrius, Cicarella^, the pen
men of Popes lives: Legends and Narrations of martial affairs and bloody
wars, which had their offspring, and were extracted from the loins of the
peacemaking Fathers Papit. Masson de ep^c. Vib. l 6 in fulio 2. p. 379. In
praesentia quidem, in Italia ^^^e s^^gent stad^^, seruent bella. ^^^mus Pon^^x
Julius b^lligera^^, ^in^it, ^^mp^a^ planeque Iu^^^ agit, etc. Sabellic. ^^nead
^. l. 4. Bergom. supplem. l. 12. Innocentius secundus bellator, etc. Bergom.
supplem. l. 14. anno 1371. Gregorius vndecimus Ponti^ex a precibus ad arma
conuersus. Urban. 4. bellator. ibid. lib. 13. anno 1262. Tom. 4. Council. Sur.
orat. Egidij Viterbiensis, speaking to Julius 2. in the Synod of Lateran says:
Militiae (quod nemo antehac potuit) Ecclesiae arma, magnis regibus metuenda
faceres. Orat. Tho de Vio Card. Accingere, pater sancte, gladio tuo, binos enim
habes, etc. page 551. Chrysostom. hom. 4. de verb. Esai. c 6. Eius est (sacerdotis)
arguere tantum liberamque praestare admonitionem non a^ma mouere, clypeos
vsurpare, etc. Vide Espenc. com. 1. Tim. l. 2. digress. cap. 6.
. And that the Pope indirecte ad spiritualia, by crooked subordination to
spiritual affairs, as Bellarmine Bellarm. de Pontif Romans l. 5. c. 1. Habet
indirecte potestatem quandam eamque summam in temporalibus.
speaks, or by a direct regitiue authority, as Francis Bosius defends Fra.
Bozzius de temp. ecclesiae monarch l. 1. c. 1. etc. 2. Sextus decretal. tit. 6.
c 17. gloss. c. fundamenta. Roma fundata a praedonibus, adhuc de primordijs
retinet.
, has ever since the days of Hildebrand, embroiled the Christian world,
suborned treason and homicide Otho Frising. l. 6. ca. 36. Quanta mala, quot
bella, bellorumque discrimina inde secuta sunt, quoties misera Roma obsessa,
capta, vastata, etc. denique tot mala tot schismata, tot tam animorum quam
corporum pericula, huius tempestatis turbo inuoluit, vt solus ex persecutionis
immanitate, ac temporis diuturnitate, ad humanae miseriae infelicitatem
sufficeret comprobandam: vnde a quodam ecclesiastico scriptore, densissimis
Aegypti tenebris comparatur.
, and made a butcherie and slaughter house of the Western regions Fazel. hist.
Sicul. l. 8. c. 3. Pontisicis consilio necatur Conradinus, etc. page 448.
. The smooth declamations of Jesuits and Seminary Priests do not so much
persuade us to believe, there is a virtue in making general peace by their
visible head the Pope, as his own fell and direful deeds, do make us fear
lest, as the old saying is, Dum tituli remedia, pixides venena habeant: Whiles
the title and inscription does promise a remedy, the boxes should contain
poison.

But I have mistaken my self; for our Adversaries place the Popes power of
making unity in matters of Religion, the same being the more even and proper
object of his priestly regency: but neither in this kind can we perceive such a
sovereign operation. The Papists have no actual unity in Religion, and there
is diversity of opinion proclaimed by themselves, in every question of
Theology. And whereas they pretend, that at the sound of the Popes sentence,
like Frogs in a marrish, at the falling in of a great log or stone, they are
all hushed, and profess whatsoever his Holiness imposes: surely in their own
Records we read of many Schismatickes and refractarie subjects, which have
risen up in the Romish Church; and these, not Idiots and pettish waspes, but
men of eminent qualities: Marsilius of Padua, Dantes Altigerius Occham the
flower of his age, the great Doctors of Paris, etc. And to speak of our own
days, and matters of yesterday, the State of Venice and their Divines in an
opposition, regarded the judgment of Pope Paul the fifth, as much as the Church
of England does the Canons of the Trident Council.

If they pretend that Pope Paul did not define or pronounce a cathedral
sentence; they should rather have said he durst not, lest his subjects turning
upon him, he had shamed himself, bewraying the weakness of his Majesty,
and become ridiculous to the peevish Heretics: who seeing his own sheep
rebelling against his Pastoral staff, and deriding his infallible tribunal,
would have cried unto him, saying; Holy Father, thou great Physician of
discord, cure thy self. The truth is, the Popes definitive sentences are rare
Sotus de not. and gra l. 1. c. 8. Concilium nihil censuit quid sit peccatum
originale, sed sub lite, inter doctores reliquit. Bannes 2 part. Tho. q. 1. ar.
8. Hoc vnum dixerim, vehementer me desiderare vt contentio haec inter pios
theologos summi Pontificis authoritate decideretur, ac componeretur. Alioqui si
ecclesia prudente and sciente, haec inter theologos varietas permittitur:
pe^nde est, acsi ecclesia diceret, vnusquisque in suo sensu abundet, dummodo
fidei veritas, and Catholicae Ecclesiae authoritas defendatur. Papir. Masson de
episc Vrb. l. 6. in Sixto 4. Decretum ab eo est de Virginis conceptione, posse
quamlibet aduersantium opinionem sine peccato, haeresisque vitio credi.
, and it behooves him to be cautelous in them; and unless it be in those few
articles, which his vassals with a common consent maintain against us, all the
rest may go which way it will, for any definition that can be extorted from
him. Yea, when he defines or sends out Bulls, they be so slipperie and
cautionarie, that they rather minister fuel of strife, then prove remedies of
discord: and among other things let the Reader consider the Bulls of Pius the
fifth, and Gregory the thirteenth, about the opinions of Michael Baius, and
compare with the same that which Vasques the Jesuit delivers, (all which is
set down by my Brother in his last book D. White Def. of the Way. chap. 7. pa.
41. etc.
) and let any man judge whether his Bulls be fish or flesh, in any other matter
but only against us.

The third absurdity, you seek to fasten upon Master White, is, that he
holds all points of Controversy must be determined by the Scripture only,
without any respect to the Churches authority.

Answ. There can be no determination of doubts in the visible Church, without
the application of the rule unto the matter in question, regulate by the same:
which application, when it is solemn and public for the whole Church, Master
White acknowledges, must ordinarily be performed by the Bishops and Pastors of
the Church.

But it is in vain for you and your fellows to bark against us about the
Churches authority, which we freely and largely acknowledge, and know, that
the Church cannot be in safety without it; but set upon us and convince us in
the things we deny, which are, 1. That the Roman Church and Pope is the only
subject of that authority: 2. That the authority of the Church is
prophetical or voluntary Stapl. A^^^. apost (...) 2. Cor. 10. Vacu^^ me^tes
offense Christo per ecclesia^ loquenti oportet, nec sub condition, Ecclesiae
vocem admittere, si verbo est annexa, si ^criptu^is consentanea nostro iudicio
loquatur, sed absolute and simpliciter. Becan. de ^ud contr. 1^^ Si occurreret
aliqua controue. sia, quae neque a perte ex Scriptura, neque ex traditione
decid^ possit, recurrendum esset ad auxilium Spiritus sancti, qui speciatim
doceret nos onmem veritatem.
, and not depending upon the rule of the written word, and the true meaning
thereof, collected by the right use of outward means.

An examination of Bellarmines speech, concerning the holy Scripture being the
rule.
T. W. The sum of your accusation is, That whereas Bellarmine makes the
Scripture a rule of faith in part, M. White produces him to persuade, that he
makes the same a total rule.

Answ. Sometimes Bellarmine writes in such manner, that he seems to deny the
Scripture to be any rule of faith Bellar. de verb Dei, l 4 c. 12. Pigh.
controuer. Ratisb. l. 3. Quorum fuit hoc in scribendo consilium, non vt scripta
illa sua prae essent nostrae religioni, sed sub^ssent potius.
. The proper and chief end of Scripture (says he) was not to be the rule of
faith, but a certain profitable commonitorie, to preserve the doctrine
received by preaching.

Secondly, presently after he corrects himself, and acknowledges the same to
be a rule in part Bellar. ibid and Great de page 1560. Bec^n de iudic. conti.. 1
c 2.
in some matters of faith, and a joint rule with tradition.

Thirdly, another time he seems to make it an entire and total rule,
concerning all such things as are generally necessary to salvation Bellar. ib.
l. 4. c. 11. and in or^t. habita gymnas. Romans 15^6 before his book o^ the
Scriptures
.

Fourthly, sometimes he writes in such manner, that one would believe he made
the same the only rule: There is one rule of faith, indubitate and certain,
namely the word of God declared by the Church Bellar de ^a^, ^is, l. 3. c 19.
: and faith cannot rest upon any thing but the authority of the divine word
Bellar. de iusti^ l. 3 c 8.
.

But he means not in these places the written word only or chiefly, but
generally the word written and traditionarie: Now Master White having to deal
with such a Proteus, who of set purpose inuolues his assertions, and makes them
ambiguous, to minister occasion of word-bate, may without much blame sometimes
mistake his meaning.

But to answer directly to the matter in question, it follows from the
assertion of Bellarmine, that the Scripture is the only rule of faith. The
rule of Catholic says (says he ^^^^ar. de verb Dei, l. 1. c. 2.
) must be certain and known; and there is nothing better known or more
certain then the Scripture. Hence I reason; that is the only rule whereunto
the chiefest properties of a rule do solely belong.

But the properties of true and certain, do only in matters of faith belong
to the holy Scriptures. And this appears:

1. Because traditions are far more uncertain, then the written word: and
many of them false, and uncertain; as shall be proved, paragraph 4. of this
Chapter.

2. The written word, is a rule of traditions, and therefore it is the only
rule. And this appears, by the doctrine of our adversaries, who acknowledge
that no traditions must be admitted, but such as agree with the Scripture
Bellar. ib. l. 4. c 3. Nec vllam ^^aditionem ad^^t^imus contra Scripturam.
Tanner. Jesuit. disp Ratisb. page 116.
, and are derived from the Scripture, and the writings of the primitive Fathers
Bellar. de Script. l. 4. c. 3. Eas tantum recipimus pro apostolicis, quas
firmis testimonijs antiquorum probare possumus, etc. Ioh. Driedo de Eccles.
dog. l. 2. c. 3. Traditiones Ecclesiae in hijs quae spectant ad necessitatem
fidei salutaris, aut demonstrantur ex Scripturis manifestis, aut ex scripturis
Patrum.
: But those Traditions which are derived from the Scriptures, have the same to
be their rule: and there is nothing more common in the primitive Fathers, then
to subject all their writings to be regulate by the holy Scriptures; therefore
such traditions as are found in the works of the holy Fathers, have the holy
Scripture to be their rule. From whence it follows, that the Scripture is
the only primitive rule of faith, as some of our Adversaries have acknowledged
Gabr. Biel. Can. mist lect. 71. g. Non in solo pane viuit homo, sed in omni
verbo quod procedit de ore Dei; id est Scriptura sacra: Quae secundum P.
Gregorium, est tanquam os Dei, quia per eam loquitur Deus nobis omnia, quae
vult a nobis fieri. Durand. praef. sup. sentent. Scotus ib in prolog.
: whereof one says expressly Ferus com. Math. l. 2. in ca. 13. page 248. col. 1.
; The holy Scripture is the sole rule of veritte, and whatsoever differs or
contradicts the same, it is error and cockle, with whatsoever show it come
forth. And another Villauincen, de formand. concion. lib. 2. cap. 2.
says; The doctrine of the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, is alone the
foundation of truth, and the rule, etc.

Paragr. 3. Eckius alleged about Tradition, and the authority of the Church.
T. W. Eckius his words are Eckius ench. l. 1. de Script. and Ecclesia.
; The Scripture is not authentical without the authority of the Church:
Master White alleging this Author, affirms; They say the Scripture
receives all the authority it has from the Church, and from Tradition.

Answ. 1. Ib. Scriptura no^ est authentica sine auth. Eccles. Ecce potestas
Ecclesiae super Scripturam.
Master White prefixing before his speech these words; They say, does not
mean Eckius only, but has reference to other Papists besides. 2. It
follows from Eckius his words, that the Scripture receives all external
authority from the Church, and from Tradition: for he says; The Scripture is
made authentical, that is, of public authority, by ye church: But the means
whereby the Church authoriseth the Scripture, is Tradition Pigh. cont. Ratisb.
loc. 3. de eccl p 97. col. 2. Baro. annal. to 1. ann. 53. n. 11. Canus loc. l.
3. c. ^. etc 3. funda. 4.
.

An observation concerning Traditions.
The question of Traditions is one of the principal Controversies between the
Papists and us Canus loc. theol. l. 3. c. 6.
. And because this Popish Priest does sundry times in his Treatise intermedle
therewith, I will declare the doctrine of both our sides concerning this matter.

Section 1.
The word or name Tradition is in it self general, signifying any doctrine
delivered from one to another, either by word or writing Irenaeus. Tertullian.
Cyprian. Bella^. de verbo Dei, l 4. ca. 2. Bannes 2 2 q 1. a^ 1^. page 167.
^^res. de trad. p. 1. post. 2. ^orin. com. Act. 6.14. Canus loc. l. 3. c. 6.
and alij.
. Act. 6.14. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. and chap. 3.6. 1. Cor. 15.3.4.

But in this present Controversy it signifies unwritten doctrines (...) P.
Galatin. de arcan. Cath. ver. l. 1. c. 1.
, given by divine inspiration touching matters of Faith and Religion, which the
Apostles by word of mouth delivered secretly only to the chief Pastors
Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 2. and 11. quaedam solis praelatis, etc. Can.
loc. l. 3. c 3. Stapl. Rel. c. 5. q. 5. ar. 2. Gr. Val. to. 3. d. 1 p. 7. q.
1.. 43. Azor. inst. mor. p. 1. l. 8. c. 4. Bos. de sig. l. 3. c. 6. Grets. def.
Bellar. de verbo Dei, page 1597.
of the Christian Church, to be taught in the same: and the which being not
committed by them to writing as the Siriptures were, yet are a part of the rule
of faith, and of equal or greater authority then the written word Stapl. Rel.
c. 3. q. 3. p. 352. Articulus fidei esse potest non solum quod in Scripturis
reuelatur: sed quod traditione ecclesiastica ad nos deriuatur.
.

Secondly, the principal matter of these Traditions, are doctrines and
articles of faith, precepts of manners, exposition of Scripture, Rites,
Ceremonies, and external actions, as necessary to Religion as those which are
found in the Scriptures All the former authors.
.

Thirdly, these Traditions are equalled by all our Adversaries with the
canonical scripture Sixtus Senens. biblioth. l. 2. pa. 123. Non minus meretur
inter ethnicos abijci, qui ecclesiasticas traditiones recusat, quam qui
euangelium recusat. Bannes 2. 2. q 1. ar. 10. de trad. concl. 5. Andrad. def.
Conc. Trid l. 2. Carb. introd. theol. l. 5. c. 5. Suar. def. fid. Cath con^
sect. Angl. l. 1 c 9.
: and in some things they prefer them before the same, calling them the
foundation of the Scripture Baron. to. 1. annal. an. 53. n. 11.
, the touchstone Can. loc. l. 3. c 2 Lydius lapis, etc
and rule whereby to try the same Pighius contr. loc. 3. Regula ad quam and
Scripturas etc.
, and they esteem them more necessary in the Church then the Scripture,
saying; Tradition is of the being of the Church, but the Scripture only of the
perfection and well being Bellarm. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 4. Nisi Hebionis
haeresis, etc. de been esse, etc. Cusan. epist. 2. ad Bohem. Sander. de visib.
monarch lib. 1. cap. 5. Hoc genus potest per se subsistere. etc. (traditiones)
non sunt ambiguae, etc. de hijs nulla lis oritur, etc. Plutarchus refert
Anachatsin, prudentem sane virum, vehementer operam Solonis irrisisse, quando
eum intellexit leges Atheniensibus conscriptas dare velle, etc.
. And the Scriptures without the same, were in a manner of no use Bosius de fig
l. ^6. c. 10. Inanis fere and nullius fructus, etc.
. They make the scripture a dead letter written in tables; and Tradition an
Epistle of Christ written in the heart.

Fourthly, they make the Pope and Roman Church the Register and authentical
keeper of these Traditions, saying they are spiritually written in the heart of
the church and Pope Coster. enchir. de Scriptur. Bos. de sig. l. 16. c. 10.
Can. loc l. 3. c. 3. fundam. 4.
, and not in books or parchments, at least many of them. And although sometimes
they seem to authorize them by the testimony of the primitive church Bellarm
de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 9. Driedo de Eccles. dog. l. 2. c. 3. Stapl. Rel. c. 5.
q. 5. ar. 2 ad. 6. Bosius, Ca^bo, and alij.
; yet they acknowledge, that they are not all of them found in the Records of
the Ancient, but may newly in every age be brought to light by the Roman Church
and Pope Grets. def. Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 9. page 1713. and 1715.
Azor inst. mor. p. 1. l. 4 c. 11. Bosius de sig. l. 3. c. 6.
; and so after a terrible rattling and thundering out of names of ancient
Fathers and Councels, in the cool of the business, the generation of these
non-script verities, for the greater part, descends from the loins of our
Adversaries Father, and fast friend the Pope.

Section 2.
The Protestants do not simply deny Tradition; but first we distinguish
Traditions, and then according to some acceptations, with a subordination to
holy Scripture, we admit thereof.

First, our Adversaries maintain, that there be doctrinall Traditions, or
Traditions containing articles of faith, and substantial matters of divine
worship and religion, not found in the holy Scripture; to wit, Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, adoration of Images, Papal Monarchy, etc. These and all
other such like Traditions, containing new parts and additions of Articles of
religion Bannes 2.2. q. 1. ar 10 de trad. Peers. Aiala. de trad. p. 3. Azor.
just. mor. p. 1. l. 8. c. 4. P. Soto d^f. consell. cath. Cum non sint in
Scriptura, necesse est esse apostolicae traditionis. Sander. de visib. monarch.
l. 1. c. 5 Orationem pro defunctis: inuocationem Sanctorum, etc. traditiones
facit.
, the Protestants simply condemn and refuse; and when we dispute against
Traditions, we take the word in this notion: and herein is the maine
difference between them and us.

Secondly, the name of Tradition in the writings of the primitive Doctors, is
taken in three other acceptations.

First, for external Rites and Ceremonies of decency, order, and outward
profession in religion not found in the holy Scripture, but used as things
adiaphorous, and not of the very substance of worship but accessarie; of which
kind, the primitive Fathers mention sundry; to wit, The signing with the
Cross, praying with the face toward the East, thrice dipping in water at
Baptism, tasting of milk and honey Tertul. de cor. mil. c 3. and in Apol. c.
16. Orig in Number. hom. 5. Ignatius epist. ad Pluladelph. Justin. apol. 2. and
orth qu. q. 118. Eusebius. hist. l 3. c. 4 and l 4. c. 22. and l. 5. c. 22. Basil.
de Spir. sanct. c. 27. Epiphan haer. 80 in fine.
, etc.

These ceremonies and the like used in the primitive Church, belong not to the
substance of religion, but are indifferent things and mutable: and lawfully
used or omitted, according to order, and commodity of every Church, and as
they be subseruient to godliness, taught in the Scripture Aug. epist 11. and
ep. 86. and ep. 118. and ep. 119.
.

Secondly, the report and testimony of the primitive Church, concerning matter
of fact, and concerning the judgment and practice of the Apostles; such
reports as explicate the meaning, or confirm the doctrine of the Scriptures;
to wit, the testimony of the said Church, concerning the number, parts, and
integrity of the Canonical Scriptures, and that the Apostles did baptize
Infants Orig com. 6. cap ad Romans Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem accepit,
paruulis baptismum dare. Hieron. contra Luciserian. Annescis Ecclesiarum hunc
esse morem, vt baptizatis postea manus imponantur, and ita inuocetur Spiritus
sanctus? Exigis vbi scriptum sit, in Actibus Apostolorum. Etiamsi Scripturae
authoritas non subesset totius orbis in hanc partem consensus, instar
praecepti, obtineret. Nam multa alia quae per traditionem in Ecclesia
vsurpantur, authoritatem scriptae legis obseruarunt.
, and admit none to the Lords Supper, but such as were first baptized and of
elder years; That they which were baptized, were afterward confirmed and
received imposition of hands, etc. These are called of the Fathers, by the name
of Tradition, and depend upon the holy Scriptures, and maintain the doctrine
thereof.

Thirdly, the primitive Church received from the Apostles lively teaching, the
sum and explication of Christian doctrine in many principal parts thereof
Cassand. de ossic. boni viri p. 7. Qui nobis initio veram hanc, and germanam
esse Christi and Apostolorum doctrinam, quae in ijs scriptis continetur, suo
testimonio approbarunt, ijdem sane, and mentem ipsam, and intelligentiam
corundem scriptorum, quam ex viua ipsa, and amplissima Apostolorum doctrina
acceperant, posteris tradiderunt. Atque haec est, quae apostolica traditio and
veritas non scripta, a nonnullis appellatur.
; and the interpretation of sundry places of holy Scripture, concerning the
Articles of the Trinity, Incarnation, and such like: The which Creed, sum of
doctrine, rule of faith, and exposition of the Scripture, being compared,
agrees with the written word: also the signification and translation of the
words and phrases of the Bible in the several languages, is received from hand
to hand, etc. the Fathers usually call these things by the name of Tradition
^ren. l. ^. c. 4. Tertul. de praescript cap 13. Orig. pro^m. l. 1. de princip.
^uscb. contra Marcel. episcopum Ancyran. Epipha. haer. 69. Cyril. Alex. apol
Council to. 1. and ad Theodos. de vecta side. Procles epist. ad Armen. ^ren. l.
3. c. 2. etc. 3. Basil. hom. 28. contra Sabel. and Arian.
.

The Protestants admit these three sorts or kinds of Tradition, according to
the doctrine and meaning of the primitive Church Apolog. Eccl. Angl. Harm.
confess. sect 17. Chem. exam. p. 1. de Trad. Calvin. 1. Cor. 11.2. comm. Beza
opusc. to. 3. Resp ad Claud. Saints. pa. 18. and in Colloq. Possiacen. com.
Gal. p. 3. Pet. Mart. com. lud. 3. B Bilson of subject. p. 4. pa. 581. and 586.
D. Field of the Church, l. 4. Herbrand. disp. pa. 117. n. 17. Lubbert. cont.
Bellar. de script. pa. 631. Hosiand. cont. Greg. Val. pa. 235. 239. Zanch. de
Scriptur. and de oper. redempt. Whitak. controu. de Script. q. 3. c. 5. pa. 223.
.

First, rituall and ceremonial about things indifferent, to be used or changed
according to the laws of every Church, and as they serve to edification, or
otherwise.

Secondly, Historical, which confirm and establish the doctrine of the
Scripture.

Thirdly, Doctrinall, by way of explication or plain delivery of that
doctrine, which is verbally contained in the Scripture.

But in the admitting hereof, we require two cautions; 1. That the holy
Scripture be the rule of all Traditions whatsoever, thus far, as that upon
examination they be conformable and subseruient unto the same B. Bilson: Teach
what you will by tradition, so it agree with the written word of God, we be not
against it. Hosiand. Si eae traditiones vrgeantur quae in ecclesia virgin
suerunt: quae que (...), admittimus.
. 2. That they have the testimony of the primitive Church in the prime age
thereof Basil hom. 28. contra Sabel. and Arrian. Ne Spiritum sanctum a Patre
and Filio separes, absterreat te Dominica traditio. Dominus ita docuit,
Apostoli praedicauerunt, Patres obseruarunt. Martyrs confirmauerunt, satis
tibi sit, vt dicas quem admodum edoctus etc. Tho. Walden doct. fid. l. 2. a^.
2. c. 19. De dubijs fidei debemus inquirere, quid senseru^t Apostoli, quid
successores apostoloru^, and deinceps viri probati vsque ad nostra te^pora
reliqueru^t in scriptis, and secundu^ quod verba ipsoru^ concordant sic elicere
veritate^. Cassan. de off. boni viri, ex Cath. trad. antiq perp. and
universally, etc.
, and scend to our days from the same by the stream of succession, through
ages following; and were received as Apostolic in other Churches as well as
the Roman.

Thus the state of the question between the Papists and us in the Controversy
of Traditions, stands in these three points.

First, whether there be Traditions of equal authority with the Scripture,
teaching diverse parts of doctrine, or other articles of faith Bannes 2.2. q. 1.
ar 10. de trad. Orationes esse ad sanctos faciendas, venerandas esse little
imagines, etc neque etiam impresse and inuolute Scripturae
and religion besides the same?

Secondly, whether any traditions are to be admitted, but such as being
examined by the Scripture, as the supreme rule of divine truth, are proved
conformable to the same?

Thirdly, whether Traditions wanting the plain testimony of the primitive,
and other precedent Churches Calvin. contra Pigh. de lib. arbitrio. Non
difficulter inter me and Pighium, in hac de traditionibus contentione conuenire
posset: si modo Ecclesiae traditionem, ex ce^to and perpetuo, sanctorum and
orthodoxorum consensu demonstraret.
are to be received, upon the bare credit and asseueration of the Roman Church
and Pope?

The Papists in every of these affirm, and we deny. And they maintain many
dogmaticall Traditions besides the Scriptures: Also, they will have Tradition
of equal authority with the written word, and to be believed absolutely
without subjection to the Scripture. And they give authority to the Pope and
Roman Synagogue to obt^ude upon us Traditions of a later hatch, and such as
were unknown and unheard of by the primitive Church, yea many which their own
Doctors, not long since have condemned.

Two Arguments against the Doctrine of Popish Traditions.
Argu. 1. If Popish Tradition be a part of the rule of faith, and of equal
authority with the written word, then it must have the same or equal
testimony and confirmation therewith. But it has not such testimony and
confirmation.

The written word of the New Testament was confirmed these five ways: 1. By
the lively testimony of the Apostles ^^n l. 3. c. 5. Discipuli veritatis
existentes, extra omne mendacium sunt.
, God bearing witness with signs and wonders, and miracles, and gifts of the
holy Ghost. 2. By the Scriptures of the Old Testament. 3. The primitive Church
had the very first coppies and authentical writings of the Scripture delivered
by the Apostles own hands Tertul de prae^cript. c. 36. Apud quas ipsae
authenticae liturae eorum recicantur, sonantes vocem and repraesentantes faci^m
cuiusque, etc. Aug. cont. Faust. M^nich. l. 28. c. 2 and l. 33. c. 9.
. And that Church delivered the Scripture to posterity, witnessing from whom
they received it. 4. The written word has the general approbation and
testimony of the whole Church of Christ in every age thereof until this day,
witnessing that the same is divine. 5. The written word has many impressions
and notes of divine verity and grace in it self Horant. loc. Cath l. 2. c. 2.
Reuerentiam, sua sibi maiestate vltro conciliat. Greg. Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1.
p. 5. Ita lectoris mentem commouet vt nulla alia doctrina.
, whereby it persuades the faithful, and assures them that it is the word of
Christ: But Popish Traditions want all these confirmations.

First, in special or distinctly they have no testimony of holy Scripture:
The Apostles or Christ himself never preached them, for any thing we can
certainly understand; they never referred people unto them, but oftentimes
both in the Pharisees and Gentiles condemn Traditions, which were very like
unto these of Popery: Math. 15. Mar. 7. Col. 2. etc.

Secondly, the primitive Church does not plainly affirm, that she received
them from the Apostles mouth, as it did the books and doctrine of the New
Testament. Our Adversaries allege some dark and uncertain speeches of
Fathers in proof of their Traditions: but they must either give us plain and
manifest testimonies, or else acknowledge that the Scripture is more evidently
confirmed by the primitive Church then Tradition; which is the thing I affirm.

Thirdly, the Papists want the perpetual consent, and general approbation of
the whole Church in every age for their Traditions, which the Jesuits confess
in regard of sundry of them Azor. instit. mor. p. 1. l. 4. c. 11. Grets def.
Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 9. Fieri potest, vt ante actis seculis, res non
suerit plane patefacta, etc. Vt aliquid censeatur apostolica traditio, ^on est
necesse, vt omni tempore ab vniuersis fidelibus creditum sit.
.

Fourthly, our Adversaries are forced for want of better proof, to confirm
their Traditions by the testimonies of counterfeit and bastardly writings,
bearing the names of ancient Fathers, Abdias, Martialis Bellar. Recog. l. 2. de
monach. Epistolae Martialis Apostoli, and liber Abdiae, de rebus gestis
Apostolorum citantur (...) nobis, tum hoc loco, tum alibi, quoniam ab aliquibus
reciptantur.
, Dennis Areopagite Gaietan. com. Act 17. An iste fit ille Dionysius, qui
scripsit libros de diuinis nominibus and coelesti hierarchia, certum non est.
, Decretall Epistles Azor. instit. mor. p. 1. l. 10 c 8. Quamuis eiusmodi
epistolae decretales, non ita constantem and certam authoritatem apud omnes
habeant.
, etc. of the credit whereof many among themselves doubt. And for want of
primitive Fathers, the Papists Greg. Val. to. 3 d. 1 q. 1. p 7. n. 45. page 377.
Carb. introd l 4 c. 8. page 472.
make their school Doctors living within four hundred years, one of their
witnesses and means to prove Tradition by.

Fifthly, Popish Traditions in themselves, to wit, the Popes royal Supremacy,
Adoration of Saints and Images, Church-seruice in an unknown tongue, single
life of the Clergy, Communion in one kind, praying to dead men, etc. are
repugnant to the holy Scripture: and many Articles of Tradition lately defined
by the Trent Council, were in former times either opposed or doubted of, by
learn^d Papists and Schoolmen Biel. 4 d. 17. q 1. alleges diverse Schoolmen,
doubting of auricular confess^o^. B. Rhenan. in Tertul praef. ad Lector. See
Bonau. 4. d. 11. q 2. de Transubstantiatione. Altifiodor, sum. l. 3. tr. 8. c.
5 quaest. 6. of invocation of Saints. Multi dicunt quod nos nec oramus Sanctos,
nec ipsi orant pro nobis, etc.
.

And from these premises I reason in this manner: That whose credit and
authority depends only upon the Roman Church now being, or upon the same
since the six hundredth year, is of inferior credit to the scripture: whose
authority depends upon the testimony of the holy Ghost, speaking in the
Scripture, upon the plain testimony of the Apostles, and upon the testimony
of the primitive Church, which received them from the Apostles: and lastly,
upon the general approbation of the whole Catholic Church since the Apostles
until now, no true Church of Christ ever doubting of them.

The authority of Popish Traditions, depends only upon the Roman Church, etc.
and they want all other plain testimony, in regard of such a measure of
testification, as the holy Scripture has the same.

Therefore the authority of Traditions is inferior to the authority of the
written word.

Argum. 2. Those things which proceed from the will of God only, can be made
known unto us no other way, but by the revelation of the Scripture. All
Articles of Faith and precepts of manners, concerning the substance of
Religion, proceed from the will of God only. Therefore they can be made known
unto us by no other means but by the Scripture.

The first proposition is delivered by diverse learned Doctors of Rome: Thomas
Aquinas teaches the same in express terms Tho. Aq 3. q. 1 ar. 3. A^^. de
doct. Christ l. 2. c 9. (...) (...) D^^^ qua^^^ voluntatem e^us. L. 3. c. 1.
Homo timeus Deum, voluntate^ eius, in Scripturis sanctis inquirit. Bellar. de
pec. l. 6 c. 3. Non est de ^ebus quae pendent a diuina voluntate, aliquid
asserendu^, nisi Deus ipse in Script. sanctis, tale aliquid reuelauerit.
, saying; Ea quae ex sola Dei voluntate proueniunt, etc. nobis innotescere non
possunt, nisi quatenus in sacra Scriptura traduntur, per quam diuina voluntas
nobis innotescit. The things which proceed from the will of God only, cannot
be made known unto us but so far as they be delivered in holy Scripture, by
which Gods will is manifested.

Gerson the Chancellor of Paris Gers. exa. doct. p. 2. consid. 1. Gabr. Can.
miss. lect. 71. Verbum Dei sacra Scriptura, quae ab ore Dei procedit, ipsius
indicat voluntatem: per quas solas plenam Dei voluntatem intelligere possumus.
Gers. p. 1. sermon. de Circumcis. Dom. consid. 1. Sacra Scriptura est regula
sufficiens pro regimine Ecclesiae.
, Men must dare to say nothing in divine matters, but that which is delivered
in the sacred Scripture. The reason whereof is, because the Scripture is given
unto us a sufficient and infallible rule, for the regiment of the whole
Ecclesiastical body and all the parts thereof, to the end of the world.

The second proposition is manifest, and also testified, Mat. 16.17. 1. Cor.
2.9.10.11.

Paragr. 4. Canus concerning Traditions.
T. W. Canus his words are Canus loc l. 3. c. 3. sundam. 4.
; To the confutation of Heretics, there is greater force in Tradition then in
Scripture. And again; Tradition has greater strength against Heretics then
the Scripture; yea, almost all disputations with them, must be determined by
the Scripture. Master White sets down Canus his meaning in this manner:
There is more strength to confute Heretics in Tradition, then in the
Scripture; yea all disputations with them, must be determined by Tradition, etc.

1. M. White leaves out the aduerbe ferme almost, or in a manner.

Answ. 1. Canus accounts the Scripture of it self, altogether insufficient
to confute Heretics, because the sense thereof whereupon confutation
depends, is only attained by Tradition Quis verus ac legitimus Scripturae
sensus, non nisi traditione ecclesiae certo cognosci posse.
.

2. He makes Tradition the touchstone Lydius lapis, etc. in manu Ecclesiae,
quo falsas verasque doctrinas exploraret. Lindan. Panopl. l. 1. c. 2. Vnica
sacra anchora Catholicae Ecclesiae, traditio.
whereby false doctrine is examined and tried; whereupon it follows, that as
M. White speaks, all disputations must be determined thereby.

Thirdly, he affirms, there is greater strength in Tradition to confute
Heretics then in Scripture.

Fourthly, all Controversies must be decided by the sense of the Scripture; but
Tradition conteines the sense of the Scripture Canus ib. St^n^rt. com. ^ Cor.
11.
. Therefore all controversies, according to Canus, must be determined by
Tradition.

Object. 2. M. White conceales the reason, which Canus renders of his speech.

Answ. 1. Master White did never intend to write out all Canus his book. 2.
Canus his reason changes not the sense of his speech, but confirms the same.

Object. 3. Canus borrows his assertion from Tertullian, which Mr. White
concealed.

Answ. First, Canus himself affirms no such thing, but only in confirming
his opinion, uses the testimony of Tertullian, with five other Authors
Egesippus, Ignatius, Iteraenus, Hilatius, Vincentius Lyr.
; neither is Tertullian, but Vincentius Lirinensis, placed next in order to
those words of Canus.

Secondly, Tertullian is not of Canus his judgment; for although in his book
of Prescriptions, he say upon occasion, that Heretics must be confuted by
Tradition: yet he neither means all Heretics, but such as denied the
Scripture in whole or in part Legi^ and Prophetarum, quaedam probat, quaedam
improbat
: neither by Tradition understands he a diverse doctrine from the Scripture,
but the preaching and doctrine of the Apostles and primitive Church by word of
mouth, containing the very same matter in substance with the written word
Regula sidei est, ^num omnino Deum ^^le, etc. Quid est hoc depos^tunit tam
tacitum vt alterius doctrinae deputetur?
, and making no addition of other parts or points of faith thereunto.

If this Popish Priest could show us his Traditions about the Supremacy,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, etc. in Tertullian, he
spoke to the purpose: but now he aequiuocates only in the word Tradition, and
deludeth his followers, persuading them that they have this old Doctor on their
side. But in very deed Tertullian Tertul de car. Christi c. 2. etc. 7. de
resur. car c. 3. etc 45. and cont. Hermo. c 22.
effectually and constantly maintains the perfection of the Scripture, and
confutes the opinion of Canus Canus loc. l 3. c. 3.
, and other Papists who say; That the Apostles delivered not all the mysteries
of Religion to the faithful in public, but some part thereof in secret to the
perfecter sort Tertul. de praescript c. 22. Iren. l. 3. c 14.
.

T.W. Says, they distrust not the Scripture, nor want the same to prove their
Catholic doctrine.

Answ. 1. The same is not necessary to prove their Catholic doctrine, all
parts whereof can better stand without the Scripture then with the same. 2.
They lock up the Scripture in chains and muzzle it, and will not suffer the
same either to go one foot, or speak one word more then their Pope allows
it. 3. The Scripture as it speaks in his own voice, or in the voice of the
primitive Church; or lastly, as it is expounded by many of their own Doctors,
will not prove their Popish Articles: witness first the place of Math. 16.
which Stapleton Stapl. Rel. c. 3. q. 1. ar. 1. Est haec Christi verbalis
constitutio, etc.
says, verbally maintains the Supremacy, but according to the general
consent of Doctors, and many Popish Writers, contains no such thing Origin,
Cyprian, Hilarie, Ambrose, Hierom, Chrysostom, Augustine, Leo, Eusebius
Emissen. Isiodor. Beda, Haimo, Rabarus, Li^a, Hugo Victor. Aeneas Siluius,
Cusanus, Gerson, gloss. Gratian. Panormitan. Gloss. ordinaria, Willermus,
Stella, etc. See Aeneas Silu. hist. Council. Basil.
. The Text of S. John, from which only they derive auricular confession, Ioh.
20.23. according to Scotus Scot. 4. d 17. q 1 ar 1.
and Caietan Caietan. com. Ioh. ^0. Fateor, etc.
, two of their most subtle Doctors, contains no precept of that Sacrament.
The place of Paul, 1. Tim. 6.10. commonly produced by them for Traditions
Caietan com ^ T^^^ 6. Commi^^um gregem sub d positi no^^^e custodiendum mandat.
, and hotly pressed by Suarez against the Kings Majesty Sua^. de^^fid. Cath.
cont. sect. Angl. l. 1. c. 10.
, to prove that the English faith is not Catholic, because the same is not
received of Roman Prelates who are the Timothees, in whose custody is the
heavenly disposition of sacred truth; according to Lira, Thomas, Caietan,
Guilliandus See their commentaries upon 1 Timothy 6. v. 20.
, etc. has another sense and meaning. And their only text for the fire of
purgatory, 1. Cor. 3.15. according to Alchasar A^chas. com. Apoc. 11. v 2.
^^t. 5. Non arridet eorum expositio, qui ad (...) pu^gato^^^ applicant, etc.
a famous Jesuit, treats not of this purging fire.

And in very deed, the great frame of Popery, both for the doctrine and
exposition of the Scripture, leans only upon the Lateran Church, holden up by
the shoulders of Friar Dominick Antonin. sum. (...) p. 3. t^t 23. c 4. (...).
Summus (...) ^lex (...) ^ccl^sia, (...) ^olu^ (...) ^^piceret, ex aduer^o vir
Dei Dominicus occurr^bat, and humeris superimpositis, totam illam casuram
fabricam sustentabat Ga^zaga de o^^ ^^raph. relig. par. 1. page 1. Reuersus ad
quandam Crucifixi imaginem fer^entius se^et orabat, ab eaque vt labentem eius
domum, omnino tanquam minitantem ruinam (...) a^et, praeposi^us est
and Ignatius Loiala, and their generation. And the Papists are destitute of
the Tradition, they so eagerly contend for, Neither are they able to prove one
maine or capital Article of their Trent faith by Tradition, beginning in the
primitive Church, and descending to our age by the perpetual current of the
Doctors of the Church ever since.

T. W. Thus we see how our Doctor by his foul collusions, has labored
several ways to oppress and obscure the worthiness of Gods Catholic
Church.

Answ. The present Roman Church, in respect of those Articles which it
maintains against the Church of England, is not Catholic.

T. W. He falsely ascribes unto her head an usurping sovereignty.

Answ. The earth never felt nor saw so foul an usurper as the Pope: who
exalts himself above the law of Christ, conculcates the highest Majesty
upon earth Lamber. S^^nab. hist. Germ. Henricus imp^rator nudis ped^bus,
ieiunus mane vsque ad vesperam perstabat Ro^. Pont sententiam expectando^ hoc
secundo hoc tertio die fecit. Nauele. Genesis 4^ Summus Pont. Imperatoris collum
pede comprime^s ait, Super aspidem and basiliscum, etc. Math. Pa^is hist. Angl.
Heuric 3. Nonne rex Anglorum, noste^ est vasallus and mancipium, etc. Gers. de
potest. eccles. lect. 11.
, incrocheth upon the right of the Church Zabar. de schi^. page 560. Ex hoc
infiniti sequuti su^t errores, quia Papa occupauit omnia iura inferiorii eccles.
, and had he power to his will, would be an absolute Monarch, both spiritual
and temporal over all the world Papir. Masson. de episc. Vib. l. 5 in Bonis 8
Cum Ponisacius non Galliae solum, sed mundi dominum, se esse praedicaret.
.

T. W. She ever sends forth most glorious beams of splendour and truth, and
perpetuity, according to that of the Psalmist, He has set his Tabernacle in
the sun; which contrary to our inuisibilists for these 1600. years, did
never set under the Horizon of an universal Latencie: That sun which never
expatiates beyond the Tropicks of Gods Traditionarie or written word; that
sun which with it defining, and infallible authority, in explicating the
true sense of Gods word, dissipates and dissolues all clouds of error:
finally, that sun whose concentrous uniformity could yet never brook any
innovation or novelty.

Answ. We both of us, Protestants and Papists, acknowledge a visibilitie of the
Church, and a perpetuity of divine truth in the same, but we differ about the
manner hereof. You will have it at all times gloriously visible, alleging
Psalm. 19.4. and to profess truth entirely, feee from all error and corruption,
and that the Popes and Prelates do thus: But we read your own Authors Alph.
Castr. con. hae^ l. 1. c. 4. Plati. in Iul 1.
, complaining of gross ignorance, hellish wickedness, and damnable hypocrisy
in your Popes and Church Bern in Ps. qui hab. s. 6. and 7. and in Cant. sermon.
33. Serpit hodie putida tabes, per omne corpus Ecclesiae. Abbas Vsper.
Sapientia prae omnibus inuisa, etc. Gers. ep. Brugis scripta to. 4 Ita a pla^ta
pedis vsque ad vertice^, etc. Con. Basil. ep. synod. Cu^ omnis Christianae, and
ecclesiasticae di ciplinae vita extinct^ sit, etc. Adr. 6. citatur ab Espenceo,
Tit. 1. p. 71 Quibus (peccatis) ad desperationem fere laborat.
: And the Scripture prophesies of an Apostasy from sincerity of faith, in
the outward face of the visible church, and premonisheth concerning Antichrists
coming, and deceivable errors, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

There shall be in all ages a visible Church in earth, some parts whereof
profess divine truth in the substance of Religion; but that there must be a
Church in all ages gloriously visible, and wherein the chiefest Prelates
sincerely maintain Gods truth without all error, is a matter affirmed by your
selves, but controlled by experience and truth. And the princely Psalmist
affirms no such thing, Psalm. 19.4. speaking literally of the Sun, Gene.
1.16. and mystically of Christ, according to the exposition of your own
Authors Iansen. paraphra. Psalm. 18. Genebrard. com. ib. v. 6. Bellarm. explan.
Psalm. 18.
.

Also, your Roman Church is of later days, become indeed a planet or wandering
star, Jude, v. 13. but yet has little similitude with the Sun, unless in
scorching heat, whereby it consumes the sap and moisture of goodness: and
many people by reason of the wrong and oppression they receive from your Pope,
do curse and cry to God for vengeance against him Math. Westminster. an. 1246.
Deuotionem in odiu^, and maledictionem conuerteba^t, etc.
: like as some Inhabitants of Africa, are reported to curse the sun when it
rises, because of the vehement heat, wherewith it annoyeth them.

Neither is the motion of your Church within the Tropicks of written or
Traditionarie word, as you pretend; but indeed within the compass of the Popes
spirit and will Sext. decret. c. 1. Romanus Ponti^ex, qui omnia iuta i^ scrinio
pectoris sui censetur habere, etc.
, you conculcate the written word, excluding it from being a principle of
Religion Bos de sig. l 16 c. 10. Scriptura non refertur inter eiusmodi
principia.
, and you regard not the Traditions of the Apostles or primitive Church: and
unless you may have liberty to canonize a new Traditionarie word, you are
unable to justify the Articles which we oppose, and you defend. We expect
primitive Traditions D. Fulk cont^ Rhem. 1. Tim. 6. n. 3. You are never able to
prove your traditions from hand to hand, from age to age, from bishop to
bishop, whereof you falsely boast etc.
, and antique Ordinances of the Apostolic Church, and you tender us novelties,
and articles of a later hatch; and you deal with us as Tertullian speaks of
the Gentiles Tertul. apol. c. 6.
; Laudatis antiquitatem, and noue de die viuitis: You magnify antiquity, but
fashion your Religion after a new cut.

And surely, will you but indifferently consider, it will appear that the
very body of your Church is cast into a new mould: and whereas in the
Apostles age, and many descents after, it was a spiritual state, now it is
become an earthly Monarchy and kingdom of this world Zabarel. de schism. page
559. Quidam summi Pontifices, qui magis ad modu^ terreno^u^ principum, quam
Apostolorum Ecclesiam rexerunt. Sander. de visib. monarch. l. 2 c. 4 Tam
sacerdotalis, quam regia potestas, communicata est pastoribus ecclesiae.
Bellar. Recog. page 21. Ex illis verbis, Ioh. 21. Pasce oues meas, colligi
authoritatem imperandi regio more. Sext. c. periculos. gloss totius orbis tenet
principatum.
, contending in our days Bellar. Recog. de sum. Pontif. l. 5. c. 4 Dum haec
recognoscerem, acriter de hac re, inter scriptores disceptabatur. Fr. Bozius
lib. 5. de temporali monarchia Papae. Bos de sig. l. 16. c. 1. Papir. Masson.
de episc. Vib. l. 5. in Bonifac. 8. Pontifex maiore odio incensus mittit in
Galliam quendam clericum archidiaconum Narbonensem, cum literis quas publicari
iubebat. Illae autem continebant diras in Philippum, nisi in temporalibus aeque
ac spiritualibus subditum se Romano Pontifici profiteretur.
more eagerly for the dominion of the earth, then it did in the prime age for
the inheritance of heaven: your grave Divines at Rome and other places, do at
this hour eagerly propugne the temporal Monarchy of the Church. And the
thirst of your Pope after worldly dominion, is so unquenchable, that Kings and
Princes the Lords anointed, whose Majesty by divine law is sacred as his
own, Psalm. 82.2. Exodus 22.28: and which no religion besides Popish, did ever
violate or assail, have their lives and kingdoms in ieopardie, and sometimes
there is but a step between them and death, by means of your religious
proiects. And whereas in times past it was Catholic conscience, To fear God
and honor the King Tertul. de idol. c. 15. Quod attinet ad honores Regum and
imperatorum praeceptum habemus, in omni obsequio nos esse oportere, etc. Contra
Scap c. 2. Colimus Imperatorem, etc. vt hominem a Deo secundu^, and solo Deo
minorem. Polycarp. apud Eusebius. hist. l. 4. c. 15. Chrysostom. ad Romans hom. 23. and
ad pop. Antioch. hom. 2. Greg. Naz. or. 18. ad ciues trep. Cyril. Alex. epist.
dedic. ad Theodos. in lib. contra Julian. Theodorit hist. l. 4. c. 8. Aug. de
verb. Dom. ser. 6.
. 1. Pet. 2.10: and all the world believed Christ Jesus, speaking in Solomon,
By me Kings reign, Prou. 8.15: and no person had right to remove the Diadem,
and take the Crown from the Kings head, but God himself, Ezech. 21.26. 1.
Sam. 15.28: in our days the Tricrowned Priest and Nazarite of Rome, either by
a spiritual or mixed jurisdiction (such as Esaias describes, saying; Thy wine
is mixed with water) can unloose and knap in sunder the girdle of Princes, even
as a thread of Tow is broken: And imperial Sovereignty, the pillar and
foundation of tranquillity and piety in the Commonwealth Chrysostom. ad pop.
Antioch. hom. 6.
, 1. Tim. 2.2. Iud. 21.25. must depend upon the courtesy and ankle bones of a
Popish distinction Bellar. de Pontif. Romans l. 5. c. 6. Non potest Papa deponere
Principes, etc. tanquam ordinarius iudex: tamen potest tanquam summus princeps
spiritualis. Non direct and immediate, sed indirecte and in ordine ad
spiritualia. Vide Sander. de visib. monarch. l. 2.
: and Traditionary exposition of Scripture, fetching his pedigree from Pope
Hildebrand, to wit; Surge Petre and macta, Act. 10.13 Baron. annal. to. 11. ex
Gregorio 7. Sentent. Card. Baronij. super excommunicat. Venet.
. That is, Go kill and confound Kings.

CHAP. V.
Paragraph. 1. Whether inward faith be needful to make one a member of the
Church.
T. W. Master White suggesteth, that we require not any true and inward faith,
or other virtues, to denominate or make one a perfect member of Gods Church,
but only an inward show thereof: and to this end introduces Bellarmine
Bellarm. de eccles. l. 3. c. 2.
, speaking thus: No inward virtue is required to make one a part of the true
Church, but only the external profession of faith.

Answ. Here again you play the falsarie; for D. White produces Bellarmine to
no such end.

Your Compartner A. D. had said; The note of sanctity belongs not to the
Protestants Church, by reason many of their people are evidently more wicked,
then they were in former time.

Doctor White, besides other answer, denies the consequent of this reason,
affirming; That Papists themselves do not make personal sanctity a note of
the Church; and for proof hereof Harding. Staphilus. Baronius.
he produces Bellarmine, etc. From whose assertion it follows, that the
former illation of A. D. is false. For if no inward virtue be required to make
a Christian an absolute member of the true Church, but only external
profession of Faith, and communion of Sacraments, then personal sanctity
which consists principally of inward virtues, is no note of the Church,
because the same is separable from many true members thereof.

T. W. Bellarmine acknowledges, that all Theological virtues are found in
Gods Church, and that inward virtues are necessary for a Christian soul: and
he compares such as want the same, to the less profitable and excrementall
parts of the body: and Master White wrongeth the Cardinal, who says; That a
man only of outward profession, is but aliquo modo pars ecclesiae, meaning
only in an imperfect or aequiuocall manner of being, etc.

Answ. First, this remoueth not my Brothers answer to A. D: for although
Theological and inward virtues, be alwaie^ found in some members of the
Church; yet the same may be wanting in many Stella com. Luc. ^8 Nunc adeo
creuit vitiorum tempestas, etc. Lambert. Scafnaburg hist. Germ. page 210. O
mo^es, O tempora, etc. Platin. vi^^ Mar cel. 1. Vitia nostra eo creuere, vt vix
apud D^u^ misericordiae locu^ relinquant. Council Basil. resp. synodal. Omnis
ecclesiasticae and Christianae vitae disciplina, vbique pene extincta videtur.
, and sometimes in the most: and the multitude of those which want them, being
according to Bellarmine, absolute members of the visible Church, may be more
wicked then people were in former times.

2. The last part of the answer, which is, That a man of outward profession
only, is a part of the true Church, in an imperfect and aequiuocall manner of
being only, is both repugnant to the Tenet of your own Doctors Stapl. Rel c.
1. q. 2. ar. 1. notab. 5 Solent haeretici dicere, sanctos esse proprie membra
ecclesiae, alios improprie and aequiuoce: sed falluntur, etc. Bannes 2. 2. q.
1. ar. 10.
, and subuerteth the Popish Church: for hence it follows, that the Roman Pope
when he is a wicked monster Platina vita Ioh 13. Sunt qui scribum hunc
sceleratissimum hominem, seu monstrum potius, etc.
, and Devil incarnate Constan. Council. sess. 11. ar. 5. Fax vitiorum, and
diabolus incarnatus. Benedict. 9. apud Baron. annal to. 11. Alexand. 6. apud
Guicciardin* and alios.
, is not the visible head of the Church: for he which is a member in an
aequiuocall manner of being Bellar. de ima. l. 2. c. 21. Quod non dicitur, nisi
improprie, simpliciter negari potest. Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 3. ar. 6. ad. 4.
Nisi forte aequiuoce, quod perinde est ac non esse.
; to wit, like a wooden leg, or a head of brass, is no organicall part, no
head or instrument to cause influx of Faith or Sacraments into the body of the
Church, as our Adversaries maintain their Pope does. And hence it follows,
that the Roman Church is many times a breathless and headless lump, without
any Faith or Sacraments; and as the head is aequiuocall, so the faith and
religion, is in name only such, and not in definition.

Lastly, if as Bellarmine says, those persons which want inward virtues, are
no otherwise members of the visible Church, then the hairs of a man's head, his
nails and evil humors, are members of a natural body; it is worthy the
inquiry, how Popes and Prelates being such, can be the foundation of the
militant Church or principal parts whereof the same consists; seeing it was
never yet heard of, that hairs, nails, or evil humors, did principally
constitute the frame of the natural body of man.

Parag. 2. Bellarmine concerning ignorance, and implicit faith.
T. W. Master White alleges Bellarmine Bellarm. de iustif. l. 1. c. 7.
, saying; Faith is better defined by ignorance, then by knowledge; to prove,
that among us the lay people are not bound to know what the matters of faith
be. But Bellarmine speaks of such knowledge as proceeds from the
demonstrable evidence of the thing known, and is incompatible with faith; and
not of Christian understanding, going with faith, and proceeding from divine
revelation* for shame Master White forbear to seduce any longer the ignorant,
etc. making them believe, that Bellarmine does support a supine, and affected
ignorance of the articles of faith.

Answ. 1. Bellarmine in the Chapter whence these words are taken, disputes
against Calvin Nunc aduersus Caluinum, etc.
, and excludes from faith such knowledge as he affirmed to be necessary
thereunto. But the knowledge which Calvin required unto Faith, was not the
knowledge of demonstration, such as the Manichees would have; Bonauen. 3. d. 24
exposit. textus.
but only the knowledge of revelation, that is, the conceiving by
understanding, the object believed, as the same is propounded in the Scripture.

2. Bellarmine gives instance in children, women, rural and unlettered
persons, who (says he Bellar. de instif l. 1. c 7. Cum maxima a pars fidelium
vel propter aetatem puerile^, vel propter serum muliebrem, etc Vide Stapl. Rel.
c. 5. q. 3. ar. 4. ad. 8. Espenc. com. 2. Pim. 3. Decantata hodie per
Catholicos Carbonarij fides, qui quicquid crederet interrogatus, responderit,
credere se quod credit ecclesia, and ecclesiam itidem credere, quod ipse
crederet.
) are numbered among the faithful, and believe the articles of the Trinity and
other points of Faith, although they scarce conceive any thing in their minds
besides the sound of the words. Hence it follows, that Bellarmine excludes
from faith as a thing generally necessary thereunto, all distinct knowledge of
the matters believed: and then saying in the conclusion of the Chapter: That
Faith is better defined by ignorance then by knowledge, he can mean no
otherwise, but that gross ignorance in diverse persons may stand with faith;
and by the word noticia, he understands both the science of demonstration
which the Manichees Aug. de vtil. cred ca. 1. Greg Val. to. 3. d. 1. qu. 2. p.
2. Manichaei contendebant, nihil esse amplius credendum, quam quod possit
euidenti ratione demonstrari.
required in faith, and also the knowledge of revelation which Calvin requires.

Paragr. 3. Whether Nauar make it heresy, to dispute of matters of faith.
T. W. Master White alleges Nauar, saying; It is heresy for a lay man to
dispute of matters of faith. But the said Author makes it only mortal sin,
and a less offense then heresy.

Answ. In the sextus Decretalium Sext. decr. l. 5 tit. 2 de haeret. c.
Quicunque.
, the prohibition, forbidding lay men to dispute of the Catholic faith, under
pain of excommunication, is placed under the Title De haereticis: and Nauar in
his Manual Nauar. enchir. c 11. n. 26. Siluest. sum. v. disp. Linwoood l. 5.
de Magistr. c. praeterea. gloss. Laicus nullo modo disputare debet de fide
public vel occulte.
, condemning in lay men all disputation concerning matters of Faith, confirms
his assertion by that Text of the Canon law: and this gave my Brother occasion
to suppose, that Nauar accounted the same heresy. And in those places where
Popery is in full strength, if lay men dispute and question matters of Faith,
the sacred Inquisitors will be bold to examine whether they smell of heresy or
not Hasen Muller. hist. Jesuit. c. 3. Si contra dispute^t, ad domum
Inquisitionis remittunt.
; and if eftsoons they do the same, their law will pronounce them Heretics
indeed.

CHAP. VI.
Paragraph. I. Whether Synesius be abused concerning his own marriage.
T. W. Master White, page 343. produces a testimony from Synesius Bishop of
Ptolemais, who in an Epistle to his friend Euopius, writes thus: Niceph. hist.
eccles. l. 14. c. 55.
The sacred hand of Theophilus has given me a Wife, and hereupon I testify to
all men, that I will neither forsake her, neither privily as an adulterer keep
her company, but I will pray to God to send me by her many and good children.
Here our Ministers incredible deceit (of which he is to himself most
conscious) lies, in applying the words, spoken by Synesius when he was a lay
man, to him as he was afterward a Bishop and Priest, etc. Synesius after he was
created Bishop of Ptolemais, lived for all the time after separated from the
company of his wife: and he acknowledges in this very Epistle, that marriage,
with a determination, not to leave the company of his wife, is a sufficient
bar or let to Priesthood.

Now what do you say Master White? do you not think that this your
perfidious dealing being once made known, will become odious, etc?

Answ. Master White says, you have a brass visage, and are able to outface
even impudency it self.

1. It is true, that Synesius whiles he was a lay man, penned this Epistle to
Euopius: and being solicited by Theophilus and others, to become the Bishop of
Ptolemais, excuses himself as unfit for so great a function: and among other
impediments alleges his marriage, professing that he would by no means
forsake his wife. But Theophilus and the rest urge him notwithstanding to
undertake the Episcopal function: And touching his marriage and all other
demands proposed by him, they leave him to his own choice, to do as seemed
good unto him. And it appears by diverse arguments, that he forsook not his
wife: 1. he says expressly, he would not forsake her Niceph. hist. eccles. l.
14. c. 55. Omnibus praedico, me illam prorsus deserturam non esse.
, etc. 2. Nicephorus affirms, that it was committed unto him, (...), by
favor or dispensation to receive the priestly dignity De quibusda^ rebus, illi
ambigenti, per commodam dispensationem sacerdotij dignitate^ suscipere
permissum est.
: whereby it is manifest, that the Church condescended unto him, and gave him
liberty to keep his wife. 3. It is affirmed by no ancient Writer Euagr. hist.
l. 1. c. 15. Suidas.
, nor by Baronius Baron. to. 5. an. 410. n. 72.
himself, relating this Story, that Synesius forsook his marriage. 4. Langus
Langus annot. Niceph. l. 14. c. 55. Index expurg. Belg. in Lango pa. 77. has
not expurged it.
a Papist, in his marginall annotation, upon this place of Nicephorus, says;
that Synesius would not put away his wife. 5. It was not simply unlawful in
those days for Bishops to live in marriage Socrat. hist. l. 5. c. 21. (...).
Niceph. l. 12. c. 34. Council. Constantinop. 6. in Trullo. c. 13.
, and therefore Synesius being otherwise minded, there was no absolute
necessity for him to forsake his wife.

To the abusiue conclusion of this Popish Priest, I answer with Seneca, Vt
quisque est contemptissimus, ita est linguae solutissimae, The more unworthy
any one is, the more slipperie and riotous is his tongue.

Paragr. 2. Concerning Paphnutius.
T. W. For his further patronizing of Priests marriage, he urges that often
obtruded place of Saint Paul, Heb. 13. Marriage is honorable among all men,
and at these words cites in the margent Sozomen, as writing, that Paphnutius
maintained the Protestants construction of that place, so as that Priests might
absolutely marry at any time.

Answ. Master White produces the Story of Paphnutius, out of Sozomen, not to
prove that Priests might marry at any time, as you belie him: but to show that
Papists in the matter of Priests marriage, are varied from the primitive Church.

And as touching the place of Paul, Heb. 13.4. which you and others Greg.
Martin. ag. transl. Rhem. Heb. 13. ann. 3.
affirm to be wrongly translated. 1. it is manifest, that Paphnutius
understood the place as we do, for otherwise it would not have served to prove
the lawfulness of Priests marriage, for which he produces it Sozom. hist. l.
1. c. 23. Greece. and Latin, c. 22. (...).
. 2. Chrysostom and Theophylact understand the same of persons. (...):
Marriage is honorable to all, says Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Heb. hom 33.
. And Vasques confesses Vasq. paraphr. in Heb. 13.3. Theophylactus
interpretatur in omnibus hominibus. Lira. Caietan. D. Fulke ag. Rhem. Heb. 13.
cites more.
, that Theophylact does interpret it of all men as we do: and the latter part
of the verse, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, being an opposition
to the first part, shows that it is fittest to expound the same of persons.

T. W. The Council of Nice did only tolerate and permit the marriage of
Priests, before their entrance into Priesthood, but not after their
consecration; which does absolutely cross the scope of M. White, who will have
it lawful for men to marry after they be entered into Orders.

Answ. The learned Papists know, that this Story of Paphnutius, and decree of
the first Nicene Council depending upon it, makes against them; otherwise why
do they censure and reject it Bosius de sig. l 5. c 9. Figmentum est quod de
Paphnutio narratur. Baron. to. 3 an. 325. n. 128. Alan. Copus dial. 1. pa. 154.
?

2. The Story being admitted, proves that Matrimony and Priesthood are
compatible; and that a Priest living in wedlock, may exercise his ministerial
office, without any offense to divine law, or the primitive Ecclesiastical law.

3. There can no solid reason be given, why the use of marriage before
Priesthood, and continued afterward; is rather lawful then that which is
contracted after Orders.

But the truth is, the best of you are in a wood, and opposing your selves
despitefully against Gods ordinance, the Lord has confounded you, partly by
his express word. 1. Tim. 3.2.12. Tit. 1.6. which as plainly approues the
matrimony of Ministers, as of any other persons Tertul. exhort ad cast. c. 7.
Vani erimus, si putanerimus, quod sacerdotibus non liceat, laicis licere.
: and also by giving up your Popes and Clergy to such intolerable
filthiness, as has made your single life ridiculous to all the world Read
the story of Ioh. Cremon. Cardinal, the Popes legate, who having the day
before, in a synod at London, condemned Priests marriage, was himself taken at
night in bed with a queen, etc. Henry. Hunting. hist. Angl. l. 7. Math.
Paris. in Henric. 1. an. 1125. Math. Westmon. Henric. 1. pa. 31. Fabian
chronicle pa 326.
. And the best you are able to perform in this Argument, is to ieare and mow,
and to befable your sectators with the fat conceit of a woman and a steeple;
fitter to be uttered by the wiseman of a morris, then a Catholic Priest: of
which Bernard says Bernard. de consid ad Eugen. l. 2.
; Toys and idle words are vanity in secular persons, but in a Priests lips
they be blasphemies.

Parag. 3. Saint Augustine concerning fasting.
T. W. The Doctor for the great auersion which he has of fasting, and
forbidden meats for certain days, writes; that ancient Monks made no
distinction of meats, and alleges Austin Aug. de mor. eccles. l. 2. c. 33.
, etc.

Answ. Doctor Whites assertion is Digress. 45.
; That the ancient Monks were not the same or like the Popish, but of another
kind, and among sundry other things they differ in their manner of fasting. For
whereas the substance of the Romish fast is difference of fish and flesh,
according to a positive law of the Romish Church: the ancient Monks knew not
this Roman distinction of meats, neither did they formally observe the same;
that is, Aug. ib.
by a general necessity Continent se qui possunt, etc. multi neque vescuntur
carnibus, etc.
, or by vow, or with reference to the Popes decree Abstinent vel propter
fratrum imbecillitatem, vel propter suam libertatem.
; or by esteeming any one kind of meat holier then another Pietatem sedulo
exercent, corporis vero exercitationem ad exiguum tempus pertinere nouerunt. 1.
Tim. 4.8.
. But their fasting was a general abstinence from all dainties, either flesh
or fish, or wine, or of any other kind Non solum a carnibus and vino abstinent,
sed etiam ab ijs quae ventris and gutturis prouocant appetitum.
. And they did this freely without compulsion, law, or vow Propter suam
libertatem.
: Also upon just occasion they used any food indifferently, as Saint Augustine
testifies in the place alleged, saying De n. or. eccl. Cath. c 33. Aug de
Ciuit. Del, l. 16. c 37. Non cibi genere, sed auiditate immodesta quenquam cul.
pandum. Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. l. 30. c. 5 Christiani non haeretici sed
Catholici, edomandi corporis causa, etc. non solum a carnibus, verum a
quibusdam etiam terrae fructibus abstinent, vel semper sicut pauci, vel ce^tis
diebus atque temporibus sicut per quadragesimam fere omnes, QVANTO MAGIS
QVISQVE SEV VOLVERIT SEV POTVERIT.
; The same persons which refrain when they are in health, if sickness
constrain them, receive any food without difference; yea, they which be in
health, do courteously minister the same to the weak, and generally to all
which cannot otherwise enjoy their bodily health: and whereas some persons
foolishly refuse that which is thw. offered, they brotherly admonish them to
beware, least by vain superstition they rather make themselves unhealthful
then holy.

In the conclusion of this Paragraph, Master White is called an Advocate of
venerie T. W. does show himself so resolute an advocate of venetie, so now of
epicurisme.
, by reason he defends Ministers matrimony; and of Epicurisme, because he
denies the Monkish distinction of meats: but it seems this Popish Priest
never read Tertullian Tertul cont. Marcion. l. 5. c. 15.
, saying; Lust or venerie is not ascribed to matrimony, no not by the very
Gentiles, but to inordinate, unnatural, or prodigious lust, (such as the Roman
Priests, Monks, and Popes Paul. Iouiu. vita Leo 10. l. 4. Platin. vita Ioh.
13. Onuphr. in Alexand. 6.
, do exercise, if their own friends have done them right.) Oh how many
wretched Priests in Italy, France, Spain, and other Regions, (says Petrus
Rauennas Petrus Raven. sermon. synod. Can. cited by Coccius p. 2. thesaur. Cath.
l. 8. ar. 6.
) do by incontinency fly more swiftly then an arrow to the region of hell!
And Holcot Holcot sup. Sap. l. p. 182. Daemones incubi. Gignunt communiter
pingues, grossos, and corpulentos, etc.
; Our modern Priests are like Satyrs or incubi through letcherie: and as the
incubi or night-mares are reported to have begotten Giants: So the Priests of
Priapus and Beelphegor Colunt hunc vilissimum Deum, etc.
( Baal-Peor, Numb. 25.3.) by the vehemency of lust, beget gross and
corpulent children. And that Epicurus himself has not equalled the Popish
Monks in gluttony, is showed before, Chapter 2. in the answer to S. Hierom,.
11.

An observation concerning the matrimony of the Clergy.
Because this Popish Priest being himself a votarie, and disciple of one, who,
according to Saint Hierom Hieron. super Daniel. 11. De Antichristo, facilior
interpretatio est, quod simulet castitatem, vt plurimos decipiat.
, Shall feign chastity that he may deceive the more: does very despitefully
in sundry passages of his Treatise, condemn, abuse, and deride the matrimony
of Protestant Ministers; therefore I will propose to the view of my Reader,
some material observations concerning this matter: to the end it may appear
what cause our Adversaries have, either to glory in their own pretended
chastity, or to calumniate in others lawful marriage.

1. The doctrine of the Romists concerning single life of Bishops and Priests,
is contrary to the express word of God. 1. Tim. 3.2. A Bishop must be the
husband of one wife, etc. one that rules well his own house, having his
children in subjection, and verse 11. speaking of Deacons, Euenso must their
wives (...). Caietan. Mulieres pro vxores, proculdubio episcoporum and
diaconorum. Hugo Card. Mulieres scilicet ordinandorum.
be grave, etc. let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their
children and their houses well. Tit. 1.6. 1. Cor. 7.2. And from the foresaid
Scripture, Clement of Alexandria Clem. Alex. l 3. (...). p. 199.
says: The Apostle admits the husband of one wife, whether he be a Priest
or a Deacon, or a lay man, which uses matrimony without reprehension.

And again, All the Epistles of the Apostles which teach sobriety and
continency, and which deliver innumerable precepts of matrimony, procreation of
children, and household government, do no where prohibit or disanull honest
and temperate matrimony. And this was the Orthodoxe faith of the prime
Christians, who said Ignatius cited by Langus, apud Niceph. l 4. c. 8. Dionys.
Corinth episc. Niceph ib (...).
; Impose the yoke of single life upon no man, for it is a perilous burden, and
hard to be kept, even when it is obtained, if it be observed of necessity.

2. In Tertullian Tertul. exhort. ad cast. c. 7.
and Cyprians days, matrimony of Bishops and Priests was reputed honorable
and lawful, Cyprian Cypr. ep. 19. vel l. 5. ep. 15.
speaking of one Foelix, says; That he administered the Priesthood under
Decimus, and lived next unto him with Victoria his wife: And in another place
Cyprian. ep. 35 vel l. 4. ep. 10.
, Let the priest Numidicus be placed among the presbyters of Carthage, who
cheerfully beheld the Martyrs when they were burned, and with them his own
wife, Lateri suo adhaerentem, tarying by his side. And the Papists confess,
that matrimony of the Clergy was lawful in the prime age of the Church. Hugo
the Cardinal says Hugo Card. com. 1. Tim. 3. Tunc licebat sace^dotes habere
vxores.
: It was then lawful for Priests to have wives. Alphonsus Castro Alph. Castro
cont haer. l. 13. v. sacerdotium.
; In the prime age of the Church we read that Priests were married. And
Pammelius Pamm^ l. an. Cypr. ep. 19.
upon the former place of Cyprian: In that age, because of the scarsitie of
single men, wedded Priests were chosen. And Aeneas Syluius Aeneas Silu. ep.
136. c. Thaboritas. citatur a Coccio thesau to. 2. l 8. ar. 6.
, afterward Pope; The primitive Church did not err, which permitted Priests to
enjoy wives: And Gerson Gerson. p. 4. Dom. octau. Epiphan. ser. de mod. viuend.
coniug. collat. 2. Bonauent. 4. d. 37. q 3. Tunc non fuit indicta clericis
continentia. Claud. Espenc. com. Tit. 1. Multis annorum centenarijs post
Apostolos ecclesia primitiua defectu coelibum, habuit sacerdotes maritos.
Conrad. Cling. loc. com l. 3 c. 36. Tempore nascentis Ecclesiae, vsque ad
Siricij and Innocentij tempora coniugati ordinabantur in sacerdotes.
; In the primitive Church Priests were married, because then there were but
few, and by reason they had wives before their conversion; and they used
matrimony soberly, and the Church was not yet endowed with temporal
possessions.

3. They which first disgraced wedlock in the primitive Church, were
Heretics Ir n. l. 1. c. 22. Clem. Al. strom, l. 2. in fine, and l. 3 per
totum. Epiphan baer. 26 Tertullian, Origin, turning heretics. Aug. ep. 74 and
de mor. Manic. l. 2. c. 18.
: and in the year 320. the Eustathians Sozom. hist. l. 3. c. 13.
were condemned for despising married Priests. And the decree of the Council
of Gangra Council. Gangr. can. 4.
, touching the same matter, is very well known.

4. Although some ancient Fathers embracing the conceit of Tertullian Tertul.
exhort cast. c. 3. etc. 9.
and Origin Orig, sup. Ro^. l. 10.
, and admiring single life, because of liberty and outward commodity: as also
because the world favored the same, did advance by their doctrine and example
solitary chastity, and disgraced matrimony: and some of their speeches, and
namely of Hierom Hieron. in libris cont. Iouin. Lud. Viues schol. Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei, l. 16. c. 34.
, scarce differ from heresy; yet the same Fathers Hieron. l. 1. cont. louin.
Eliguntur mariti in sacerdotium. Plurimi sacerdotes habent matrimonia.
acknowledge, that married persons were elected Priests in those days. And
Augustine Aug. haeres. 40.
says, The Church had many such. And Socrates Socrat. hist. l. 5. c. 21.
Gratian. d. 31. c. aliter and d. 36. c. Cenomannus.
; Not a few Bishops of the East, living in the Episcopal office, procreate
children by their lawful wives. And Chrysostom Chrysostom. sup. Tit. hom. ^.
(...), etc.
says, That wedlock is so precious, that with it one may ascend to the throne
and dignity of a Bishop Hist. Trip. l. 1. c. 10. Spiridion habuit vxorem and
filios, etc. vit clarus, etc.
.

5. The learned Papists acknowledge, that matrimony in the Clergy is not
prohibited by divine law, but only by Ecclesiastical or the Popes law Aug.
Triumph. de pot. eccles. q. 92. ar. 3. Consilij and supererrogationis opus.
Alphons. Castro cont. haer. l 13. v. sacerd. Altisiod. sum. l. 4. tr. 9. q. 4
Tho. Aqu. 2. 2. q. 88. ar. 7. and Caietan, opusc. to. 1. tract. 27. Sot. 4. d
38. q. 1. ar. 1. Siluest. sum. v. matrim. Mich. Medin. de continent. c. 1.
Azor. p. 1. inst. mot. l. 13. c. 12. Est communis sententia Theologorum veterum
and recentiorum.
. And sundry Papists Aeneas Siluan Platin. vita Pij 2. and de gest. Council.
Basil. Multi saluarentur in sacerdotio coniugati, qui in sterili coelibatu
damnantur. Panormitan. cum olim. de cler. Stephanus An^rerius. Durand. Lindan.
Erasmus, etc.
have affirmed, that it were profitable for the Church to have the single life
of the Clergy removed, because of that horrible scandal which Priests and
Ecclesiastics did bring upon their Order by whoredom and filthiness. And
when after the 1000. year Pope Hildebrand generally obtruded the law of single
life upon the Clergy, that Act of his is censured by Historians and others,
as a novelty and a thing pernicious. Antonine Antonin s^^. hi^t. p. 2. ^^. 6.
c. 1. 21
the Archbishop of Florence, and Sigebert Sigeber. ch o^ an. 1074. 18.
reporting how this Pope removed married Priests from their office, say: This
was done by him nouo exemplo, after a new fashion, and as many conceived, of an
inconsiderate zeal, and that it caused a grievous scandal in the Church: and
how, few Priests after the enacting of this law lived continently; but some for
lucre and vainglory feigned continency, and many did accumulate to
incontinency, perjury, manifold adulteries, etc. The same is affirmed by
Auentine Auentin. annal Boio^ l. 5.
, Lambertus Scasnaburgensis Lamber. Scaf hist. Germ. page 201.
, Matthew Paris Math. Paris. Will. Conquest. an. 1074.
, and others.

6. There was never generally, or in regard of the greater number, any true
chastity in the Popish Clergy; and ever since the law of single life was
obtruded, whoredom and bawderie so shamefully distained them, that they became
a byword to the Christian world Auentin. annal l. 5. Cauda salax
sacrificulorum in prouerbium abijt.
.

Bernard Bernard. de conuers. ad cler. c. ^^.
complains in this sort: If according to Ezekiel his prophecy, we dig
through the wall, we shall find in the house of God an horrible abomination:
for after and besides fornication, adultery, and incest, the very passions of
ignominy and works of filthiness, (Romans 1.27.) are not wanting, for which
the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, the very nurses of filthiness were
praedamned. Some of the Priests of the Church are besprinkled with the loathsome
and matterie filth of this uncleanness, and abstaining from the remedy of
wedlock, they break out into all flagitious wickedness.

Auentine Auentin. annal l. 5. page 448.
in the Story of Pope Gregory the seventh, the Author of this compelled
Eunuchisme, speaks in this manner; And thou, O vigilant Gregory, what
would thou have done if fortune had reserved thee until our days, in which
to dally with women, to whore, drink, to ravish and deflowre virgins, to
adulterate wives, is become the principal study of Priests, in so much, that
cauda salax sacrificulorum in prouerbium abijt?

The Council of Treuers Council. Treuir sub Ioh. to. 4. Council. Surij edict. 2
page 829. Polydor. de inuentor. l. 5. c. 4. says the like.
celebrate in the year 1548. relates as follows; To this sin (of
drunkenness) is joined another more grievous stain of offense; to wit, the
unlawful society of Priests and Deacons with women, which how intolerable
envy and hatred of all the professors of Catholic faith against sacred
persons, it has procured from the first beginning until now, can hardly be
expressed. And we must ingenuously confess, that no stain of wickedness has
more grievously offended the eyes of the vulgar, and ministered greater occasion
to their rage and cruelty against the Ecclesiastical state then this. Gerson
Gers. de vita spir. l. 4. cor. 14. Inexperti forsitan erant hij doctores, quam
generale, and qua^ radicatum sit hoc malum: quo deteriora flagitia circa vxores
aut silias parochianorum, and horrendae abominationes in alijs prouenirent.
reports, that in his days the letcherie of the Popish Clergy, was a
general and a rooted evil: and many judged it a smaller offense for Priests
to live with Concubines of their own, then to commit more grievous crimes with
the wives and daughters of their Parishioners, besides other more horrible
abominations. Hugo Cardinalis Hug. Card. com. super 1. Tim. 3.
: Priests in our days are not the husbands of one wife, (according to Paul, 1.
Tim. 3.) but fornicators with ten or twenty harlots. And lastly, Sigonius
Sigon. de reg. Ital. l. 9.
; An inquiry being made in Germany into Ecclesiastical persons, there was
scarce one found who was not a Simoniacke or a fornicator.

7. Whereas the Papists in specious words rejected wedlock in their Clergy,
yet indeed they did practice and admit it: for although their Bishops and
Priests kept no women under the title of wives, yet they generally maintained
Lemans and Concubines which were an inferior kind of wives Lippoman. cat. Genesis
22. Con cubinae olim non erant illegitimae and fornicariae, sed vxores minime
principales. Lesseus de just. and iur. l. 4. c. 3. d. 7 Aliqui iurisper^ti
dicunt, concubinatum legit ^num coitum. Barthol. and alij. Constit. Otho. de
concub. cler. gloss. Vxor comedit cum viro in eadem patina, eam honest induit,
etc. sed quando tenet illam vt ancillam, and mittit ad aquam, etc.
.

Onuphrius in the life of Pope Alexander the sixth, says Oauphr vita Alexand. 6.
; If this Pope at any time were not oppressed with business, he devoted
himself to all sorts of pleasure without respect, being especially addicted to
women, of which he begat four sons and two daughters. The chief of his
Lemmans was Vannocia, a Roman, which by reason of her beauty and amorous
dalliance, and marvelous fruitfulness in his meaner fortunes, he detained in
a manner as a lawful wife Iustae vxor s loco pene habu^t.
.

Pope Hildebrand Lamber. Scaf. hist Germ.
, the Father of the general decree of single life in the Clergy, was
reported to have lulled night and day without any shame, in the arms and
embracings of the great Countess Maud: and that she being surprised with the
stolen dalliance of this Pope, regarded not second marriage after the deceasse
of her first husband. Read Antonine Antonin. sum. hist. p. 3. ut. 21. c. 3.. 3.
, reporting the like of Pope Clement the fifth: and Pope Leo Ionius l 4 de vita
Leo 10.
the tenth was defamed, for sodomiticall filthiness, with his Pages and
Chamberlaines, says Iouius, a Romish Bishop.

And as touching the common sort of Priests, Gratians gloss is not unknown
Gloss. d. 81 c. Maximin.
; Few of them were found without that fault: And the gloss upon Legate Otho
Gloss. Othon. de concubin. cler. Si secret. Si non cast^ tamen caute. Conrad
Cling. loc com. l. 3. c 52. Vbi sunt, qui corrigunt tam aperta lenocinia, quod
presbyteri, sub praetextu ancillarum, habeant concubinas, cum quibus tot habent
pueros: aliqui legitimas apud se, friuole contra voluntatem maritorum, detinent
vxores: aliqui virgins deflorantes, and penes se occulte retinentes, etc.
aliqui pluribus non contentantar, sed hodie illam, cras alteram constuprant,
etc.
; If a Priest keep his Concubine privately within his own or his friends
house, he incurreth not the penalty of this Constitution.

Peter Rauennas, Raue^nas sermon in synod. Came.
and Michael Lochmaier Lochmaier. paroch page 134 Sum. praedic. de Luxur. lect.
7. Sicut patet de viris ecclesiasticis, qui ancillas sub titulo familiaritatis,
in domibus suis continuo tenent, in quibus ipsimet dominantur, and peccandi
liberas habent habenas.
, living about the year 1490. report, that many Clearkes in their days did
openly keep Concubines as their wives, and brought up children. And Clemangis
Nic. Clemang de corrupt. stat. eccles. page 36. Gers. defect viror. eccles. n.
66. Sacerdotes in consuetudinem duxerunt sub praetextu ancillarum habere
concubinas. Espenc. com. Tit. 1. page 67.
: The Priests being at a fee with the Prelates, do commonly and openly keep
their Concubines.

And Iacobus de Graphijs Jacob. Graph. decis. aur. p. 1. l 2. c. 76. n. 6. Vide
Marium Belg de schism. and council p 653. and 656.
, a Monk of Cascina in Italy, living in our days, complains; Oh grievous
(to be reported) Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, do in the open face of the
world keep Concubines as if they were wives, and openly bring up their
children. And Friar Paul Pater Paul. Venet. l. Italico, of the Order of Serui.
a Venetian now living, reports; that the Abbot of Neruesa, besides other
unchaste behavior, was accused to the State of Venice for daily filthiness
with his natural Sister. And one Scipio Saracino, a Canon of Vincenza, was in
like manner accused, for putting in practice his lechery even within Churches.

8. If there were the love of true chastity in the Pope, and Roman Clergy,
why do they tolerate and support the Stews in Rome it self, and all other
places of their government? Sixtus the Pope in late times, as a Papist Cornel.
Agrippa de vanit. scientiar. Nobile lupanar. Llamas sum. eccles. p. 708.
Francisc. Sansouin. de gub reg. l. 11. c. de iud. Marescal. Council. delect.
Card. de emendand. eccles. exhib. Paulo 3. to. 3. edit. Colon. col. 1551.
Sleidan com l. 12. Gloss. Othon. de concub. cler. Videtur quod hoc crimen
meretricij, sub dissimulatione transire debeat in ecclesia.
reports, builded a famous Stews. And the question being debated by Schoolmen
of nicest conscience Gers. de vita spir. l 4. coral. 14. and p. 4. ser. Aduent.
2. de luxuria.
, whether it be lawful for the Roman Church to tolerate harlots, is resolved
affirmatively. And Iacobus de Graphijs Iac. Graph. decis. aur. p. 1. l. 2. c.
75. n. 4. ita tenuit Decius in l. inuitus. n. 7. ff. de reg. iuris.
says; That according to some great Canonists, the Popes law does so far
forth tolerate fornication, that it compels harlots to play the queanes with
any that will, provided always that they be paid their fee.

To conclude this observation: let our Adversaries in their malice against
honest matrimony, being Gods ordinance, beware lest that be verified of them
which Clement of Alexandria Clem. Alexan. Strom. l. 2. (...). page 181.
speaks of Plato and other Philosophers: That they maintaining decrees of
chastity with their tongue, served vile lusts, some using Harlots and Lemmans,
and many abusing young men. And there is a memorable speech of Augustus the
Emperor, in Dio Cassius Dio hist. Rom l. 5 6.
used to some of like affection with our Roman Priests: It is not the love of
single life, and a desire to be without women, which has persuaded you, for at
his pleasure every one has his mate by his side; but you seek liberty for
lasciviousness and lust. The true reason why the Pope does so eagerly (against
the Apostles doctrine) maintain the single life of the Clergy, is, temporal
commodity, and the worldly glory of the Church Bonauent. 4. d. 37. ar. 1. q.
3. Tunc non fuit indicta Clericis contine^tia, propter paupertate^, quia non
tantu^ abu^dabant tunc, quantum nunc.

Mald. sum. q. 15. ar. 12. Si vsque ad hoc tempus sacerdotes habuiss^nt vxores,
introducta fuisset in ecclesiam exitiosissima tyrannis: quis esset Princeps,
qui nollet esse sacerdos?


, as Gerson intimates in the words formerly alleged, Nondum erat Ecclesia
dotata. And Bonauenture expressly delivers the same: Whiles the Church was not
endowed with temporal wealth and dominion, it had married Priests. And it is
to be noted, that at the same time, and by the same Pope, who usurped over the
Magistrate Lambert. Scaf. hist. Germ. Vt Romanus Imperator subditus Romano
Pontifici semper, dictoque obtemperans foret.
, was this law of single life obtruded upon the Church, and no doubt to the
same purpose, to support the liberty, pride, and pomp of the Antichristian
state.

Paragr. 4. Whether Baronius be corrupted concerning miracles.
T. W. Our Minister labors to prove by the confession of Catholics, that
working of true miracles is common to Heretics, and therefore no peculiar
note of the true Church or faith: and to this end he alleges Baronius Baron.
annal. to. 1. an 68. n. 22.
touching the miracles of Simon Magus, etc. But Baronius affirms not that
these were true miracles, but impostures and slights only.

Answ. The word miracle is of a common signification, and comprehends both
true and false maruels Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, l 10. c. 16. Illa quippe miracula
deotum Gentilium. Tertul apol. c. 23.
, between which there is this difference.

1. True miracles have three properties,.1. They are effected by divine power,
Exodus 8.19. Psalm. 77.15. and 136.4. 2. Their matter and external Act, is
real, not fantastical, or a delusion of sense. 3. Their final cause is the
confirmation of verity.

But false miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. are the work of Satan, or some delusion
of sense Aug. ibid. Specie tenus mortalium sensus imaginaria ludificatione
decipiunt. Aug. lib. 83. qu. q. 79. Quaedam miracula sceleratos homines facere,
etiam pseudoprophetas, pseudochristos, Math. 24. Mar. 13. and Antichristu^, 2.
These 2 qualia sancti facere non possunt, etc. Vide Espenc. com. 2. Tim. 3. n.
14. page 90. etc.
, or strange and rare effects, having hidden causes in nature or art: and their
final cause by which principally quoad nos, in respect of us, they are
distinguished from true, is falsehood and wickedness.

These things being premised, I answer; Dr. White says not as you charge him,
that the working of true miracles (being such, according to all their causes)
is common to Heretics, neither produces he Baronius to prove this; but using
the word Miracle largely, as the Scriptures and Fathers many times do, he
says; The working of miracles, that is, of wonders and maruels Aug. de ciu.
Dei, l. 20. c. 19. Gratian. cons. 26. q. 5. c. Nec mirum. Aug. sup. Exodus q. 21.
reputed miracles, and such as cannot be discerned to be other, but only by
their end, are common to Heretics Suar. def. fid. Cath. l. 1. c. 7. Haec
adulterari possunt, and ita exterius fingi, vt non sint necessaria signa verae
fidei.
: and this is the plain doctrine of the Scripture and Fathers. Deuteronomy. 13.1.
Math. 24.24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Revel. 13.13.

And Baronius Baron. an. 36 c. n. 21.
affirms thus much, producing Anastasius Nicenus, who reports of a
Macedonian Heretic; I beheld an Heretic of the sect of Macedonius, at
Cyzicum, who by pretext of prayer removed an Olive tree out of the place
wherein it grew, etc. and this same Heretic caused a dead man to speak, etc.
Wherefore it is not meet to admit every one which works signs, for a Saint,
but we must examine things according to the Apostles rule: Believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God or not. 1. Ioh. 4.1.

And whereas our Adversary would have the world believe his Popish miracles,
wrought by Saint Dominicke, Saint Francis, Saint Katherine, etc. 1: The same
are in themselves so absurd and ridiculous, that common sense detesteth them,
(read the margent Antonin. hist. p. 3. tit. 23. c. 1.. 3. Dominicke making the
sign of the cross, and traveling in great showers of rain, the same never
wet him or his clothes. His books lying many days in water, were hurt no more
then fishes. With the kiss of his hand, he made lecherous Monks chaste. Ib.
He made heretics see the devil. lb. c. 14. 3. Katherine of Siena by virtue
of the host, lived many days without food.. She was solemnly wedded to
Christ. By prayer she was enabled to read. Christ took out her heart, and
gave her a new one.. 10. She smelled the filthy sins committed in the Popes
Court, out of Auennion in France, to Siena in Italy.. 13.
.) 2. They are referred to maintain superstition and false doctrine. 3. Their
own Doctors give no credit to them Canus loc. l. 11. c. 6. Nostri plerique de
industria, ita multa confingunt, vt eorum me pudeat and taedeat, etc. Clingius
loc. com. lib. 4 cap. 42. Villauincent. de formand concion. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Nonnullae diuorum historiae circumferuntur prorsus insulsae, etc. Caietan.
opusc. to. 2. tr. 1. cap. 5. Non censeo digna de quibus verba fiant.
: but of this matter further is to be spoken hereafter.

CHAP. VII.
Paragraph. I. Bellarmine concerning Transubstantiation.
T. W. Master White alleges Bellarmine Bellar. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 23.
, saying; It may justly be doubted whether the text be clear enough to enforce
transubstantiation, seeing men sharp and learned, such as Scotus was, have
thought the contrary. But here are certain words omitted, (to wit) it may
justly be doubted, whether the text without the declaration of the Church, be
clear enough to convince an obstinate man, in the point of Transubstantiation,
seeing men sharp and learned, etc.

Answ. Bellarmines speech concerning the Churches declaration, carries a fair
show among them which understand not the matter: but indeed it leaves the
Scripture in the same obscurity it found it. For by the Churches declaration,
he understands not such an explication of the Scripture, as does open and
expound the meaning thereof by conference of places, knowledge of tongues, or
by observing the expositions of former interpreters, or by arguments and
means: such an exposition as gives light, and makes one see that in the
Scripture it self, which he was ignorant of before: but only a papal
sentence, wherein the Pope and Roman Synagogue without proof or
demonstration, affirm this or that, to be the sense of the Scripture.

For example; There is nothing indeed extant in the text of the Gospel from
whence it may appear, that the sacramental elements are transubstantiate into
the body and blood of Christ Biel. can. miss. l. 4. Quamuis express tradatur
in Scriptura, quod corpus Christi veraciter sub speciebus panis continetur^
tamen quomodo ibi sit Christus, an per conuersionem alicuius in ipsum, an sine
conuersione incipiat esse corpus Christi cum pane, manentibus substantia and
accidentibus, non inuenitur expressum in canone Bibliae. Durand. 4 d. 11. q.
1.. 15. Camerac. 4. sent. q. 5. ar. 2. Non potest ratione probari, nec
euidenter sequitur ex Scriptura, sed quod ita sit creditur ex authoritate
ecclesiae.
, and if all the learned and godly men of the world, should all their life long
poare into the text, they could espy no grounds to lead them to this
exposition; yea, the doctrine of other Scripture and evident reason, do teach
another manner of Christ his presence in the Sacrament: yet Pope Innocent the
third in a Roman synod Council. Lateran. 3. sub Innocentio 3. c. 1. Cuius
corpus and sanguis, in sacramento altaris, sub speciebus panis and vini
veraciter continentur, transubstantiatis, pane in corpus, and vino in sanguinem
potestate diuina.
decrees transubstantiation, and commands all the faithful to believe, that
the same is contained in the text of the Gospel. But how can the bare
authority and affirmation of a man, make that the meaning of the holy Ghost,
which is not collected from the Scripture, either in plain words, or by
arguments? Saint Augustine Aug. de verb. Dom. sermon. 2.
taught, That the words of the Gospel carry their exposition with them. And
Hilarie Hilar. de Trin. l. 1.
, It is unlawful to impose a meaning, but we must rather receive a meaning
from holy Scripture. And Irenaeus Iren. l. 3. c. 12.
, Ostensions which are in Scripture, cannot be made known but by the Scripture.

For as much therefore as that which Bellarmine calls the declaration and
exposition of the Church, is indeed no declaration, but a presumptuous imposing
of a foreign sense upon the Scripture; it follows, that if the Text be not
in it self clear to prove transubstantiation, the Pope or Roman Churches
exposition makes it not so.

Paragr. 2. The Mr. of sentences about Confession.
T. W. In this next place we will descend to the Sacrament of penance,
profaned by this our Doctors deprauations.

Answ. Repentance or penance, as the same is taught in holy Scripture, is a
virtue, but no Sacrament. 1. It has no corporal visible element or outward
sign, which, according to Saint Augustine and other Doctors, is essential to
every Sacrament Chry hom. 7. in ^. cap. Cor. 1. Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 1. c
2. and l. 3. c. 9. and con. Maximin. Atrian. l. 3. c. 22. Isiodor. orig. l. 6
c. 19. Sacramenta dicuntur quia sub tegumento corporalit^m rerum, etc. Hugo
Victor. de Sacram. l. 1. p. 9 c. 2. Sacramentum est corporale, vel materiale
elementum. foris sensibiliter propositum, ex similitudine reprae entans, ex
inst^tution^ significans, ex sanctificatione continens aliquam inuisibilem and
spiritualem gratiam. Haee definitio ita proptia and perfecta agnoscitur, vt
omni sacramento, solique conuenire inueniatur. Omne enim quod haec tria habet,
sacramentum est; and omne quod hijs tribus caret, sacramentum proprie dici non
potest.
. 2. Auricular confession, which you make a part thereof, and absolution
depending upon this confession, and which according to your Tenet, is the form
of this Sacrament, have no institution in the New Testament.

T. W. And first, to bear the Reader in hand, that by the acknowledgement of
Catholics, auricular confession and other parts of this Sacrament, are not
necessary.

Answ. Doctor White in this Digression Digress 33.
, treats of satisfaction, and not of auricular confession; and the word
Confession is only rehearsed by the way in the sentence, which he produced
about satisfaction.

T. W. He produces the Master of Sentences, saying; by Contrition only,
without Confession or payment of outward punishment or liberality of the
Prelat, or pains of Purgatory, I may go straight to heaven: where we find
these words, (or liberality of the Prelate, or pains in Purgatory) to be
added by Master White, to make the confession of this Author more full and
swelling.

Answ. My Brother cites three Authors in his margent, and propounding their
sentence, prefixeth before the same; (others say:) but you pretend, that he
alleges the Master of Sentences only, and has corrupted his testimony by
adding certain words to it. But those words are in Panormitans Glossator
Panormitan. c Deus qui. de poen. and remiss. gloss. ib. Dicit se audiuis^e a
multi, theologis, quiboc melius sciunt quam iuristae, quod potest esse tanta
contritio peccatoris, quod absque alia satisfactione exteriori in hoc seculo,
and absque aliqua liberalita te praelatoru^, and sine vlla poena purgatorij,
habebit vit^m aeternam propter maximam misericordiam Creatoris. Bonauen. 4. d.
18 ar. 2. q. 2. Tantum potest conteri, vt Deus totum remittat, and statim
euolabit (ad coelum.)
, being one of the Authors, from which the whole sentence is produced.

T. W. The Reader ought to conceive, that although all Catholics teach, that
perfect contrition is of force to blot out a man's sins, yet they hold, that
this contrition cannot be without confession, at least in voto, that is, that
the party has a desire to confess his sins to a Priest when opportunity
shall serve.

Answ. The latter part of this assertion is not generally true, 1. Sundry
Papists have taught, that a contrite person may obtain remission of his
sins, without reference to the keys, or confession made to the Church. And
this opinion was indifferent in Gratians Gratian. de poen d. 1. c Vtrum sola.
Sunt qui dicunt, que^libet veniam criminis sine confessione ecclesiae, and
sacerdotali iudicio posse promereri. lb. c. Quamuis. Cui harum potius
adhaerendum sit, lectoris iudicio reseruatur. Scot. 4. d. 14. q. 2. ar. 2.
time. 2. Venerable Bede Beda to. 7. hom. aestiual. Dom. 14. in Luc. 17. page
98. B. Rhenan argum. in Tertul de poenit.
maintains the necessity of auricular confession in case of haeresie only,
and enormous crimes, and not for other mortal sin. 3. Concerning the purpose
of confession, to be included in contrition, Gabriel Biel Biel 4. d. 17. q. 1
ar. 1. notab. 2.
has these words: It seems that one may have perfect contrition sufficient
to remission of sins, sine voto confessionis, without the purpose of
confession. 4. Many Schoolmen hold, that an implicit purpose thereof is
sufficient Biel ib. Si quaeris quomodo confessio in voto includitur in
confessione, potest dici implicit and virtualiter, etc.
, from whence Canus Canus Rel. de poen. p. 5. page 884. Si per poenitentiam
peccata remittuntur, sine explicito voto huius sacramenti, reuera delentur sine
ordine ad claues.
infers; If by penitency sins are remitted without an explicit purpose of
Sacramental confession, then they are blotted out without any reference to the
keys.

T. W. Such you see, is the proceeding of our Minister through his whole book,
ever inuesting his doctrine and assertion with most foul and stained
deprauations, well discovering the spotted guiltiness of his soul; therefore
I could wish Master White (that so his mind might be apparelled answerably to
his name) to follow the admonition of the Evangelist, Get thee a white garment,
(to wit, of repentance and future integrity) that thou may be clothed, and
thy filthy nakedness do not further appear.

Answ. It is very reasonable, that you which are quick sighted in observing
faults in others before they be committed, and so liberal in exhortation,
should make some reflection upon your own errors; otherwise the saying in the
Gospel, Physician heal thy self, and, Hypocrite pull out the beam, etc. may
justly be retorted upon you. And touching Doctor White, whom you first accuse
at your pleasure, and then exhort: I answer, That you are loud in words, and
lame in proofs, and being your self naked, Apoc. 3.17. give him counsel to
be clothed, 2. Cor. 5.4. who is in the place and fellowship of those which
having washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, do
wear white garments, which the unclean filth of a Popish black mouth cannot
distaine.

Paragr. 3. Bellarmine concerning satisfaction.
T. W. To make the Catholic doctrine of satisfaction more ungrateful, Master
White produces Bellarmine Bellar. de purgator. l. 1. c. 10.
thus writing: Christ's satisfaction it self takes not away the punishment due
unto us, but it remooueth it so far forth, as we have grace from thence to make
our own satisfaction of power.

In this place Bellarmine handling a School point, whether our satisfaction
receiving his force from the passion and satisfaction of Christ, may be termed
one satisfaction, or two satisfactions, resolves that it is but one
satisfaction, and that formally ours, neither by this is excluded Christ or his
satisfaction. Here all men may see, that Bellarmine does in no sort detract
from the passion or satisfaction of Christ, for he says; 1. That Christ's
satisfaction is not excluded by ours. 2. That by his satisfaction we have grace
to satisfy. 3. That our satisfaction applies Christ's to us. 4. That without
Christ's satisfaction, ours can be of no force.

Answ. In these words two things are affirmed by you. 1. That your doctrine of
satisfactions is Catholic. 2. That Bellarmine does fully acknowledge the
necessity of Christ's satisfaction, both to produce man's satisfaction, and to
concur with the same, to make it of price and value. Concerning this latter,
you trouble your self in vain in acquitting your Cardinal, who is not accused
by D. White touching this matter.

But the false doctrine wherewith he and his fellows are charged, is: That
they conioyne the actions and sufferings of just persons with Christ's, making
the same with his, a joint satisfactorie price, and part of digne compensation
for the guilt of venial sin, and for the temporal punishment of sin.
Suares says Suar. 3. Tho. to. 1. d 4.. 9. Dico simpliciter and absolute posse
hominem iustificarum satisfacere, de condigno, pro veniali peccato, atque adeo
ex iustitia, and non mere gratis illius remissionem consequi. Henriq. sum. mor.
de Sacram. l. 4. c. 15. Paluda. 4. d. 16. q. 1. 2. Soto 4. d. 15. q. 2. 2.
Ledesm. q. 28. ar. 2. Bellar. de poen. l. 4. c. 14. Christi sanguis etc poena^
temporalem totam, nisi propria satisfactione cooperante non expiat. Opera
nostra cooperari expiationi, and propitiationi Christi. Ruard. Tap. ar. 6. page
179. Egid. Coenic. de Sacram. to. 2. d. 10. d. 2.
; A just person may simply and absolutely in condignitie (or justice) satisfy
for venial sin, and not obtain the remission thereof freely. Gregory
Valence Greg. Val. to. 2. d. 6. q. 17 p. 5. Cogitandum est, Christum non solum
suam sed etiam nostra^ simul satisfactionem aeterno Patri acceptandam
obtulisle, vt ex vi etiam nostrae satisfactionis debitum illud temporalis
poenae solueretur licet diuersa ratione. Bellar. de poen. l. 4 c. 15. Christus
satisfecit immediate, pro culpa and reatu mortis aeternae, etc. mediate autem
pro poena temporali, etc. Mald. disp. to. 2. de Satisf. cap. 1. page 79. vt cum
praeceptori, etc.
; Christ did not offer his own satisfaction only to God the Father to be
accepted, but also ours, that by the power of our satisfaction, the debt of
temporal punishment might be discharged. Bellarmine Bellar. de purg. l. 2. c
10.
, It pleased Christ to conioyne our satisfaction with his own. Vasques Vasq
to. 1. d. 15. c. 6. n. 39. Quando pro satisfactione in gratia facta, remittitur
nobis poena temporalis, non condonatur nobis illud debitum, sed vere
compensatione nostra tollitur, and nos sumus digni, qui deinceps eo debito
careamus. Ruard. Tapper. artic. 6. Compensando aequiualens secundum iustam Dei
aestimationem. Capreol 4. d 15. Perfect, hoc est adae quando emendam culpae,
potest satisfacere.
; When as temporal punishment is remitted unto us, for satisfaction made in
grace, the debt is not forgiven us, but is truly taken away by our
compensation, and we are worthy to be free of that temporal punishment. And
again Vasq. 1. 2 p. 2 d. 223. c. 3. n 38.
; The works which we exhibit to God after our justification by the help of
grace, do in such sort by their very nature, without any pact or promise of
God, satisfy for the temporal punishment of another life (in Purgatory) that
God can in no sort justly punish the man who has thus satisfied. Victoria
Fran. Victor. sum. sacram. de satisfact. n 199. Bellar. de poen. l. 4 c. 12.
and de indulg l. 2. c. 9. Opera paenalia per Spiritum Christi facta, ex
condigno reatum poenae temporalis expungunt. Viguer. instit. theol. c 16. verse.
21. Suarez tom. 4. d 37.. 1. Sunt proprie solutio pro poena. lb. assert. 2. Per
satisfactionem poenam compensamus and soluimus. Greg. Val tom. 4. d. 7. q. 14.
p. 1. Haec compensatio quae fit in satisfactione, non tantum habet respectum ad
poenam, sed ad nonnullam offensam and iram Dei, quae per eiusmodi
compensationem auerti debet. Ruard. Tapper. art. 6. Cum satisfactio opus fit
iustitiae, ex genere suo, contra gratiam, distinguitur. Maldon. disp. to. 2. de
satisfact. cap. 1. Vno modo gratum vocatur, quod Deus acceptum habere debet
velit, ^o^t. Atque hoc modo grata sunt ea, quae proficiscuntur ex ipsius
gratia, etc.
; If a man be considered in the state of grace, etc. thus he does most properly
and according to equality, satisfy God, if we join our merits to Christ's.

This doctrine of our Adversaries which my Brother impugned, is neither true
nor Catholic.

1. It is repugnant to holy Scripture, which instructs (...) and eleuating
the mind to devotion. But other teach Dom. Sot. 4. d. 15. q 2. ar. 3. Can. Rel.
de Sacram. p. 1. ad. 6. Walden. sacram. to. 3. tit. 4. c. 68. Lede^m. 4. p. 1.
q. 28. ar. 3 d. 3. Azor. p. 1. instit. mor l 4. c. 11. Canis. sup. catechis.
Turrian. l. 3. pro epist. Pontif. c. 6. Beuxam. to. 2. harmon. Math. 14. page
520.
, that they effect the same immediately by their very outward act, ex opere
operato; and when one has no actual cogitation of the sin or motion to
repentance. And your learned Jesuit Azorius Azor. inst. mor. 1. l. 4. c. 11 q.
11. Iac. Graph. decis. aur p. 1. l. 1. c. 6 n. 10. Exemplum de eo, qui se aqua
lustrali aspergit: nam etsi nullatenus excitetur ad feruorem, nec memoriam
habeat venialium, tamen obtinebit per illam aspersionem eorum veniam Henriq.
sum. mor. de Sacr. l. 4. c. 15. Non ratione impetrationis tantum, aut quia
excitant motum poenitentiae, vel charitatis, sed ex opere operato, etc.
and Jacob de Graphijs t say: That whatsoever other think to the contrary,
yet this is indeed Thomas his opinion. And so if Doctor White were deceived
about Thomas, your own Authors misled him.

CHAP. VIII.
Paragraph. I. Whether Bellarmine be corrupted about the question: If God be
the Author of sin.
T. W. TO the justifying, that Catholics are as far engaged in defending
that blasphemous and horrible doctrine, Digress. 41.. 50 page 271.
that God is the Author of sin, as the Protestants are, he alleges
Bellarmine, etc.

Answ. It is an impudent slander, to charge us with holding God to be the
Author of sin; and had not the foul beam of malice blinded your eyes, you
would have observed Doctor Whites speech in this very place, saying Ibid page
271.. 51.
; We hold that God is not the Author of sin, but the Devil and man's own
will; the contrary whereunto we defy as blasphemy.

T. W. He alleges Bellarmine Bellar. de amiss great. l 2. c. 13.
, thus writing; God by a figure, etc. Thus our Minister alleges Bellarmine,
and then triumphantly concludes: Let our Adversaries look well into these
speeches, and they shall find that we say in effect no more. Your Adversaries,
Master White, have looked well into these speeches, and they do find and say
in effect, that you are a most faithless, dishonest, and corrupt Writer, and
indeed one of those whom the Spanish phrase calls, Un hombre de salmado, a
fellow without a soul: for if you either feared God, or had a true conceit of
any Religion, or thought that the soul were immortal, you would never deprave
this Author as you do, making the Catholics to be patrons of that blaspemie,
which in their souls they damn to the pit of hell.

Answ. 1. I find that verified in you, which Cyprian Cypr. ep. 55. or l. 1.
ep. 3.
speaks, saying; It is the fashion of those, whose breasts and souls the
Devil inhabiteth, to testify their venomous rancour with a furious voice:
otherwise what can be the incentiue of this your savage abuse of Doctor White
in this place?

You pretend two causes: 1. That he produces Bellarmine to maintain, that
Catholics are patrons of blasphemy, and hold God to be the author of sin.
2. That to the end he might enforce the Cardinals words to sound to this
purpose, he depraueth and curtalleth sundry parcels of his speech. But neither
of these assertions are true. 1. Doctor White produced Bellarmine, to show,
that learned Papists in substance of doctrine, consent with the Church of
England, concerning the providence of God about sin. And he does in no sort
tax them for making God the author of sin; but freeth both them and the
Protestants from this blasphemy.

2. He omitteth no words in Bellarmine, material to that purpose, whereunto he
alleged him; to wit, which served to prove the threefold action of God about
sin, delivered by him.

Doctor White comprehends the Doctrine of the Protestants of England,
touching Gods providence, about sin, in three propositions.

1. God, as the universal cause of all things, sustaineth mankind, and
vpholdeth his being, Act. 17.28. yea, the being and moving of all his actions,
(in regard of their entity) good and bad.

This position is maintained by Bellarmine Bellar. de amiss. great. l. 2. c. 5.
and by all the Papists. God (says he) concurreth as an universal cause, to the
substance and entity of the action: The entity of the hatred of God considered
in it self, is not evil Bellar. ib. c. 18.
, etc. As an universal cause he conferres a certain force and influxe
indifferent, etc.

2. Doctor Whites next position is, God withholdeth his grace, being bound to
no man, and leaves the wicked to themselves: whereupon it follows, that
their hearts harden, and they cannot but sin. The manner how he hardens, is
not by creating the sin, (as he does grace in the elect) but by denying them
the power of his grace which should mollify them, and by offering them sundry
objects, which they convert into occasion of sin and ruin, etc.

Bellarmine Bellar. ib. c. 18.
and other Papists assent to this doctrine, saying; God does not only forsake,
and by desertion suffer men to be subdued of their enemies, but also he does
not bestow congruous grace whereby they may obtain strength, etc. And other
branches contained in this second Article, are delivered by Bellarmine, Chap.
13. l. 2. de amiss. gratiae. And Vasques Vasq 1. d. 99. c. 4. n 21.
says; God is the Author of the cogitation and occasion, from whence he knows
that sin will proceed. Lira Lira super Exodus 4.
; For the punishment of sin he takes away his grace. Caietan Caietan. com.
Math. 21. v. 33.
; The householders going into a far Country, Math. 21.33. is Gods subtraction
of his gracious help, keeping men from evil.

3. The Doctors third proposition is, God ordinateth the sin, which is
nothing else but the directing of it in such manner as he pleases, that it
proceed no further or otherwise, then his good pleasure wills. Now
Bellarmine Bellar. de amiss. great. c. 16.
delivers the doctrine contained in this proposition, saying; God by a
marvelous power rules the hearts of wicked persons, and hinders them, that
they cannot perform, endeavor, will, or think any other thing, then what he
permits. And again, Praesidet voluntatibus malis Ibid. c. 13.
, etc. He sits as ruler over wicked wills, and rules, bends, and plyeth them,
working inuisibly in them, etc. He inclined the corrupt will of Semei to curse
David, by permitting, etc. Bannes Bannes 1. q. 23. ar. 2.
; Sin being considered, as it is permitted of God, is under the providence of
God, and under the will of God. Vasques Vasq. 1. q. 22. ar. 2. obseru. n. 27.
; Sins are as it were the matter whereabout the providence of God is occupied.

And thus Doctor Whites three positions, containing a sum of our doctrine,
are a Breuiat of that which is taught by Bellarmine and other Papists,
concerning Gods providence about sin.

T. W. Now we will see what a mount of impostures and deceipts our Minister
has heaped up, in producing this one authority. 1. He omitteth altogether
without the least intimation of Bellarmines dislike thereof, the first kind or
manner how God may be said to compel man to sin; to wit, properly and
immediately, which Bellarmine calls impious and blasphemous, and yet Master
White endeavors throughout all the passage here urged, to charge him
therewith.

Answ. Like a Mountebanke you proclaim a mount of impostures, and bring forth
a Mouse. 1. It is no imposture for Doctor White to omit that which is on all
hands by Papists and Protestants condemned as a blasphemy. 2. It is a wilful
calumniation in you to say, that Doctor White endeavors to charge Bellarmine
with holding, that God properly and immediately compels man to sin: But as
your Cardinal is innocent from this blasphemy, so no Protestant believes or
maintains it.

T. W. 2. For the more engaging of Bellarmine herein, he immediately applies
that example of a Hunter letting go the slip, to Gods commanding and inclining
men to sin, which Bellarmine only by illation applies thereunto.

Answ. When an Hunter lets go the slip, he is willing that the hound should
follow the game; so Bellarmine affirms, Bellar. de amiss. great. l. 2. c. 13.
Becan. de auth. pecc. c. 13. p. 162
that God does permit, and by giving liberty as it were, excite those, which
of themselves are prone and disposed hereunto, to commit the sin they desire,
and my Brother charge him with saying no more.

T. W. 3. Where Bellarmine says, that wicked men by divine providence, are
inclined to one evil rather then another, not positiuely, but by permission,
The Minister has left out these latter words, etc.

Answ. My Brothers purpose being only to show, that Bellarmine agrees with
the Church of England, in the doctrine of Gods providence about sin, produced
so much as served to that purpose, and had no just occasion to deliver other
particular speeches of his, concerning the special manner, how wicked persons
are inclined to sin.

T. W. Our Minister subtly taking hold of the word Positive, does leave out
all the rest, wherein is expressed how the same word is to be understood, and
joins it immediately with the words, occasionally and morally.

Answ. In his first solution Bellarmine denies that God morally moves, the
will to evil Bellar. de amiss. great. l. 2. c. 13. primus modus etc.
, and this might justly occasion Doctor White in reciting his opinion, to omit
the word morally: but in the fourth solution, Bellarmine Bellar ib.
thwarteth himself, saying; God inclines the will to evil, occasionally, and
morally. Now in this case what should Doctor White do? If he had put in the
words morally and occasionally, you might have opposed him with the former
place; God does not morally incline to evil. And now he leaves it out, you
charge him for omission, out of the latter.

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? T. W. He purposely forbeareth the
example, wherein Bellarmine does interpret the words, occasionally and
morally; to wit, in sending a good thought, and not an evil thought.

Answ. Doctor White never intended to coppie out al Bellarmines works, but to
collect the sum of his doctrine touching the three points formerly named:
neither has Bellarmine those words, and not an evil thought; and so your self
are faulty in adding, as you charge the Doctor with omitting.

An observation concerning the providence of God about sin.
1. That God Almighty being only good, does notwithstanding permit and govern
wicked actions and sins, is taught by the holy Scripture, Acts 2.23. and
4.28. and by the primitive Fathers Aug. de Genes. ad lit. l. 8. c. 4. Deus
bipartito, prouidentiae suae opera, praest vniuersae creaturae, naturis vt
siant, voluntatibus autem vt sine suo iussu, vel permissu nihil faciant. Et de
Ciu. Dei, l. 11. c. 17. and l. 14 c. 26. and l. 22. c. 1. Enchirid. c. 11. etc.
100. and 101. De Trin. l. 3. c. 4. and l. 8. c. 24. Clem. Alexand. strom. l. 1.
and l. 7. Hieron. l. 3. in Ierem. c. 12. Prosp. ad excerp. Genesis d. 8.
, and generally by all the Protestants and Papists Bannes 1. q. 23. ar. 3. Tho.
Aq. 1. q. 22. ar. 2. Becan. de praedest. Calu. Stapl. de iustif. l. 11. c. 7.
etc. 15. Vasq. 1. q. 22. ar. 2. obseru. Serrar. in Josh. l. 1. c. 9. q. 1.
.

2. There be four actions of divine providence about sin: 1. Of permission
Aug. de diuinat. daem. c. 2. Deus aliquid and improbat iustus, and permittit
omnipotens. Bellarm. de amiss. great. l. 2. c 16. Decreuit permittere, vult
permittere, etc.
, Act. 14.16. 1. Cor. 10.33. 2. Of inspection and knowledge, Job. 34.21.22.
Psalm. 94.7. 3. of limitation Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, l. 5. c. 9. Voluntates nostrae
tantum valent, quantum eas Deus valere voluit atque praesciuit.
or restraint, Genesis 20.6. 4. Of direction Id. de Genesis ad lit. l. 11. c. 3.
and order, whereby sin being in it self altogether evil, is by Gods
wisdom ordered to some passive event, which is good, Romans 8.28. Genesis 50.20.

3. God is not the Author or efficient cause of sin, as it is sin Id. Resp.
ad art. falso impos. impos. resp. 10. detestanda and abominanda opinio, etc. De
vtil credend c. 18. Polan. these. p. 2. de pecc. Doctores Ecclesiarum
reformatarum non statuunt, peccati authorem, seu causam efficientem esse Deum.
, in any manner whatsoever. Psalm. 5.4. James 1.13. 1. Ioh. 2.16. And this is
the general doctrine of the primitive Fathers, and of all reformed Churches.

4. The Author and efficient cause of sin is the will of man Aug. de Ciuit.
Dei, l. 5. c. 9. and l. 12. c. 6. 7. and l 14. c. 13. and l. 15. c. 21.
Enchirid. c. 23. Cont. Julian. l. 1. c. 3. De gratia Christi. l. 1. c. 19. De
nupt. and concupisc. l. 2. c 28. Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. l. 22. ca. 22. A
voluntate est initium peccati. Caietan. in 1. Tho. q. 23. ar. 3. Gers. compend.
theol. de pecc. actual. Bonauent. breuiloq. p. 3. c. 1. de orig. mali. Caietan.
opusc. to. 3. tr. 1. orat. 3. Malum ex naturali boni defectu, ex mutabilitate,
mutabilitas ex possibilitate, possibilitas ex finitate, finitas suboritur ex
nihilo. Malum a bono nascitur, sed per accidens.
. Math. 15.19. by deficiency from the Creator to the Creature. The same at the
first was created good. Ephe. 4.24. And being endued with liberty to choose
good or evil, as it should be pleasing unto it self, and having in it a
possibility of deficiency, because it was created mutable, and of nothing; did
voluntarily by it own election and motion depart from the obedience of the
Creator, to an inordinate desire of the Creature. Genesis 3. And by this means
Concupiscence entered into the soul; and from the sin of the first man, being
propagated to posterity, brings forth actual and personal transgression in
all the sons of Adam. And thus the first efficient cause of sin, was the
will of man, by deficiency from good, and the next efficient cause of actual
sin in us, is habitual concupiscence.

5. Whereas sin is a deficiencie and aberration from the rule of justice, 1.
Ioh. 3.4. it cannot subsist alone, or of it self Aug euch. c. 11 De Ciu Dei,
l. 14 c. 11. and l 19 c 23. Fulg. de fid. ad Petr. c. 21. Anselm. de casu.
diab. l 9. c. 10. 11. Damascen. orth. fid. l. 2. c. 4. Aq. 1. q. 48. ar. 3.
Caietan ib. Molina 1. Tho. q 5. disp. vnica.
: but even as halting must necessarily be joined with some motion of the body,
and hoarsenesse of speech with the action of speaking: So the evil of sin is
conjoined with some action or motion of the soul or body, which has a
positive and natural being, and whereunto there happens a going astray from
divine Law: even as it happens to a lame man's natural motion, to have
halting concurring with it.

Of that, which is positive and natural in sinful actions, all Divines
acknowledge God to be the Author; both in that he preserves man's being, will,
and faculties, whereby he is enabled to his operations Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, l.
22. c. 24. Efficacem potentiam suam si rebus subtrahat, nec progredi poterunt.
, and also because as the first and principal mouer, he produces together
with the second cause, all positive motion, Act. 17.28. Caietan. 1. Th. q. 19.
ar. 8. Stat causam secunda^ necessario moueri a prima, and cum hoc ipso moueri
modificari, ex natura causae secundae. Prima causa non attingit effectum
secundae causae, in seipsa: sed modificata, cooperatione sua iuxta modum ipsius
causae secundae.
For example, in the sin of lying, there is the action of speaking, and there
is an inordinate manner, or declining from verity in speaking; the one being
natural, and which may be applied to good as well as evil, is the operation
of God, and of the natural power of man: the other is a defect of the second
cause, and of man himself only.

These two, namely the entitie or substance, and the prauitie of the actions go
inseparably together, and the latter cannot be without the former, and touching
the same the Schoolmen teach as follows.

Vega Vega pro council. l. 2. c. 15.
; God coworketh with man, those actions which have an intrinsecall and
inseparable naughtiness. Greg. Arimin Greg. Arim. 2. d. 28. q. 1. ar. 3.
and Capreolus Capreol. 2. d. 28. q. 1 ar 3. ad. 12.
; God works with man the evil act Conrad. 1. 2. q. 49 ar. 1.
. Conradus; God produces more principally the substance of the act of sin,
then the will it self. Driedo Ioh. Driedo de Red tr. 2. c. 2.
; God as an universal cause effects the motion of the will when it wills
adultery. Vasques Vasq. 1. Tho. d. 99. c. 4. n. 21.
, God is the author of the cogitation and occasion, of which he knows that
sin will proceed. Anselm Ansel de concord. lib. arb. and praedest. c. 2.
: The act of sin according to the substance, is of God. Gerson Gers. p. 4.
centilog. de causa finali, 5. and p. 3. de consol. l. 2. pros. 2.
; The second free efficient cause, (the will) can do nothing by sinning, but
God concurreth positiuely to all that which is positiuely in the act.
Seraphinus Capponus Seraph. com. Gen 49. concl. 2. append.
: The evil of sin is in some sort of God. And Thomas Aquinas Th. Aq. contra
Gentil. l. 3. c. 71. Altisio. sum. l 3. tr. 8. c. 3. q. 2. Deus potuit
praecipere quod vnus homo habeat duas vxores, and multa alia malia.
, Evil actions as they be deficient, are not of God, but of their next
deficient causes: but all the action and entitie they have, is of God; even as
halting proceeds from the power locomotiue, in respect of motion, but in
regard of the defect, from the lamenesse of the thigh.

6. The action of God, whereby he is said to excoecate, Ioh. 12.40. Esa. 19.14.
to obdure, Stapl. Antid. Apost. To 9. v. 19. etc. Obduratio, etc. ex solo Dei
beneplacito esse potest. Ipsa permissio peccati potest esse a sola voluntate
Dei, etc.
Romans 9.18. to deceive, 1. King. 22.23. Esa. 63.17. deliver into a reprobate
mind. Romans 1.28. to impell or excite to evil. Psalm. 105.25. 2. Sam. 24.1. 2.
Sam. 16.10. and to work by wicked persons, as his instruments. 2. Sa. 12.11.
Esa. 54.16. is not an action of infusion, or positive production Aug. de
praedest and great. c. 4. and sup. Psalm. 77. and echirid c. 99. and sup. Josh.
q. 18. Cornel. a Lap. com. Romans permissiue and indirecte obdurat.
, such as he uses in the just, when he causes virtue and grace, Phil. 2.13.
1. Cor. 11.12. and does illuminate and sanctify them. Heb. 8.10. Ezech. 36.26.
Ephe. 2.10. But a work of desertion, permission, and order: whereby 1. he
leaves man to himself. Act. 14.6. and forsakes him. 1. Sam. 16.14. that is,
affords not occasions and means, apt and congruous to reform him: and
suspendeth or denies the concourse of his special help and grace. 2. He
suffers man to be tempted above his strength, to be ruled by his errors. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11. and transported by his own concupiscence. Romans 1.24. Psalm.
81.12. and permits Satan to exercise his subtlety and malice toward him.
1. King. 22.23. 3. He orders objects and means Aug. super Exodus q. 18.
Vtitur Deus been cordibus malis, etc. Quamuis vniuscuiusque cordis in malitia
qualitas, id est, quale cor habet ad malum, suo fiat vicio, etc. tamen
qualitate mala huc vel illuc impellatur, causis sit quibus animus propellitur:
quae causae vt vel existant vel non existant, non est in hominis potestate,
veniunt ex occulta prouidentia. Vide ib. q 24. and 29.
in such sort, as that they may be incentiues by way of occasion, to provoke
the wicked to exercise that sinfulness, which is in, and of themselves, where,
and how God will have it so break out for punishment, correction, example, or
trial.

Object. 1. Calvin and Beza teach sundry other things, concerning the
providence of God about sin.

Answ. 1. They and all their followers absolutely deny, that God is the author
of sin, etc. And Calvin says; It is an execrable blasphemy to teach thus.
2. For as much as our greatest Adversaries affirm, that we of the church of
England are no Caluinists Bellar. Recog de Eccles. l. 4. c. 6. pa. 49.
, it is iniust to blame us for their doctrine if it be faulty. 3. Sundry
reverend and judicious persons B. Abbot. Antilog. cont. Eudaem. page 66. and
Answ. to D. Bishops preface. B. Morton. Cath. apol. l. 1. c. 25. D. Field of
the Church, l. 1. c. 23. D. Hackwell ag. Carriar, c. 2. n. 12 page 101.
, having examined Caluins doctrine, do free him from those imputations, which
his Adversaries object against him.

Object. 2. Calvin teaches, that God decreed the fall of man, and that sin
happens by the ordinance and will of God Calvin. instit. l. 1 c. 18. and l.
3. c. 23. Beza de praedest cont Castal. page 391. and 340. Polan. these. p. 3. de
pec. page 673.
. From whence, according to Bellarmine Bellar. de amiss. great. l. 2. c 3. 4.
, Becanus Becan. li. de au^h. pec.
, etc. many blasphemous illations do follow.

Answ. God may be said to decree the fall of man, and to ordain sin three
ways. 1. Decreto causante, by such a decree and will, as does naturally
Physice.
or morally cause and effect it: and thus to say that God decreed sin, makes
him the Author of sin. But Calvin and Beza Beza cont. Cast^l. de praedest.
pro impio and blasphemo habemus. Molina. 1. q 23. disp. 4 m. 11. Quos Deus
praes^uit per praescientiam conditionalem, futuros pro sui arbitrij liberate,
etc. Vide Cornel de Lap. ^om. Romans 8. v. 29 n. 188. Dionys. Carthus. com. Romans
8.
maintain not any such decree of God, but condemn the doctrine thereof as
blasphemous: and yet Becanus and the Jesuits declame and dispute against them,
as guilty of this blasphemy.

2. God may be said to decree the fall man, decreto permittente, by a
permissiue decree: conditionally, and with reference to man's own act; to wit,
if man himself by his own free election, would fall into sin, then God
decreed to suffer him: and upon the prescience of man's own voluntary fall, he
ordained the permission of his sin. This is the doctrine of Molina, Fonseca,
Suarez, Bellarmine, Becanus, Valenza, Vasques, Stapleton, and many Papists
Fonseca. Metaph. 6. q. ^. sect. 8 Molina in 1. Tho. q. 13. ar. 13. disp. 17.
Suar. opusc. l. 2. c. 6. etc. Vasq. in 1. Thom. disp. 67. Bellar. Recog. lib.
de great. and lib. arb. page 108. Becan. de praedest. Cath. c. 5. Gregor. Val.
to. 1. d. 1. q. 23. p. 3. Stapl. Antid. Apostol. Romans 11. v. 29. Scientia media.
.

3. God may be said to decree the fall of man, decreto permittente, and
ordinante Iun. cont. Bellarm. de eccles. l. 4. c. 9.
; by such a decree in God, as did both determine to permit it, and purpose with
himself, that upon his permission it should infallibly be Bellar. de great. and
lib. arb. l. 4. c. 13. Deus intelligit res omnes, quae quoquo modo esse
possunt: deinde voluntate decernit ex hijs, quae velit reipsa existere. Vasq.
to. 1. d. 99. c. 4. n. 21. Tametsi Deus sit author cogitationis and occasionis,
ex qua nouit futurum esse opus peccati. Hugo Victor. de Sacram. l. 1. p. 2. c.
22. Si non potest prouidentia eius, aut mutari, vt aliud fiat, quam praeuisum
est, etc. necesse est totum fieri quod prouisum non est.
: for example, 1. God decreed to create man mutable, and subject to
possibility of falling. 2. He decreed to permit Satan to tempt him. 3. He
decreed not to concur with Adam by effectual grace, and to enable him to
resist temptation. 4. He knew that without this concourse of grace man would
fall, and he willingly permitted him so to do. This seems to be the sum of
Caluins doctrine, touching the decree of God about the fall of man. Concerning
the truth whereof, I presume to say nothing, referring my self to the grave
judgment of other more reverend persons, who have purposely handled this
matter. Lord Archb. of Canterbury in one of his 6. Lectures. D. Abbot B. of
Salisbury. D. Morton B. of Chester. D. Field, D. Hackwell, alleged before.


But in defense of my Brothers assertion, who affirmed, that learned Papists
say as much in effect, touching Gods providence about sin, as Calvin does, I
think his assertion is true, in respect of sundry Papists Vasq. 1. d. 99. c.
3. n. 9. Recentiores doctrinam Thom. and antiquorum, putant sic esse
intelligendam, vt Deus ab aeterno praefinierit singulas nostras actiones, id
quod non solum in operibus gratiae censent esse verum, sed in alijs etiam
operibus peccati, si sermo sit non de malitia, sed de substantia actus. lb. c.
4. n. 22. (aliqui sentiunt) Deum nos applicare, agere, impellere, etc.
, although it be doubtful whether Bellarmine holds thus or not.

1. Sundry learned Papists, to wit, Bannes, Rispolis, Ferrariensis, Marsilius,
Gregory Arimin, Adam Sasbot, Shumel, etc. maintain; That Gods decree of
reprobation, goes before all praeuision or foreknowledge of sin Bannes 1. q.
23. Ferrar. l. 3. cont. gent. c. 161. Marsil. 1. q. 41. ar. 2. Greg. Arim. 1.
d. 41. q. vnic. ar. 2. Adam Sasb. com. Romans 9. Durand. 1. d. 40. q. 2. Capreol.
1. d. 41. q. un. Caietan. and Shumel. 1. q. 23. ar. 5.
. But upon this assertion it follows, that God preordained the fall of man,
because according to this Tenet, Reprobatio^ implies anabsolute will and
purpose of God, to suffer man to fall into sin, and to infer the punishment of
damnation, because of sin Bann^s 1. q. 23 ar. 5 Rep obatio inclu^^^
voluntatem, permittendi alique^ cadere in culpam, and inserendi damnationis
poenam pro culpa. Raspol^s d^ praefinit. l. 1. q 1. concl. 3. Permissio pecc.
and obduratio, effectus reprobationis, secundum Thomam. etc. Altisiodor. l. 1.
c 9 q. 2 Reprobatio est praescientia Dei, qua ab aeterno scit Deus, se non
appositurum gratiam ini, etc.
. And Bannes Bannes ib ar. 3 page 270. Deus habuit hunc actum ab aeterno, volo
permittere haec peccata, volo quibusdam non dare auxilia, quae si reciperent
non peccarent.
a celebrious Doctor, says; God from aeternitie had this act in himself, I
will permit these sins, I will not bestow helps and means upon certain
persons, which if they might have received, they would not have sinned.

2. Many learned Papists, and among the rest Benius Benius de efficacitate
gratiae, c. 2. etc. pa 7. etc. Osor. ep. l. 9. de iustitia. Anton. Delphinus de
iustif.
, instiled excellentissimus, do teach, that God bestows not upon many
persons sufficient grace, whereby they may avoid infidelity and mortal
sin. And from hence also it follows, that his purpose and will is, that
some persons shall fall into sin.

Object. 3. Calvin and Beza teach, that God not only permits Beza de
praedest. contra Cast^l. Nos affirmamus non tantum inanem illam and
commentitiam permissionem, aut desertionem: sed Dei concilium decretum,
voluntatem. actionem denique vero interuepire.
diverse persons to sin, but that he uses a secret action, and inclines
their will to exercise the naughtiness which is in themselves, upon such
objects as he has appointed.

Answ. Their meaning is Calu. cont. Libertin. c. 14. Beza de praedest. con.
Castal p. 366. Sicut Sol in cadauer radios tuos emittens, etc.
, that like as when a man moves a dead carrion, there arises a noisome
savor, not effected by the mouer, but proceeding from the filthiness of the
rotten carkase: So God by a secret occasional action Beza* Excitat tum
Sathanae, tum aliorum ministerio, propria improbitate vtens.
, moves the heart of man, being full of uncleanness, and causes the
unsavory filth of sin, lurking before in the heart, to break out, and to
annoy the wicked person himself or others, who deserve to be punished or
corrected by this means: In this action there is no iniquity or savor of
wickedness in the moouer: but whatsoever is corrupt and filthy, proceeds
from man himself, who before this motion, was a carrion dead in sin. And if
we allow Physicians to use venomous herbs Basil. sermon. Quod Deus no^ est auth
maloru^. Bellar. de amiss. great. l. 2. c. 13. Medici vtuntur viperae veneno.
, and in certain cases to extract the poison which is them, to the compounding
of bodily medicines: how much more is the Lord able by his providence, without
any defilement of himself, to apply the wickedness of the creature to a good
event?

2. It was the plain doctrine of Saint Augustine Aug. de great. and lib arb c.
20. etc. 21. Eius voluntatem proprio vitio malam, in hoc peccatum, iusto suo
iudicio and occulto inclinauit. De corrept. and great. c. 14.
, that God by a secret motion works in the hearts of wicked men, inclining
them to their particular objects. For speaking of Shimei, he says Aug. de
great. and lib arb c. 20. etc. 21. Eius voluntatem proprio vitio malam, in hoc
peccatum, iusto suo iudicio and occulto inclinauit. De corrept. and great. c. 14.
; The Lord by his just judgment inclined his will, being formerly wicked
through his own fault, into his sin. And again De great. and lib. arb. c 21.
super Exodus q. 18. Vniuscuiusque cordis in malitia qualitas, id est, quale cor
habeat ad malum, suo fit vicio, quod inoleuit ex arbitrio voluntatis: tamen vt
qualitate mala huc vel illuc moueatur, causis fit quibus animus propellitur*
quae causae vt existant vel non existant, non est in hominis potestate, sed
veniunt ex occulta prouidentia.
; God works in the hearts of wicked men whatsoever he will: inclining their
wills whither he pleases, either to good for his mercy, or to evil for their
own demerits. And in another place Cont. Julian. l. 5 c. 3. De praedest sanct.
c. 20.
; God works his judgments not only in the bodies, but hearts of men, by
marvelous and ineffable means. And the same is affirmed by Hugo de Sancto
Victore Hugo de Sacram. l. 1. p. 5. c. 29. Deum ad iudicia sua iusta complenda,
malas voluntates hominum, quibus ipse vult modis and occasionibus* sieve intus,
sieve foris. and excitare ad volendum, and dirigere ad perficiendum, and
ordinare ad subsistendum.
, and by the ordinary Gloss Gloss ordinar Romans 1. tradidit eos Deus. Et
citatur a Thom. ^. 2 q. 79. ar. 1.
.

Object. 4. Calvin and Beza say, That God produces the same act which a sinner
does, but in a different manner.

Answ. Asorius the Jesuit says the like Azor. inst mor. p. 1. l. 1. c. 21. In
peccatis quae perperam committuntur, cum voluntate humana Deus etiam operatur
id quod fit.
; In sins which are wickedly committed, God together with the will of man,
works that which is done. And Andreas Vega Vega pro council. l. 1. c. 15. page
28. 29.
: God, according as sundry Divines do more probably think, by his will and
concourse, effects our sins together with us. Canus Loc lib. 2. c. 4.
; There is no absurdity, if we refer the same work as it is a punishment,
to God the Author, and as it is a fault, to Satan. These Doctors and Calvin
intend no more, but that which other Schoolmen hold; to wit, that God
produces the same act in regard of the entitie or positive being; but not the
same formally Beza: Non vult Absolonis incestu^ vt incestum. Peccata a
voluntate Dei procedere quatenus peccata, si diceremus, fateremur, nos omnibus
supplicijs dignissimos. Molina. concor. great. and lib. arb. d. 31. Plerique
antiquoru^, etc. Actio quatenus est a libero arbitrio, est vitiosa: quatenus
est a Deo tanquam a prima causa and origin totius esse creati, neque vitiosa
est, neque pecc. quoniam a solo Deo habet esse, ac proinde bonitatem
transcendentem, defectum vero a regula.
, or according to the obliquitie and wickedness thereof.

Object. 5. They teach, that God in his providence uses sinners, and their
wills and deeds, to be his instruments, to the effecting of his own most just
and holy will.

Answ. They mean, that they are passive instruments, and effect his will,
only in regard of the event Beza annot. Act. 4. v. 28. Referendum est verbum
(...), non ad consilia and voluntates Herodis and Pilati, sed ad ipsorum
consiliorum euentum. August. tom. 3. de agon. Christi, c. 7. Malus homo and
malus Angelus, diuinae prouidentiae militant: sed nesciunt quid boni de illis
operetur Deus: non ergo pro meritis malitiae stipendiantur.
; and as in adultery, the luxury of parents is wicked, and yet the children
begotten are Gods creatures De nupt. de concupisc. l. 2. c. 20. De Ciuit. Dei,
l. 22. c. 24. Cont. Faust. Manich. l 22. c. 83. Ex adulterorum concubitu,
formatur and nascitur homo, de hominum opere malo, bonum opus Dei.
: So in wicked deeds, the action is sinful, and yet the passion or thing
produced by it, as it is received in another, may be good.

Paragr. 2. Saint Augustine, concerning reprobation.
T. W. Our Minister, to prove his blasphemous doctrine of reprobation or
damnation, does shroud himself under an abused testimony of Saint Augustine
Aug. tom. 2. ap. 107. ad Vital.
, whom he thus cites; It is a manifest truth, that many cannot be saved, not
because themselves will not, but because God will not, (which without all
obscurity, is manifested in Infants) These latter words Master White has
fraudulently omitted.

Answ. 1. Where you charge Doctor White with blasphemous doctrine, touching
reprobation, it seems you much regard not what you say, Psalm. 12.4. Master
White holds no other doctrine touching reprobation, then your own Thomas,
Caietan, Capreolus, Ferrariensis, Bannes, and the learneder part of Aquinas his
Scholars, have always taught Thom Aq. 1. q. 23. Caietan. ib. Bannes ib.
Chumel ib. Ferrar. contra gent l. 3 c. 161. Rispolis. de praefinit. l. 1. q. 1.
c. 3.
; and which is lately propugned against Molina and Suarez, by Shumel, Rispolis,
Martines, and other Papists Pererius com. Romans 9. d. 5.
, and which the Church of Rome it self, never condemned as erroneous.

2. Saint Augustines testimony, Epist. 107. affirms verbally, that many
people cannot be saved, not because they will not, but because God will not
have them saved: And he means elder persons as well as Infants; as it
appears by another place Aug. de bono perscu. c. 8. and de praedest. sanct.
c. 6. Prosp. ad excerp genuens. d. 3. Greg. in euang. hom. 30. Bellar. de great.
and lib. arb. l. 2. c. 3. Sicut verum est non omnes saluos fieri quia ipsi non
volunt: sic etiam verum est, non omnes* saluos fieri, quia Deus non vult
voluntate beneplaciti.
, where handling the same Argument, he names elder persons, saying; Of two
infants being alike corrupted with original sin, why one is chosen and
another forsaken, and of two elder persons, why one is effectually called, and
the other not, must be referred to the unsearchable judgment of God.

Benius a learned Papist, affirms Benius de eff. gratiae, c. 16. Constante^
semper censuit, non omnibus offerri gratiam.
; That it is the constant doctrine of Saint Augustine, that sufficient grace is
not given to all men by God: And the same Author says; That this was the
doctrine of many great Schoolmen, both before and since the Trident Council
Ib. ca. 4.
. Gregory Ariminense Greg. Arim. 1. d 46.
holds thus, and Vasques Vasq. 1 d. 97: c 6. Necesse est fateri Augustinum
eius fuisse sententiae. Et ib. ^ 34. Augustinus, Prosp^r. and Fulgent^^s, Isius
fuere sententiae.
the Jesuit acknowledges the same. And Saint Augustine himself both
expounds the place of Paul, 1. Tim. 2. God will have all men to be saved,
etc. of the elect Aug. de corrept. and great. c. 14 Ita dictum sit, omnes
homines vult saluos esse, vt intelligantur omnes praedestinati. Benius de
effic. great. c. 16. Enixe semper atque constanter ad solos electos referri
voluit.
; and also expressly teaches: That if men in a secret judgment be not severed
from the mass of perdition, by the grace of predestination, neither words nor
deeds, whereby they may be enabled to believe, are applied unto them Aug de
bono perseu. c. 14. Isiodor. de sum. bon. sieve sent l. 2 c. 15. Nonnulli ita
despiciuntur a Deo, vt deplorare mala sua non possint. Aug de fid. ad Petr. c
35. cited by Espenceus, com. 2. Tim. page 59. Non magis irae vasa quae Deus non
praedestinauit ad vitam, vlla ratione saluari possunt quam misericordiae vasa
perir^. Stapl. Antid. Apost. Romans 9. v 11. etc. Ad hanc adoptionem filiorum
Dei, ad hanc primam salutem, quae in baptismo credentibus consertur* quod
attinet, cur hodie and per omnes a tates aliquae gentes vocantur, and aliquae
non aut olim tam pauci Iudaei, tam multi Gentiles vocabantur, si quis velit
eorum operibus causam discriminis tribuere, propositum Dei secundum electionem,
id est, gratuitam and fixam Dei electionem subuerteret.
. From whence it follows, that the doctrine which this Popish Priest calls
blasphemous, is Saint Augustines: and that according to this great Father, many
men cannot be saved, not because they will not, but because God will not. And
the naming of infants by Saint Augustine, Epist. 107. is not to restrain the
speech only to them; but by the example of infants, to prove the assertion
unanswerably: for if infants being sinners in a less degree then elder
persons, are yet many times by a secret judgment of God, excluded from
Baptism the means of their salvation; then may God more justly deprive elder
people being guilty of greater sins, of efficient grace.

CHAP. IX.
Paragraph. I. Epiphanius, concerning the Adoration of the Virgin Marie.
T. W. WHereas according to Catholic doctrine, different degrees of honor,
are to be exhibited to God, and his blessed Angels and Saints; as to the first,
Adoration, and to the other in a far lower degree: not only damned spirits,
but damnable Heretics, their painful Scholars, as envious emulators of
glorious Saints, do ever labor by many subtilties, to rob them quite of all
deserved veneration. In which kind Master White willing to act his part, even
against the blessed Virgin, the mother of God, alleges Epiphanius, saying;
The virgin Marie, was a virgin, Epiphan. l. 3. haeres. 79.
and honorable, but not given for us to worship, but her self worshipped him
who took flesh of her.

But for the revealing of this illusion, it is to be observed, that Epiphanius
writes against certain women who adored a chariot, and did offer up bread in
the name of Marie: which was unlawful in two respects, 1. because it is not
permitted to women to sacrifice Why do your women b^pt^ze? Epiphan. haer 42
. 2. because this manner of adoration by sacrifice, is proper only to God, and
there belongs no more but honor and worship to the blessed virgin and
Saints.

Answ. 1. The declamation of this Popish Priest beginning with damned spirits
and damnable Heretics, is like himself: for Master White and all the
Protestants acknowledge, that due honor and veneration is to be exhibited to
all the Saints of God, both living and defunct. We say with Epiphanius Epip.
haer. 79. (...). page 450. (...).
; Let Marie have honor, and let the Lord our God be adored. But the Papists, In
stead of honor exhibit error (as the same Father speaks) to the blessed
Saints; and their manner of worship according to him, is heresy and dotage.

2. Whereas you say, that damned spirits are aemulators of this adoration,
which you exhibit to glorious Saints: the truth is, that your superstition
Gers. p. 1. ser. de coen. Dom. de vita clericor. Sanctis reuerentes esse
videntur, colentes eorum sepulchra, memorias, atque reliquias: tamen nequaquam
eos imitantur in sanctitate, immo praesentibus inimicantur and insidiantur, qui
sanctorum vita^ atque mores quaesierint imitari. Math. 23.29.
of adoring Saints is the doctrine of Devils, for the principal foundation
thereof was feigned miracles, and apparitions Thyreus Jesuit de appar. spir.
append. 1. ad. l. 1. Sumpserunt quidem illae ex apparitionibus initium.
of Devils, in the likeness of Saints. Delrius Delrio inquis. mag. l. 4. c. 1
q. 3.. 5. page 146.
the Jesuit says; The Devil appeared to one in the likeness of S. Vrsula,
etc. and to one Secondello, a Deacon, the Devil appeared in the shape of our
Lord, saying; I am Christ. Antonine Antonin. sum hist. p. 3. tit. 23. c. 10..
1. in fine. Vide Isiodor. etymol. l. 8. c. 9. citatur a Gratian. cons. 26. q.
5. c. Nec mirum. Aug. de cura. pro mort. c. 10.
; The Devil did usually appear to a certain devout Friar of Paris, in the
likeness of the virgin Marie, and revealed many things unto him.

3. Although Epiphanius reprove in particular the fact of the Colliridians, yet
in confuting their error, he utters diverse speeches, and uses arguments,
whereby he condemns in general all religious adoration of the virgin Marie.
His words are Epiphan. haer. 78. in fine. and 79. (...) page 448. (...), etc.
(...).
; Neither Elias nor John Baptist, nor Teclah, nor any Saint is adored, etc.
And, If God will not have Angels adored, how much more, not her which was
begotten of Anna and Ioiakim? Again, Let none adore Marie, either man or
woman. And, What Scripture has said any thing of this? and which of the
Prophets ever commanded a man to be adored, much less a woman? And, although
she is glorious, holy, and honorable, yet is she not appointed to be adored.

But here our Adversary treading in the steps of Baronius Baron. tom. 4. an.
373. n. 30.
and Bellarmine Bellarm. de San. beat. l 1. c. 15
, endeavors to elude these testimonies, saying; That Epiphanius condemns
only the exhibiting of divine honor to the holy Virgin.

Answ. Some part of that worship which Papists give to the virgin Marie; to
wit, Invocation, Romans 10.14. Vows, Psalm. 50.14. Oaths Malmesbur. de gest.
Angl. l. 2. c. 10. Dunstan jurat, Per Deum and matrem eius ignauus homo erit.
Tursel. Laur. hist l. 1. c. 2. ante Deiparae effigiem, ara solido e saxo
quadrato, etc. Tursellin. hist. Laur. lib. 1. c. 17. Quotide adoraturus Deum
cu^ matre eius, etc. Ib. lib. 2 cap. 16. diploma Leo^. 10 Nullum promptius
miseris aut efficacius peccatoribus refugiu^ inueniatur, merito totius animi
mentisque affectibus recolentes, illam in coelis primum adorandam, deinde in
terris vbique venerandam, etc. page 129. (...), etc. page 447.
, Deuteronomy. 6.13. are the actions of divine adoration. And Tursellin the Jesuit
commends Paul an Hermit, and says he adored God and his mother.

2. Epiphanius in the place alleged by Doctor White, says; The Lord in the
Gospel speaks to the Virgin his mother, What have I to do with thee woman?
In which speech, to the end that none should think her over excellent, he
calls her woman, prophesying as it were aforehand of the heresies which
should arise, and premonishing that none in admiration of her sanctity, should
fall into this doting heresy of adoration Suar. in 3. Thom. tom. 1. d. 52.. 3.
Adoratio Sanctis exhibita est quodammodo diuina. Tursellin. praef. in hist.
Lauretan. Ad huius (Mariae) arbitrium, etc. terras, maria, coelum, naturamque
moderatur: hac annuente and per hanc, diuinos thesauros mortalibus and
coelestia dona largitur. Vt omnes intelligant, quicquid ab aeterno illo,
augustoque bonorum font, in terras profluat, fluere per Mariam.
.

An observation, concerning adoration of Images.
There is nothing so wicked and absurd, but a Romist can defend it: neither is
any thing so true, but he can outface it: witness among other things, the
adoration of Images. The same is an impiety so apparently condemned in the
Scripture, that neither blasphemy it self, witchcraft, adultery, or any
sin, is more plainly detected and prohibited.

And the primitive Church consents exactly with the holy Scripture; and for
many ages did in general proclaim the same to be Idolatry. Nevertheless, our
Adversaries calling darkness light, and sour sweet, Esa. 5.20. defend it,
pretending that they propugne a Catholic verity. The sum of their Tenet is
this which follows.

1. They maintain the making, setting up, and using of Images in religion
Council. Trid. sess. 25.
. And among the rest, the making of the Images of God himself, and the
Trinity Tho. Aqu. 3. q. 25. ar. 3. ad. 1. Suar. 3. Tho. to. 1. d 54.. 2.
Durant. de ritib. eccl. cath. l. 1. c. 5. Thyreus de appar. spir. append. 1. c.
1. Posseuin. bibl. l. 18. c 16.
.

2. They teach a threefold use of them: 1. Of ornament or beautifying their
Temples and religion. 2. Of instruction Bellarm. de imag. l. 2. c. 10.
, wherein they affirm; that pictures many times instruct better then
Scripture. 3. Of adoration, making them Instruments of worshipping God and the
Saints. And concerning adoration, they maintain, that Images are to be adored
with the same adoration, with the sampler Naclant. com. Romans cap. 1. digress.
de imag. page 42. Non solum fatendum est, fideles adorare coram imagine, vt
nonnulli ad cautelam forte loquuntur, sed and adorare imaginem sine quo
volueris scrupulo: Quin and eo illam venerantur cultu, quo and prototypon eius.
Propter quod, si illud habet adorari latria, and illa, latria: si illud dulia
and hyperdulia, and illa pariter eiusmodi cultu adoranda est. Llamas sum. eccl
par. 3. c 3. page 265. Tenemur ex hoc praecepto, viuificae crucis vexillum
adorare, etc. At non solum crucis verae lignum ipsum, sed and imaginem crucis
cuiusque materiae, vel picturae adorare debemus, etc. Tho. Aqu. 3. q. 25. ar.
3. ad. 2. and 3. sent. d. 9. q. 2. Bonauent. 3. d. 9. ar. 1. q. 2. Richard. 3 d
9. ar. 2 q. 2. Albert. 3. d. 9. ar. 4. Paludan. 3. d. 9. q. 1. Almain. 3. d. 9.
q. 1. concl. 5. Marsil. 3. q. 8. ar. 2. d. 2. c. 3. Mayor. 3. d. 9. q. 1.
Capreol. 3. d. 9. q. 1. ar. 1. c. 2. 3. Caietan. 3. q. 25. ar. 3.
, appointing only a respective difference; to wit, that the principal is
worshipped simply and for it self: but the Image in regard of the similitude
and reference to the principal. And thus the Images of God and Christ, and the
Crucifixe, are by their doctrine to be adored, with divine worship properly
called Suar. 3. Tho. to. 1 d. 54.. 3. Dicendum est hanc imaginum adorationem
non esse absolutam sed respectiua^, quanqua^ per eam non abusiue tantum, sed
proprie imagines adorentur.
: like as Christ his manhood being personally united to the Deity, partakes the
same adoration with the Godhead Suar. ibid.. 4. and d. 56.. 2. Sicut humanitas
Christi coadoratur Verbo. Thyr. de appar. spir. append. 1. c. 2. n. 10. Azor.
p. 1. instit. mor. l. 9. c. 6. Iac. Graph. decis. aur. p. 1. l. 2. c. 2. n. 15.
. And other Images of the virgin Marie, and the Saints, are respectively to be
adored with worship suitable to their samplers.

3. They make the adoration of Images, a meritorious work Andrad. orth. expl.
l. 9. page 284.
; and condemn the deniers thereof as Heretics, and having power, they cruelly
torment and burn them to death Sixth. Senens. bibl. l. 5. an. 247. Balthazar
Hicmarus qui Viennae exustus. Suar. tom. 1. d. 56.. 2. Aegidius Hispanus
negauit crucem esse adorandam, qui propter hunc and alios errores Hispali
damnatus est.
.

4. The principal Arguments whereby they propugne this operation, are these
which follow.

Argu. 1. The Tradition and custom of the Church, and the authority of the
second Nicene Council, etc.

Answ. 1. Peresius Aiala Peers. de Trad. p. 3. de imag. Neque Scripturam neque
traditionem ecclesiae, neque communem sensum Sanctorum, neque concilij
generalis determinationem aliquam, nec etiam rationem, qua haec efficaciter
suaderi possit, adducunt.
, a great learned Papist and Bishop, ci^ing many Doctors and Schoolmen,
affirms; That the doctrine of adoration of Images, has neither Scripture,
Tradition of the Church, common consent of the Fathers, nor yet effectual
reason to confirm it. 2. The second Nicene Council was very late Bellar. de
scriptor. in chronol.
, about the year 787. And it was controlled by another Council in the West
Genebrard. chronol. ann. 794. who cites Ado and Regino. Aimon. de gest. Franc.
l. 4. 85. Hincmar. Rhem. cont. Hincmar. Landan. c. 20. Abbas Vsperg. chron. an.
793.
: neither did it maintain adoration of Images, in such manner, as Suarez,
Thyreus, Posseuin, and the Jesuits do, but only veneration, or yielding
outward reverence in passing by them, or standing before them Read B. Bilson
of subject. part. 4. page 550.
, etc.

Argu. 2. The Jews in the Old Testament, adored the Arc of the Covenant,
whereunto were annexed the Images of the Cherubins Bellarm. de imag. l. 2. c.
12. Imagines Cherubin super arcam existentes, necessario adorabantur ab ijs qui
arcam adorabant. Suar. to. 1. d. 54.. 3.
. Psalm. 99 ver. 5. the Old Translation has, Worship the footstool of his
feet (which was the Arc.)

Answ. If the place of the Psalm be rightly translated, it is, Worship at his
footstool, or before his footstool (...)
, that is, worship God, looking toward the place where the arc of the
Covenant rests, and in the Tabernacle or Temple where the Arc is placed, bow
down before it Gen^br. com. Psalm. 98. v. 5. Iansen. ib. Ioh Campen. ib.
. And the Cherubins were not appointed to be adored, as Tertullian Tertul.
contra Marcio^ l. 2. c. 32.
, and after him Lorinus Lorin. com. Act. 17. v. 25. Constat adorationem ab
Hebreis non esse ipsis exhibitam.
the Jesuit, affirm; and how could they which never saw the Cherubins, Heb.
9.7. worship them in the same manner the Papists do their Images?

Argu. 3. It was lawful in the Old Testament to worship the brazen Serpent
Bellarm. de imag. l. 2. c. 12.
and the Cherubins; therefore it is as lawful to adore and worship the Images
of Christ and the Saints.

Answ. Although veneration, which is a reverent using of sacred things, be due
to such signs as God himself has appointed; yet that measure and such
actions of reverence as Papists Suar. 1. d. 54.. 4. Fieri recte posse vt
prototypum in imagine, and imago cum prototypo vno actu adoretur: atque hoc
modo posse imaginem Christi adorari latria.
exhibit to Images, are unlawful to be exhibited to the signs instituted by
God himself, as appears by the example of the brazen Serpent Tertul. de
idol. c. 5.
. 2. King. 18.4. and the water of Baptism Peers. de trad. p. 3. de im. p. 162
.

2. As it does not follow, that because we are to honor the Kings Lieutenant,
having received authority from the King; therefore we must exhibit the like
honor to another, whom the subjects have exalted to that dignity of their own
head: So although God had appointed the adoration of sacred signs ordained by
himself; it follows not, that Images which are erected besides his
ordinance, are capable of veneration Altisiod sum. l. 1. c. 15. Non in quolibet
signo adorandus est Deus sed in proprio, sicut Moses adorauit D^^i in rubo in
quo loquebatur ei, etc. and Abraham in Angelo: vnde non est adorandus in
lapide, eslet enim idololatria, de non proprio signo Dei facere proprium.
.

Arg. 4. Because God has wrought sundry miracles by Images, therefore they
ought to be adored Bellar. de imag. l. 2. c 12. Suat. p. 1. d. 54.. 3 Deus
^arijs miraculis per imagines sactis, hunc cultum, sibi placitum esse testarus
est.
.

Answ. Both the antecedent and consequent are false. 1. The miracles which our
Adversaries affirm, to have been wrought by Images, recorded in their
Legends, are of no credit by the testimony of their own Doctors. Canus Carus
loc. l. 11. c 4. and 6. Vt iam pudendum sortastis sit, histori^^s quosda^
gentium ^uisse v^raciores qua^ nostros
denies the authority of the Stories, in which they be reported. Gabriel Biel
Gabr. Biel. can. Miss. lect. 49 Al quando miracula fiunt etc. non virtute
imaginum, sed operatione daemonum.
affirms; That such miracles were many times wrought by the power of the
Devil. Cardinal Lira Lira super Daniel. c. 14.
says; That the people were shamefully deceived with feigned miracles, wrought
by the Priests and their companions for lucre sake. Antonine Antonin. sum.
hist. p. 3. tit. 23. c 6.. 3. Dourolt. Ie uit flores exemplar. cap. 7. tit.
29.. 6. Vbi coram imagine crucifixi, tert^o genua fl^^^t, visus est a quodam
sancto viro ad singulas genu flexiones, nobilis illius, Crocifixus caput^n^m
humiliter inclinare.
reports, that the Crucifixe spoke to Friar Peter, saying: O Peter, what
wrong have I done thee? And at another time; O Peter, I have prayed for thee
that thy faith shall not fail. And Thomas of Aquine, praying devoutly before
the Crucifix, was lifted up a cubit above the ground, and a voice proceeded
from the Crucifixe, saying: O Thomas, thou have written worthily concerning me
Antonin ib. 7. 11.
. And William Malmsburie M^lmesb de gest. Reg. Angl. l 2. c. ^. Alia li^^^ae
docent, Dominicam imaginem express loquutam clericos, eorumque fautores
consudisse.
reports, how the Crucifixe at Winchester uttered a speech in favor of Saint
Dunstane, which confounded the Priests: But Polydore speaking of the credit of
this miracle, says Polydor. hist. Angl. l. 6. page 121.
; It was thought by many, that this was rather an oracle of Apollo then of God,
and proceeded from the fraud of me^, and not from divine power. And as Satan
wrought miracles among the Heathen Bellar de imag l. 2. c. 13. Diaboli opera
interdum idola mouebantur.
by Images; So he was effectual among the Papists by lying wonders. 2 Thessalonians.
2.9.

2. The consequent of the Argument is false; as the Synod of Frankford Synod.
Frankford. Resp ad arg. 44. Niceni Concilij.
, in the solution of the Arguments of the second Nicene Council, answers:
for although God wrought a miracle by the waters of Jordan, in healing Naaman.
2. King. 5.14. and by the bones of Elizeus; and by the clay and spittle, Ioh.
9. yet the said creatures were not thereby made capable of adoration: even so
admit it were true, that God had wrought miracles by Images, yet from thence it
follows not, that the same ought to be adored.

Sect. 2. Wherein are delivered some of the Protestants arguments, against
worship of Images.
Arg. 1. The Lord has expressly forbidden the adoration of Images, in the Law
Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 5.8. Leuit. 26.1. Exodus 32. Number 23 11. and 25.3 Deuteronomy. 4.15.
and the Prophets Psalm. 1.5.4 and 135 15. Esa. 40.17 and 44.8. and 44 13 and
16.5. Hab. 2.18.
, and in the New Testament Act. 15.20. and 17.29. Romans 1.23.25. 1. Cor. 10 14.
2 Cor 6.16. Gal. 4.8. and 5.20. 1 Thessalonians. 1.^. Act 14.13. Apoc. 9.20. and
19.26. 1. Ioh. 5.21.
.

Object. The Papists except against this argument; that God in the places
alleged, condemns the Idols of the Heathen, which were Images of false Gods
Bellar. de imag. l. 2. c. 13. ^uares. Greg. Val and alij. Ioh. Arbor. Theosoph.
lib. 1. cap. 37. Vetat fieri imagines, and adorari propter se, and sum, and
more gentilium, etc.
: but he condemns not the Images of the true God, in such apparitions a he
made in the Scripture, nor the Images of Christ and the Saints.

Answ. The Lord condemns in general all Images and Idols devised by man, for
worship and adoration, Exodus 20.5. Leu. 26.18. And the Israelites erecting
Images, in resemblance of the true God Abulens. in Exodus 32. q. 7.
are condemned, Exodus 32.5. 1. King. 12.28. with c. 16.32. and 2. King. 17.28.
Also the adoration of the brazen Serpent Lo^in. com. Act. 17.25. Serpentem
aeneum conflari iussit Deus, etc. non ita vt adorati vellet, quod cum deinceps
populus faceret, aliquo modo incensum adolendo, Deus confregit. Tertul. de
idol. c. 5.
, an image of Christ, Ioh. 3.14. and framed by divine precept. Number. 21.9. yet
because it was adored, is destroyed. 2. King. 18.4. And the Lord forbidding
adoration of Images, makes such a description of them, as agrees not only to
the Idols of the Heathen, but to the Images of Christians; to wit, That they be
the workmanship of a man's own hands Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 57. Qui vocem habetis
and aures, and rationis estis participes, ad ea quae nullum habent sensum
tanquam bruta abducimini. Aug. in Psalm. 113 c. 2. Plus valent ad curu^ndam
infelicem animam, quia os habent, oculos habent, aures h^bent, nares habent
manus habent, pedes habent, etc.
, have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, etc. Esa. 44.13. Psalm. 115.4.
Psalm. 135.15. 1. Cor. 12.2. Also the continual practice of the Jews, does
show what was the meaning of Gods law, for by virtue of the former precepts
they refused all Images Tertul. contra Marc. l. 4. c. 22. and apol. c. 16 Orig
con. Cells. l. 5. Joseph. con. Appion. Tacitus annal l. 5. Vasq 2. de ador. d. 4.
, and admitted no Statues or Images, either of God himself or the Angels, or
of Abraham, Moses, Elias, etc.

Arg. 2. The primitive Church for many ages, condemned adoration of Images,
yea, all religious use of them. Some of them say Lactant. instit. l 2. c. 19.
; There can be no religion where Images are in use. Augustine Aug. in Psalm. 13.
Quis adorat vel orat in^u^ns simulach^u^?
condemns worshipping or praying, looking upon an Image Arnob. con. gent l.
6. offic. Romans ex de cr. Council. Trid Fest. invent. sanct cru^^ O crux
splendidior cunctis astris, mundo celebris, etc. salua praesentem cateruam.
. Ambrose says; God will not be worshipped by stones Ambros. l. 5. ep. 31.
: And Augustine Aug. in Psalm. 149.
; Art thou not ashamed to worship that which a Carpenter has made. Clement of
Alexandria Clem. Al. orat. cont. gentes, and Strom. l. 5.
: Christians are forbidden to exercise the deceitful art (of painting or
caruing Images:) for the Prophet has said, Thou shall make unto thy self no
likeness. And Hierom Hieron in 3. c. Daniel.
; The worshippers of God may not adore Images. And Augustine Aug de cons.
euang. l. 1 c. 10.
; They justly err which seek Christ and his Apostles, not in sacred books,
but on painted walls. And he condemns the worshippers of pictures Aug. de
mor. eccles. cath. c. 34. and in Psalm. 113. conc. 2.
. And Irenaeus Iren. l 1. c 24.
, Epiphanius Epiphan. haer. 27. and haer 80. in anacheph.
, and Augustine Aug. haeres. 7.
, condemn the Heretics which worshipped the Images of Jesus and Paul. And
some of our Adversaries heretofore, and some Jesuits Bellarm. de imag. l 2. c.
24. Qui colebant imagine^ Christi diuinis honoribus, ^^ter haereticos
numerantur ab Irenaeo, etc. atque isti fine dubio, imaginem eius propter ipsu^
co^^bant B Ren in. annot. Tertul. conc. Valentin. in fine. Imagine^ Christi
iconicam venerabantur Calland in cons. Nich Clemang. lib. de ^ouis sestis.
at this day confess, that the primitive Fathers abandoned Images.

Bellarmine Bellarm de imag l. ^ c 16.
and Suarez Suar p. 1. l. 54.. 3.
pretend, that Heretics were condemned by the Fathers, not simply for having
and using Images, but because they did the same in an unlawful manner, and
after the fashion of the Gentiles.

Answ. All imagerie in divine worship, is heathenish ^u^eb hist l 7 c. 17. Nec
mirum videri debet, eos, qui ex gentibus olim a seruatore nost^o cu^ti ^u^,
^sta fecis^e, quando and apostolorum illius imagines, Pauli and Petri and
Christi, in tabul^s c^l^^b^ depict is astetuari vidimus, quod veteres ex
gentili consuetudine, eos quos seruatores putabant ad hunc mod^m adorare soliti
fuerunt.
, 1. Cor. 12.2. Neither can our Adversaries out of the holy Scripture or
Fathers, show us any rule for the lawful worshipping of Images, more then for
lawful adultery, or lawful cutting of a man's throat in private malice.

Arg. 3. Many famous Papists in all ages, have condemned the worshipping of
Images, which proves, that this custom is not Catholic.

Holcot says Holcot. com. in Sapient. lect. 154.
; No adoration is due to any Image, neither is it lawful for any man to
worship an Image. And Durand Duran. Ration 4^ ar. Can. Rubr. 9.
; For as much as neither men nor Angels ought to be adored, let them consider
what they do, who under pretext of religion and piety, do adore diverse
Images: for it is not lawful to worship any thing made with hands.

In a provincial Synod holden at Mentze Synod. prouinc. Mogunt. sub Archiep.
Sebastian. c. 41.
, it was thus decreed; Images are not set up that men should adore and worship
them, but that they may be put in remembrance by them of things profitable. And
the same is the judgment of many famous Papists Enchirid. Colon. expos. de
call. Gers. p. 2. comp. theol. de 10. praecept expo^ 1. ad adorandum and
co^endum prohibentur.
; yea, our greatest Jesuits Bellar. de ima. l. 2. c 10. Suar. to. ^. d. 54.. 3
and 4.
are divided concerning the manner of the adoration of Images.

Argu. 4. No Image made by a Carpenter or founder, does so truly resemble God
or the Trinity, as man does which is endued with grace, Ephe. 4.24. Genesis 1.26.
But religious adoration is not due to such, no not to the Apostles, Act. 10.26.
nor to Angels, Apoc. 19.10. If therefore we may not worship those Images of God
with religious adoration which the Lord himself has framed, is it not absurd
to worship them which a Caruer makes? And verily an Ass deserves more justly
to be worshipped then an Image, because an Image is a dead block or earth Aug.
n Psalm. 1 13. c ^. S^ pud^at adorare bestiam quam Deus fecit v^dentem,
audientem, etc. quam pudendu^ est adorare mutum and carens vita, sen uque
simulachram?
, the other a living creature: And accordingly Clements Alexandrinus, says
(...). p, 17.
: Images are more vile then any living creature: and all images being earth, I
have learned to tread upon them, and not to adore them.

Paragr. 2. Whether Gregory be corrupted about worshipping of Images.
T. W. Master White speaking against Images, he affirms, that the Church of
Rome for bad the worship of them; as appears by the Epistle of Gregory to
Serenus Greg. mag. l. 7. ep. 109.
, etc. It is this Ministers evil hap, by most of his citations, to manifest to
the world his folly and falsehood: for who not distracted, would urge that
against his Adversary which impugneth himself, and that in such a manner, as
conuinceth him of fraud and wilful malice? And then he affirms, that Gregory
allows the use of pictures in the Church, which M. White and his fellows
refuse: 2. He blames Serenus for breaking them down. 3. He allows the
lawful veneration of them, and only condemns that adoration which is proper
to God, as appears l. 7. ep. 5. where he calls the Cross venerable.

Answ. Master White his words are these: The primitive Church at the first
admitted no image at all, neither painted nor graven. Next when they began to
be used, yet the Church of Rome forbad the worship of them, as appears by
Gregory, etc.

Here be two assertions; 1. That the primitive Church admitted no Images; which
is so manifest, that Lorinus a Jesuit Lorin. com. Act. 17. v. 25.
confesses it, and this Adversary has nothing to oppose against it.

2. That the Roman Church disanulled the worship of them. And this also is
confirmed by the testimony of Gregory a Roman Pope, whose words in an Epistle
to Serenus Greg. mag. l. 7 ep. 109.
are; It lately came unto my ears, that your brotherhood beholding certain
people worshipping of Images, did break in pieces those Images, and cast them
out of the Church. Surely I commend your zeal, in being careful that nothing
made with hands should be adored, but yet I judge you should not have broken
them, etc. Therefore your brotherhood may both preserve them, and yet prohibit
people from worshipping of them: That so the ignorant may have something to
teach them knowledge of History, and yet not offend in the worshipping of
pictures. And that Gregory forbad the adoration of images, is acknowledged by
Gratian Great. de consecr. d 3. c. perlatum. Gloss.
, Durand Durand. Rational. l. 1. Rubr. de picturis.
, Biel Biel. in Can. Miss. l. 49.
, and other learned Papists.

But our Popish Priest says, that Gregory by adoration, means such
adoration as is proper to God only.

Answ. 1. It is absurd to think, that the Massilians being Christians, did
give absolute Latria, or divine worship to Images, considering that many Pagans
disclaimed this Lactant. diu. instit. l. 2. c. 2. Orig. contra Cel^. l 7. Aug.
in Psalm. 96. Extitit nescio quis disputator, etc. and ait, non ego illum
lapidem colo, nec illud simulachru^ quod est sine sensu. Adoro quod video, and
seruio ei quem non video. Et in Psalm. 113. c. 2. Nec simulachrum nec daemonium
colo, sed per effigiem corporalem eius rei signum intueor quam colere debeo.
Sozom. hist. eccles. l. 7. c. 15.
. 2. The images which were commonly in use at these times, were not the Images
of God or of Christ only; but of other Martyrs and Saints. And Christians used
not to adore these, with divine honor, but with an inferior worship agreeing to
the sampler. 3. Gregory in another Epistle to Serenus Greg. m. l. 9. c 9.
, commands people to kneel and bow down to the omnipotent Trinity only,
and not to images: whereby it appears, that he prohibited such adoration of
Images as the Papists at this day maintain.

But this Popish Priest alleges a place out of Gregory Lib. 7. ep. 5. Vt
sublata exinde, cum qua dignum est veneratione imagine atque cruce.
, in proof that he maintained the worshipping of Images; willing that a
certain image of the mother of Christ, and the venerable Cross, unlawfully
placed in a Synagogue by a certain be removed from thence, with such
veneration or reverence as was meet.

Answ. 1. If the title venerable prove religious adoration of images,
according to the Popish doctrine: then it may also prove religious worshipping
of a Master of Art, because he is called in the University, venerabilis
Magister, and perhaps it will prove, that venerable Bede was adored religiously
when he lived. 2. Veneration in Gregory, signifies only a reverent using of
the image and sign of the Cross, by reason it was (in his judgment) a sacred
monument. But our Adversaries make their images the object of religious
worship, such as proceeds from the virtue of Religion Suar. tom 1. d. ^6.. 1.
Quanquam reuera ab eodem habitu procedit, quo ipse Christus colitur.
; and they cause the people to kneel, bow, offer Incense, and perform other
service to them, with the same devotion as to the samplar Tho. Aqu. 3. q. 25.
ar. 3. Nos adoramus adoratione latriae imaginem Christi.
, if it were present.

But T. W. obiecteth, that whereas Gregory forbad the breaking of images, and
approved the use of them in Churches for Story, Master White and the Church
of England condemn this.

Answ. 1. Master White produces elder Fathers, and all the primitive Church
condemning the placing of images in Churches Read Epiphanius his epist^e
translated by S. Hierom in the end of Epiphanius works. Cum vidissem in
ecclesia Christi contra authoritatem Scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem,
scidi illam, etc.
; and therefore he is no nouellist in this matter. 2. The Church of England
has dealt no otherwise with Images then the holy Scripture warranteth in the
example of the brazen Serpent. 2. King. 18.4. And Saint Augustine Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei, l. 10. c. 8.
and the Canon Law it self Gratian. d. 63. c quia.
approve of in the like cases. 3. Protestants do not simply condemn the use
of Images for Story and ornament, being not otherwise offensive Theses
Geneuens. c. 30. Est alius multiplex imaginum vsus licitus, etc. Rex Iacobus
apolog. of the oath of alleg. page 40. I quarrel not the making of images,
either for public decoration, or men's private uses, etc.
.

Paragr. 3. The Council of Eliberis concerning images.
T. W. Here now I am come to the last corruption, which I intend to display,
the which I have purposely reserved wherewith to close up the taste of my
Reader, so notorious is it for the authors so dextrous and depraved conueiance.

Answ. Socrates, (...).
Although conceit do many times puff up fools, as wind does bladders: yet I
can hardly believe your hope is according to your words. For all the skillful
Surgeons of your Popish sect, having experienced their best remedies, fail in
the cure of the blow, which the Canon of the ancient Council of Eliberis has
given their puppets; and therefore it is scarce credible that a land-leaping
Emperick can salve this incurable ulcer. But let us hear what you say.

T. W. Where as every one of the former deprauations, etc. rests in abusing
the authority of some one particular man, this strikes at a whole Council,
consisting of many scores of Fathers; so happy a progress M. White has made
in the profession of corrupting.

Answ. I perceive by this entrance what will be the vpshot of this business:
Good Sir, at your leisure tell me how many scores of Fathers are contained in
nineteen: for if you consult with the Tomes of the Councels Surius tom 1.
council. in council. Elibertin. Baron. annal to. 1. an. 57. n. 119. Bellar. de
imag. l 2. c. 11. Sixth. Senens. bibl l. 5. annot 247. Posseuin. appar. v.
council. Elibert. Duran. de rit. eccles. cath. l. 1. c. 5.
, and your great Doctors, they will tell you there were only 19. Fathers in
this Council.

T. W. Our Minister to overthrow the religious use of Images, produces the 36.
Canon of the Council of Eliberis Placuit in ecclesia picturas esse non debere,
ne quod colitur aut adoratur in parietibus depingatur.
; to wit, No picture is to be made in the Church, lest that be adored which is
painted on walls. But the very words of the Canon are; It pleased the Council,
that pictures should not be in the Church, lest that which is worshipped and
adored, be painted on the walls. Be obseruant here Reader, and mark the
difference which is made of the same words, by a witty interchange of their
place in Translation and thou shall see that my delicate Minister here, even
transcends himself. The Council says; Images are not to be in the Church,
lest that be painted on walls, which is to be worshipped: Master White
translateth, lest that be worshipped which is painted on the walls. This
difference is small in show of words, but great in sense: for the words of the
Council acknowledging the worship of Images, make the worship due to them to
be the cause why they are not to be painted on walls: but Master White says,
they are not to be painted on walls, because they are not to be worshipped. Now
the reason why the Council would not have the walls of Churches to be painted
with images, was in regard of the due respect they bare unto them: for being so
painted, they were subject to be defaced, either by the invasion of enemies in
those times, or by rain or weather; whereas images drawn in tables, being
portable and remoueable, do lie open to no such danger.

Answ. The sum of all the former talk is; That the Elibertine Council did
not prohibit the making and setting up of images in Churches, but allowing the
same, provided that they should not be painted upon bare walls, to prevent that
they might not be defaced or destroyed.

But against this toy I oppose as follows.

1. The Text of the 36. Canon of the Council of Eliberis, is; Placuit in
ecclesijs picturas esse non debere: It pleases us of the Council, that there
ought to be no pictures in Churches. Our Adversaries must answer this first
part of the Canon. For howsoever that which follows be understood, these
words apparently exclude Images out of Churches. If the Council had said, It
pleases us, that there ought to be no Images upon the walls of Churches, our
Adversaries Gloss might have carried some poor color; but they decree
generally, It pleases us that there be no pictures in Churches.

2. The most of our Adversaries confess, that this Council decreed against
Images, and thereupon they reject or extenuate the authority of it. Canus says
Canus loc. l. 5. c. 4.
; It was not only impudently, but impiously decreed by this Council,
concerning the taking away of Images. Surius Sutius 1. tom. council. annot. in
36. Can. Council. Elibe^t.
acknowledging it decreed against Images, says; That this was necessarily and
profitably done for those times, but afterward the worshipping of images was
decreed in the 7. Council. Sixtus Senensis Sixth. Senens. lib ^ ann. ^17. Cum
animaduertissent gentes nuper ab idolorum superstitione ad Chris^um venientes,
ad pristinam idololatriam inclinari etc. iudicarunt praesenti morbo non aliter
posse mederi quam imaginum interdictione.
and Baronius Baron. an 57. n. 120. Canon de imaginibus non receptus.
confess; That this Council forbad the setting up of images, but that the
decree thereof took no place. Andradius says Andrad orth. expl. l. 9.
; The Council forbad only the setting up the images of God and the Trinity;
and with him agree Ferdinand Mendoza Mendoza def. Council. Elib. l. 3. c. 5.
, and Lorinus the Jesuit Lorin. com. Act. 17. ver. 25. Eo sensu cauit
Concilium Elibertinum picturas in ecclesia esse, ne putaren^ Deum esse quid
corporeum.
, saying: That the Council provided, no pictures should be in the Church, lest
the ignorant people coming lately from Paganism, should think God to be
corporeal.

Lastly, although Suarez Suar. tom. 1. d 54.. 1.
the Jesuit slubber over the matter about this Council with Bellarmines
Bellar. de imag l. 2. c. 9. Alan Copus dial. l. 5. c. 16. Sander. de imag. l.
2. c. 4. Peers. de Trad. p. 3. de imag. Posseuin. appar. v. Council. Elibert.
Gloss, yet he prefixeth these words to the explication; difficilius
explicatur, etc.

Conclusion of T. W. Here I make an end of his corruptions, etc. only I must
say, that in regard of the impuritie and conscionlesse deportment of him in his
whole Treatise, I cannot but commiserate such credulous souls as do highly
praeiudge of his book, as being written in all sincerity and plainness, etc.

Answ. If your performance had aequalled your boldness and your declamations
were demonstrations, the credulous souls you commiserate (being many of them
so judicious and learned, that you are unworthy to hold them the candle) might
justly have censured Doctor White for negligence, in alleging these
testimonies which you have excepted against. But forasmuch as you have played
the vocalist and worded it only, your triumph is like the cracking of thorns
under a kettle, Eccles. 7.7. and Saint Hieroms reproach may justly be applied
unto you, Cum aureos montes pollicitus fueris, ne scorteum quidem numum
praestitisti, having promised the Reader golden mountains, you render him not
one leatherne mite.

And whereas you depart this scene, grinning at Master Purchase, because he
graces my Brothers book with the style of Via lactea, The white or milken way;
and tax him for being in his own writings maleuolent: I suppose no man will
marvel, though he which has gained respect from so many ingenuous persons in
the kingdom by his pains, cannot please oculo nequam, a cankered Romist,
whose eye is all envy, and his tongue venomous as a Serpent.

Finis primae Partis.
The second part of the Book: Wherein T.W.P. accuses D. White of delivering
many notorious untruths, confessed to be such, by the most eminent Protestants
and Doctors of his own side.
Having repressed this Adversary in his first encounter, wherein consisted the
pride of his strength, I am now to proceed to his second part, the entrance
whereof is loud and tumultuous, Math. 7.25. but of a light and windy nature,
and has more sound then force, as will appear in the progress thereof.

T. W. Lying is the second pillar which supporteth the whole weight and frame
of Master Whites work. He delivers false assertions, vast untruths, gross
lies, acknowledged to be such by his own brethren; By the most eminent and
learned Protestants of Christendom, the most accomplished for their literature
that ever lived, etc. I will choakingly and irrepliably convince him of
notorious miscarriage: I have thought good to supererogate with some in
disprouing his falsehoods, etc.

Answ. It is reported of Marcellus Julius Frontin. stratagem. l. 2. c. 4. n. 8.
the Roman, in the stratagems of war, that he leading on a time a small and
weak army, caused all the Skullions, slaves, and seruitors of his host, to
shout together with the Soldiers; and by this means affrighted the enemy
with a conceit of a terrible encounter: Not unlike hereunto T.W.P. begins
with a terrible noise; and as another Thersites or Shemei, beroareth Doctor
White with the scandal and outcry of false assertions, vaste untruths, gross
lies, etc. and then Thraso-like secondeth them with ostentation: But coming at
length to encounter and blows, he fights with a Bull-rush, and the choking
stuff wherewith he glories to strangle Doctor White, (being of less force
then Pope Adrians fly Abhas Vsperin Frederic. 1. Adrianus apud Anagniam, musca
necatur. Naucler. gener. 39.
) melts into froth and fatuity.

The sum and substance of this second part, may be comprised in this
Syllogism.

He which in an opposition to a common Adversary, delivers sundry positions,
the contrary whereof is affirmed by many learned Divines of his own side, he
utters gross lies, vaste untruths, etc.

Doctor White in an opposition to a common Adversary, does thus; ergo Doctor
White utters gross lies, vaste untruths, etc.

Answ. Exchanging the person, this objection will presently return the same
way it came.

For thus I retort: He which in an opposition to a common Adversary,
delivers diverse positions, the contrary whereof is affirmed by many learned
Doctors of his own side, he utters gross lies and vaste untruths, etc.

But T. W. D. Whites Adversary has done this: for he speaks Contrary to
Canus, Surius, Baronius, and Andradius, about the Council of Eliberis Part 1.
chap. 9. paragr. 3.
; And contrary to Gregory Ariminense, Vasques, and Benius, in expounding
Augustine about reprobation or sufficient grace Ibid. chap. 8. parag. 2.
, and contrary to Stapleton Chapter 5. parag. 1.
, in saying that a man wanting inward virtues, is but an aequiuocall member of
the visible Church: and contrary to Pighius and the Doctors of Colen Cha. 1.
parag. 3
, touching the formal cause of justification, etc.

Therefore T.W.P. Doctor Whites Adversary, utters gross lies, vaste
untruths, is an impostor, a fellow without a soul, and I know not what.

If this argument be good, the most Writers, except the Canonical, will prove
guilty of gross lying, and vaste untruth: Gabriel Biel Biel. Canon. miss.
lect. 41.
speaking of the Doctors of the Church, says; One Saint contradicts another,
Saint Augustine opposes Cyprian; and Augustine and Hierom are of a contrary
judgment. And Guido de Perpinniano Guido Carmelita de haeres. in Genesis cap. 7.
: Doctors are repugnant to Doctors, and Disciples to Disciples; yea, the
Scholars to their Masters, and this frequently, and very often. Now
therefore admitting that D. White in handling some questions, did vary from
other private Writers, this can no more convince him of falsehood, then the
difference between Scotus and Thomas, or Suarez and Bellarmine, does them and
others of the like.

Object. D. White in some of these untruths, affirms, that not one Father, or
any one Protestant taught such, or such a point, etc.

Answ. You should have done well to have named, where the Dr. utters this
large assertion: for finding that you commonly ouer-reach, we credit you no
further then you prove.

T. W. 2. Object. In that Master Whites untruths do make head against the
Catholic faith, and strengthen the Protestants Religion: Other Protestants
would not contradict the same to the weakening of their own cause, were it not
that the evidence of truth on the Catholic side, does force them thereunto
Briarly, apol. page 6.
; and therefore the voluntary acknowledgment of any one such learned
Protestant, must in reason ouerballance many scores of others, not confessing
so much.

Answ. In this objection there be diverse loose branches: 1. all Doctor Whites
assertions do not make head against the Catholic faith; for some of them
concern matter of fact, story, manners, etc.

2. Other Protestants may possibly contradict Doctor White, not by evidence of
truth, but upon these occasions. 1. One man sees not all things, and diligence,
labor, Bergom. chron. a^n. 1203. Neque omnia possumus omnes, neque sancti
Euangelistae vnum and idem de Christo scripserunt, etc.
and longer inquisition bring matters to light, which have been formerly not
so well known. 2. The state of the question may either vary, or be more fully
explaned and better understood, and accordingly men's speeches may alter. 3. It
is common with our Adversaries, one of them to oppose another in the
Controversies which they maintain with us. Thus Bellarmine and Baronius
contradict Canus Can. loc. theol. l 6. c. vlt. ad. 11. Bellar. de Pont. l. 4 c.
11. Non nulli ex catholicis. Honorium haereticum suisse contendunt, vt Melchior
Canus. Baron. tom. 8. ad annum 68^. quem voluissem sensibus potius fuisse ca^um
quam nomine.
, about Pope Honorius his falling into heresy. And Pighius, Catherinus,
Gropper, etc. are thwarted in their tenet, concerning justification, original
sin, certainty of grace, etc. by later Doctors Berllarm. de matrim. l. 1. c 6.
Can. loc. l. 8. c. 5. Pigh. contr. lo. 2. Catherin. l. de pecc. orig. Confess.
Colon. and Antidagm. Bellar. de amiss. great. l. 5. c. 16. and de iustif. l. 2.
c. 1.
.

But letting pass the former proposition, the assumption, which is (Doctor
White has uttered vast untruths, gross lies, acknowledged to be such by the
most eminent and learned Protestants, etc.) is insufficiently confirmed by this
Adversary.

For first, upon the examination of the thirty particular instances produced to
the former purpose, it will appear, that Doctor White has not uttered one
manifest or notorious untruth, affirmed to be such by the testimony of any
eminent or worthy Protestant.

2. Where the Popish Priest undertakes to make remonstrance of his accusation,
by the testimonies of the most eminent and learned Protestants: 1. Sundry of
the Authors produced by him, are no Protestants; David George is a damned
Heretic Thuanus to. 2. hist. l. 12.
, Sebastian Francke, an Anabaptist Briarly apol. tr. 1.. 3. p. 131.
, Matthew Paris, a Monk of Saint Albons, placed by Bellarmine Bellarm. de
scriptor. eccles.
among Popish Writers, and alleged by him, and by Baronius Baron. to. 12. an.
1169. n. 42.
and Sigonius Sigon. de reg. Ital. l. 18. Bellarm. Recog. page 121.
, as a Roman Catholic. 2. Some of his Authors dwell at Non-such Andr. Brixius
cited, untruth to page 108.
. 3. Diverse are so obscure and mean, that no man respects them. 4. Some are
malcontents, and men blotted with singularity and nouelty. 5. Many of the
testimonies alleged from such Protestants as are eminent and learned in deed,
are recocted Coleworts, gleaned out of Master Briarlies Apology, and are for
the more part already cleared by the learned B. Morton Cath. Appeal. D.
Whitak. cont. Campian. and cont. Duraeum. D. Hu^ph. Ies. p. 2
of our side.

The first untruth, wherewith T.W.P. charge M. White, concerning trial of
faith by antiquity.
T. W. Master White speaking of the Fathers of the primitive times, and of
their judgment in matter of faith, between the Protestants and us, writes;
We are so well assured, (meaning of the resolution of the Fathers) that we
embrace that kind of trial which is by antiquity, and daily find our
Adversaries galled thereby. But this is acknowledged to be a vast untruth by
Doctor Humphrey Vita Iuel. p. 212 taken out of Briarly his apology tr. 1.. 3.
page 140.
, who taxed Bishop Jewel for giving the Papists too large a scope: saying;
That he was injurious to himself, and after a manner spoiled himself and his
Church. Also by Doctor Whitaker Cont. Dur. le fui^ ^^ page 4^3.
, who writes; That the Popish religion is but a patched couerlet of the
Fathers errors sewed together. Lastly, Luther De ^eru. a^bit. page 434.
traduceth the Fathers, calling them most blind and ignorant in the Scriptures,
etc.

Answ. No man can better report another meaning, then the Author himself: and
Campian Campian. Rat. 5.
the Jesuit in his challenge, obiecting this place of Doctor Humphrey, was
answered by the same Doctor himself then living, in this manner: Humphr. (...)
suitism. p 2. ad 5. Ra^. Camp. page 6^8. Dixi quide^ Iuellum, qua erat
multiplici doctrina and heroino animo praeditus, non modo ad scripturas, sed
etiam ad tot centurias, etc. prouocasse: sed vobis maiorem ansam reclamandi
praebuit, and vobis nimium largitus est, vobis plus aequo concessit, sibi
interim nimis iniurius. etc. Au cuiquam videri potest haec oration acris
reprehe^sio? immo excuso illum and laudo, quod pugna difficilior sit pulchrior.
That he never blamed the reverend Bishop Jewel, for challenging the Papists
to a disputation out of the Fathers, but greatly commended the same: only he
judged that the Bishop had yielded the Papists a greater scope then was
convenient; to wit, in the largnesse of his offer, which was, that if in 27.
Articles propounded by him, the Papists were able to produce one place out of
any one Father of the first 600. years, plainly testifying the contrary
doctrine to those Articles propounded by him, he would then yield them the
cause.

Doctor Humphrey affirms, that Bishop Jewel learnedly maintained his
challenge, and failed not at all in the performance thereof, but did
supererogate with his adversaries more then he was bound. See his own words In
vita Iuel. Atque hic protestatio illa and denunciatio, quam vanam and futilem
esse aduersarij calumniantur, repetenda est: quam tamen veram esse, ipsi qui
paulo maiori ingenio and excellentiori doctrina valent, non negabunt: SI QVIS
VLLVM ANTIQVVM DOCTOREM ET PATREM, etc.
in the margent.

2. Doctor Whitakers in all his writings, is resolute to submit the Protestants
cause, to be tried by the Fathers, as witnesses of the truth: and he
proclaims against Campian Whitak. cont. Campian. ad Rat. 5 page 114. alleged
by Briarly apol. tr. 1.. 3. page 135.
and all other Papists, saying; Hearken, O Campian, the same most true and
constant speech, which Jewel uttered at that time, when he challenged all you
Papists to trial of antiquity, of the first six hundred years, offering
you, that if you were able to produce out of any Father or Council, during
that time, any one plain and evident testimony, he would yield you the
victory: This very profession do we all of us make, we all undertake the
same, and will not break promise.

So far is this reverend Doctor from allowing the primitive Fathers to be
patrones of Papistry, that he affirms, they are wholly ours Ibid. Toti ad
nostras parts peruolant, and vos acerrime lacessunt atque oppugnant. In summis
causis habemus omnes astipulantes. Patres and magni facimus, and assidue
legimus, and cunctis accuratioris theologiae studiosis legendos proponimus.
Duplic. contra Stapl. page 187. Plus tribuendum est ecclesiae primitiuae, quam
subsequ^ntium seculorum ecclesijs.
in all material points, and he honoreth and prefers them before other
writers, commending the study and reading of their books, to all judicious
Divines, and by their testimony in his disputations, he defends the truth of
our faith.

Object. But he calls Popery a patched couerlet, framed of the errors of the
Fathers.

Answ. It is confessed by our Adversaries, that the Fathers had their errors
Bannes 2. 2. q 1 ar. 8 Licet sancti Patres errare potuerint, and de facto
errauerint aliquando etc. Guide. Carm de haere^. generat. c. 7. In dictis
Sanctorum extra canonem bibliae, non est infallibilis veritas, certa and
indubitata.
, and themselves in diverse cases challenge and censure them. There is none of
the Fathers, says Stapleton Stapl. Rel c. 6. q. 4.
, in which something erroneous may not be observed. And Anselme Ansel. com. 2.
Cor. cited by Sixtus Senensis biblioth l. 5. in praef. p. 329. Posseuin. sell.
bib. l. 12. c. 23. Villauinc. de rat. stud. theol. l. 4. c. 6. obseru. 1.
says; In the books of those holy Doctors which the Church reads as
authentical, some things are found wicked and heretical: And Mulhusinus
Mulhusin. disp. de fid. page 43. Bannes 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 8. Errauit Bernardus,
etc. errauit Cyprianus, etc.
the Jesuit; We know the Fathers were men, and erred sometimes.

Chrysostom and other of the Fathers, are charged by Stapleton, Sixtus
Senensis, Tolet, Pererius, and Maldonate, to have erred about freewill; and
Clemens of Alexandria, Chrysostom, Theodorit, Hierom, Ambrose, and Euthymius,
erred about original sin, says Doctor Stapleton De Iustif l. 1. c. 10.
.

Before the Pelagian heresy arose, Augustine was deceived Aug. de praed^st.
sanct. c. 3. Q^em meu n errorem, nonnulla opuscula mea satis indicant, etc.
in the matter of divine grace and freewill; and although the same Father is
many times Orthodoxe in the question of Purgatory Aug. de temp. ser. 232. Duo
loca sunt, and tertius non est. De verb. Apost. ser. 14. Hypog. l. 5. Tertium
locum penitus ignoramus.
, yet at other times he varieth (at the least doubtfully De sid. and oper. c.
16. Enchir. c. 69. Tale aliquid po^t hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est, and
vtru^ ita sit quaeri potest.
) from his own sounder judgment.

In these and the like cases it is verified, which Cyril Cyril. l 6. contra
julian.
speaks upon other occasion: That as Horseleaches suck the naughty blood
out of the veins: so Papists excerpt that which is most imperfect and unsound
from the Fathers; and thus Popery, according to D. Whitakers, is, a patched
couerlet, framed of the Fathers errors. But hence it does not follow, that the
said Doctor would not stand to their judgment in such manner as my Brother
undertakes, that is, to the unanimous consent of the Fathers, or to the
judgment of the learnedest Fathers, or to the advised or deliberate doctrine
of the Fathers. It is possible for some Fathers to err, and yet others to
judge aright. The same Father may sometimes utter a straggling and exorbitant
sentence, and yet in other places correct himself Aug. contra Cresc l. 2 c. 31
and 32. De orig. a^^^n^r l. 4. c. 1. De bo^. perseu. c. ^1 l. 1. Retract c. 19.
.

Lastly, the Papists of a small error of the Fathers, may occasionally
procreate a great one; as from praying for the dead, used in one respect by the
Fathers Read D. Field of the Church, l. 3 c. 17.
, the gross praying for the dead, with a reference to Purgatory. Now this is
the patched couerlet which Doctor Whitataker means, implying no scurrility as
this Popish priest obiecteth, but truly taxing the slipperie dealing of Popish
Hucksters in abusing Fathers ^ee Briarly apol. p. 1. 3. ^ 1^. pa 128.
.

3. Concerning Luther, even as in sacred Scripture the Prophets, Esa. 1.11. and
66.3. and the Apostles, having to deal with Hypocrites, which placed justice
in outward ceremonies, utter diverse speeches in disgrace of legal rites, not
depressing the same in themselves, but showing they were unprofitable to such
as abused them: So Luther being opposed by Adversaries, which preferred the
Fathers before the Scriptures, correcting that abuse, uses some broad
speeches, (such as our Adversary names) against the errors of some Fathers,
(not generally of all:) But otherwise, When Fathers are lawfully used, as
witnesses and interpreters of truth, he esteems Lu^h. ^d Marc^. Brandeburg.
tom. 2. Germ. page 243. Periculo um and horrendum est, quicquam vel andire vel
credere, quod aduersatur vnanimi testimonio fidei and doctrinae sanctae
Catholicae ecclesiae, quam inde vsque ab initio, vnanimiter seruauit. Com. in c
5. Gal Patres euangelium and fidem in Christum, absque vlla hypocrisi, pure and
simpliciter tradiderunt, and ecclesiam ab innumeris erroribus expurgarunt.
them according to their worth, and yields as much unto them as themselves
require Aug. epist. 19. and ep. 111. de orig. anim. l. 4. c. 1. and de bon.
perseu. c. 21. Hieron. cited by Biel, Can. Miss. lect. 41.
.

But as for our Adversaries, there is nothing more ordinary with them, then to
reject the testimony of the Fathers Bellar. de verb. D. l. 4. c. 11. Can. loc.
l. 7. c. 3. Stapl Rel. c. 6. q. 4. Greg. Val tom. 3. d. 1 q. 1. p. 7.. 45.
Carb. introd. l. 4. c. 19. Viguet. instit. theol. c. 17. v. 2. Vasqu. p. 1 d.
12. c. 1. Guide. Carmel de haeres. in Genesis c. 7. Thyr. de appar. visib. l 1. c.
25. Stapl. Rel. c. 3. q 1. ar. 1. Vega de iustif. l. 11. c 6. D^^edo de eccles
dog. l. 4. c. 6. Suar 3. p 2. d. 2. 3. Bannes 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 8.
, and they profess to do thus whenever their authorities repugne the
articles of their Roman church Hos. cou. Brent l 3. page 167. Cum ecclesia
Doctores admittimus. Baron. annal. 1. ann. 34. n. 213. Matta. de iurisd par. 4.
page 273. Bannes 2. 2 q. 1. ar. 8. Omnes sancti conueniunt B. Virginem
contraxisle originale pecc. and tamen, etc. Maldon. com. Ioh. 2. v. 4.
.

Untruth 2. M. White charged to deny that, concerning Tradition, which other
Protestants grant.
T. W. Master White labors to prove, that the Protestants Church receives
not necessarily any one Tradition; and in his table, No part of our faith
stands upon Tradition: and page 47. The Scripture proves it self to be the
very word of God, and receives not authoririe from the Church: But Master
Whites brethren, Doctor Whitaker Whit^k. cont. Sc^pl. page 298.
, Master Hooker Hooker. pol. ec^l page 146.
, and Doctor Couel Couel. def. page 31.
, affirm the contrary to this, etc.

Answ. None of Master Whites brethren will, or can charge him with falsehood as
you pretend, but they generally accord with him in both his assertions, being
rightly understood.

1. He maintains, that no part of our faith depends or is builded upon
Tradition, in the same manner as upon the Scripture: Not upon Tradition, as the
foundation of belief, or as the last resolution of faith; But as a subordinate
help, administering cause, or external testimony to the truth. And
accordingly Doctor Whitaker Whitaker. de Script. q. 3. c 5. Non nego
traditionem ecclesiasticam esse argumentum, quo argui and conuinci possit, qui
libri Canonici sunt, etc. sed dico hoc externum tantum argumentum and
testimonium esse. Contra Stapl. page 300. Testimonium ecclesiae non est causa
fidei. tanquam externo argumento, etc.
speaks, and no otherwise. But you have wilfully omitted the latter part of
the said Doctors words, wherein he explicates his meaning.

2. In the next assertion M. White acknowledges, that the ministry of the
Church induces us, to assent to the Scripture. But you will have Tradition and
the ministry of the Church (understanding the present Bellarm. de Sacram. l.
2. cap. ^5. Stapl. Rel. c. 5. q. 1. ar. 1 ad. 2. Nostra fides praesentis
ecclesiae iudicio and authoritate nititur, non Apostolicae, etc. page 501.
Church) not only an adiuuant cause of belief: but a foundation and principle
thereof Baron. tom. 1. an. 53. n. 11. Scripturarum fundamentum traditio.
Siluest. Prier. cont. Luth. conclus. 56. Indulgentiae non innotuere nobis
authoritate Scripturae, sed authoritate ecclesiae Romanae, quae mayor est.
, of equal or greater authority then the Scripture. And for proof hereof you
reason as follows.

T. W. If any maine article of faith be taught by Tradition only; then Master
Whites assertion is false, saying; No part of our faith stands upon
Tradition. But some maine part of our faith; to wit, that the Gospel and Acts
are the sacred word of God, is taught by Tradition only; according to the
testimony of M. Hooker and D. Couel. Ergo, It is false which M. White
affirms, that no part of our faith stands upon Tradition.

Answ. Master Hooker Hook. eccles. Pol. l. 3. page 147.
affirms two things: 1. The first outward motive leading men to esteem of
the Scripture, is the authority of Gods Church. 2. Afterward by bestowing our
labor in hearing or reading the mysteries thereof, we find by the thing or
matter it self, that which gives us full satisfaction.

According to this judicious Author, the authority and testimony of the Church,
is the first motive and means to lead us to the knowledge of the holy
Scriptures; and when we are led by the hand of the Church unto them, and by the
ministry thereof are helped about the sense and interpretation, they contain
in themselves a divine authority, verity, and light, whereby people come to
infused faith.

And from this assertion, I answer the Papists objection; If any maine Article
of our faith do depend upon Tradition, as a divine principle thereof: then it
is true which the Popish Priest says, that some part of our faith is builded
upon Tradition. But if an article of faith depend upon Tradition, only as an
introduction and administering cause thereof, then it is false, that some part
of our faith is builded upon Tradition.

Object. How is it possible to know that the Gospel of Matthew is divine
Scripture, and the Gospel of Nicodemus bearing the same title, is not.

Driedo de eccl. dog m l. 4. c. 4. page ^39. Enchirid. Colon pa. 70.
Answ. 1. To the knowing hereof, by an historical and acquisite faith, the
testimony and tradition of the church (especially the primitive Church) is
necessary.

Secondly, to know this by a divine and infused faith, (besides the authority
of the Church:) the matter, character, and contents of the very book, and
comparison with other Scripture, do serve as an inward cause, to produce the
said infused faith.

When Onesimus brought Saint Paul's Epistle to Philemon; his bringing thereof,
and reporting who was the Author, did authorize the Epistle so far, as to
make Philemon receive and read it: but upon the perusal thereof, Philemon
found matter and inward arguments in the very Epistle it self, whereby (the
spirit of God co-working) he was fully induced to believe it as divine and
Apostolical Scripture.

Untruth 3. Wherein Doctor White is charged with a false assertion, of the
continuance of the Protestants faith.
T. W. Our Minister laboring to enammell and beautify his deformed faith,
with the specious title of antiquity and succession, uses these swelling
speeches Way to the Chure, sect. 17. page 86.
: Against all Papists whatsoever, we make it good, that the very faith we now
profess, has successively continued in all ages since, Christ, and was never
interrupted so much as one year, month, or day; and to confess the contrary
were sufficient to prove us no part of the Church of God. Words of brass, but
if he be put to proof, no doubt of leaden performance, etc. Luther Luth.
epist. ad Argentin. and loc. com. class 4. p. 51
and Bishop Jewel Jewel apol. p. 4. chapter 4.
affirm contrary hereunto, that the truth of Religion was restored, made
known, and brought to light by Luther himself, and Zuinglius, etc.

Answ. Here be two things to be examined: 1. The truth or falsehood of Master
Whites assertion in it self. 2. The comparing thereof with the speeches of
Luther and Bishop Jewel.

Touching the former, the Reader must observe, that Doctor White D. Wh. Way to
the Church, sect. 45. page 335. and digress. 48. page 337.
speaks of substantial and primitive doctrine; not of accessorie and
secondary points. And thus it is true, that the principal articles of the
Protestants faith have continued in all ages. Nevertheless, if Doctor Whites
words be extended as far as they literally found, I suppose they may be
defended, and that in all ages, and when Luther began to teach, there have been
Christian Churches in the world, and public teachers in the Roman Church, who
have rejected the Trident faith.

1. The Grecians Guide. Carm. de haer. Grae cor. c. 3. etc. 20.
, Armenians lb. de haeres. Armen. c. 1.
, Waldenses De haer. Walden c. 1. and 4.
and Bohemians Bohe^ de mor. gent. l. 3. c. 11. Nich. Eymeric. p. 2. q. 14.
Conrad. Vsperg. anno 1180. Cocc. thesaur. Cath. l. 7. ar 6.
, denied the supremacy of the Pope, and authority of the Church of Rome.

2. The Greek Church, the Bohemians, and Waldenses, denied Purgatory, prayer
for the dead, seven Sacraments, satisfactions, and the single life of Priests
Guide. Io. Bohe^. Council. Florent. sess. vlt.
.

3. The Armenian Churches, the Waldenses and the Graecians denied
Transubstantiation, and the Romish sacrifice of the Mass Guide. de error. Armen.
.

4. The Iacobites or Nestorians, denied auricular confession Guide. de error.
Jacob. c. 2.
.

5. The Waldenses, Bohemians, and Greeks, denied invocation of Saints, Popes
pardons, frierish miracles, and the fastes and ceremonies of the Roman Church
Guide. de error. Wald. Bohem. l. 3. de mor gent. P. Emilias de gest Franc. l. 2.
.

6. The Aethiopians denied invocation of Saints, allowed no Masses for souls
departed, and affirmed, that Church laws bind not the conscience Dresser. de
eccles. Ethiop. Dam. Goes de mor. Ethiop.
.

7. Among the Papists themselves, Ferus taught the justification by faith alone
Ferus com. Ioh. 1. and Ioh. 16. charged by Do. Sot. in his annot.
, and is charged by Dominicus Soto, to have held the same opinion with the
Lutherans in the article of justification Com. l. 3. in Math. c. 20. charged by
Soto.
. Also, he condemned merit of works; he affirms, that predestinate persons
only have faith Com. Ioh. 17.
, and that the faithful may be assured of their salvation Com. Ioh. 17.
, he denies the temporal jurisdiction of Popes Com. Mat. 16.
and Prelates: and says, the Scripture is the only rule of faith Com. Mat. 13.
. Durand denied transubstantiation, (as our Adversaries themselves charge him
Flor. theolog. in l. 4. sent. q. 5. ar. 1. An panis in corpus Christi
conuertatur? Quatuor sunt opiniones: 1. est Durandi, qui omnino negat
Transubstantiationem, etc.
) and Caietan held premises, whereupon follows the destruction of
Transubstantiation Ibid. Caietan affir ^at panem transubstantiati in corpus
Christi. Concedit nihilominus rem quae erat panis manner, and esse corpus
Christi. Haec est omnino fugienda, ex ea enim sequitur conuersionem istam in
corpus Christi non esse transubstantionem.
.

Albertus Pighius Pigh. contr. loc. 2.
and the Divines of Colein Antididag. Colon.
, maintained, that the merit of Christ imputed, is the formal cause of
justification. And Pighius agrees with the Protestants in the matter of the
doctrine of merit Pigh. ibid. In eandem nobiscum sententiam conueniunt.
.

Cardinal Caietan, a chief Pilot in the Roman Sea, maintains the lawfulness
of public prayer in a known tongue Caietan. com. 1. Cor. 14.
, and denies, that the Text of Ioh. 20.23 Com. Ioh. 20.
. and Ephesians. 5.32. and James 5.4 Com. Ephesians. 5. Com. Iac. 5.
. (being the sole grounds of Scripture which Papists have for three of their
Sacraments, auricular confession, matrimony, and extreme unction,) do teach
any such thing.

Lastly, Lira Lira sup. Esdr. 1. and sup. Tob.
, Abulensis Abulens. in Math. c. 1.
, Caietan, Hugo, Richardus de Sancto Victore, etc. deny sundry of the
Apocryphal books of Scripture, lately made canonical by the Trident Fathers:
And Galatinus, Pagnine, Johannes Campensis, etc. deny the authority of the
old Latin translation Can loc l 2.10 Perer. com. Dan l. 16. Bellar. de verbo
Dei, l. 1. c. 7. Galatin. praef de arcan. fid cath. Faber praefat. epist. Paul
Sixth. Senens. bibl l. 4. Saints Pagninus. Ioh. Campens. ep. dedic. paraph in
Psalm. Richard. de sanc Victor. Except. l. 2. c. 9. Sunt praeterea and alij
libri, vt Sapie^tia Salomonis, liber Jesus filij Sirach, liber Judith and
Tobias, and liber Machabeotu^, quae leguntur quide^, sed non sc^ibuntur in
Canone.
.

T. W. Bishop Jewel and Luther affirm, that Protestancy began in their days.

Answ. They speak respectively, Et secundum quid, that Luther and Zuinglius
were the first, who in such a manner, and with so good success: and which in
these Western parts, by a public opposition and separation of many nations,
and so exactly and powerfully preached the Gospel, and condemned Popery; but
they affirm not contrary to D. White, that our doctrine in such a manner as I
have declared before, was no where professed in the world.

Untruth 4. Wherein Doctor White is challenged, for affirming the unity of
Faith and doctrine among the Protestants.
T. W. For the justifying of the Protestants doctrine, M. White says, of the
book entitled, the harmony of confessions; If the Jesuit can show in this
book (wherein the particular Churches set down and name the articles of their
faith) any jar in dogmaticall points of faith, I am content you believe him
in all the rest. Here the Reader has a bold assertion, which the more easily
to win a credulous ear, is steeped in musk: but I fear Master Doctor, the
note diapason, which implies an absolute and general concord, will here be
wanting, etc. And then the Popish Priest produces six examples of doctrine
out of the Harmony of confessions, which he pretends to be discordious with
the doctrine of the Church of England, and of the Caluinists in France and
Germany.

Answ. If you will proceed substantially, and prove that there is discord of
faith and doctrine among the Protestants, you must perform these two things:
1. produce principal parts of doctrine belonging to the maine object of faith
Aq. 2. 2. q. 2. ar. 5. Fidei obiectum per se, etc per accidens and secundatio.
Stapl. dapl. l. 1. c 12. n. 3. Omnes qui Spiritum sanctum habe^t, de rebus ad
religionem necessario pertinentibus, etc. perinde sent^unt. Aug cont. ul. l. 1
Alia ^unt in qui bus inter se, ali quando etiam optimi atque doctissimi regu ae
cath. defen^ores, salua fidei compage, non conso aut. De Ciuit Dei, l 15. c. 5.
Pugnant inter se boni and mali, etc.
, and demonstrate, that the Protestant Churches which are reputed Orthodoxe,
(for we have nothing to do with Anabaptists, Arrians, etc.) are divided in
these: 2. You must also give instance in such persons, as are reputed sound
members and vital parts of the several Churches wherein they live; not of
Nouellists, incendiaries, and extrauagants, which are condemned, and resisted
by the sound and best parts of the Church. Romans 16.17.

These things bring premised, let the places produced by you out of the
Harmony of Confessions be examined.

T. W. We find this Harmony to teach; That sins are eftsoons punished, even
in this life, as David's, Manasses, etc. and the punishments may be mitigated by
good works. See here how fully it acknowledges the abster sieve nature of
penance and satisfaction.

Answ. 1. You do not faithfully recite the words of the confession of Auspurge,
but have omitted part thereof, and namely that part which explicateth their
true meaning. The whole words are; We give warning of this also, that sins
are eftsoons punished with temporal punishments in this life, as David,
Manasses, and many other were punished: and we teach, that these punishments
may be mitigated by good works, and the whole practice of repentance, as Paul
declares, 1. Cor. 11.31. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.

Ans. The Popish Priest has omitted these words; With temporal punishments in
this life: and also the latter part of the sentence, The whole practice of
repentance, etc. 1. The confession acknowledges only a temporal punishment of
sin in this life for just persons: The Papists extend the temporal
punishment of sin to Purgatory in the life to come Bellar. de Purg l. 1. c.
7.
. 2. The confession teaches, that good works mitigate temporal punishments
by way of impetration, and as they be actions of repentance: The Papists teach,
they do it as a satisfaction and compensation Stapl. antidot. apost. 1. Cor
11. page 651. Sunt verae compensationes and satisfactiones praeteritorum
peccatorum.
of Gods justice.

Secondly, whereas you say, that the place alleged, fully acknowledges the
abstersive nature of penance and satisfaction: you should rather have said
foully; for the said confession in that Section Harm. Confess. c. 8 ar. 3. de
confess. Non oneramus conscientias satisfactionibus, etc. Satisfactiones
obscurabant beneficium Christi.
, expreslie reproves Popish satisfactions, saying; that they obscure the
benefit of Christ's redemption.

Thirdly, whereas every difference and contrariety is between two or many:
you have alleged certain speeches out of the harmony of confessions, without
paralleling the same with any contrary assertion; and so you prove no
disagreement of the Protestants by the said confessions, but only deliver what
some of them teach.

T. W. This obedience toward the law is a kind of justice, (mark you this
discord) and deserves reward.

Answ. These Authors presently after the place alleged, explicate their
meaning, saying; After that the person is reconciled to God, and made just by
faith, his obedience is accepted and pleases God, and is reputed a certain
kind of justice. The Papists esteem inhaerent righteousness, to be perfect
and absolute justice, such as God cannot refuse or condemn by his law Vasq 1.
2. p. 2. d. 122. c. 3. Sunt ita perfect meritoria, vt nullum habeant defectum,
ob que^ vita aeterna illis denegari possit. Bellarm. de iustif. l. 2. c. 10.
Maldonat. cont. to. 2. de poenit. page 84. Deus accepta habere debet, velit
nolit, etc.
. These Protestants in their confession, teach, that it is justice in an
imperfect manner, or low degree of justice, elevated hereunto by Gods free
acceptance, and not by rigor of justice Anselm. prosolog. cap. 10. Iustus es,
non quia nobis reddis debitum, sed quia facis quod te decet sum bonum.
: And in this their Tenet all learned Protestants concur with them.

2. Whereas they say, that our obedience deserves reward; they use the word
merit or deserve, as the ancient Fathers did, for to obtain, procure, and
impetrate Read part 1. chap. 1. obs. 4. of M^rite, in this book. Chrysostom. 2.
Cor. hom. 27. Deus hoc in mercedem imputat, non quod just nobis debeat: sed
quod misericors est and pius.
, and not for meriting properly and by condignitie, as the modern Papists do.

T. W. Like as the preaching of penance is general, even so the promise of
grace is general, etc. Here needs no disputation of predestination, or such
like, for the promise is general.

Answ. The preaching and promise of grace is universal, in regard of all kinds
and states of people Aug. enchir. c. 103.
. Act. 10.35. Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11. to whom the Ministers of the Gospel must
in their preaching and doctrine offer the same in common, without respect of
persons. But if it be universal in regard of efficacy, or in respect of the
preaching thereof, to every particular person, and every nation at all times,
how comes it to pass, that so many Infants deceasse without baptism (which
you say to them is damnable Bellarm. de Baptism. c. 4. Quos Deus
praedestinauit, ijs remedia ad salutem efficacissime prouidit. Proinde omnes
qui in infantia moriuntur, si praedestinati sunt, sine dubio baptizantur; and
contra, si reprobi sunt, non baptizantur.
?) And so many Nations, to wit, the Indians, before your Friars and Bandogges
came among them Benzo. hist. nou orb. l. 3 c. 5. Ouieden. hist. indor. l. 16.
c. 11. Phil. Camerar. med. hist. p. 1. c. 38. These authors report, that the
Spaniards fed their mastiue dogs with the miserable Indies: and how an old
woman pursued by a bandogge, kneeled down, and held out the Captains letter
to the mastiue, and escaped the very dog being more pitiful then the Spaniard,
etc.
, wanted preaching, Sacraments, and all means of salvation? And wherefore do
Thomas of Aquine, Bellarmine, and the rest of your Doctors handle the doctrine
of predestination, if the same be false or dangerous?

But whereas the confession of Auspurg says: There needs no disputation of
predestination; it condemns indiscreet and curious disputing of
predestination Vide Prosper. ep. de lib. arb. ad Rufin.
, such as passes the bounds of Gods revealed word, or is divided from the
doctrine of repentance and good works: otherwise you cannot be ignorant that
both the sacred Scripture and the primitive Fathers Aug. de bono perse c. 15.
and 16. Prosp. ad excerp Genuens. resp. ad. dub. 10. in fine.
, maintain the preaching of predestination.

Lastly, the Popish Priest, to confirm his supposed discord between this
confession of Auspurge and the Protestants of England, should have done well,
to have set down wherein the Church of England Articles, 1562. ar. 17.
varieth from this confession, in any of the former assertions.

T. W. As touching private confession, etc. we affirm, that the ceremony of
private absolution is to be retained in the Church, and we do constantly
retain it.

Answ. The Popish Priest concealing part of the speech, would insinuate, that
the confession of Saxony approves auricular confession and Popish absolution;
but that this is false, appears by the words placed in the margent Harmo.
confess. sect. 8. Saxon. confess. ar. 16 Nec diuinitus mandata est, etc. nec
possibilis.
.

2. The Church of England approves private confession of sins unto the
Minister, and allows private absolution thereupon Apol. Church Engl. p. 2.
chapter 6. and Iuel def. page 141. and 149. Abuses and errors set apart, we do no
more mislike private confession, then a private Sermon. Communion book,
visitation of the sick.
; and yet condemns Popish auticular confession imposed by necessity, and
requiring particular emuneration of all mortal sins: And also, the making
absolution a Sacrament of the Church; and ascribing the efficacy of remission
of sins, to the external word pronounced by the Priest.

Suarez Suar. tom. 3. d 2.. 2.
the Jesuit says; That Sacraments (among which penitential absolution is
one) effect grace, not only by their form, but also by their very matter, and
that they have a physical efficiency in conferring of grace, like Christ's
humanity Ibid. d. 9.. Per v^ram and physicam efficientiam, sicut humanitas
Christi.
. Bosius says Bos. de sig. lib. 1. c 10. and 11. Non per obtutum cogitationis
vllius, etc. Sacramento rum vis, praecedit omnibus factis, and cogitatis
nostris: diuinitatem ingenerat tanquam arbor vitae in paradiso.
; They ingenerate Divinity, like the tree of life in Paradise, immediately
without any preuious motion or thought of man's mind, and that the Sacrament of
Penance conferreth grace, without any precedent disposition, more then
attrition Coster. enchir. c. de poenit. Sola attritione, etc. Greg. Val. to. 4.
d. 7. q. 8. p. 3.
, (which according to sundry popish Doctors, implies no formal purpose of
forsaking sin Vega pro council. l. 13. c. 21. Non est necessarium ad remissionem
pec. propositum formale vitandi pecc. Cap. 25. Nollent patrasse, and tamen non
dolent, dolor sensitiuo aut intellectiuo.
, nor any sorrow, either sensitive or intellectual for the same, but is a
velleity Stapl. Antid. Romans 7. v. 15. Leuis and debilis affectus, qualem
scholastici velleitatem vocant. Acost. de salut. Indor. l. 6. c. 11. Mald. sum.
q. 16 ar. 1. Tol. instruct. sac. l. 3. c. 5. Caietan. opusc. tom. 1. tract. 4.
quaest. 1. Non intendit, actualiter committere pecc. mortale, nec intendit
mutare statum suum, quo detinetur in peccato mortali, vt patet in
concubinarijs, vsurarijs, etc. qui consitentur peccata sua, displicetque ijs
peccasse, habentque velleitatem relinquendi pec. non tamen deserunt
concubinatum, aut restituunt vsuras, etc. and haec displicentia cum eiusmodi
velleitate Attritio dici potest, etc, est valde communis, and communiter
vocatur Attritio. Est a voluntate sieve charitate.
or wishing, one were able to be sorry for sin and could forsake it; or an
imperfect sorrow proceeding from fear of punishment or worldly occasions, and
not from the love of God.)

This doctrine of Popish absolution, the Saxon confession, and the Church of
England condemn: but absolution, public or private, agreeable to the
Scripture, both in the outward discipline of the Church Calvin. instit. l. 4.
c. 11.. 2.
, Math. 18.18. and in the ministry of the word and Sacraments, and remission
of sins, conferred by God therein, we maintain and justify Chem. exam.
Council. Trid. p. 2. pa. 221.
.

T. W. In like sort he says, that Bishops have jurisdiction to forgive sins.

Answ. The Chureh of England Herbr. de Clan. n. 31. in disp. Service book of
the Church of Engl. in visit. of the sick.

Chem. Ib. in absolutione Deus ipse per ministerium euangelij remittit pecc.
singulis credentibus.


Apol. angl. p 2. Chapter 6.
and other Protestants believe, that Bishops and Ministers have received the
keys of the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 16.19. and by preaching the Gospel and
administering the Sacraments they forgive sins. Aug. co^t. Parmen. l. 2. c 11.
per euangelium in cuius praedicatione sp. sanctus operatur. Cypr. ep. 76. n. 8.
Cyril. Alex. in Ioh. l. 12. c. 56.
Ioh. 20.23. 1. Cor. 4.15. 1. Tim. 4.16.

The difference between the Papists and us, is touching the manner, how they
remit sins: Concerning which we teach three things. 1. Negative: The whole
authority and efficacy of taking away sins, by way of condonation and
purging sin, is in God and Christ only. Esaias 43.12. Luke 5.21.24. And this
in former days was the judgment of the Fathers Aug. cited by Lombard. l. 4.
d. 18. Nemo tollit pecc. nisi solus Deus. Hieron. com. Math. 16. and su^er 14
cap. ^sa. Chrysostom in Ioh hom. 85. Ambros. de Cain. and Abel. l. 2. c. 4. and
sermon. 66. de natal. Petri and Pauli.
and principal Schoolmen Al. Hal 4. q. 11. M. 1. ad arg. Bonau. 4. d. 18. q.
1. Scot. 4. d. 19. ad quaest. Caietan. com. Ioh. 20. Vis and efficacia
remissionis non in discipulis, sed in Deo remittente. Altisiodor. sum. lib. 4.
tr. 6. cap. 8. q. 2.
. 2. The Pastors and Ministers of Christ forgive sins two manner of ways. 1.
By coapting and preparing sinners, that they may be capable of forgiveness,
and have in them such dispositions Aq. 4. d. 18. ad 2. Neque sacramentum
poenitentiae etc. operando perting it direct ad gratiam, nec ad culpae Remiss.
sed dispositiue. Ferus com. Math. 16. Ea adhibent per quae Deus remittit. pecc.
and gratiam dat.
of faith, repentance, and virtue wrought by the Ministry, Romans 10.17. Act.
11.14. And also such outward seals as God requires to be preuious unto
remission of sins, Mar. 16.16. 2. As Ambassadors, messengers and keepers of
the outward seal, they manifest Gab. 2. d. 27. q. vnic. du. 5. Sacerdos
absoluendo confitentem, pronunciat eum absolutum, non remittit peccatu^. Scot.
4 d. 18. Sacerdotes dimittunt ostendendo and manifestando. Bonauent. 4. d. 18.
Sacerdotes habent se ad modum demostrantis, etc. Bucer. script. Angl. apol. ad
Edw. Fox. page 675. Nec dubitant dom. nostrum Iesum, in ecclesia sua nobis
praesentem, ipsumque pecc. remittere in coelis, dum ecclesia eius iussu and
ministerio peccata remittit in terris.
and externally seal, and apply the grace and forgiveness, which God at the
use of the word and sacraments does himself confer.

But our modern Papists affirm, that Bishops and Priests forgive sins by
the word of absolution, in such a manner, as Christ wrought miracles, and
forgave sins by his voice. Suar. 3. d. 9.. 2. Per veram and physicam
efficientiam, attingentia veram gratiae productionem, sicut Christus sua
hum^nitate, tangendo vel loquendo ^acrebat miracula. Tolet. com. Luc. 5. annot.
41. pariratione procedunt potestas miraculorum and potestas remittendi peccata.
Chat. Trid. de poenit. Neque aliter accipienda est vox sacerdotis peccata
condonantis, quam vox Christi, qui ait paralytico, Math. 9. confide fili,
remittuntur tibi pecc. tua. Stapl. Antid. Ioh. 20. Remittunt pecc. vere sicut
Christus remisit, verbo absolutionis non praedicationis, verbo efficaci, etc.
Non verbo testimonij.
Ioh. 11.43. by a true and physical efficiencie, reaching to the very
production of grace, and dissolution and destruction of sin Bell. de poenit.
l. 3. c. 2. Dedit donum pecc. remittendi, non concionando, etc. sed plane
extinguendo, and dissolue^do.
.

T. W. Finally, not to rest upon every particular, we find there: We do not
speak of the Church, as if we should speak of Platoes Idea, but of such a
Church as may be seen and heard, etc. The eternal Father will have his Son
to be heard among all mankind.

Answ. 1. All the Protestants believe this doctrine; to wit, that the Church by
the ordinance of Christ ought to be a visible society, (and not a Platonicall
Idea) of people professing the Gospel of Christ sincerely, etc. But ab officio,
from that which ought to be, to the being it self, it always follows not:
and by the frailty and error of man, and especially by the tyranny of
Antichrist, it has happened that the Church for certain ages has wanted part
of this perfection; and yet in the mistie darkness of superstition, God
preserved some Pastors and people visibly professing the truth of religion, in
the foundation, though the same were infected with error and superstition in
other points. And the state of the question, between you and us, is not,
whether there be always upon earth a visible Church: but concerning the manner
of the visibilitie; whereof I have treated before Part. 1. Chapter 3. paragr. 2.
obseru. touching Churches visibilitie.
.

T.W. Now I appeal to Master White, whether there be in these points, any
concordance between the Harmony of confessions, and the English Protestants,
Caluinists, etc.

Answ. Your appeal to Master White is ridiculous, and only used for
ostentation: for you have not produced so much as one particular instance, of
any doctrine taught by the Church of England, repugnant to these points
delivered in the Harmony of confessions; and therefore you may rather appeal
to that black one, who set you aworke in this business, then to Master White,
who can observe nothing but darkness and folly in you. Hic niger est, etc.

Untruth 5. Wherein D. White is accused, for affirming of an immutabilitie of
the faith of the present English Church.
T. W. Master White insisteth in his supposed constancy of religion here in
England, and thus writes: If the Jesuit can show, the Church of England since
papistry was first abolished, to have altered one article of the present faith
now professed, I am content, etc.

For the disproofe of this falsehood, we will convince the same, by discovering
the manifold and weightiest alterations of our public English Leiturgie, since
the first entrance of Protestancy into England.

Answ. Master White speaks of the alteration of faith: saying, It is not
enough to say, we vary, unless he can make true demonstration that the
variance is in faith: and you prove a change in Leiturgie, and form of
Service; not remembering that your selves, have changed your Breuiaries,
Portesses, and Missals, more then once even of late years Posseuin. Appat. v.
Missale and verb. Breuiariu^. Read D. Rainold against Ha^t. Chapter 8. dims. 2.
page 41^. Pl^^ina, vita Sixth 1.
.

T. W. The Service book of King Edward, published by Cranmer, P. Martyr, and
Bucer, and confirmed by Parliament, kept almost all the prayers and ceremonies
of the Mass: with crossing of both their sacraments, and the accustomed rites
of baptism, as a formal consecration of the water of baptism with the sign
of the cross: the using of Chrisme and the anointing of the child. Again, it
retained prayer for the dead; and the offering up of our prayers by the
intercession of Angels. But when Queen Elizabeth came in, the Leiturgie was so
altered, that it took away prayer to Angels, most of the ceremonies: Baptism
by lay persons, and grace given thereby; Confirmation of children, and strength
given thereby: The Priests blessing the Bride and Bridegroom with the sign of
the cross: The Priests absolution: The special confession of the sick
penitent; and the anointing of the sick.

Answ. 1. The first Service book of King Edward, was not altogether approved
by Bucer, and Peter Martyr, as you report, but in some things reproved: as the
censure of Bucer Bucer. script. Angl. page 428.
upon the same does declare. Secondly, it was rather accepted of the
Protestants by tolleration, because at first they could obtain no more, then
by an absolute approbation: Thirdly, the same was changed and reformed, and
those things which you name, were left out of the said Leiturgie, by another
edition thereof, established in the fifth year of Edward the sixth An act for
uniformity of prayer, anno. 5. and 6. Edw. 6. printed by William Whitchurch.
1552.
. And that later Service book of King Edward, is in substance, all one with
the Service book of Queen Elizabeth. And thus since King Edwards reign,
there has been no material alteration of the English Service book. Fourthly,
the particulars wherewith you charge the first English Service book, are some
of them, not found in the same, to wit, invocation of Angels; for the book
mentions intercession of Angels, Revel. 8.3. Tobi. 12.12 Chem. loc. com. p.
1. de angelis, offerunt orationes nostras deo. Bernard. sermon. 3. sup. missus
est. Et in cant. ser. 7. Aug. Epist. 120.
. but no invocation.

2. The said book prescribes not Popish praying for the dead, with reference
to Purgatory Read D. Field of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 17.
, but prayer of gratulation and thanksgiving: and request for the happy
resurrection of the bodies, and remission of sins at the day of judgment, by
an open and solemn application and promulgation of the sentence of remission.
3. The anointing of the sick with oil, was not used as a Sacrament,
according to your doctrine, but as an adiaphorous rite: and the same was
tolerated for the present, as the Apostles winked at the Legals, until the
truth of the Gospel was fully revealed. 4. The other ceremonies named by you,
were retained in the infancy of reformation for outward peace, and being in
their nature contingent and mutable, it was in the Churches liberty to alter or
take them away.

And thus as my Brother affirmed, there was never since Protestancy first came
in, any alteration in substance or in the maine body of doctrine and religion
in the Church of England, but either in ceremony or in lesser points of faith,
which deserve no more to be called a change of faith, then the putting off old
garments a transmutation of the substance of man's body Aug. Epist. 86. Ea
quoque vestis, etc.
.

Lastly, whereas you produce Master Parker and Master Cartwright, testifying
the change of our English Service book, and requiring new alterations. 1. If
these men had been peaceable and friends to the Church wherein they were bred,
their testimony might have stood you in some stead. 2. But being as they were,
both you and they may take notice, if you please, that the Church of England is
not carried about with every blast: and rather wishes you to change your
minds, and cease to rend the unseamed coat of Christ Cypr. d. unit. eccles.
n. 5. qui pacem Christi and concordiam rumpit, aduersus Christum facit. n. 16.
In euangelio, tunica domini nostri Christi non diuiditur omnino, nec scinditur:
possidere non potest indumentum Christum qui scindit and diuidit ecclesiam
Christi.
, then iniustly to deprave the religion, against which you have nothing solid
or effectual to oppose.

Untruth. 6. Doctor White accused for delivering an untruth, concerning the
Roman Churches mutabilitie, in matters of faith.
T. W. He confidently auerreth, that the Church of Rome is varied from her
self in matters of faith, since she began to be the seat of Antichrist, etc.

Answ. Master White affirms, that the modern Church of Rome is varied from
her self in matters of faith, (to wit, in some, not generally in all or in
every one;) and he names in the place alleged by you, five points, wherein
the same has changed. Also he says, it is varied from that it believed
formerly, (namely before it was the seat of Antichrist) and since the time it
began to be so. But T. W. pareth off the limitatio^ of D. Whites speech, and
produces him auerring in general and confusedly, a mutability of the Romish
belief: and accordingly he disputes against him; proving a perpetuity of
faith in some points, (which is not denied:) whereas he ought to have defended
a perpetuity in all, at least in those five examples alleged by his
adversary. Also, he should have ascended higher, and proved his perpetuity,
as well before as after the arising of Antichrist. But he perceived that this
was too hot for him, and thereupon he chooses rather to beat the air, and
proceed as follows.

T.W. The most received opinion of the Protestants, touching Antichrists
coming, is, That S. Gregory the Great, was the first Antichrist. And Augustine
the monk, professing the same religion with him, and planting it in England;
it is confessed by D. Humphrey, that the said doctrine contains the chief
points wherein we differ from the sectaries of these times, etc.

Answ. 1. The most received opinion of the Protestants is, that Gregory the
Great, was not Antichrist: The definition of Antichrist, (says our learned
Sonhius Sonh. disp. de Antichristo. n. 41.
) agrees to the Roman Pope, after the death of Gregory the Great, and after the
murder of Mauritius. And the most received opinion of all Protestants, is, that
the Roman Pope began (and yet but in part) to be Antichrist, when by the
donation of the parricide Phocas Plat. Bonifacius 3. a Phoca imperatore
obtinuit, magna tamen contentione vt seeds B. Petri, quae caput est omnium
ecclesiarum, ita diceretur and haberetut ab omnibus. Beda de 6. aetat. mundi.
Paul. Diacon. hist. Longob. l. 4. c. 21. Abbas vsperg. in Phoca.
, he took unto him, the title and authority of universal Bishop, formerly
condemned as Antichristian by Gregory the first Greg. lib. 4. ep. 36. Ipse est
Rex super omnes filios superbiae, l. 6. ep. 30. Ego fidenter dico, quisquis se
vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat aut vocare desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrit, etc.
: But yet as a babe and suckling differs from a strong man, and (according to
your Bellarmine) is a man, secundum quid Bell. d. iustif. l. 5. c. 18. Puer dici
potest homo secundum quid, si ad virum perfectum comparetur. d. Espenc. com. 1.
Tim. digres. l. 2. ^. 7. p. 275.
: So your Pope became not a perfect Antichrist, until the direful monster
Gregory 7. and after him Paschalis 2. Adrian 4. Alexander 3. Boniface the 8. of
hissing snakes, turned into fiery dragons. In those days the Pope became a
perfect Antichrist Plat. in Paschal. 2. Episcopus Florentinus affirm^u^t
Antichristum natum esse. Sabel. Aenead. 9. li. ^. Auentin. annal. l. 7.
Hildebrandus ante annos 170. prim^s, specie religionis Antichristi imperij
fundamenta ^ecit. Math. Paris. chron. Angl. in Henri. 3. Robertus Episcopus
Lincolniensis: nonne Antichristus merito dicendus est, etc.
, playing the hypocrite and tyrant in the Church, by these four actions. 1.
exalting himself as a King and Monarch over the house of God. 2. Making his
own word and definition of equal authority with the holy Scripture Grets.
def. Bell. de verb. dei definitio Papae, aeque authentica ac scriptura. P.
Cluniac. lib. 1. ep. 2. Eius testimonijs sicut Apostolicis, absque vlla
contradictione, acquiescendum est.
. 3. Usurping temporal jurisdiction over kings and civil states Papir.
masson. de episc. vrb. in Leo. 10. ex Longolio. Te nontam quasi pontif.
maximum, quam vt principem Romanum, id est, Regum omnium plane regem, etc.
. 4. Cruelly murdering the servants of Christ which denied obedience to his
traditions and tyranny.

Secondly, concerning Gregory the Great, we believe that he was superstitious
in diverse things, and entertained some erroneous conceits, which in process
of time became scandalls and occasioned others to err more dangerously: yet we
deny that himself was Antichrist, either generally, or in the principal
articles maintaining the same doctrine, which our adversaries at this present
do.

T. W. D. Humphrey Iesuitism. p. 2. Rat. 5. page 627.
, charge Augustine the monk with many Popish opinions, which he received
from Gregory: and the Centuries Centur. 6. Index at the word, Gregory.
tax Gregory with Popish and erroneous doctrine, in sundry articles.

Answ. It is true, that Gregory maintained diverse superstitious opinions, which
in process of time, by his followers were intended or increased, until they
became Antichristian: but he maintained no capital article of Popery in such
manner as the same is now professed. But admit that sundry of his opinions were
Popish, yet this disproueth not D. Whites assertion, affirming that the Roman
Church is varied from it self, as it was in the prime age, and as it held
since it became Antichristian; for besides these points, specified by you,
there be sundry other wherein the said Church is varied from it self, to wit,
the Supremacy, Adoration of images, Communion in one kind, the perfection of
the Scripture, etc.

T. W. But all this arises from an inward repugning of the Minister against
our Church, in regard of the unchangeable certainty and constancy of faith
professed by her: whereas the want thereof in our Adversaries religion is most
notorious: as appears not only from their several confessions, one ever
impugning another, but also from their different translations of their Bibles,
still made to sort with their faith, of the last edition, etc.

Answ. 1. Touching your concord and the Protestants supposed discord, we shall
inquire in the sections Untruth 7. and 7.
following. 2. To your objection taken from diversity of translations,
whereupon you would infer a mutability of faith, I answer: 1. The primitive
Fathers approved variety of translations, and themselves did frame and publish
them. S. Augustine says: Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 11. Quae quidem res,
plus adiunit intelligentiam, quam impediuit. Ioh. Arbor. Theosoph. tom. 1. l.
8. c. 11. Sacrae literae olim versae erant in vulgarem linguam, and eas
Hieronimus in Dalmaticam linguam vertit.
They who have translated the Hebrew into Greek may be numbered, but the Latin
interpreters are innumerable, which thing has rather helped understanding then
hindered it. Origens great work of compacting together the original texts,
with diverse translations, was highly commended by the primitive Church Epiphan.
haeres. 64. in principio. Sixtus Senens. Bibl. l. 3. Hexapla. Octopla.
. And when Saint Hierom after many other translated the Scriptures, who
reproved him but ignorance or malice? Secondly, many learned Papists, to wit,
Augustine Nebiensis, Pagnine, Vatablus, Arius Montanus: the Doctors of Rhemes,
and others in France, Poland and Germany, have translated the Scriptures, some
into Latin, and some into other languages Sixth. Senens. bib. l. 3. d.
Translat. Posseuin. biblioth. l. 2. c. 12.
. Thirdly, whereas you calumniate, saying: that we translate partially, and
with correspondence to our faith of the last edition, who (as Augustine Aug. in
Psalm. 80.
speaks) can hinder the forge of a seduced heart, to form what fancy it
lusts? and your tongues and pens are your own, etc. Psalm 12.4.

But for the thing it self: 1. The original texts are extant to reprove us,
if we go awry. 2. There be many precedent translations, Greek, Caldey, Latin,
and the primitive Fathers, and other Doctors of the Church, as guides to go
before us: Also the skillful linguists of every age, would control us, if we
should deal corruptly. 3. Touching matters in controversy, we freely offer to
be judged by former translations used by the Fathers, and by the translations
of Pagnine and Vatablus being Papists.

4. If the old Latin translation be authentical Trid. Council. sess. 4.
decret. 2.
, why have so many Popish Doctors impeached the credit thereof? Cardinal
Caietan Praefat. in Math.
, the learned of his age says, The vulgar edition of the new Testament is
many times unfaithful, or not to be trusted. Johannes Campensis the Hebrew
professor at Louan Praefat. in Psalm.
: The vulgar translation is unworthy to be accounted Saint Hieroms: and Vega:
Vega pro Council. Trid. l. 15. c. 9.
It was never the intent of the Trent Council to make the same authentical.

T.W. In respect of their wonderful mutabilitie, and variance among
themselves, whereby they indignifie and wrong the nature of true faith, we have
reason to demand of any of the professors, of what thinking he is, rather then
of what faith.

Answ. 1. Behold the misery of one blinded with superstition and partiality:
God never gives him grace to look back to his own faith, which cannot
possibly exceed the nature of opinion, depending only upon humane traditions
and fables: Gers. d. sig. Ruin. ecclesiae. sig. 8. Fabulae and non sanae
doctrinae sunt, quae non in Reuelatione spiritus sancti, sed secundum
traditionem hominum consistunt.
and the credit of a deceivable Pope. Can. loc. l. 5. c. 5. negat ex fide
certu^ esse quod pontifex errare non possit. Hadrian. 4. de sacr. Confirm. pa.
26. Certum est quod possit errare, in ijs quae tangunt fidem haeresim per suam
determinationem aut decretalem asserendo. Council. Basil. Resp. synodal. Alph.
Castro. cont haer. l. 1. c. 4. Non credo aliquem esse adeo impudentem
adulatorem Papae, vt ei tribuere velit ne errare possit. Gerson. de pot.
eccles. lect. 11.
And on the contrary, the faith of our Church is builded upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, and resolved into the very handwriting of the most
true God Aug. in Psalm. 144. Chirographum Dej, quod omnes transeuntes legerent.
; and received from thence by the sacred means which Christ has left to
search out the truth by, can be nothing else but Ghristian Orthodox, and
infallible faith. Secondly if famous Papists themselves say true, times have
been, not long since, wherein diverse of the court of Rome have not had so much
as an opinion of the truth of Christian faith: for thus writes Petrarch the
Archdeacon of Parma; Fra. Petrarch. ep. 13. Fabulosa omnia, etc. Inter naenias
habentur, etc. Conrad. Clingius. lo. com. l. 3. c. 52. Sacram. scripturam
reputant fabulas, and in ea meditantes iudicant phantasticos.
Faith, charity, hope of eternal life, and those things which are reported of
hell, etc. are reputed fabulous and trifling toys among these men.

Untruth. 7. Touching Protestants concord in matters of Religion.
T. W. Dissentions among the Protestants are not merely personal, or about
points a diaphorous, but they concern most profound doubts of their religion;
since otherwise they would never anathematize or condemn one another with such
acerbity of words. And it is affirmed, by D. Willet Medit. in Psalm. 122.
, D. Whitaker De Ecclesia q. 5. c. 2.
, and Luther Cont. Louan. these. 27. and tom. 7. Wittemb. pa. 381, etc. Et tom.
2. Germ. de coena. dom. p. 174.
, that the differences are not in small points of government and ceremony, etc.

Answ. 1. Master White acknowledges, that there be differences and iarres
among the Protestants Sect. 33. n. 2.
. 2. He denies that there is any such discord, or difference among them as
dissolueth the unity of faith, essential to the true Church. 3. The
difference among the Protestants is no other, then such as has formerly been
in the true Church of Christ Aug. de ciuit. dei l. 15. c. 5. proficientes,
nondumque perfecti inter se pugnare possunt, etc.
, since the Apostles age. 4. Coming home to the Church of England, he
affirms that there is no contrariety or iarres between the same and other
Protestant Churches; or at home in it self, in points of faith, meaning
(according to Stapleton Digress. 21.
, and Thomas Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 3. ar. 6. notab. 1. and 2.
their distinction) in primitive articles of faith, or about things essential
in the object of faith. But the difference is either in accidental, probable,
and secondary points, or touching things difficult in religion, for the
searching out of the verity whereof, it is profitable, that learned men
proceeding modestly, dispute pro and con Aq. 2. 2. q. 2. ar. 5.
: Or else the disagreement is personal, either among private men, or raised by
private men, schismatically and factiously against the Church. Stapl. Rel. c.
1. q. 3. ar. 6. licet and vtile est, de rebus difficilibus in Ecclesiam aliter
atque aliter disputare, nec hoc vnitatem violat, sed veritatem illustrat.


Now, what has D. Whites adversary to except against this? 1. If he dispute
the question of unity in it self, the Scripture, and Fathers, and the History
of the Church will convince him, that unity in the substance of faith and
religion observed by the firmest members of the Church, is simply necessary and
an essential property; and other unity is of the perfection and wel-being of
the Church, and yet contingent and variable, sometimes greater, sometimes
less; and at no time absolute in all the parts: and the same many times by
reason of the malice of wicked impes, is greatly wanting. In the days of
Constantine, wherein it is acknowledged by all men, that the visible Society
of Christians was a true Church, there happened so grievous and unseemly
contentions among the Bishops and Pastors: that the discord of Christians was
brought upon the stage, and religion derided and traduced by infidels Eusebius.
vita Constantin. l. 2. c. 60. and l. 3. c. 12. Socrat. hist. l. 1. c. 3.
Sozomen. hist. lib. 1. c. 15. Chrysostom. in 1. c. Gal. deridiculo facti sumus and
gentibus, and Iudaeis, dum ecclesia, in mill parts scinditur.
.

Saint Augustine acknowledges that the concord of godly men in this life,
wherein they are not perfect, but proficient, is sometimes interrupted with
discord, and dissentio^ arises even among brethren De ciuit. Dei, l. 15. c. 5.
and Saints Aug. in Psalm. 3.
. And there be diverse things, (says he) wherein the best learned and most
worthy defenders of the Catholic rule, without prejudice to the body of faith
do not accord, and one of them speaks more truly then another of the same
thing Aug. cont. Julian. l. 1. c. ^.
.

2. The Popish Priest endeavoring to impeach the truth of D. Whites assertion
in matter of fact, and concerning his report of the concord of the Church of
England: proceeds insufficiently in two respects. 1. He relates his
assertion imperfectly, omitting diverse branches thereof, as appears by my
former collection out of D. White, compared with this mangled relation of the
Popish Priest.

2. The testimonies produced out of D. Willet, D. Whitaker, and Luther,
contain no more then my brother acknowledges. 1. D. Willet blames some
private men, to wit, Master Hooker, etc. (how justly, let himself upon second
thoughts reuise:) for singular and new opinions. Secondly, he taxes the
Puritanes, for disturbing the peace of the Church about ceremonies: This
censure of D. Willet opposes not my brother, having for the general affirmed
the same; and such differences destroy not the unity of the Church, for two
reasons. 1. The latter strive, but prevail not, and therefore even as a
furious assault against an army strongly keeping his order and ranks: or
waves beating against a rock and dissolved into froath; so these blasts and
wafting encounters being resisted, vanish into nothing; the body and firm
parts of the Church, like an invincible army and immovable rock, still
persisting in unity. 2. The contrary disputations of private men, about hard
questions of Theology See Aug. epist. 19. de ciu Dei, li. 11. c. 19. de doct.
Christ. l. 1. c. 36. de Genesis ad. lit. c. 18. Hieron. ep. 13.
, impeach not the unity of the Church any more, then the contrary pleading of
Lawyers, subuerteth the public concord of the State.

D. Whitakers speaks of oppositions and contentions, used by learned men in
disputation for the finding out of the truth, and increasing knowledge, and
which your selves maintain to be lawful and profitable.

Luthers personal and fretfull speeches, proceeding from passion against such
as were contrary minded to him, prove that godly men have infirmities, and are
sometimes over bitter one against another: like as Cyprian was against Pope
Steven, calling him proud, ignorant, and of a blind and wicked mind Bell. d.
Pontif. l. 4. c. 7.
; and Epiphanius against Chrysostom Socrat. hist l. 6. c. 17. Niceph. l. 13.
cap. 17. and 21. Chrysostom. 2. Cor. hom. 27. Nomi na fratrum habemus, opera autem
hostium: and membra omnes dicimur, and sicut bestiae dissidemus.
: etc. But they are insufficient to demonstrate that Protestant Churches want
the note of unity; neither does condemning and anathematizing one another,
imply dissension in profound points of religion, but may proceed from affection
and want of charity: as appears by Pope Victor, proclaiming anathema against
the East Churches about an adiaphorous ceremony Eusebius. hist. l. 5 c. 23.
Niceph. hist. lib. 4. c. 28. Socrates. hist. lib. 5. c. 21. (...), etc. page
249.
: By Pope Stephen, and by Sergius, condemning their predecessor Formosus, and
raking him being defunct, out of his grave, etc Luitp. d. viti^ Pontif. Romans in
Formoso. Martin. Polon. in Sergio 3 Formosum e sepulchro extractum and in sede
Pontificali sacerdotaliter indutum, decollari praecepit, and in Tiberim
iactari, and omnes per ipsum ordinatos deordinauit, etc.
.

Untruth. 8. Touching the disagreement of Papists, in their faith.
T. W. The Doctor seeing his own synagogue torn in sunder with divisions and
contentions, and well knowing how prejudicial the want of unity is to the
true religion of Christ, (for God, is not a God of dissension, but of peace)
does maliciously endeavor to cast the like aspersion upon our Catholic
Church, saying; They which know Rome and Papistrie are sufficiently satisfied
in this matter, to wit, that the Papists live not in that unity which is
pretended: and he says, The contentions of our adversaries touch the faith,
and, the Papists are divided about the principal articles of the faith. But
contrary to this: D. Whitaker, D. Fulke, and Duditius, acknowledge our unity
and consent in the mysteries, and other fundamental points of religion, etc.
And Catholics must needs have unity, because they follow not their own
judgment, but the supreme resolution and current of the Church.

Answ. 1. I have maintained in the former section, that the Church of England,
has as great unity as the Primitive Church had: and wants nothing of that
unity which is essential and necessary to the being of the Church: and in
regard of the maine body and principal parts, our Church enjoys as perfect
unity, even in government, order, and the accidental branches of faith, as
any Church of Christ upon earth: neither is it distracted and torn asunder as
you declaime, but is an unanimous Society, according in the faith of the
Scripture, and in the faith and orderly government of the Primitive Church.

2. Your testimony taken out of the Apostle, to wit, God is not a God of
dissension, but of peace, 1. Cor. 14.33. concludes not as you would have it,
that there can be no discord in a true Church: for then the like assertion, to
wit, God is not the author of pride or envy, but of humility and charity:
would prove that there can be no pride or envy in the true Church. Phil. 1.15.

3. D. White affirming, that your contentions touch the faith, and are in the
principal articles of faith, etc: explicateth himself saying Digress. 24. n.
19.
: Your difference is in all the points of religion, wherein you differ from us,
and wherein Papistry properly consists. If therefore the matters in which you
and we differ, be articles of faith, as your Doctors affirm Bell. praefat.
oper. praefixa. Agendum est non de rebus leuibus, sed de grauiss.
quaestionibus, quae ad ipsa sidej fundamenta pertinent, etc.
; and the Trent Council, pronouncing anathema to the deniers, seems to
declare: Then D. White delivered no more then what he confirmed by many
particular instances, which you make no haste to answer.

4. The contrary testimonies produced by you, do not prove against D. White
that Papists have no contentions Gers. desect. viror. eccles. n. 54. Fides est
debilis, virtus imperfecta, schismatici abunda^t.
, (for your Doctors proclaim them in every question, which they handle, as
appears by Suarez, Henriquez, Vasques, Asorius, etc.) But that you have one
kind of unity, to wit, a superstitious and hypocritical crouching to the
Popes tribunal, which Protestants detest. But what can this avail you, when
the Turks at this day and the obstinate Jews are found as unanimous in their
sects as you are in your Popish superstition? And never boast of external
unity Hilar con. Auxent. Pulchra opinto vnitatis, sed quae euangelij and
Christi est. Aug. de verb. D. ser. 6. Haeretici, Iudaei and Pagani, vnitate^
fecerunt contra vnitate^.
, unless (as Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 1 (...), etc. page 118. gr.
speaks) you can prove the same to be in good, and for God.

Untruth. 9. Touching the Popes Supremacy.
T.W. The Doctor writes in his 27 digression thus: The Primitive Church did
not acknowledge the Popes supremacy. Here I see Master White will ever be
Master White. I mean, that he will be ever like unto himself, first in
coining, and after in maintaining most impudent untruths, etc.

Answ. My Brother did not only write, that the Primitive Church acknowledged
not Papal primacy, but confirmed the same with weighty authorities, all which
you cowardly dissemble and ouerlooke; and yet to salve the credit of your
cause, you bandy words, and then (skipping over the premises and proofs,)
assault the conclusion with certain broken testimonies: but that the
imbecillitie of your proceeding may the better appear, first I will deliver
the state of the question, and then examine your proofs.

The mystery of Papal primacie challenged by your late Doctors, is, That the
Pope is a visible monarch over all the militant Church Bellar. Recog de sum.
Pontif. ex illis verbis, Ioh. 21. Pasce oues meas, colligi authoritatem
imperandi regio more. Bos. de sig. l. 18. c. 1.
. And his monarchy implies these particulars. 1. That all Ecclesiastical power
both of order and jurisdiction, is derived from him, to all other Bishops and
Pastors of the Church B ll^rm. de eccles l. 3. c. 5. Bonauent. p 6. B^euiloq.
ca. 12. Great. d 19. c. ita Dominus. P. Blesensis epist. 4^. Durand 4. d. 24. q.
5. Alu. Pelag de planct. eccles. l. 1. ar. 58.
. 2. That he has a proper and direct authority over all the Christians in the
world, both Ecclesiastical and secular Bald. prooem. decretal. n. 6. Est
Dominus Dominorum, and quae cunque potestas est sub c^elo, est in summo
Pontifice. Ioh Bromiard. sum. praedic. c. 17.
, the principal actions whereof, are these following. 1. To frame and set out
for all Christians the rule of faith and good manners Bellarm. de Pontif. l. 4
c. 1. Grets def. ib. page 1015. Azor. instit. mor. 2. l. 5. c 4. Stapl. dupl.
l. 2. c. 10.. 3.
: To point out the books of Canonical Scripture and the traditionary word
Gregor. 7. ap. Baron. 11. anno 1076 n. 33. Nullum capitulum, nullusque liber
canonicus habetur absque eius authoritate. Zanc. Justinian. de obed. cap. 12.
Ioh. Capistran. de author. Pap. and Council. fol. 93.
, and to deliver the sense and interpretation hereof, and to conclude and
determine all controversies of religion with an inerring sentence.

2. To prescribe and enact laws to the whole Church, equally obliging the
conscience to obedience with the divine law Bellar. de Pontif. l. 4. c. 15.
: 3. To exercise external power of directing and commanding as aforesaid: and
also of censure and correction over all Christians. To grant dispensations
Azor. instit. mor. 2. l. 5. c. 3.
, indulgences, absolution from oaths Id. part. 1 l. 11. c. 9. Syluest. sum. v.
iuramentum. Lesseus de instit. iur. l. 2. c. 42. dub. 12. Gratian. c. 15. q. 6.
c. Nos sanctorum. Baron. 11. ann. 1076. n. 33.
, vows, etc. To canonize Saints: institute religious Orders, deliver from
Purgatory Azor. 2. l. 5. c. 26.
: to call and confirm general Councels Ib. lib. 4. cap. 13.
, to dethrone and conculcate Kings Stapl. Rel. c. 3 q. 5. ar. 2. conclus. 6.
Potest nouos principes facere and alios tollere. Baron. an. 1076. n. 32. Azor.
2. l. 10. c. 2 and l. 4. c. 19. Extra de mayor. and obed. c. Vnam sanctam.
Gloss. in fine.
, etc.

And this is the Popes primacie which Doctor White affirms, that the
primitive Church did not acknowledge.

T. W. The Popes, by the acknowledgement of our learned Adversaries, did in the
400. year after Christ (which age for wisdom and gravity, is most approved
by the grave judgment of the Kings Majesty Stapl. Rel. c. 3 q. 5. ar. 2.
conclus. 6. Potest nouos principes facere and alios tollere. Baron. an. 1076.
n. 32. Azor. 2. l. 10. c. 2 and l. 4. c. 19. Extra de mayor. and obed. c. Vnam
sanctam. Gloss. in fine.
) exercise authority and Sovereignty Confer. before his Majesty. page 97.
over all other Churches. This appears by Julius Bishop of Rome, who, as
Cartwright writes Reply 2. p. 1. page 501. 502.
ouer-reached in claiming the hearing of causes, that did not appertain unto
him: and of Damasus he shamed not to write, that the Bishop of Romes sentence,
was above all other to be attended for in a Synod.

Answ. Omitting your cleanly skipping over the first 300. years of the
primitive Church, coloring the matter with a speech of his Majesty's, etc. I
answer to the testimony of Master Cartwright. 1. That this Writer (such as he
is) affirms not that Pope Julius or Damasus, enjoyed the supremacy usurped by
later Popes: But he says of Pope Celestine, That as Julius had done at the
Council of Antioch, so he ouer-reached in claiming the hearing of causes which
appertained not unto him. And of Damasus, That he shameth not to write, that
the Bishop of Romes sentence was above all other, to be attended in a synod.

But first, your consequent from claiming to having, is claudicant; for Pope
Paul the fifth claims many things at this day, which the Church of Christ
will no more yield him, then the African Churches formerly yielded Zosimus and
Celestine their claim Council. Afric. ca. 101.
. 2. The soueraignety claimed by these Popes, Read Bishop Bilson against the
Jesuits apolog. page 43. Theod. Balsamon. Nomenclat. tit. 8. Socrat. hist l.
2. c. 5. and 13. Trip. hist. l. 4. c. 9. Sozom. hist. l. 3. c. 9. Niceph. hist.
l. 9. c. 5. and l. 11. c 13. Read Jewel def. page 470. Whitak. de script. page
325.
was not the same which modern Popes challenge.

T. W. Saint Hierome speaking of Damasus, says; I following none chief but
Christ, hold the fellowship of communion with your blessedness, that is with
Peter's chair: upon that rock I know the Church to be built, whosoever shall
eat the paschall Lamb out of that house, is a profane person, etc. whosoever
gathers not with you scatters Hieron. ep. 57.
.

Answ. Saint Hierom Read B. B^lson of subject p 60. D. Rainold ag. Heart, chapter 7.
diu. 8. and chapter 8. diuis. 6. Erasm. schol. Hieron. ep. 57. Super illam petram,
non super Romam: nam fieri potest, vt Roma quoque degeneret: sed super eam
fide^ qua^ Petrus professus est, and hactenus Romana seruauit ecclesia. Hieron.
1. cont. Iouinian. Dicis, super Petrum fundatur ecclesia, licet idipsum in alio
loco, supra omnes Apostolos fiat. Ioh. Arbor. to. 1. Theosoph. l. 5. c. 5.
consulting with Damasus about the doctrine of the Trinity, which was opposed
at this present by the Arrians, professes that he holds communion with him,
being his Bishop and Ordinary, and who succeeded Peter in the chair; that is,
in the ministry and teaching of wholesome doctrine. 2. He says, that the
Church was built upon the rock of heavenly doctrine and verity; first taught
by Peter and the other Apostles, and now professed by Damasus. 3. That
whosoever varieth from this doctrine, and the communion of Damasus now
professing the same, is a profane person and enemy of Christ. But how do these
things prove such a Supremacy as our Adversaries desire?

T. W. The Centuries Centur. 5. c. 10. 1014.
acknowledge, that Theodorit a Greek Father, being deposed by the Council of
Ephesus, making his appeal to Pope Leo, was by him restored to his
Bishopric: And Chrysostom appealed to Innocentius, who decreed Theophilus,
Chrysostom. his enemy, to be de deposed and excommunicated.

Answ. 1. Theodorit being in misery, supplicates to Leo Bishop of Rome Theod.
ep. 113 ad Leon. Cent. 5. c. 10.
, being the first of the Patriarchs, and in grace with the Emperor, and highly
respected, because of the Orthodoxe faith, (which he learnedly propugned
against Heretics) desiring to be relieved by his mediation and personal
authority, which accordingly Leo performed. 2. The Centuries saying, that Leo
restored him, affirm nothing of the manner, neither say, yt he restored him by
Papal authority; but signify rather that he restored him in regard of his
own consent, and approbation of his innocence, and by motion to the Eastern
Bishops. And this appears to be true, because Theodorit is actually restored
in the Council of Chalcedon Chalced. Council. act. 8. Gloriosissimi iudices
dixerunt, omnis iam dubitatio de Theoderito soluta est, quippe Nestorium coram
nobis anathematizauit, and a sanctissimo archepiscopo senioris Romae, Leone
su^ceptus est.
, and not before.

Touching Chrysostomes appeal, the Centuries speak not in the page alleged
by you: and the report which is made concerning the excommunication of the
Emperor Arcadius, and Eudoxia his wife, and Theophilus, etc. is taken out of
Nicephorus, a late Author, and wants credit for these reasons: 1. Because it
is omitted by Theodorit, Socrates, and Sozomen, Historians of that time, and
which purposely wrote the whole Story of Chrysostom Socrat hist l. 6. Theod.
hist. l. 5. Sozom. hist. l. 8. Trip. hist. l. 10.
. 2. Because other grave Historians Otho Frising. l. 6. c. 35 Lego and relego
Romans imperatorum gesta, and nusqua^ inuenio quenquam eorum, ante hunc Henricum
a Pontif. Romans execratu^. Espenc. com. 1. Tim. l. 2. digr. 8. page 275 Primus
Hildebrandus, nouo, etc.
affirm, that the first Emperor excommunicated by any Pope, was Henry the
fourth.

T. W. Thus we find how dissonant our Ministers assertion, touching the
primacie, is to the practice of the primitive Church, etc. And that Saint Peter
and his successors were ever to be accounted, the visible bases or foundations
of Gods Church, and all other Bishops but Columns. And as this foundation
immediately supports these pillars, so these pillars, the rest of this
spiritual edifice and structure.

Answ. 1. You make a distinction between bases or foundations, and Columns:
against which I object two things. 1. How will you reconcile your self with
Doctor Stapleton Stapl. Rel. c. 3. q 1. ar. 1 ad. 4.
, who says; All the Apostles were foundations, but all were not rocks? 2. If
your distinction be solid, then Peter was no Column, but only a basis or
foundation; and the other Apostles were only Columns, but no foundations. But
the Scripture confuteth this, calling Peter a Column, Gal. 2.9. and all the
Prophets and Apostles foundations (...) old transl columnae, (...).
Ephe. 2.20. Revel. 21.14.

2. From a basis and foundation of the Church, by way of ministry and
doctrine, you cannot prove a visible Monarch in your transcendent acceptance,
because all the Prophets and Apostles were foundations; Ephesians. 2.20. and yet no
Monarchs. 2. From a bare and naked succession of place, founded only upon
report of men Dom. Bannes 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 10. Sot. 4. d. 24. q. 2. ar. 5. Aug.
Triumph. and Th. W^ldens. cited by Cordubensis l. 4. q 1. de potest. Pap. prop.
8. d 1. Zibarel. de schis page 551. Hunc esse Papam, vel illum, non est de iure
diuino.
, you cannot conclude a real succession of your Pope to Saint Peter, in the
perfection and latitude of his spiritual power, more then Caiphas could prove,
that he was the legitimate successor of Aaron in maintaining truth, when he
condemned Christ and his Apostles, because he locally succeeded him in outward
priesthood Hieron. epist. 3. did. 4. Non sanctorum sunt filij, qui tenent loca
sanctorum, sed qui exercent opera eorum.
.

Untruth 10. Whether Gregory the Great impugned the present Supremacy.
T. W. Master White for the impugning of the Popes Soueraignetie, among other
things, says; Gregory had no such jurisdiction as now the Pope usurps, but
detested it in John of Constantinople, and in himself, etc. where the Reader
may be instructed, that the reason why this Gregory is by some supposed to
disauow the doctrine of the primacy, is, in that he rejects in John of
Constantinople, the title of universal Bishop as sacrilegious, which his
saying was grounded only in taking the name of universal Bishop, to exclude
the true being of all other Bishops, as is confessed by Andreas Brixius De
Eccles. l. 2. c. 10.
.

Answ. Here is a beggarly and desperate shift: for Gregory the Great,
chokingly and irrepliably confounds the present Papacy, and that by two
assertions.

1. He affirms, that no Bishop ought to be universal, either in title or
jurisdiction. 2. He confesses himself to be the servant and subject of the
Emperor.

Touching the former, He calls the title of universal, profane Greg. l. 4.
ep. 36 Nullus decessorum meorum hoc prophano vocabulo vti voluit, etc.
, proud Ib epist. 36.
, foolish Ep. 38.
, Antichristian Lib. 6. ep 30.
, blasphemous Lib. 4. ep. 32.
, scelestious, etc. Touching jurisdiction over the other Patriarchs, He
acknowledges that he has no power to command them, but only as a Brother to
advise them Lib. 7. ep 30. sicut iustistis: quod verbum iussionis, peto a meo
auditu remouere, quia scio quis sum, qui estis. Loco enim fratris estis,
moribus patres. Non ergo iussi, sed quae vtilia visa sunt indicare volui, etc.
. Concerning the latter, no Minister in the Church of England can carry
himself more submisly to the Kings Majesty, then Gregory the Great did to
the Emperor and his wife, acknowledging, that the imperial power was higher
then any other, and that himself and all men were subject to the same by the
ordinance of God, and that he was the servant and subject of the Emperor Lib.
2. ep. 61. Ego indignus pietatis vestrae famulus, etc. Dominorum legem su^cepi
etc. potestas super omnes homines dominoru^ meorum pi^tati coelitus data est.
Sacerdotes meos tuae manui commisi. Ego iussioni subiectus. Imperatori
obedientiam praestiti. vide l. 4. ep. 31.32.
.

But the Popish priest says, as Bellarmine Bellar. de Pontif l. 2. c. 31.
and others have done before him, that John the Bishop of Constantinople meant
to ingrosse all Episcopal authority to himself, and to exclude the true being
of all other Bishops, making them his Vicars, and no Bishops.

Answ. 1. John of Constantinople challenged no more then (as Gregory says
Greg. l. 4 ep. 36. Mihi per sanctam Chalcedonensem synodum Pontifici Aponolicae
sedis: hoc vniuersalitatis nomen oblatum est.
) the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, would have yielded his
predecessors: but they never intended in that offer, to exclude themselves from
being Bishops, and to become Vicars, but only to yield him superiority over
them. 2. What John challenged at this time, Boniface the third obtained
afterward under Phocas Plat. in Bonif 3. ^onifacius a Phoca Imperatore
obtinuit, etc. Vt seeds B Petri, quae est caput omnium ecclesiarum, ita and
diceretur and haberetur ab omnibus, quem quidem locum ecclesia
Constantinopolitana vindicare conabatur.
; which was no more but to have other Patriarchs subject to him. 3. It is
confessed by Cardinal Cusanus Card. Cusan. concord. Cath. l. 2. c 32.
, that Gregory condemned John of Constantinople, because he desired to have
all other subject to him. 4. It is plain by Gregory's words, that the
Patriarch of Constantinople did only challenge primacy over other Bishops, and
not ye subuersio^ of the Episcopal order: for thus he speaks Greg. l. 4. ep.
38. Cuncta eius membra conaris tibi supponere, etc. Cupis teipsum praeponere,
etc.
; S. Paul reproues the Corinthia^s, because they would subject themselves to
other heads then Christ; what will you therefore answer Christ the universal
head of the Church at the day of judgment, which endeavor by the name of
universal, to subject or place under you all his members? And then presently
produces the example of Lucifer; who, says he, Nulli subesse, and solus
omnibus praeesse, etc. would be ruler over all, and subject to none.

T. W. That Gregory did both claim and practice the primacie, is acknowledged
by the Centurists, etc.

Answ. 1. The Centurists Centur. 6. c 7. de primatu, page 440.
confirm by diverse examples, that the Roman Bishop attained not the supremacy
in this age.

2. They censure Gregory and other Popes for boasting too much of the
excellency and pre-eminence of the Roman Sea, and for usurping over other
Churches more the^ was meet: But none of the particulars wherewith they tax
Gregory, do prove, that he challenged the supremacy which our Adversaries at
this present maintain.

1. Appointing watch over the whole world by way of counsel, instruction, and
brotherly admonition, as the first of the Patriarchs, or as the first member of
the universal Church, or over the whole world by a Synecdoche, Luke 2.1. will
not prove Supremacy more then S. Paul's taking care for all churches, shows
him to have been a visible Monarch. 2. Cor. 11.28.

2. To be called head of all Churches Gregor. Regist l. 4. c. 4. Paulus ca put
nationum. Prud. Bethelem caput orbis. Cyril. tom. 4. ep. 5. Episcoporum caput.
, imports not papal domination: for it may be given to men in regard of
praeeminence in place and order, or in respect of gifts and graces; and it may
also imply such authority over others, as is common to more then one, etc.

3. The Centurists were mistaken about the Constantinopolitan Church, for
Bizansenus primas in Gregory Lib. 7. ep. 64.
is not the Patriarch of Constantinople, but the Primate of Afric, as the
Gloss of the Canon law Gratian. d. 22. de Constantinopol.
, lately set forth by Gregory the thirteenth, and Baronius Baron. an. 599. n. 4.
, Binius Binius tom. 2. council. page 508.
, etc. affirm.

4. To command Archbishops, to place Legates, to appoint Synods, etc. was done
by the Roman Bishop as a Patriarch, and the other Patriarchs within their
circuit might do the like. And thus none of the things here objected prove
Supremacy, as the same is now challenged by the Pope.

Untruth 11. Doctor White challenged, for saying Papists are more vicious then
Protestants.
T. W. For the extenuating and lessening of the sinfulnes of the Protestants,
the Doctor much extolleth their imputative and supposed virtues, and as much
depresseth the lives of Catholics in general, and thus he intituleth that
leaf, The Protestants people as holy as the Papists.

Answ. You begin this Section with untruth, and prosecute the same with
falsification throughout.

1. Doctor White neither extenuates the sinful lives of Protestants, nor
mentions imputative virtues: and whereas you covertly reproach the Protestants,
teaching the imputation of Christ's obedience in the matter of our redemption
and justification, Esa. 53.5. Romans 5.19, it had been more reasonable for you,
1. to have consulted Augustine Aug. in Psalm. 118. conc. 3. and enchirid. c. 41.
and Bernard Bern. in Cant. c. 23. and epist. 190 Omnes mortui sunt, vt vnius
satisfactio omnibus imputetur.
, yea sundry of your own Doctors Vega de iustif. l 15. ca. 2. Stapl. de
iustif. l. 7. c 9. Aliquid singular est in illa iustitia, and obedie^tia
Christi, qua pro nobis satisfecit, etc. illa enim per communicationem sic
nostra est, vt perinde nobis imputetur, ac si nos ipsi satisfecistemus, etc.
Less. de just. iur. l. ^. c. 1. d. 2. Voluntas Christi, qui est caput, ipsis
(in fantibus) veluti membris tribuitur, cu^ alia^ habere nequeunt. Greg. Val.
to. 2. d 8. q. 5. p. 4. Infantes, and ij qui perpetuo caruerunt vsu rationis,
etc. Vt per alienam Christi voluntatem and obedientiam iusti constituantur,
etc. page 1304.
, before you had quarrelled us. 2. To have considered whether it be not more
credible, that Christ's merits are imputed to the paenitent and believers, then
that the virtues of Dominicke, Francis, Katherine, and other Saints are imputed
Azor. instit. mor. 1. l. 4. c. 11. Anton hist. p. 3. tit. 23. c. 2.. 1. Vide
Conrad. Cling. loc. com. l. 3. c. 52.
.

2. You affirm, that most of the testimonies produced by the Doctor from
Popish Authors against your wicked lives, are found in Sermons or exhortations,
uttered in the heat of amplification, and delivered generally, and without any
reference or comparison to the lives of Protestants.

Answ. Two of those testimonies only are alleged out of Sermons; the rest are
positive and Historical speeches, seriously uttered by famous Papists, who
testified that, whereof themselves were eye and ear witnesses.

T. W. I will prove from the Protestants own confessions, that the lives of
Catholics are generally more virtuous then the Protestants: for Luther Dom.
26. post Trin. Dom. 1. Aduent. Sermon. conuiual. page 55.
says; The world is grown worse and worse, etc. and whereas in Popery people
did willingly follow good works, now they do contrary, etc. And Iacobus
Andrea Conc. 4. in c. Luc. 21.
complains; That they do not exercise any good works, but in stead of
fasting spend their time in drinking, and turn praying into swearing, etc.

Answ. You have filched Cocc. the saur. Cath. l. 8. ar. 12. Canus loc lib. 6 c.
8. Quasi non a Prophetis saepe populus arguatur, in quo multi essent, ad quos
repraehensio, nullo modo attineret.
these stale and ouerworne allegations from Brierly, and both he and you
pervert the same against the Authors meaning, who intend not thereby to censure
all Protestants, as delinquent in this manner, but they accuse only the
hypocritical and imperfect members of the Church, which appertain to the
same, as the chafe and tares to the Wheat. And such reproves as these, are
usual in the primitive Fathers, who notwithstanding intend not thereby to
disgrace the godly members of the Church, but only to rebuke the wicked.
Cyprian says Cypr. de lapsis. n. 4. and ep. 8. Fecit Dominus noster voluntatem
Pat^is, and nos non faci^ us Domini voluntatem. patrimonio and lucro students,
superbia^ sectantes, aemulationi and dissentioni vacantes, simplicitatis and
fidei negligentes, saeculo verbis solum, and non factis renunciantes,
vnusquisque sibi placentes, and omnibus displicentes.
; All sorts of people gave themselves to worldliness, and forgetting what the
faithful did in the Apostles days, and what they ought at all times to do,
they gave themselves to increasing their patrimony with insatiable
covetousness, and there was not any sincere faith to be found in Priests, nor
any mercy in men's deeds. And Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 36 1. Cor. Aug. Psalm. 30.
Qui sunt inimici Ecclesiae? Pagani, Iudaei. Omnibus peius viuunt mali
Christiani, etc. Chrysostom. 2. Cor. hom. 27. Sicut corpus mortuum Ecclesiae video
multitudinem abiectam, and quemadmodum in corpore recens mortuo, est videre
oculos manus, pedes, ceruicem and caput, sed nullum membrum facit quod debet:
ita and hic omnes fideles praesentes, sed non est efficax fides. Feruorem enim
extinximus, and corpus Christi mortuum fecimus.
; The Church in former days was a very heaven, the divine spirit guiding all
things in it, etc. but we have only some small remnants hereof. And the Church
seems to be like a woman, which is decayed and fallen from her ancient
happiness, and retains only chests and old caskets, as tokens or badges of
the treasures and happiness, which are wasted and lost.

2. The said Authors words being uttered by Rhetorical amplification, in
sermon fashion, must not be set upon ye tenters, but confined to their true
meaning, which was rather by such inuectiues, to deter people from sin, and
to set before them the ugliness of sin, in those who were lately come from
Popish superstition, and professed reformation: In whom even ordinary offenses
were heinous, by reason of this circumstance.

But we are able to produce literal assertions, both out of your Doctors and
Stories, which directly and historically charge the main body of your Popish
Church, with general and monstrous wickedness.

Bernard says Apolog. ad Gulielm. Abbat.
; We have not only lost the virtue of ancient religion, but we retain not so
much as the appearance thereof. And Gerson Gers. p. 1. sermon. de Circumcis.
consid. 1. Et de potest. eccles. lect 10. Et part. 2. sermon. de vita Cleric. Et
torn. 4. epist. Brugis scripta.
; The state of the Church in our days, is wholly become brutish, and all the
vigor of Ecclesiastical discipline is languished, withered, and faded away; and
the Churchmen which should reform the world, are become more vile then any
other: and from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, the ouzing
matter of filthiness has ouerspread the whole body. Matthew Paris Hist. Ang in
Henric. 3. page 353. and 441.
: The Church of Rome is become like a shameless and common strumpet,
confounding right and wrong, setting all things to sale, regarding neither
justice nor honesty, accounting usury for small, and symony for none offense.

And many modern Papists testify the like. Dubliuius Hodoepor. Hierusal.
prolog. ad lector.
says; Even among our selves the ancient flame of charity is not only cooled
but extinct, and there seems to be left no small tracke or footstep of former
piety and faith. And Fatius the Jesuit De mortif. c. 4. page 35. Vide Stell.
in Luc. 17. page 182 and 205. Espenc. com. Tit. 1. digress. 2. page 71. Adam
Sasboth. hom. 3. super Scriptur. Eritis mihi sancti. Innocent. 3. sermon. 1.
fest. Pentecost. Ecce mundus fere totus liquefactus est vitijs, fere
liquefactus totus in peccatis. Nam superabundauit iniquitas, and refriguit
charitas multorum, etc. Bergom. supplem. chron. lib. 13. ann. 1218. Tanta
clericorum and improborum hominum licentia, vt nulla religionis facies, in
ecclesia Dei dignosceretur, etc. Ruard. Tapper. orat. 10. page 373. Agnoscimus,
and ingenue consitemur, etc. in corpore ecclesiae, a planta pedis vsque ad
verticem capitis, non esse sanitatem, and corrupta esse omnia, etc.
; There is such penury of men, living after the rule of reason, that one had
need have a candle to find them out.

T. W. Let us a little enter more particularly into the courses of such our
Ministers, as from whom we are to expect the greatest satisfaction in this
point: that so in an even libration of the matter, the Reader may rest fully
satisfied, and Master White more clearly and irrepliably convinced of his
former untruth, etc. I will content my self only with the example of Zuinglius
and other Ministers of Heluetia Zuingl. tom. 1. supplic. euangel. ad ep.
Constant. Et paraenes. ad com. Heluet. ciuitat.
, who preaching our new Evangelical doctrine to that Commonwealth, petitioned
to the State in this manner: We earnestly request, that the use of marriage be
not denied unto us, who feeling the infirmity of the flesh, perceive that the
love of chastity is not given to us of God: for if we consider the words of
the Apostle, we shall find with him no other cause of marriage, then to
fulfill the lustful desires of the flesh, which to burn in us we may not
deny, seeing that by means thereof we are made infamous before the
congregation; for the love not of lust, but of chastity, lest that the souls
committed to our charge, by example of our sensuality, should be any longer
offended. Wherefore seeing we have made trial, that the weakness and
infirmity of our flesh has bin (O the grief) the cause of our falling, etc.
hitherto we have tried, that the gift of chastity has been denied us. We are
not otherwise of such uncivil conversation, that we should be evil spoken of
among the people committed to our charge, this one point excepted. We have
burned so greatly, that many things we have committed unseemly: we cannot be
charged for any wickedness, this point only excepted.

They insisted further with the Heluetians in the like Dialect, etc. Since
according to the doctrine of our reverend Father Luther, A slander. These words
are none of theirs.
(which we are bound to teach and practice) nothing is more sweet and loving
upon earth then a woman: Alas, why should we, who have of late revealed ye
Gospel of Christ, heretofore so long eclipsed, be reco^pensed therefore with
the want of that most delightful and natural comfort of a woman, being forced
to imitate the superstitious Papist, in embracing a votarie and barren life? Or
why should the Heluetian state so severely exact at our hands, that we who only
incorruptly preach the Christian faith, should only herein be deprived of our
Christian liberty? Heu quanta patimur!

Answ. Here this Painter has used his black art, in pourtraying a Chimaera or
Idol for his friends to stare upon. For the discovery of whose falsehood, the
Reader is to be advertised of these particulars.

1. That he has played the falsarie in translating and alleging the words of
Zuinglius, and ye rest. They say the desire of chastity, meaning by chastity
single life Studium castitatis, etc. Socrat. hist. l. 1. c. 8.
, (that is, a mind and purpose to lead a single life) is not given us by God.
The Popish Priest racketh their words, as though they affirmed, they had no
love of honesty or chastity in general.

2. He produces them, as saying; There is no other cause of marriage delivered
by Saint Paul, but to satisfy the lustful desires of the flesh; and then
despitefully enstileth them illuminated brethren. But the Ministers say, If we
consider the words of Paul, 1. Cor. 7. we shall in him find no other cause of
matrimony Altisiod. sum. l. 3. tract. 7. c. 6. q. 6. Tempore Apostoli erat
matrimonium ad remedium tantum.
, then the boiling heat, or burning of the flesh to lust: that is, Saint Paul
writing to the Corinthians, does in that seventh Chapter mention no other cause
of using matrimony, but to be a remedy to restrain inordinate lust, in such
as have not obtained the gift of continency from God: as if he should say;
although single life have many commodities, and in these times of persecution,
especially be very profitable, yet I prefer honesty before any other
commodity, and thereupon for the repressing of inordinate lust, I allow
matrimony to all such as have not the gift of continency. And other necessary
cause of marriage (at this present) I make none but this.

See how wretchedly this Impe of Antichrist peruerteth their words; for that
which they say of repressing lust, he detorteth to the satisfying of the lusts
of the flesh. The Heluetian Ministers reason in this manner: All people ought
to have liberty to embrace that state of life, wherein they may use the means
which God has appointed to preserve them from sin. But the means appointed
by God, to preserve such as have not the gift of continency, from secret
burning or open filthiness, being sin, is matrimony; and Saint Paul names no
other cause of choosing wedlock before single life, but only this. Therefore
both Ministers and all other people, according to Saint Paul's doctrine, are to
be permitted their Christian liberty in the matter of wedlock, for the
repressing of sin.

3. The third abuse of this Popish Priest, is yet more impudent; for in the
last place he has himself coined and composed, an abusiue speech, which he
produces as uttered by the Heluetians; and then flings dirt and dung about
him, crying, libidinous, and goatish Ministers, etc.

But if the Reader please to peruse the writings of Zuinglius Tom. 1.
paraenesis ad com. Heluet. ciuit. Supplic. ad epise Constant.
, from whence this sycophant has pared his broken sentences; he shall, if he
carry an honest mind, find nothing uttered lewdly or unseemly; yea, the whole
discourse breathing honesty and virtue: The Ministers esteem and honor single
life, in all such as have the gift of continency Castitatem ipsam, praeclarum
rarumque donum Dei esse non negamus, and illis magnopere cong^atulamur, qui
tantam in seipsis gratiam experiuntur.
, and require no more but that, whereas in popery the Clergy by sale or
permission, generally retained Concubines Vetus Heluetiorum institutum, qui
nouum aliquem sacrorum antistitem recepturi, iniungere eidem con sueuerunt, vt
co^cubinam habeat propriam, ne aliarum vxores vaga libidine comprimat. Nos non
libidinis oestro excitati, sed honestatis veraeque pudicitiae amore permoti.
Quod si voluptati hac in re voluissemus indulgere, nunquam essemus passuri,
capistro vxorum implicari, etc.
, and lived in brothelsome impuritie with many women, that they might have the
liberty of marriage, and lead a chaste and honest life.

Concerning the speeches in particular, I answer, 1. These men particularly
confess their incontinencie: and did not David and Paul acknowledge, the one
his adultery, the other his blasphemy and persecution of Christ's Church? 2.
They desire to live in a married state of life, according to Gods ordinance and
commandment. 1. Tim. 3.2. 1. Cor. 7.2. That they might neither defile their
own conscience with burning and filthiness: nor by scandalous and dishonest
life, discredit their profession and offend others.

3. They utter not much more of themselves in this matter, then some ancient
Fathers have done: and popish Votaries and Saints have said far more.

Gregory Nazianzene Greg. Naz. carm. aduers. carnem. and carm. de rebus suis.
Baron. ann. 389. n. 13.
, complains that in his old age, he was vexed with unchaste and libidinous
motions, and had much ado to keep his body in subjection, S. Hierom says
Epist. 22. ad Eustoch.
, that he reckoned it no shame to confess his frailty: acknowledging that his
mind burned with unclean desires, and that the flames of lusts boiled within
him, and he professes more then once that he was no virgin Ep. 50.
Virginitatem in coelum fero, non quia habeam, etc. Epist. 43. Ego lapsus sum.
. Bernard says, that he was never able to fly the lusts of the flesh, and
that they did always pursue him. Anselme Meditation. Tu anima mea perfida Deo,
periura Dei, adultera Christi, de virginitatis sublimitate miserabiliter
demissa es, in barathrum fornicationis, etc. Delectatus es in volutabro
turpitudinis.
confesses, that he had lost his virginity, and defiled his soul with
fornication, and wallowed in the dungeon of uncleanness, and been perfidious
to God, perjured (or a vow-breaker) and an adulterer to Christ, etc. S. Francis
Legend aur. de S. Francis. Bonau. and Sur. de eod. cap 5. Antonin. sum. hist.
tit. 24. c. 2.. 1.
the devout limitor, was so oppressed with lust, that he was feign to lie naked
in the snow to quench his flame; and to cast himself into a pond in a great
frost, that so he might subdue his bosom enemy. The golden Legend reports,
that Pope Legend. aur. c. 83. de sanct. Leone.
Leo the first, by the means of a woman kissing his hand, was so vehemently
tempted with lust, that he was feign to cut his hand off: but the virgin Marie,
having compassion of her high Priest, joined the hand to his body again.

T. W. Libidinous and goatish Ministers, whose very pens spumant venerem, and
with whom, even to meditate of a woman, is the center of your most serious
thoughts, etc. wholly absorpt in lustful and fleshly cogitations Greg. Naz.
orat. 4. in sanct. Baptism. Puritatis tibi ratio, etia^ inito matrimonio
constabit, etc. nec enim quia honor praestat virginitas, idcirco turpe and
ignominiosum est matrimonium, etc.
.

Answ. Ignatius Ignat. ep. ad Philadelph. Aug. con. Julian. lib. 5. c. 10. Bern
in Cant. ser. 66. Turpitudinem in solis existimant reputandam vxoribus: cu^ vel
sola sit ea, quae cum vxore est, quae turpitudinem excusat, etc.
says, Whosoever traduceth lawful marriage and procreation of children, by
the name of uncleanness or defilement, the same nourishes in his bosom the
apostating Dragon the Devil. The infamous terms of libidinous and goatish,
agree to the brothelsome impuritie of the Popish Synagogue Bern. de conuers.
cler. c. 29. Ber. in council. Rhem. Quae in occulto fiunt ab episcopis turpe e^
dicere, etc. masculi in masculos turpitudinem operantes etc.
, with whom it is more honest to keep 600. queanes Auent. annal. l. 5. Pro vna
vxore, sexcentas mulieres inire licebit. Coster. de coelib. c. 17. prop 9. Gr.
Val. op. de coelib. in fine.
, then to live with one wife: of which Bernard Bern. in Cant. ser. 66.
speaks; If you take away out of the Church honorable wedlock, and the
undefiled marriage bed, you fill the same with Concubinaries, ribbalds,
incestuou^ persons, Seminifluans Gers. par. 2. de pollutione diurna, and de
pollut. nocturna. Nauar. Man. c. 16. n. 6. 7. Siluest. verb. pollutio. Tolet.
instruct. ^ac. l. 5. c. 13.
, and Gonorrhoeans, yea with male Sodomitry, and all kind of uncleanness.

Untruth 12. Concerning auricular confession.
T. W. Discoursing of auricular confession, he says: That the primitive Church
knew it not, page 227 Digress. 33.
. But contrary to this, the Centurists Centur. 3. c. 6. col. 127.
do confess, that in the times of Cyprian and Tertullian, private confession
was used, even of thoughts and lesser sins. And Doctor Whitaker Cont. Camp.
Rat. 5.
writes, that most of the Fathers were in an error about confession, etc. Thus
we see how little blood was in Master Whites cheeks, etc.

Answ. Doctor White in the place alleged, says not as you charge him, but as
follows. Auricular confession was not received in the Fathers days, as
necessary to salvation, or as Christ's immediate commandment. 2. In disproofe
of his assertion, you bring testimonies concerning private confession, and he
speaks of Popish auricular confession.

The Protestants acknowledge, that private confession is profitable, yea many
times necessary for instruction and consolation Bellar. de poen. l. 3. c. 1.
. The difference between us is, touching Sacramental confession, consisting
of an entire and particular enumeration of all mortal sins, of thought,
word, and work, together with all material circumstances of the same, to be
made to a Roman Priest, to this end, that the Priest as a Judge may absolve the
sinner of the guilt of his sin Alex. Hal. 4. q. 18 m. 3. ar 1. Sacerdos iudex
and arbiter inter Deum and peccatorem. Ar. 2. Omne pec. est confitendum, sieve
occultum sieve manifessum: cordis, oris, operis etc Gers. opus. Tripartit. de
confess. Gabr. 4. d. 17. q. 1. Bonauent. 4 d. 17. and in confessional. de pura
consc Council. Trid. sess. 14. c. 5. Suar. 3. to 4. d. 22. n. 1. Wald. sum. q.
18. ar. 3. 4. 8. Tolet. instr. sac l 3. c 7. Lochmaier. paroch. page 33.
Quaedam monialis Abbatissa quae valde continenter vixit, obticuit vnum pecc.
carnis, ideo fuit aeternaliter damnata. Henriq. sum. mor. l. 5. and l. 6.
: And this manner of confession, urged as necessary to salvation, was unknown
to the primitive Church; neither do the Centurists or Doctor Whitakers affirm
the same, to have been used by the Fathers; but they speak of other
confession, and only censure some inconvenient speeches Whitak. cont. Camp.
Rat. 5. de poenitentia admodum incommode, etc.
of Cyprian and others, about satisfaction, wherein they seem to attribute too
much thereunto concerning expiation of sins.

And in the Centurists there is an apparent mistaking of Cyprian, about the
confession of thoughts and smaller sins Read D. Mortons Appeal, l. 2. c.
14.. 2. page 254.
.

Untruth 13. Concerning Fasting.
T. W. Our delicate Minister as a professed enemy Way to the Church. p. 224.
to all austeritie of life, writes thus against fasting: All antiquity can
witness, that in the primitive Church fasting was held an indifferent thing,
and every man was left to his own mind therein.

Ans. Doctor White was an enemy to your hypocrisy and superstition, and justly
condemned you in these particulars: 1. That you deliver a false definition of
fasting Salmero^. to. 4. p. 1. tr. 11. p 105. Nihil aliud est ieiunium, nisi a
carnibus abstinere. Llamas method p 3. cap. 5.. 22. Read my answer, par. 1.
chapter 2. 1. page ^8. 69.
.

2. That glorying as much as the Pharisees, and ascribing such transcendent
effects thereunto, yet indeed you retain the name and shadow thereof only,
without the substance and matter Cassan. defens. lib. de offic. boni viri, page
119. Lindan. Panopl. l 3 c. 11. Horant. loc cath l. 5. c. 11. Me loqui pudet de
hac virtute sacrosancta ieiunij, quae nomine tenus hodie in ecclesia
obseruatur, etc. neque apud nos qui merito ea defendimus, in vsu sunt, sancta
ieiunia, nisi tantun: modo secundum quandam externam caeremoniam. Putamus enim
nos ieiunare si semel in die, vsque ad ingluuie^ prandemus, probe poti and
melius pasti, non pro naturae sustentatione, aut vnius duntaxat diei, sed in
tanta quantitate, vt vel Miloni olim protribus diebus satisfacere potuisset.
Taceo qualitatem and quantitatem cibariorum, and condimentorum, quando iam
neque mare neque terra, neque aer, neque salsamentarij gulae nostrae sufficient
etc. Sum. Armilla, v. ieiun. n. 12. Facientes collationem grossam, secundum
consuetudinem Romanae curiae, non frangunt ie^u^ium.
.

But religious fasting, such as is conformable to the precepts and examples of
holy Scripture, and to the practice of the primitive Church, and the wholesome
laws of present Churches, we maintain and urge as a pious and godly exercise,
and ascribe all such effects thereunto, as we find warranted by sacred Writ,
and the uniform doctrine of the ancient Church.

The Prophet Joel says; Chap. 2.12. Turn unto the Lord with all your heart,
with fasting, etc. David says; I humbled my soul with fasting, etc. Psalm.
35.13. And Daniel; I was in heaviness for three weeks of days, I ate no
pleasant bread, neither tasted flesh nor wine. Chap. 10.2.3. Our Savior
delivers a rule for fasting, and promises a reward thereunto, Math.
6.6.17.18. And the Disciples of John Baptist. Math. 9.14.15. The Apostles of
Christ and the primitive Christians, duly exercise the same. Act. 13.2 2. Cor.
6.5. 1. Cor. 7.5. Saint Luke says of Anna: She served God ((...)) with
fastings and prayers. Luke 2.37. And of Cornelius, that he fasted and prayed,
etc. Act. 10.30. And the primitive Fathers Tertul. apol. ca^. 40. Cypr. sermon.
de ieiun. and tentat. Justin. orat. ad Antonin. Pium. Otare ieiunantes, and
petere a Deo priorum pecc. remiss. docentur. O^g. hom. 4. in diverse. Basil.
hom. de laud ieiunij. Chrysostom. ser. 1. de ieiunio. and ser. 2. Ambros lib. de
Elia and ieiunio. Aug. de temp. ser. 65.
with an unanimous consent, maintain the necessity and benefit of fasting,
composing whole tracts in commendation hereof: and God has by sundry examples
testified his respect, and approbation of this holy duty Iten. l. 2. c. 56.
Postulante per ieiunium and supplicationem multam reuersus est ^piritus mortui,
etc. Cypr. sermon de ieiun. and tentat. Tertul. ad Scapul. c. 4.
.

In regard of all which, I assent to those which make religious fasting an
exercise of Hooker eccl. pol. l. 5.. 7^. page 387. The world being bold to
surfeit does now blush to fast: supposing that men when they fast, do rather
bewray a disease, then exercise a virtue.
virtue, and which teach that God is mediatly served by the same Chemnit.
harmon. euang. Luc. 2 v ^7. Anna cultum Deo praestitit, non legalibus victimis,
sed Euangelicis, seu spiritualibus: du^ offe^ret Deo animam per orationes, and
corpus per ieiunium. Hooker pol. eccl. l. 5. n. 72. Vide A dam Sasboth. com.
Esa. 29. page 127.
; and that being joined with prayer and inward humiliation, it is an adiuuant
means to appease and deprecate Gods anger, 1. Sam. 7.5. 2. Chron. 20.3. Judge.
20.26. Dan. 9.3. and to impetrate sundry benefits. Nehe. 1.4. Ierem. 36.9.
Esd. 8. 23. Hest. 4.16.17. Ion. 3.7.8.9. Math. 17.21. Act. 13.2. etc Tertul. ad
Scapul cap. 4 Quan do non geniculationibus and ieiunationibus nostris etiam
siccitates sunt depulsae? Ambros. de Elia and ieiunio, cap. 2 and cap. 10.
Hieron. ad cap. 6 Daniel. Aug. sermon. 60. de Temp. Epiphan. in compend. doct.
Basil. hom. 1. de laud. ieiunij. Calvin. instit. l. 4. c 12.. 19. Hooker
eccles. pol. l. 5. 72. Much hurt has grown to the Church of God, through a
false imagination, that fasting stands men in no stead, for any spiritual
respect, but only to take down the franknesse of nature, etc.
.

And whereas some Protestants seem to deny that fasting is a good work, they
speak of the external act of abstinence considered materially, and as it is
divided from a religious end and manner Hieron. ep. 8. ad Demetriad c. 6. leiun
um non perfecta virtus, sed caeterarum virtutum, fundamentum est, etc. Chrysostom.
hom. 78 in Math. Aug. ser. 62. and quaest. mixed. ex vtroque Testam. q 20.
. Esa. 58.5.

T. W. Doctor White affirms, that in the primitive Church fasting was held an
indifferent thing, and every man was left to his own mind thereof, no law
binding to this or that manner.

Answ. Doctor White speaks of the circumstances, to wit, the time and
external manner of fasting, not of the substance or exercise of fasting in it
self; and touching this he affirms no more then the Fathers Aug. epist. 86.
Sozom lib 1. cap. 11. historia Spiridion. and Niceph l 8. c. 42. Socrat. hist.
eccles. lib. 5. cap. 22. (...) page 249.
and sundry learned Pontificians have said Caietan. com. Act. 13. Clingius loc.
com. lib. 3. c. 41. Quemamodum in primitiua Ecclesia absque praecepto sactum
fuit. Arbor. theosoph. lib. 9. cap. 19.
.

T. W. Aerius was condemned by Epiphanius and Augustine, for taking away all
set days of fasting; which is acknowledged by Doctor Fulke, Doctor Whitaker,
Pantaleon, etc. And the Lent fast was holden in the primitive Church more then
arbitrarie. Whereupon Master Cartwright reprooueth Saint Ambrose, for saying
it is sin not to fast in Lent. Thus you see how familiarly this Ministers pen
drops lie after lie, etc.

Answ. Aerius was culpable in that he condemned, such fasts as were lawfully
established by public authority of the Church Hooker eccl. pol. l. 5.. 72.
Aerius worthily condemned for opposition against fasting. Epipha. haer. 75.
. But this makes nothing against my brothers assertion, who speaking of
precedent times, before such laws were enacted, to wit, the Apostles own
days, and the time next ensuing the same, says, every man was left to his
own mind, no law compelling him, etc. And in this assertion, he agrees with
Saint Augustine, and with Socrates, and also with many of your own Doctors
Caietan. Clingius, etc. See Arboreus before.
. And therefore your rude and moody conclusion, wherein you give D. White the
lie, proceeds of rankor, and from no other just cause.

Untruth 14. Whether Montanus were the first that brought in the laws of
fasting.
T. W. Our Doctor in further disgrace of Fasting, thus writes; Montanus a
condemned Heretic, was the first that ever brought in the laws of fasting,
from whom the Papists have borrowed them. But Master Hooker Eccles. pol. l.
5.. 72.
acknowledges, that Montanus was condemned for bringing in unaccustomed
fasting days, and new kinds of fasting, diverse from the Catholic Church, and
the Protestant writer of Querimonia Ecclesiae, professes the like Page 110.
.

Answ. 1. Doctor Whites assertion is taken out of Eusebius, who among the
heretical obseruances of Montanus, reckons up this as one, (...), he inacted
laws concerning fasting Eusebius. hist. eccl. l. 5. c. 16.
. 2. Although there were difference between his laws of fasting and the
Popish, (which Doctor White denies not) yet the Popish superstition might take
it beginning from this Heretic; even as the Saracens in their Alchoran,
having borrowed sundry things from the Jews, differ in the kind and manner of
superstition.

Untruth 15. Whether Protestants make God the Author of sin.
T. W. Master White being desirous, that his Religion should decline all
contumelious reproach and slain, touching the author of sin, thus writes:
The doctrine of the Protestants does not make God the Author of sin, nor
infers any absolute necessity constraining us, that we cannot do otherwise
then we do. But contrary to this Briarly apol. tr. 2. c. 3. page 577 has the
same.
, Zuinglius says Zuingl. de prouid. Dei.
; that God moves the thief to kill. And that the thief kills, God
procuring him: and the thief is enforced to sin. And Beza Beza, display of
popish abuses
: God exciteth the wicked will of one thief to kill another, guides his hand,
etc. And Calvin Calvin. instit. l. 2. c. 4.. 4.
; In sinning the Devil is not author, but rather an instrument, etc. This
doctrine is condemned by Castalio, Hooker, Couel: and Iacobus Andrea Colloq.
Montisbelg. page 47.
charge Beza with making God the author of sin. Thus we see how antipodes
like, and oppositly our Doctor treads to the feet of his own brethren.

Answ. Protestants affirm, that it is blasphemy and damnable heresy, to teach
that God is the author of sin Read before part 1. chapter 8. paragr 1. obseruat.
. And some learned Papists acquit the Protestants of this imputation commonly
objected. Suarez says Suar. opusc. l. 2 c. 2. page 111.
; The Heretics (Protestants) know well, that God intends not that which is
formal in sin, nor inclines the will of man to intend it. And Vasques Vasq
1. d. 99. c. 4. n. 22. Plane dicunt, etc.
: Calvin, Zuinglius, and Beza, do plainly affirm, that sin as it is sin,
is not to be referred to God as the cause thereof.

T. W. The former sayings of Protestants, although they do not actually imply
so much, yet they do it potentially, and by necessary inference.

Answ. 1. The like forms of speech are used by Papists themselves: Canus Can
loc l. 2. c. 4. and 7. Vasq. 1. d. 96. c 10 n. 64. Quia De is vtitur ministro
suo sathana tanquam instrumento, and ita dicitur efficere quod suus minister,
autoritate sua roboratus facit.
says; God uses his minister Satan as an instrument, and thus is said, to
effect that which his minister being strengthened by his authority, does. And
V^sques Vasq. ib 99. c. 4. n. 22. Nulla habita ratione determinationis nostrae,
ad opus pecc. nos applicate, excitare, ^egere, impellere, etc. Ib. c. 3. n. 9.
Recentiores theologi doctrinam, S. Tho^ and antiquorum theologorum, sic patant
intelligendam: vt Deus ab aeterno praefinierit singulas nostras operationes,
eiusque praefinitio fuerit prior ordine causae nostra determinatione and
cooperatione: quia nulla habita ratione illius, ex se Deus, singula opera no
^ra decreuerit: id quod non solum in operibus gratiae censent esse verum, sed
in alijs operibus etiam peceati, si sermo sit, non de malitia, sed de
substantia actus.
: Diverse modern Schoolmen affirm, that God having no respect of man's own
determination of himself to sin, does apply, excite, and impell to the deed of
sin.

2. Zuinglius, Beza, Calvin, etc. speak of the substance and matter of the act
of sin, not of the wickedness or quality. Zuinglius De prouid. Dei.
has these words; Ad opus non ad crimen, To the work, and not to the fault:
Neither simply to the deed, but as it serves to the end prefixed by him. To the
work, Ratione passionis and euentus, In respect of the passive event.

3. This Popish Priest notoriously abuses Calvin Instit. lib. 2. c. 4. n 4.
: for whereas he says, that Satan is Gods instrument, in agendo, in doing;
the Popish Priest produces him, saying; that he is Gods instrument in
peccando, in sinning: And that which this learned author speaks of the
positive act of sin, this Romist applies to the quality: as if one saying,
the motive faculty in the natural body, effects motion, therefore it
effects halting.

4. Master Hooker Eccles. pol. l. 5. page 104.
in the place objected by this Priest, treating of the twofold will of God,
affirms, that Gods secret will is not the rule of moral actions, but
speaks nothing concerning this present question.

5. Castalio, and Iacobus Andrea, being Adversaries to Calvin and Beza, and the
one of them a phantastike, and the other a turbulent vbiquitarie, are not
indifferent censors to pass upon the credit of these worthy men.

Untruth 16. Whether Saint Bernard were a Papist.
T. W. He is not afraid to publish, that Bernard was a Papist, in none of the
principal points of their religion: and then he adds, He stood against the
pride of the Pope. But whosoever will observe what is confessed by the
Protestants, must acknowledge, that impudency it self would be ashamed to have
mentioned such a groundless untruth. For it is granted by Simon de Voyan Upon
the catalogue taken out of Briarly.
a Protestant, that he was Abbot of Clareiuax: and by Osiander Epitom. cent 12.
, that he was thought to be the author of 140. Monasteries: and the Centuries
Centur. 12. c. 10.
say, he worshipped the God Maozim, and Doctor Fulke Ag. Rhem. Luc. 22.
, and Doctor Whitaker Cont. Duraeu^, page 154.
charge him, for defending the Popes Ecclesiastical authority; and yet if we
believe M. White, he stood against the pride of the Pope, etc.

Answ. Doctor Whites words are; Bernard knew not the present Roman faith; he
was indeed a Monk, and in many things superstitious, but he was a Papist in
none of the principal points of religion: For he held the sufficiency of the
Scriptures without Traditions Sermon. de vtil. verbi Dei, and sup. Cant. ser. 86.
and ep. 91. and l. de praecept. and disp.
, Justification by faith alone Sup. Cant. ser. 22. and ep. 77. and ep. 190.
, that our works do not merit (condignely Ser. 1. Annunciat. Mar. in Cant. ser.
61. and de great. and lib. arb. in fine.
:) that no man is able to keep the law (in perfection according to the
commandments Sermon. 1. fest. omn. Sanct. De verb. Esa. ser. 5. and de de dic.
eccles. ser. 5. Et in Psalm. Qui hab ser. 7. Et in Cant. ser. 37. and ser. 50.
and in vigil natal. Dom. ser. 2.
.) That a just man, by the testimony of the spirit within him, may be assured
of grace Ser. 1. de Annunciat. de dedic. eccles. ser. 5. in Psalm. Qui hab.
sermon. 7. In Cant. sermon. 37.
; and there is no such free will as many Popish Schoolmen teach In Cant. ser.
81
, he stood against the pride of the Pope De consid. ad Eugen l 2. and 4.
, and the opinion of the immaculate conception of the virgin Marie Epist. 174
in sine.
. And then Doctor White explaning his meaning more fully, says; Bernard
professed not the Roman faith as the Council of Trent, and the Jesuits have
set it down, at the least, in the fundamental points thereof.

Against this our Popish Priest produces certain Protestants, saying; That
Bernard was an Abbot, and builded Monasteries, and honored the Mass, and
eagerly defended the Pope, etc. And from hence infers, that Doctor White
has dealt untruly, affirming that he was no Papist, and in saying he stood
against the Popes pride. But this illation is not coherent: Bernard was a
Papist in some things, (as an Ethiopian is white in some things, namely, his
teeth) ergo he was a through Papist in the maine articles concluded by the
Trident Council.

D. White proves he was no through Papist, in certain articles specified by
him, according to the present Tenet of Popery: and the Popish priest produces
other points, wherein Protestants confess he was Popish.

And besides the former articles named by my brother, it seems unto me that
Bernard was no through Papist, in sundry other articles; and namely in the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, of which he is altogether silent in his works
Vide Bernard sermon. 1. in fest. Martin. and Psalm. Qui habitat. fer. 3. and
Cantic. ser. 71. and tract. de dilig. Deo.
. Also, he taught that the Eucharist was a commemoratiue sacrifice only Ser.
in Coena Dom.
, and he held not the precise number of seven Sacraments Sermon. de sacr. Altar.
and ablut. pedum. and ser. alio de Coena Dom.
, nor the physical efficie^cy of any Sacraments. He never taught adoration of
Images: he believed habitual concupiscence to be sin Sermon. 6. de Aduent.
, maintained the authority and praeheminence of the civil Magistrate, and the
general subjection of the Apostles, and all the Clergy unto him Epist. ad
episc. Senon. cited by Espenc. com. Tit. 3. digress. 10
. He censured the single life of the Clergy In Cant. ser. 66
, the hypocrisy of Popish fasting Epist. ad Guli. Abbat. and ser. 7. in Psalm.
Qui hab. and epist. 42. ad Henric. Archiep.
, and plainly confesses in terms, that the Roman church was degenerate from
ancient Religion Apol. ad Guliel Abbat. Religionis antiquae non solum virtutem
amisimus, sed nec speciem retinemus.
.

And lastly, what he thought of the Popes pride, (because the Popish Priest
doubts) let his own words testify: who speaking to Pope Eugenius, says
Lib. 4. de consid.
; You come abroad glistering with gold, abounding with all variety, etc. but
what do your sheep receive from hence? If I durst be bold to reveal my
thoughts, I would say, these are rather pasture for Devils, then food for men.
Forsooth Peter did thus, and Paul in this manner deluded the world. Surely the
zeal of the Church is fervent for nothing, but only to maintain dignity:
Every thing is referred to honor, but little or nothing to sanctity. Saint
Peter never came abroad adorned with gemmes, arrayed with silk, attired with
gold, mounted upon a white Palfrey, guarded with Soldiers, or attended with
ruffling seruitors; without all these he fed Christ's sheep, and herein you
have not succeeded Peter, but Constantine.

Untruth 17. Touching the miracles of Saint Bernard and Saint Francis.
T.W. Doctor White says, what is reported of Bernard and Francis, are lies.
This is spoken to the dishonor of the Roman faith, diverse of whose professors
through Gods omnipotency, and for the manifestation and strengthening of his
truth, have at all times been able to exhibit great miracles: the which
prerogative resting only in our Church, much displeases our Minister, etc.
And then he produces Osiander, granting a certain miracle of Bernard: and
Matthew Paris reporting, that there appeared certain wounds like unto our
Saviors, in the hands, side, and feet of Francis, a little before his death,
etc.

Answ. Osiander Osiand. epit. cent. 12. c. 6.
does not acknowledge any true miracle wrought by Saint Bernard in confirmation
of Popery, but speaking of a certain marvel reported to have been done by
him, he admits by a concession, that possibly such an outward act might be
done; but he supposes Satan to have been the author thereof Praestigijs
Sathanicis effecta existimo, etc.
for the confirmation of error, and hence infers, it was no true miracle
according to all the causes.

2. Admit Osiander were deceived, and that Saint Bernard wrought true miracles,
yet might God concur with him in this work, not in maintenance of his
superstition, but to confirm other parts of his Christian faith and
profession; even as when Judas wrought miracles, Christ concurred with him for
confirmation of faith, and not for approving his covetousness.

But against Popish miracles, whereupon our Adversaries much rely, making the
same a sign of truth and note of the Church, I object: 1. The credit of these
miracles depends only upon the testimony of Legends, which Papists
themselves discredit Can. loc. l. 11. c. 6. Caietan opusc. de concept. virg.
c. 1. Espenc. com. 2. Tim. 4. digr. 21.
. And omitting the authors alleged by my brother: for proof hereof, let this
testimony of learned Gerson be considered Gers. par. 1. Quae ver. credend.
Primus gradus respicit legendas and miracula sanctoru^, etc. quae omnia
suscipit ecclesia, and legenda permittit, etc. magis attenditur id, quod pia
recogitatione fieri potuit, quam illud quod factum est.
: The Church permits Legends to be read, not determining that they be
certainly true, but such as possibly might be true; and howsoever true or
false, yet not unprofitable for stirring up devotion.

2. The matter of these Popish miracles, is in it self so absurd and
ridiculous, that it will rather provoke laughter or indignation, then cause
belief.

Baronius Baron. an. 1028. n. 5.
tells, that Saint Fulbert sucked our Ladies breasts. Antonine Antonin. sum.
hist. p. 3. tit. 23. cap. 4.. 6. etc. 7. 8. etc. 1.. 4. Can. loc. 11. c. 6.
reports, that S. Dominicke walked in the rain and was not wet; and his books
lying all night in the river, were taken out dry, and no more hurt then a fish.
The said Friar espied the Devil sitting in the Church like a sparrow, and
calling him to him, deplumed him, and so put him to a great reproach. Also, he
compelled the Devil to hold him the candle in his bare fingers, until they
were well burnt. And on a time a certain lecherous Priest kissing this Saints
hand, was cured for ever after of incontinency.

Thomas of Aquine Antonin. ib. c. 7. n. 8.
was so ravished in his meditation, that he suffered the candle whereby he
read, to burn his fingers, and never felt it. And Notaries attended him in his
sleep, and wrote Dictates from his mouth.

The author of Saint Bernards life Vita Bern. praefixa operibus eius.
tells, that he by saying a piece of the Lords prayer, made a horse that had
broken his bridle, and was run far away into a meddow, of his own accord
to come again to him Lib. 1. c. 13.
. A woman laying his staff by her in the night, thereby drove away the Devil,
who had carnally used her many years before L. 2. c. 6.
; and he excommunicated the Devil, and thereby disabled him for meddling in
this sort with any more women Ibid.
. At another time he blessed good ale, and giving the same to certain lewd
persons, caused divine grace to enter into them Lib. 1 c. 11.
. Also by excommunication he destroyed flies. And on a time the mother of an
Infant deceassing, he enables the Grandame of the child, being above eighty
years of age, to give her Grandchild suck Lib. 4. c. 4. Jacob. Reming.
Jesuit. mur. ciuit. sanct. fundam. 8. page 210. Sancti Francisci mirabilia
opera, tanto numero, a sancto Bonauentura optima fide enatrata.
.

But the miracles of S. Francis, reported by Vincentius, Antonine, Bonauenture,
the golden Legend, Lippoman, and Surius, are more then marvelous.

This Saint and limitor, Francis, understood the secrets of men's hearts Surius
tom. 5. de prob. sanct. hist. vit. Francisc. ex Bonau. c. 2. etc. 5. etc. c. 15.
, which the Apostles seldom did. He changed water into wine by the sign of the
Cross, and a capon into a fish Antonin. sum. hist. tit 24. c. 2.. 2.
: He causes water to spring out of a hard rock, equalling Moses: and
excelling Elizeus, he makes ankers to floate above the waters; speaking to
Wolves Seruauerunt and lupi pactionem serui Dei. Sur. c. 8.
, and calling them brethren, he mollified their ferity, that they devoured no
cattle.

He preaches to Birds and Fowls Sut. ibid. c. 12. Antonin. ib. c. 2.. 5.
, exhorting them to praise God; and they were attentive to his doctrine, and
suffered him to touch them, and would not depart until he blessed them with
the sign of the Cross, and gave them leave. He caused Swallows and
Grasshoppers, and a wild Falcon, to join with him in praising God.

He exhorted a Cade-lamb Sur. ib. c. 8. Monebat vir pius ouiculam, vt and
laudibus diuinis attenderet, and ab omni fratru^ offensa caueret, etc. Ipsa
ecclesiam ingrediens sine alicuius informatione flectebat genua, etc. Duralt.
Jesuit. flor. exempl. c. 5. tit. 6. n. 2. Ouis Francisci adorat eucharistiam.
to be attentive to the praises of God, and to beware of offending her
brethren; and hereupon the Lamb daily frequented the Church, and without any
instructor kneeled before the altar of our Lady at the elevation of the host,
in honor of her maker. ( Oh, says Surius O discant haeretici, vel a pecude
venerari matrem Christi and eucharistiam adorare. Lib. conform. p. 72. S.
Francis saying Mass, saw a Spider in the chalice, which he would not cast
forth, but drunk it up with the blood of Christ: afterward feeling his thigh
to itch, he scratched it, and there the spider came forth, without hurting the
Friar.
, let Heretics learn to worship the blessed Virgin, and to adore the
blessed Sacrament, by the example of this sheep.)

The same Friar had a second Cade-lambe, which he gave to one Lady Jane, and
the said Lamb when her Lady lay long a bed, or was negligent in her devotion,
would come and bleate at her chamber door, and push her with her horns, and
by diverse signs and gestures, admonish her dame to go to Church.

This great Limit or saying to the fire, Frater ignis, O brother fire pain me
not, assuaged the violence thereof, so that he felt no pain when one burnt him
with a hot Iron Surius ib. c. 5.
. The holy Angels came to him and were his Minstrels Bonauent. and Sur. ib.
; and his horse bridle being put under a woman travailing in child, caused her
present deliverance Ib. c. 12.
. And after his death a piece of his hempen cord wherewith he girded himself,
did the like to other women Ibid. c. vltimo.
. And the water in which this hempen girdle was steeped, being drunk, cured the
morrion of beasts, and the water wherein he bathed himself was a present
remedy for the pestilence.

But nothing is more famous about Saint Francis, then that which D. Whites
Adversary undertakes to justify, and to confirm his Popish faith by,
(according to a saying, like lips like Lettuce) to wit; the impression of
Christ's wounds in his body Surius and Bonau. ib. c. 15.. 1. de miraculis. Liber
conform. Vincentius. Bencius Ies. etc. Bosius de sig. l. 15. c. 3. Antonin.
sum. hist. p. 3. tit. 24. c. 2.. 18. Viegas sup. Apoc. com. 1.. 18. page 553.
. The manner hereof according to Matthew Paris Histor. Angl. in Henric. 3. page
329.
, was this.

The fifteenth day before the departure of Saint Francis out of this life,
there appeared wounds in his hands and feet, continually bleeding, such as were
the wounds of Christ when he was nailed on the Cross. Also his right side was
open and bloody, so as one might see his very intrals and heart. And he told
the Cardinals and others, who demanded of him what this vision meant, That the
same happened in confirmation of his doctrine, concerning Christ crucified, etc.
And further he said, that after his death, the wounds which did now bleed,
should be presently dried up, and become like his other flesh.

The Popish Priest accuses Doctor White of foul untruth, because he rejects
this part of Saint Francis his Alchoran, confirmed by testimony of many great
Doctors, and according to Bonauenture and Surius Sur. and Bonau. ib. c 13. etc.
15.
, by the Pope himself.

But Master White requesteth this Popish Priest and his fellows, before they
enforce him, to fix his credo upon this marvel, that they will remove some
few obstructions, which hinder his belief concerning the same.

1. Matthew Paris Hist. Angl in Henr. 3. p. 329. Quinta decima die, etc.
says, that Saint Francis was branded with these marks fifteen days before
he died: and that being defunct, they were dried up, and appeared like the
other flesh of his body. But Bonauenture and Surius Ib. c. 13. Biennium
antequam spiritum redderet coelo, etc. In morte vident permulti, etc.
report, that they were imprinted in him two years before his death: and that
they were seen of few whiles he lived, because he sought in humility to cover
them, but at his death they appeared to many. And they further report Ibid.
cap. 15.
, that Pope Gregory the ninth doubting (like Saint Thomas) of the truth of
this matter, Saint Francis after his death appeared to him in the night, and
lifting up his right arm, showed him the wound in his side, and calling for a
pot, there issued forth so much blood from the wound, as filled the pot up to
the brim.

2. I demand how Saint Francis could live two years, or so much as fifteen
days, having so many wounds in his hands and feet, bleeding either
continually, or (as the book of Conformities says Barthol. Pisan. lib.
conformit. A singulo vespere die louis, ad sequente^ veneris vespera^, etc.
) bleeding once every week from Thursday even to Friday even, in imitation of
Christ bleeding on the Cross. But suppose what you will of the other four
wounds, the fifth wound in the right side was absolutely mortal, and piercing
the caull of the heart, and letting out the vital spirits, does according to
the doctrine of our Adversaries Tolet. com. Ioh. 19. v. 34. Torniel. annal.
sacr. anno mundi 4084. n. 24.
, writing upon the passion of Christ, instantly destroy life.

3. If Friar Francis his devotion Bonauent. Itinerar. meant. prolog. Adeo mentem
Francisci absorbuit, quod eius in carne patuit, dum sacratissima passionis
stigmata, in corpore suo ante mortem, per biennium deportauit.
toward Christ crucified, caused this impression of wounds in him, how
happened it that the Apostle Paul and other Martyrs, before whose eyes Christ
Jesus was always crucified, wanted the like characters? Either you must
affirm with the author of the Conformities Barth. Pis. lib. conform. Demon
per mulierem Rauennatem, confessus fuit cuidam Iacobo presbytero Bononiensi,
Franciscum occupare Luciferi cathedram, etc. Page 18. Franciscus plus suit quam
Johannes Baptista, etc.
, that this Friar had a pre-eminence greater then John Baptist and the
Apostles, and assign him the high chair in heaven, from whence Lucifer fell:
or else with Auentine Annal. lib. 4. Huiusmomodi ineptias atque naenias,
noctuis relinquo, quarum oculi lumen solis fetre nequeunt, etc.
, leave these fooleries and old wives tales to lying Papists, whose eyes like
night Ravens, take pleasure in darkness, and cannot endure the light of truth.

Untruth 18. Doctor White affirming the Protestant Churches euer-visibilitie.
T. W. In defense of the continuance of his own Church, he thus says; The
learned amongst us confess and prove against all that contradict it, that
ever since Christ's time without interruption, there has been a company of men
visibly professing the same faith that we do: Though the Church of Rome
degenerating into the seat of Antichrist persecuted them, and so many times
drove them out of the sight of the world, that to it they were not visible.

Answ. You pare and mangle D. Whites speech Sect. 45. page 335.
, omitting two parts thereof, which being added, explicate his assertion, in
such manner, that they deprive you of all occasion to cavil.

1. He says, that ever since Christ's coming, there have been a company of
men, professing the same truth, which we do, In the affirmative, that is, in
matters of faith and godly life, ^ag. 335.
necessary to salvation.

Secondly, he adds, the sincere professors of Orthodoxe truth, were not
always visible to the world, under the notion of true believers: but though
the world many times knew them, as men different from them in profession, yet
being blinded with malice and unbelief, they knew them not to be the Church of
God.

And thus Doctor Whites assertion may be reduced to these two propositions: 1.
There were always found in the world a visible company of believers,
professing the same faith which the Protestants do in all affirmative
articles, necessary to salvation. 2. There were always in the world some
Christians who resisted the chief points of Papistrie as they came in, and the
same Christians were visible in such manner, as Gods people use to be in time
of persecution.

Now what have you to say against this?

T. W. Before I convince this, I would demand where our Ministers head-peece
was when he thus wrote: since these few lines do inuolue an irreconciliable
contradiction: a company of men visibly professing, yet to the world not
visible, this is as much as invisible visible, and white remaining white, to be
black; the moon to shine in her greatest eclipse. And if the Church were
latent to the world, then it was seen only by some out of the world.

Answ. Did you never hear of one that was visible to his friends and latent to
his enemies? of one visible to the seeing, and invisible to the blind? And is
it an apparent contradiction to say; our Savior after his resurrection, was
visible to his Disciples, and other faithful people by the space of forty
days, Act. 1.3. and yet he was invisible the same time to the Scribes and
Pharisees? The true Church was always visible to the friends and lovers of
truth, to such as had eyes of faith and spiritual prudence, to discern the
sheep of Christ from the members of Antichrist: but it was not at all times
generally visible to Infidels and Tyrants. It was often unknown to the world,
speaking of that part of the world; Qui ab amando mundum dicti sunt mundus Aug.
in Ioh. tr. 2. and tr. 76. Mundus, quo nomine si nisicati sunt, a regno eius
alient.
, who are called the world, because they peruersly love the world, such as in
whom the love of the Father is not: It was visible to the world, speaking of
that moity of the world; Qui carne versantur in mundo, sed cord inhabitant
coelum: Which are bodily conversant in the world, and in their hearts be the
inhabitants of heaven.

T. W. Napper writes, that Gods true Church was latent and invisible 1260.
years: and Sebastian Francke, that for 1400. years, the Church has been no
where external and visible; and Doctor Fulke Napper. com. Reu. prop. 37.
Sebast. Franc. epit de abrogand statut. eccles. D. Fulk answ. to a counterf.
cath. This is fil^hed from Briarly, tr. 1.. 9. p. 226. See the same page 129.
, that in the time of Boniface the third, which was an. 607. the Church was
invisible, and fled into the wilderness, etc. And sundry Protestants acknowledge
the Churches not being until Luther, etc. From all which it is ineuitably
concluded against this architect of lies, that the Protestants imaginary
Church consisting of ayrie supposals, had no subsisting or being in the world
for these last 1000. years, etc.

Answ. 1. You pitifully abuse Sebastian Francke, calling him a famous
Protestant, who was an Anabaptist, and an unlearned and malapert hot-spur
Ch^mnic loc. com. to. 3. p ^60 Sebastian. ^rank homo ^e^ulans and indoctus.
.

2. Speaking of some manner of Churches visibilitie, and respectively to the
state thereof in the primitive Church, and as it is now since the restoring of
the Gospel, the Church may be said to have bin invisible since Pope Boniface
the third.

3. Whereas you conclude, that the Protestants church had no being in the world
for the last 1000. years; if you mean it had no being in respect of ye name of
Protestant Church, or in regard of the personal teaching of Luther; or in
regard of external separation from the Roman society, I will not contest:
but then I retort, that your Church in regard of the late Trent faith, had no
being at all in the world for 1500. year: But if you infer that our Church
had absolutely no being, in respect of the maine and primitive articles of our
faith, and such things as be essential in religion: I answer, it had the same
subsisting and being with the best members of your church, and at this present
differs no otherwise from them, then a body which has recovered health, from
it self being sick Read before part 1. chap. 3. paragr. 2. observation of
the Churches visib.
.

Untruth 19. Touching Priests marriage.
T. W. The Doctor much apologizing and defending the marriage of the Clergy,
affirms that the Church of Rome holds contrary herein, to that which was
taught in the primitive Church.

But contrary to this, Cartwright confesses of the first Nicene Council,
Briarly page 78.
that it prohibited marriage to such as were entered into Orders, although it
allowed the marriage of such as were contracted before. And Master Jewel
confesses, that in the matter of Priests marriage, Harding had many Fathers on
his side. And Chemnici^s grants, that Origin, Ambrose, Epiphanius, and
Siritius, teach this doctrine of single life of the Clergy.

Now I refer it to the judgment of any indifferent Reader, whether he will
believe the former learned Protestants, confessing the practice of this our
Catholic doctrine in the primitive Church, or Master White denying the same.

Answ. If that which you say were to the purpose, you might with credit request
your Reader to take notice of it: but that which you have brought out of
learned Protestants (whose words, because they are impertinent it is needless
to examine) is heterogenious to the question.

Doctor White affirms truly, that you are varied from the primitive Church in
the matter of the matrimony of the Clergy; and by the primitive Church he
understands the whole primitive Church, the flower and principal part
whereof was the first 300. years. Now your own Doctors Bonauent. 4. d. 37.
ar. 1. q. 3. Sot. 4. d. 37 q 1. Gratian. d. 56. cont. Cenoman. Caietan. opusc.
to. 1. tr. 27.
grant, that in the primitive church thus understood, marriage of the Clergy
was reputed lawful. Bonouenture says; Continency was not enjoined the
Clergy in the primitive Church: And with him agree Gratian, Scotus, Gerson,
Hugo Cardinal: and in a manner all your Doctors, of which I have cited many
before Part 1. chap. 6, paragr. 1. obseru. touching marriage, etc.
. And this being so, why do you berayle Doctor White for affirming an evident
truth, which Papists themselves deliver?

T. W. But learned Protestants acknowledge, that sundry primitive Fathers
maintain single life of the Clergy.

Answ. 1. It follows not, from some primitive Fathers after the 300. year,
to the primitive Church in general, whereof Doctor White speaks: for
although some primitive Fathers taught, that Christ preached forgiveness of
sins to those which were in hell Iren. l. 4. c. 45.
, yet you will not admit that the same was the general doctrine of the Church.

2. None of the primitive Fathers maintain your Popish doctrine of single life
of the Clergy: to wit, that their marriage is simply unlawful, and they are
to be reputed Heretics if they marry; and that it is better for a Priest to
be a fornicator Pigh loc. 15. page 223. Tolerabilius in fornicationem incidere
quam coniugem fieri.
, and to use 600. queanes, then to keep his own wife Auentin. annal l. 5.
Coster. de coelibat c. 17. prop. 9. Bonauent. 4. d. 37. ar 1. q. 3. Hic morbus
maxim viget in elericis.
: and especially that Priests marriage is therefore unlawful, because the Pope
has decreed it to be so Bonauent. ib. Istud statutum impositum fuit
authoritate praelatorum, sed maxim pontificis summi.
I suppose in these assertions, you shall not by confession of learned
Protestants, have many primitive Fathers consenting with you.

Untruth 20. Concerning Images.
T. W. Inueighing much against the religious use of Images, he says; Touching
Images, the Church of Rome holds contrary to that was formerly holden. And
after that he alleges, that the ancient Christians of the primitive Church
had no Images. But diverse Protestants, to wit, the Centuries, and Doctor Fulke
acknowledge, that Lactantius attributed too much to the sign of the Cross.
And Paulinus caused Images to be painted on Church walls. And Ambrose reported
sundry things superstitiouslie, touching the Cross: and Tertullian is thought
to affirm, that Christians had the Image of the Cross in the places of their
public meetings, and privately in their houses, etc.

Answ. Doctor White says Page 345. 47, number. 5.
; The Church of Rome not only worshippeth Images, but commands to do it
with divine honor, etc. and herein it is departed from the primitive Church.
Now this being my brothers principal assertion, about the matter of Images:
and proving directly his maine intent, which is, that your Church is departed
from the primitive faith: why do you cowardly pass it over, and snatch at
another sentence, the truth or falsehood whereof is not greatly material? It
is very probable, that the primitive Church in the prime ages thereof, for two
or three hundred years, had no Images: For Irenaeus taxes the Gnostickes for
having Images Iren. l. 1. c. 24. Clem. orat. ad gentes, page 35.
. And Clement of Alexandria: We are expressly prohibited to use the deceitful
art of painting, according to that of Moses: Thou shall not make unto thy self
the likeness of any thing. But whether they had any pictures and images or
not, is not material to the Controversy between the Papists and us; For we
reckon pictures and images used for Story and ornament, out of the case of
scandal, among adiaphorous things: The difference between us, is concerning
Adoration of Images.

Object. Lactantius is censured by the Centurists Centur. 4 c. 10.
, for affirming many superstitious things of the efficacy of Christ's Image.

Answ. 1. The Centurists were many times over rigid in censuring the Fathers,
whom we imitate not; and about this matter of Lactantius Lactant. de vera sap.
l. 4. c. 27. Si assistat aliqu^s signatam fron^e^ gerens, etc.
, the very inspection of the place will manifest, that he spoke not of the
Image of the Cross, but of the sign: And the sign of the Cross was no
Image, but a significant action.

Paulinus, of whom Doctor Fulke speaks, lived after the 400. year: and Saint
Ambrose in the year 374. Bell. de script. vixit 400. an.
. But Doctor White speaks of the former ages, saying; ancient Christians of
ye primitive church had no Images. Tertullian is thought by the Centuries, to
intimate in his Apology, that Christians had the Image of the Cross, either
in their public assemblies or private houses. But this is only the thought
and surmise of those authors, unable to convict Doctor White of untruth. We
expected choking and irrepliable testimonies, according to your glorious
ostentation, in the maine body of the Controversies, and you produce a poor
conjecture, concerning an unprofitable branch of a question.

Untruth 21. Concerning Transubstantiation.
T. W. Doctor White writes: The Roman Catholics have altered the faith of the
ancient Fathers in Transubstantiation. But in affirming this, Master Whites
credit and estimation is particularly, in this, most dangerously wounded by the
hands of his own brethren. For the Centurists say Cent 5. p. 517. taken out of
Briarly, tract. 2.. 7. page 185. a^swered by D. Morton, Appeal page 94. 95. 488.
; Chrysostom is thought to confirm transubstantiation, and other Protestants
affirm, that Theophylact and Damascene do evidently incline to
Transubstantiation. And Doctor Humphrey writes, that Gregory the Great
brought in Transubstantiation. This gives sit occasion to the Reader, to take
notice how clear, perspicuous and shining, our Catholic faith of
Transubstantiation was, in those primitive times, etc.

Answ. 1. Sundry learned Papists have affirmed, that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is neither ancient nor perspicuous, but perplexed with many
difficulties Suar. 3 d 50.. 1. Sunt scholastici qui hanc doctrinam de
transubstantiatione non admodum antiquam esse dixerunt, etc. Bellarm. l. 3. de
Euchar. c. 23. Scot. 4. d. 10. q. 1. and d 11. q. 3. Gabr. lect. 41. in Canon.
Miss. Camerac. 4. sent. q. 5. ar. 2.
.

2. How can that be clear and perspicuous, which expressly contradicts the
holy Scripture, affirming, bread and wine to remain after consecration? Luke
22.18. 1. Cor. 10.16. and 11.26. and is reproved by the testimony of all the
senses Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c. 12. Absit a nobis vt ea quae per sensus corporis
didicimus, vera esse dubitemus.
, and cannot be defended but by destroying the quantity and figure of Christ's
body, or giving it a manner of existing after the nature of spirits, yea of God
himself Bellar. de euch. l. 1. c. 2. Corpus Christi non est in eucharistia
corporaliter. Bellar. ib. l. 3. c. 4. Quomodo Deus est in loco, etc. Gabr. can.
Miss. lect. 43. Humanam videtur excellere intelligentiam, quod corpus tam
speciosum in sua quantitate and lineamentis, and figura perfectissima, cum
omnium membrorum and organorum perfecta distinctione, est in parua hostia,
cuius quantitatem long excedit. Videtur enim incomprehensibile quomodo caput
sit praecise, vbi digitus, pes, vel oculus: cor and hepar, vbi manus etc. salua
partium distinctione and sine earum confusione. Camerac 4. sent. quaest. 5. ar.
2. Quomodo idem corpus numero, possit secundum se totum existere in pluribus
locis, etc. Quomodo multae parts eiusdem corporis, possunt simul existere vni
and eidem loco, etc.
: and multiplying the presence thereof in many places at one time? and the
patronizing whereof inuolues the defenders with inexplicable perplexities and
contradictions Greg. Val. exam. mist. Calu. In hijs verbis, Hoc est corpus
meu^: Demonstratiuum hoc, non demonstrat proprie Christum, nec panem, nec
indiuiduum vagum: fed substantiam illam indiuiduam determinat^m, contentam sub
sensibilibus accidentibus panis, idque secundum substantiae rationem communem
and indiuiduam, vage per ordinem ad illa accidentia: Quae substantia secundum
eam rationem in principio illius enuntiationis est panis, and in fine corpus
Christi.
. And does all this without reason, considering the same doctrine of
transubstantiation, is not delivered in the Scripture Suar. to. 3. d. 46 3.
Cai^tanus docuit, seclu a ecclesiae authoritate, verba illa, Hoc est corpus
meum, ad veritatem hanc confirmandam non sufficere.
, and merely devised by the Pope.

Object. 1. According to the Centurists, Chrysostom is thought to confirm
Transubstantiation.

Answ. The Centurists say; Chrysostom seems to confirm Transubstantiation:
but it follows not from seeming to doing or being, Prou. 26.16. Chrysostom
may seem to ignorant and partial Readers, to confirm that which indeed he
does not.

Object. 2. Theophylact and Damascene incline to Transubstantiation, according
to Occolampadius, etc. Damascene taught the said doctrine.

Answ. You pretend that your faith of Transubstantiation is clear,
perspicuous, and shining; and yet you fly to obscure authors living after the
800 year, for the confirmation thereof. Also, your selves in other cases
affirm, that the doctrine of one or two Fathers, does not make a matter to be
of Catholic faith. 2. Although Damascen, by his new manner of speaking, gave
occasion to the error of Transubstantiation, and for that cause is censured by
Vrsinus and others, yet he never expressly or plainly taught the same doctrine:
and the (...) or transmutation of bread and wine, in Damascen, is not an
essential conversion of the substance of the elements, but a mystical and
rational transmutation, in regard of the use and effect Read Orthodox.
consensus, page 140. where this is proved. D. Bilson, differ. p. 4. page 751.
Hospin. hist. sacram. l. 3. c. 7. page 256.
.

Object. 3. Gregory the Great, by the confession of D. Humphrey, confirmed
Transubstantiation.

Answ. 1. D. Humphrey uttered this, not from any known doctrine of Gregory
Read D. Morton Appeal, l. 5. c. 6. n. 2
, or express sentence out of his works, but only from the report of the
Legend: and he does this, by a concession, rather to make way to an intended
discourse against his adversary, then by a simple approbation of the truth of
the report.

Untruth 22. Touching conversion of England by Augustine the Monk.
T. W. To deprive Saint Augustine the Monk of the honor and reverence due unto
him by us English for our conversion, Briarly tr. 1.. 1. page 57.
Doctor White writes; That Augustine converted not the Country of England to
the present Romish faith; and that his conversion was only the planting of
some trifling ceremonies. But contrary to this the Magdeburgians acknowledge,
that Augustine converted England, and he converted it to the same faith, which
Gregory the Great professed, and the Centuries and D. Humphrey affirm, that
this faith was the Popish faith.

Answ. 1. The Centurists Centur 6. c. 10. page 687.
do not affirm, that Augustine the Monk converted England; but they say,
Dicitur conuertisse, he is reported to have converted that Nation from
Paganism to Christ; sed Galfridus Monumetensis, etc. But Ieffry of Monnemuth
writes: That before this, truth was preached, and sincere doctrine delivered
Vide Godofri. Mon. de orig. and gest Britan. l. 8. c. 4.
, etc.

Secondly, it is untrue, that the Centurists or D. Humphrey affirm, Gregory
to have professed your present Roman faith: they censure him for some
superstition, but his errors were different from yours, which I will manifest
in one of your particulars, to wit, the Mass. The Centurists (you say) charge
him with the celebration of the Mass: but they also clear him from the error
of your idolatrous Mass, wherein you pretend Tol instr. sac. l. 2. ca. 4.
Azor. instit. mor. l. 10. c. 8.
, That Christ is truly in the very substance of his body and blood, offered to
God by the Priest, as properly as he was by himself on the Cross: saying
Centur. 6. c. 10. page 682.
; The doctrine of Saint Gregory, which concerns the matter of the Supper is
very sound, only he makes often mention of Mass and oblations. In other
particulars also which you produce out of Gregory, there is apparent
difference between him and you, as it is proved against Brierly, by the
reverend Bishop D. Morton in his Appeal Lib 1. cap. 2.
.

And you must be advised, that a material agreement in some particulars, does
not make a formal concord: and all that can be produced out of Gregory is
only such; but when he denied the Supremacy, he cut the throat of your
Popery, and destroyed the basis and last resolution of Roman faith, which
vanishes like smoke, if it have not a domineering Pope of infallible judgment
to animalize and support it.

Untruth 23. Concerning conversion of Countries.
T. W. Conversion of Heathen countries to the faith of Christ, foretold so long
since by the Prophets of God, to be accomplished only in the true Church of
Christ, Doctor White affirms, to have been done by that Church which
conspired in faith and doctrine with the Protestants, and not by the Church of
us Catholics.

Answ. 1. Conversion of Countries to the faith of Christ entirely professed, is
proper to the true Church. But it may happen that a corrupt Church, which
holds not the faith entirely throughout, but erreth in some parcels thereof,
may convert Heathens; and this conversion shall be mixed; in some things to
true Faith, in other to erroneous believing: like as diseased parents when they
procreate children, do together with their nature and kind propagate
hereditarie sickness. And thus the Ecclesiastical Story reports, that the
Arrians converted the Goths to Christianity Socrat. hist. l 4. ca. 27. Sozom.
hist. l. 6. c. 37. Freculph. chron. to. 2. l. 4. c 20.
. It is therefore false which you affirm, that conversion of Heathen countries
is only accomplished by the true Church Bellar. de eccles. l 4. c. 12. Bosius
de sig. l. 4. c 1.
, understanding by true Church, a society of Christians, teaching incorrupt
doctrine in all points.

2. In reporting Doctor Whites speech, you do according to your manner omit
part thereof: He affirms, that diverse Heathen countries; to wit, the Indians,
Hiberians, Burgundians Socrat. hist. l. 1 c. 19. Sozom. hist. l. 2. c. 24.
Niceph hist. l. 14. c. 40.
, etc. were converted by other Churches, and not by the Roman; and then, that
none of those ancient conuersions made 1000. years since, were to the present
Roman faith consisting of Supremacy, transubstantiation, traditions, etc. but
to the Catholic and Orthodoxe faith of the primitive Church.

T. W. It is confessed by Protestants, that the Roman Church has been
Antichristian more then a thousand years, and that the true Orthodoxe Church
has been latent all this time, etc.

Answ. I have before in the proper place To the 19. untruth.
, where these things were objected, made answer.

T. W. 2. The Protestant Church, by the confession of Castalio a learned
Caluinist, etc. and David George never wrought any conversion, neither has
that appeared in the Protestant church which the Prophets foretold, of the
enlargement of the Church, and conversion of Nations thereby: and Castalio
thereupon deemeth those prophesies to be as yet not fulfilled.

Answ. 1. The Protestants have converted many Nations from dumb Idols, 1. Cor.
12.2. and from gross superstition, not much inferior to the impiety of
heathens: and thus according to the Prophets, Esa. 2.20. they have been Gods
instruments in a notable and welnigh miraculous conversion.

2. They have their share in all the precedent and ancient conversion of
Heathens by former Churches, by reason of consanguinitie of their doctrine with
them.

3. Castalio, whom you instile a Caluinist Briarly tr. 1.. 10.
; saying, that many prophetical predictions are not performed; means such
predictions as concern the Church in general, whereof the triumphant is a
part. Many things uttered by the Prophets, touching the glory and happiness of
the Church, Are but in semine, and plantation, in the Church militant, and
shall receive their perfection and glorious consummation in the life to come.

4. David George Thuan. hist. to. 2. lib. 12. Mellif. histor. part 3. page 451.
Stapl. Prompt. cath. p. 2. fest. Petri and Paul. page 155.
affirmed himself to be the Messiah, and was a blasphemous wretch: and yet as
bad as he was your friend Briarly Briarly pa. 308.
and you belie him. The ground of his heresy was not as you say, that because
the predictions of the Prophets touching the enlargement of the Church and
conversion of Nations were not fulfilled, therefore the Messiah was not come:
but he infers Hist. David. Georg. Holland. per Rector. and Academ. Basil.
to. 3. Germ. etc. artic. 8. Si Apostolorum and Christi doctrina, vera illa and
perfecta fuisset: Ecclesia quoque quam sua doctrina excitatunt and firmarunt
necessario permansisset, neque perijsset. Quia aduersus ecclesiam ne orci
quidem portae praeualent. Iam vero constat per quosdam, apostolorum doctrinam
and structuram funditus euersam esse, ex quo consequitur necessario apostolorum
doctrinam and aedificationem, mancam and imperfectam fuisse.
, that the Apostles doctrine was imperfect, because it continued not purely in
the succeeding Church, and because the frame of Religion which they had
erected, was euerted and ruined.

Untruth 24. Concerning the Popes authority, in calling of Councels.
T. W. Doctor White charging the Pope with innovation of his jurisdiction,
says: The beginning of the Popes supremacy over Councels was of late, since
the Councels of Constance and Basil; decreed within this 100. year, in the
Council of Lateran by a few Italian Bishops, Briarly p. 107.
whereas in the ancient Church it was otherwise.

But contrary to this, it is confessed by Doctor Whitaker De Council. q. 9 c. 2.
page 42.
, that Pope Julius challenged by an Ecclesiastical Canon, to assemble a
Council. And Danaeus Resp. ad Bellar par. 1. page 595.
confesses the same, etc. and the Centurists Centur. 5. col. 781.
in the first age censure the Popes of that age, for challenging to themselves
power of celebrating Councels, and rejecting Councels, etc.

Answ. Doctor White speaks of that supremacy over Councels, which modern
Popes usurp; which besides the claiming the sole right of calling, and
appointing Councels, and prescribing the form of proceeding in the same,
implies the disallowing, or ratifying the decrees thereof by his sentence; and
maintains that Councels are to decree nothing but that which the Pope does
first by his preinstructions, recommend and ratify Bos. de sig. l. 5. c. 9.
Potest Pontifex Romans qua part voluerit, habere concilia rata, eademque vbi
placuerit, reprobare. Est enim Petri successor, etc. Quod ipse sancit ab
vniuerso concilio sancitur. Bellarm. de Pontif. l. 2. c. 26. and de council. l.
2. c. c. 17. Greg. Val. anal. l. 8. c. 7. Azor. inst. mor. p. 2. l. 4. c. 13.
.

For the maintenance of this supremacy, which subuerteth all general Councels
Aen. Silu. de gest. council. Basil. page 19. Afferunt generalia concilia,
nullius esse penitus efficaciae, nullius omnino momenti, nisi Romans Pontifex
illa indixerit, etc. Quorum sententia si vt ipsi volunt, inviolata persistit,
ruinam ecclesiae secum habet. Quid enim remedij erit si criminosus Papa
perturbet ecclesiam, si animas perdat, si peruertit exemplo malo populos, si
denique contraria fidei praedicet, haereticisque dogmatibus imbuat subditos?
etc.
, and makes them to be nothing but the Popes stalking horses: and opposes the
practice of the primitive church, which gave the highest Ecclesiastical power
of judgment to the general council, our Adversary brings nothing, but
alleges Doctor Whitaker and Danaeus, acknowledging that Pope Julius by a
Canon of the Church Socrat. l. 2. c. 13.
, (not by divine law) challenged a prerogative, that he ought to be called to
the general council, and without his sentence no decrees might be concluded.
But 1. that which Pope Julius does challenge, was common to the other
Patriarchs, and they had the same right Socrat. hist. l. 7. c 28.
. 2. The Patriarchs claimed this by Ecclesiastical law, and not by divine law.
3. It employed no more, but that the Pope as a principal member of the church,
ought to have his voice in general councels Reg. iuris. Quod omnes tangit ab
omnibus debet approbari.
, and assent unto such decrees as passed in the same Vide Whitak. de script. q.
5. c. 6.
.

The Centurists speak not of the supremacy in question between our
Adversaries and us, but only censure a swelling humor Lud. Vines schol. in
Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, l. 20. c. 26. Illa demum ijs videntur concilia, quae in rem
sua^ faciunt: reliqua vero non pluris aestimanda, quam conuentum muliercularum,
in textrina vel thermis Paralip. Vrsperg. in council. Basil. Eugenium Papam
tantum abesse, vt generalibus concilijs debeat obedire, vt tunc se dicat maxim
mereri, cum concilij decreta contemnat.
of some Roman Popes, who labored to exceed the ancient bounds allotted them
by the church, although they never so much as dreamed of the usurpation, which
their successors, against all right of God and man did make.

Untruth 25. Concerning merit of works.
T. W. For the more disauthorising of the doctrine of the merit of works, our
Minister thus outlasheth: The doctrine of the merit of works, was lately begun
by the Schoolmen. But contrary to this assertion, the Centurists, Luther, and
D. Humphry, Centur. 5. col. 1178. Luth. co^. Gal. 4. D. Humph. Ies. p. 2. page
530.
censuring the writings of the Fathers, for teaching the doctrine of merit.

Answ. Doctor White speaks of the merit of condignitie, and of the merit of
congruitie, by the power of nature: and he truly charge the Schoolmen, to
have been the authors of the doctrine hereof Walden. sacram. tit. 1. c 7. page
30.
: and the Centurists, Luther, and D. Humphry, deal not with the Fathers about
this kind of merit, but only note them for using some broad speeches, which
gave occasion to subsequent error.

Untruth 26. Touching the sacrifice of the Mass.
T. W. The Minister endeavoring calumniouslie to dishonor the most healthful
and incruent sacrifice of the Mass, writes, that the Mass began not all at
once, but by degrees.

Answ. The word Mass, was for a good season unknown in the Church Henriq.
sum. mor. l. 9. c. 10. Vox, missa, est plane latina: and illa nunquam vtuntur
apostoli, etc. nec vllus ex Patribus graecis aut Syris etc. Ambros. l. 5. ep.
33. is the first latin Father, etc
. In later times it was used to signify the form of public prayer, and
administration of the Sacraments Enchir. Col. de Euchar. Missa vocabulum est ex
Hebraea lingua mutuatum: quo significare voluerunt Patres, quod Graeci
leiturgiam vocarunt. Council. Mileuitan. ca. 12.
; and then more strictly, the administration of the Eucharist Isiodor. orig. l
6. c. 19. Missa tempore sacrificij est, quando catechumeni for as mittuntur,
etc. Al. Hal. 4. q. 10. tr. 1. de Missa. Cassal. de sacrif. miss. l. 1. c. 3.
Mos erat vt dum sacerdos celebraturus esset, catechumeni, energumini, and
poenitentes admitterentur, ad decantationes Psalmorum, ad lectionem
Scripturarum: postea vero ante mysteriorum celebrationem, extra delubrum
educerentur, etc Diaconus illis exituris dixit, Ite, missa est, id est, sacrae
oblationis, cui vos interesse non licet, iam est exordium, ideo secedite.
Dionys. Areo page c. 3. par. 2. Aegid. Coenic. de Sacr. q. 83. ar. 1. dub. 3.
n. 47.
: whereunto, the conuerts unbaptized, (catechumeni) were not admitted, but
dismissed, and commanded to depart, by the words of the Deacon, p Ite missa
est. This Mass of the primitive Church, Doctor White impugneth not.

And further, to the Eucharist and Supper of the Lord administered according to
the ordinance of Christ, Doctor White yields all due honor: 1. He
acknowledges, that it is a memorial and true representation of the sacrifice
of Christ upon the cross, 1. Cor. 11.26. Secondly, a divine instrument and
seal authentical, really applying the body and blood of Christ to every
worthy receiver, for the remission of sin, and the impetrating of spiritual
and worldly blessings, 1. Cor. 10.26. Thirdly, it is a sacrifice of
commemoration, praise and thanksgiving, serving to the glorifying of God, and
giving thanks to Jesus Christ for the gracious work of our redemption.

In the holy use of this Sacrament, the faithful glorify God; and truly in an
ineffable manner partake the body and blood of Christ Chrysostom sup Ioh hom. 4^. and
sup. 1. Cor. hom. 24. Cyril. in Ioh. 15. l. 10. c 13. Ambros. de ijs qui mist.
initiantur. c. 9.
, 1. Cor. 10.16. and thereby obtain an augmentation of spiritual graces,
faith, hope, charity, repentance Cypr. ep. 64.
, etc. They are armed against temptations, comforted in misery Cypr. ep. 63.
, made more spiritual and religious, assured of the favor and love of God,
the forgiveness of their sins Enchir. Col. de Euchar. Principalis finis
huius sacramenti, vt Christo incorporemur, deque r^^issione peccatorum, and
furura gloria, tanquam pignore quodam certi reddamur. Vide Cypr. ser. de Coena
Dom. Chrysostom. ser de euchar in Encaenijs and hom 26. in Math. Aug. le pecc. mer.
and remiss. lib. 1. c. 24. Damasc. l. 4. theolog. ca. 14.
, and the possession of celestial happiness. Ioh. 6.50.51.54.56.57.

Touching the name and title of Sacrifice, our Church gives the same to the
holy Eucharist Service book, in the Communion.
: and that, not only in respect of certain pious actions annexed unto it, to
wit, prayer, thanksgiving, alms, etc. Romans 1.12.1. 1. Pet. 2.5: But in regard
of the Eucharist it self, wherein, 1. the outward elements of bread and wine,
receiving the calling of God ^ren. l. 4 c. 34. Percipiens vocationem Dei, etc.
, are made sacred, and appointed to divine worship, 1 Cor. 11.26. and become
instruments of grace to men. Secondly, the body and blood of Christ, present
to the soul, are by the faith and devotion of the Pastor and people which
receive these mysteries, presented and tendered to God, with request, that he
will vouchsafe, for the merit thereof, to bestow grace and remission of sins,
and other benefits upon them.

But as touching the Popish doctrine of the Mass, 1. Although we will not be
contentious about words, if the truth of matter may be had Aug. de Genesis ad lit.
lib. 4 c. 5. Dum res cognoscitur, no^ esse de vocabulis laborandum.
: yet we judge that the name of sacrifice does not in a proper or univocal
sense, belong to the Eucharist; because our Savior, upon whose example and
doctrine the Sacrament is founded Cypr. ep. 63. In sacrificio quod Christus
obtulit, non nisi Christus sequendus. Suar. to. 3. d. 54.. 2. and d. 55.. 3.
, neither made choice of any altar Lesseus de just. and iure, l. 2. c. 38. dub.
2. Ad sacrificium requiritur sacerdos and altar.
, nor ordained any Priests in the New Testament, nor himself used any words or
action sacrificall.

Our Adversaries affirm, that the consecration of the Elements Greg. Val. to.
4. d. 6. q. 11. Can. loc. lib. 12. c. 13.
, used by our Savior, was an oblation of them to his Father: But although
consecration be a kind of oblation, yet it is not such as is requisite to a
real sacrifice, as appears in the water of Baptism: and in Chrisme Bellarm.
de confirm. l. 2. c. 8.
the element of Popish confirmation, which is consecrated by the Bishop before
the unction: and in oil Olive, the element of extreme unction Bellar. de
extrem. vnct. l. 1. c. 7.
, which is consecrate in like sort by the Bishop.

Our Adversaries therefore further say, that the consecrating of the Elements
of the Eucharist, in such manner that they lose their substance, and are
converted into the body and blood of Christ Coster enchir. de sacrif. Miss. Hoc
sacrificium peragitur, conuersione panis and vini, in corpus and sanguinem
Christi saluatoris, dum peragitur consecratio. Lesseus de just. and iur. l. 2.
c. 38. d. 2. n. 16. Suar. to. 3. d. 75.. 6.
, is in manner of a sacrifice to offer them to God.

But then 1. the sacrifice depends upon Transubstantiation, and unless that be
granted, there can be no proper sacrifice Alex Hal. 4. de euchar. quaest. 10 m.
7. ar. 3.. 1. Resol. quomodo posset oblatio reiterari, nisi praesens esset in
sacramento, cuius oblatio in ipso iteratur? Azor. instit. mor 1. lib. 10. c. 8.
Tol instruct. sac. l. 2 c. 4. Aegid. Coenick de Sacram. q. 83 ar. 1, dub. 1. n.
16. and dub. 2. nu. 41.
.

2. Every external sacrifice must be visible and sensible Aegid. Coenic. de
Sacr. qu. 83. ar. 1. dub. 4. Cum hoc sacrificium sit humanum and sensibile,
eius hostia debet aliquo modo esse sensibilis.
: but the conversion of the Elements into the body and blood of Christ, by the
words of consecration, is invisible Ib. number. 78. Realis eius immutatio non est
sensibilis, etc. Mald. disp. to 1. de eucha^. par. 3 page 319. Sacrificium est
oblatio sensibilis, rei sensibilis, etc. page 322. In cruce corpus Christi
forma visibili oblatum est, in eucharistia inuisibili.
.

3. If consecration be sacrificing, then the matter and thing consecrated is
the host: but the matter and thing consecrated are the creatures of bread and
wine, and not the body and blood of Christ Aegid. Coenick de Sacr. q 83. ar. 1.
d. 4 Circa Christum, etc. nulla fit realis immutatio, etc.
. Whereupon it will follow, that the Host or thing offered in this sacrifice,
shall be only the outward Elements Ib. number. 79. Dici non potest quod species
sunt pars huius hostiae.
, (which according to our Adversaries Tenet, alone are changed by consecration)
but this is repugnant to the present doctrine of Pontificians Suar. disp. 75.
conclus. 3. and vlt. and est fere communis. Coenick. ib. n. 74.
.

Finding therefore many difficulties in their opinion, which maintain the
Eucharist to be an external and proper sacrifice, we content our selves to
hold with the primitive Fathers, that the same is a sacrifice according to a
large acceptance of the word, and in a figurative meaning, so called, because
it is a representation of the real sacrifice of Christ once offered upon the
Cross Aug. ep. 23. Ex similitudine ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. Chrysostom. in
Heb. 10 hom. 17. Theoderit. com. Heb. 8. Aug. 83. quaest. q. 61. Cyprian. ep.
63. Theoph. com. heb. 10. De Consecr. d 2. cap. Quid sit sanguis.
.

2. The things which we simply condemn in the Popish Mass, are these.

1. That Christ existing in earth, covered with the forms of bread and wine, is
in his very substance offered to God his Father Catec. Trid. de euchar. Tol.
instr. sac l. 2. c. 4. Rhem. Heb. 9. 7.
.

2. We reject private Masses, in which the Priest eats alone Henriq. sum.
mor. l. 9. c. 1.
and undertakes for a fee to apply the fruit thereof to particular persons
Biel. can. miss. lect. 26. Sacerdos offerens sacrificium in persona ecclesiae
potest eius fructum and virtute^ alicui vel aliquibus specialiter applicare.
Scot Quodl 20.
.

3. That it is of equal force with the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross
Henriq sum. mor. l. 9. c. 19. Ita prodest Missa ac si nunc Christus pateretur,
and recens illius sanguis, qui in Missa offertur, flueret de latere eius in
calicem and in os celebrantis.
. 4. Or conferreth grace by the outward work done to some kind of iniust
persons Tolet. instr. sac. l. 6. c. 14. Angelus. and Syluester, verb.
eucharistia Remittitur mortale quando existens in mortali, non habet
conscientiam ipsius nec affectum. Vnde reuerenter accedens, quamuis antea non
fuerit contritus, consequitur gratiam charitatis, quae contritionem perficit,
and remissionem peccati.
. 5. That it satisfies, ex opere operato, for temporal punishment Suar. 3. d.
79.. 6. Henriq. sum. mor. l. 9. c. 12.
. 6. and is beneficial to the defunct, as well as to ye living Henriq. ib. c.
16. Non solum viuis, sed animabus defunctorum prosunt sacrificia Missarum, etc.
. 7. That it depelleth all evil, both of punishment, fault, and misery Ib. c.
12. n. 1. g. Ac depelleret omne malum non solum poenae, sed culpae, miseriae
and indigentiae nostrae, etc.
. 8. Or is available as a sacrifice of Christ's body, to procure plenty of the
fruits of the earth, and to be a remedy against pestilence, inundation,
tempest, scar-fire Ibid. c. 13. n. 3.
, etc. 9. And the administration thereof in an unknown tongue, together with
invocation of Saints, and prayer for souls departed, with reference to
Purgatory.

T. W. Now here to instruct the Doctors ignorance, or at least to detect his
malice, I am to lay down the judgment of the Catholic Church, teaching what
is maintained to be essential to the sacrifice of the Mass, and what but
accidental.

Answ. You undertake to deliver the judgment of the Catholic Church, touching
what is essential to the sacrifice of the Mass, when you are altogether
unable to yield us any common resolution from your own Doctors Suar. to. 3. d.
75.. 1. Variae opiniones in praesenti quaestione ortae sunt.. 2. Sex actiones,
de quibus dubitatum, in qua vel quibus earum, essentia sacrificij consistat.
.

T. W. The true nature then and essence of this sacrifice, we hold to consist
in the oblation of the most sacred body and blood of Christ, and consummation
thereof. What prayers or ceremonies do either precede or follow the words of
the institution, are no essential part of the Mass, and if they were all
omitted, yet were the sacrifice true and perfect, etc.

Answ. Why do you bear your Reader in hand, that Doctor White has proved the
nouelty of the Mass, only in such parts thereof as be accidental? 1. He
proves Transubstantiation, which is so essential to your Mass, that it
enters into the definition of it Tol. inst. sac. l. 2. c. 4.
, to be a novelty.

2. He produces some of your Doctors Cited by Azor inst. mor. 1. l. 10. c. 8.
acknowledging that no sacrifice was offered by our Savior in his first
institution of the Eucharist.

3. Affirming that Thomas Aquinas was ignorant of this sacrifice, he speaks
of the Essence, and not only of the contingent parts thereof.

T. W. It is the Catholic doctrine of the Church, that the essence of the
sacrifice of the Mass consists in the oblation of the body and blood of
Christ, and the consummation thereof.

Answ. The judgment of the Catholic Church about the Eucharist, is grounded
upon the words and deeds of our Savior at his last Supper Suar. 3. d. 75.. 3.
Nulla actio est de substantia huius sacrificij, quam Christus in coena non
exercuit. Cypr. ep. 63. sine lib. 2. ep. 3.
. But our Savior therein used no sacrificall oblation, nor sacerdotall
consumption.

Touching the former, 1. This position was maintained by Cornelius Mus Canus
loc. l. 12. c. 13. Suar. 3. d 74.. 2.
, a famous Bishop of your Church, at the Trident Council. 2. Iansenius
Concord. Euang. c. 131.
affirms; That no sacrifice can be proved effectually out of the Evangelists,
or any other Scripture. 3. Your Doctors are unable to demonstrate any
sacrificall words or deeds of our Savior in his administration.

2. And that consumption of the Elements can be no essential part of the
sacrifice appears, 1. Because according to many Doctors it is uncertain,
whether Christ in his first institution being then the Priest, did himself
receive the Sacrament Suar. tom 3. d. 75.. 5. Referunt Euangelistae Christum
Dominum, consecrasse eucharistiam: non autem ita referunt sumpsisse.
. 2. Although Bellarmine and Gregory of Val. make consumptio^ to be of the
essence of the sacrifice, yet Becanus Becan. de trip sacrif. c. 8. Suar. ibid.
Tho. Aqu. 3. q. 79. ar. 5. and q. 82. ar. 4. ad. 1. and q 83. ar. 4.
, Suarez Bonau. 4. d. 14. ar. 1. q. 4. Aegid. Coeninc. de Sacram. q. 83. ar. 1.
dub. 5. conclus. 4 and 6.
, Egidius Coeninck, etc. deny the same, saying; That sole action is essential
to the sacrifice, which the Priest as a minister does exercise in the person of
Christ: But this is consecration only, for herein the Priest speaks in the
person of Christ, but in the receiving he does nothing in Christ's person, but
in his own Mayor 4. d. 14. q 9. Alan. de sacrif. miss. c. 25. Cassal. de
sacrif. l. 2. c. 25. Oxomens. de sacrif. c. 11. Catharin opusc. de sacrif.
m^ss. Palac. 4 d. 8. q. 1. and 4. Turtian. l ^8. constit. in schol. ad. cap. 5.
10. 11. 12. 14.
.

3. It is presumption in you, to affirm that to be the doctrine of the
Catholic Church, which is neither determined by any public sentence of the
Church, nor maintained by the common consent of your own Doctors.

Melchior Canus Loc lib. 12. c. 13. Vide Sot. 4. d. 13. q 2. ar. 1. Qui requi^^
quatuor actiones, etc.
your learned Bishop says: There be four things essential in the sacrifice
of the Mass, consecration, oblation, fractio^, and consumption. Alphonsus
Castro Cont. haer. lib. 10. verb. Missa.
; There be three, etc. consecration, oblation, and consumption. Bellarmine and
Gr. Valence Bellar. de Miss l. 1. c. 27. Greg. Val. 4. d 6. q. 11. p. 1.
; There be two, Consecration and Consumption. Stapleton Stapl. Antid. Euang.
Math. 26. page 360.
; The sacrifice consists in benediction, thanksgiving, and consecration.
Scotus and Eckius place the essence of the sacrifice in that oblation which is
made after consecration Scot. 4. d. 13. q. 2 ar. 1 Eckius de sacris. Miss. cap.
9.
. But Suarez, Becanus, Lesseus, Costerus, Aegidius Coeninck, place it only in
Consecration Suar. 3. d. 75.. 5. Becan de tripl. sacrif. c. 8. Less. de just.
and iur. l. 2. c. 38. dub. 2. Coster. enchir. de Miss. page 335. Coeninc. de
Sacram. q 83 ar. 1 dub. 5.
.

T.W. In the other part of this Section the P. produces Calvin, Hospinian, and
others, affirming that the doctrine of the Mass was universally taught in the
primitive Church.

Answ. Calvin affirms Calvin. instit. l 4. c. 18. 10.
, that the Fathers held the true and Orthodoxall sense of the mystery of the
Eucharist. So far is he from condemning the primitive Church for error in
doctrine about this Sacrament, or for believing the Mass; only he and other
Protestants observe in the Fathers some inconvenient speeches.

Hospinian Hospin. hist. sacr. l. 1. c. 6.
is wretchedly abused by you; for when he says, the Devil did deceive men
more about this Sacrament, even in the first age, the Apostles yet living, then
about Baptism: He speaks not of the Orthodoxe Fathers, as though they had
been deceived by Satan, but 1. of the Corinthians who erred about this
Sacrament, and are reproved, 1. Cor. 11.2. Of the Simonians, Menandrians, and
other Heretics, who utterly rejected the Eucharist, because they would not
acknowledge the verity of Christ's humane nature Cum illi Eucharistiam omnino
repudiarint, ne veritate^ carnis Christi propter symbola eucharistica fateri
cogerentur.
.

And thus you which exclaim against Doctor White, saying; If you cannot blush
for shame, grow pale for fear, have need to place the said monition in the
forepart of your wallet, unless you desire to be of their number, of which
Seneca Seneca de ira, l. 2.
speaks: Aliena vitia in oculis habes (or rather habere te fingis,) a tergo
tua sunt. You place other men's faults in sight, and hang your own behind your
back.

Untruth 27. Concerning Wafer Cakes.
T. W. The Doctor inueighing farther against the Mass, says; that Wafer Cakes
were first brought into the Sacrament in the eleventh age, or Century after
Christ: But it is confessed by Doctor Bilson, that in the days of Epiphanius
it was round in figure: and Cartwright says, it was brought in by Pope
Alexander, etc.

Answ. The words of D. White are these: Honorius is noted for bringing in of
Wafers into the Sacrament; and then he produces Cassander Cassand. Leiturg. c.
27. page 66. 68.
, reporting, that the Author of the exposition of the Roman order took it
grieuouslie, that the loaves of bread anciently used in the Church, were turned
into slender plates, etc.

And other learned Papists affirm, that Wafers were unknown in the primitive
Church. Durandus Durand. Rational. diu. offic. l. 4. c. 53.
says, In the primitive Church all that were present at the celebration of the
Mass, did every day communicate. Their oblation was a great loaf, sufficient
for all, which the Graecians are said to continue to this day. And Salmeron
Salmer. in 1. Cor. 10. disp. 17. page 138.
the Jesuit; In ancient time every communicant had a portion broken unto him
out of one loaf. You should therefore rather have accused your own Doctors of
falsehood if their report offend you, then Doctor White.

But you produce Doctor Bilson, confessing, that in the days of Epiphanius the
sacramental bread was round in figure: and Master Cartwright saying, that Pope
Alexander brought in Wafer cakes. I answer, that you reason wildly from the
figure to the matter, as though loaf bread or leauened bread might not be
fashioned in a round figure.

Untruth 28. Concerning Adoration of the Sacrament.
T. W. The Minister persisting in his serpentine and venomous disposition
against the most blessed Sacrament, lyingly forgeth, that the adoration thereof
is a late invention, following upon the conceit of the real presence, and
prescribed 1220. years after Christ by Honorius the third.

Answ. Doctor White justly condemned the adoration of the outward materials and
Elements of bread and wine in the Eucharist, with latria or divine worship,
maintained by your greatest Doctors Henriq. sum. moral. l. 8. c. 32. Speciebus
eucharistiae etc. semper datur latria, propter Christum quem continent, sicut
imagini Christi and signo crucis. Suar. 3. d. 65. Eadem adoratione est
adorandum qua ipse Christus. Greg. Val. to. 4. d. 6. q. 11. p. 2. Diuino cultu
latriae interno and externo illud adorandum esse, etc. Antonin. sum. hist tit.
23. c. 7.. 10.
, (although some of you dissemble this Idolatry Stapl. prompt. cath. p. 2.
sermon. in die Epiph. page 29. Nec catholici species quas vident, adorant, sed
totum Christum.
.) But of the other side (if the disease of the Seminary had not transported
you Chrysostom. sup. Genes. hom. 41. Malitia obtenebrat rationem, and eum qui semel
a via aberrauit, per abrupta praecipitem dat.
) you might have observed, that my brother (intending only to propugne the
public doctrine of the Church of England) could not be carried with any evil
disposition against the blessed Sacrament.

Our Church and all the godly Pastors of the same, most religiously honor and
esteem the holy Eucharist, being one of the sacred seals of the New Testament
Hooker Eccles. pol. lib. 5.. 67. These holy mysteries received in due manner,
do instrumentally both make us partakers of the grace of that body and blood
which were given for the life of the world; and besides also impart unto us,
even in true and real, though mystical manner, the person of our Lord himself,
etc. What merit, force, and virtue soever there is in his sacrificed body and
blood, we freely, fully, and wholly have it by this Sacrament. This Sacrament
is a true and real participation of Christ.
, (conduicts of life, and conueiances of heavenly grace unto us) and unto the
person of Jesus Christ, and unto his body and blood united personally with the
deity, and once upon the Cross offered for our redemption, and now
represented, made present, communicated, and received in a mystical manner, in
the lawful and holy use of this Sacrament, 1. Cor. 10.16. Ioh. 6.54. etc. we
yield the same Adoration Gomar. specul. eccles. p. 68. Christum esse in coena
praesentem, agnoscimus, and adoramus, etc.
(both inward and outward) whereof Saint Paul speaks, Heb. 1.6. and Saint
Augustine Aug. sup. Psalm. 98. vide Aug. de doctr. Christ l. 3. c. 8.
; No man eats Christ's flesh, but he first adoreth Christ.

And as touching the Doctors assertion: That Honorius the third seems to have
been the first author, who solemnly decreed and appointed the superstitious
adoration of the outward signs of the Eucharist: He was induced to think thus
by no serpentine malice (as your Adders language, Psalm. 140.3. styles) but by
probable collection of Story, and by the report of learned Divines, (who
before him) affirmed the same Hospinian. hist Sacram. par. 1. l. 4. c. 6.
.

T. W. Now that there was no innovation touching the adoration of the Sacrament
at that time, is evident from two reasons; 1. Because no Historiographer does
give the least intimation of any such institution brought into the Church;
only Honorius decreed, that the Priest should more diligently admonish the
people thereof, in regard of some former negligence crept in concerning the
same.

Answ. 1. If your argument from negative authority be good, to wit; No
Historiographer does report any such institution of Honorius, ergo there was
none: then mine will not be evil, No Historiographer does report, that any
such devotion was used before Honorius commanded it; ergo it is probable that
he was the first author.

2. In the decree of Honorius Decretal. 3. de celebr. miss. l. 3. tit. 41. cap.
Sane cum olim.
there is no intimation of any such like adoration formerly used: but a strict
precept hereafter to do it. And if you contend that this adoration was more
ancient, produce testimonies, and make it so appear; otherwise we must father
this superstition upon Honorius, unless you derive the pedigree from an elder
parentage.

3. Your learned Doctors, which propugne the Trent doctrine touching adoration,
do make the decree of Honorius Suar. tom. 3. d. 65.. 1.
next unto the Trident Council, the principal ground (in respect of Church
authority) for this manner of adoration.

T. W. The former point is proved from the abundant testimonies of our
Adversaries, charging the times precedent to Honorius, with the said adoration.
Auerroes living eighty years before Honorius, charged Christians for adoring
the Sacrament. The Centurists speaking of the prayers of Saint Ambrose, say;
Those prayers contain the adoration of the bread in the Sacrament. Chemnicius
produces diverse sentences of Augustine, Nazianzene, and Ambrose, which in his
judgment affirm the adoration of the Sacrament.

Now all these authorities do demonstratiuely convince, that the adoration of
the Sacrament was not introduced into the Church as an innovation in the time
of Honorius.

Answ. 1. What manner of adoration used by Christians in the Eucharist,
Auerrohes the Saracen reproved, I suppose it is doubtful: and if you speak
to purpose, you must prove that he condemned such adoration as is now in use
among you, and that your manner was then in general use among Christians.

2. The place of the Centuries which you object, is not in the 43. page of the
fourth Centurie. The Centurists Centur. 4. c. 4. page 294. Erasmus non esse
Ambrosij censuit, etc.
refuse this book of Ambrose named by you, as a counterfeit, and therefore
they cannot out of the same charge Saint Hierom with a false opinion.

3. You abuse Chemnicius Chem. exam. council. Trid. p. 2. page 92.
, by saying that he produces certain Fathers, affirming the adoration of the
Sacrament in your Popish manner: for he says, they adored the person of Christ
in spirit and in truth, who is present in the Sacrament; and maintains that
it is Idolatry to adore the forms of bread and wine.

Untruth 29. Concerning the succession of Catholic Pastors.
T.W. After the Doctor has Thrasonically boasted of the succession of the
Protestants in his own Church, he proceeds further, affirming that the
succession of the Pastors and Bishops in the Church of Rome, has been
interrupted, etc. Now the question here intended, is not of succession of
doctrine, by which slight, diverse of our Adversaries use to decline the
testimonies of the ancient Fathers, alleged by us for succession, but only of
external succession of Bishops and Pastors, etc.

Answ. 1. Few men are better able to discover a Thraso then your self, being
no mean artisan in this mystery: and yet you are here mistaken, saying;
Doctor White Thrasonically boasted, etc. For without any word or sign of
ostentation, he only affirms, That our English Bishops succeed lineally in
their places, from the first Apostles of our land: which is a matter more easy
to be proved, then that Pope Paul now living, succeeds Hildebrand or Gregory
the seventh.

2. Where you say, that the question intended by Doctor White, is not of
succession of doctrine: his own words reprove you, saying; Lineall succession
is, when the persons succeed as well in doctrine as place. Page 412. and after
again; We do not deny but they have a rank of Bishops externally sitting one
after another, but lawful succession stands not herein. From whence it
appears, that Doctor White speaks of succession, as it is described by your
Doctors Hos contra Brent. l. 5. p. 233. Quando nos de successione gloriamur, de
eo gloriamur quod 1. Episcoporum Catholicorum quorum loca tenemus, doctrinam
successerimus. Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 4. ar. 2. no tab. 1. Successio de qua
agitur, nec locorum tantum est, nec personarum: sed etiam verae atque sanae
doctrinae successio. Et princip. doct. l. 13. c. 6. Gr. Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1.
p. 7.. 25. Bellar. de eccles. l. 4. c. 8. Grets. def. Bellar. de verbo Dei,
page 1720.
, and whereof there be two parts; one as it were the outward body; to wit,
local and lineall succession of person: the other is as the soul, or the
animalizing part, to wit, the succession of doctrine. And surely you are
disposed, even to proclaim your self a liar, who term it a slight and
evasion of the Protestants, to call for true doctrine in lawful succession,
seeing your selves make the same essential Successio personalis nulla est, vbi
successio doctrinae coniuncta non est. Stapl. l. 13. c. 6. princip. doctr.
in succession, and deny the Greek church Stapl. ib. Graecae Ecclesiae, ab
ipsis Apostolorum fundamentis, personarum successionem, demonstrate possunt.
, which has personal succession as well as yours, to be a true Church, because
of heretical doctrine.

T. W. Doctor White denying, that the Roman Church has external succession of
Bishops and Pastors, utters a malicious lie, and is controlled by his own
brethren: for the Centurists in the tenth Chapter of every Century do
elaborately set down the particular succession of the Bishops of Rome, even
from Saint Peter to their own time. Doctor Fulk in like manner says; You can
name the notable persons in all ages, in their government and ministry, and
especially the succession of the Popes, etc.

Answ. 1. Doctor White speaks of true and lawful succession, and you produce
testimonies out of Doctor Fulke and others, for succession in general. 2. The
Centurists Centur. 12. cap. 8. page 1189.
report the interruption of lawful succession in your Roman Church, by
schisms of Popes, and also the corrupt entrance of many Popes into the Papal
throne; which argues, that they justified not your succession as lawful, but
only for Story, related the same such as it was. 3. You affirm, that the
Centurists set down the particular succession of Roman Bishops until their
own age, whereas their work ends in the 1300. year, which was 250. years
before their own age: and within this time there have happened certain schisms,
and ruptures of personal succession Read part 1. chap. 3. paragr. 3 obseru.
2. prop. 2
.

T. W. Calvin flatly denies succession to be found in his Church: So
dangerously wounding himself with that sentence of Augustine, The succession
of Priests from the very seat of Peter, until this present Bishop, does
justly hold me in the bosom of the Church.

Answ. Calvin in the place mentioned by you, only says; That God in our time
raised up Evangelists, whose calling was extraordinary: but he affirms not
in general of all Protestant Bishops and Pastors, that they wanted external
ordination, neither intermedleth particularly with the Church of England, whose
Bishops and Ministers at the first had their outward ordination from the former
Church.

2. Saint Augustines Aug. to 6. cont epist. Manich. c. 4. Tenet authoritas,
miraculis inchoata, spe nutrita, charitate aucta, vetustate firmata, etc.
testimony, who speaks of succession when it was lawful and incorrupt: of
succession which had truth of doctrine joined with it: Begun with miracles,
nourished with hope, increased by charity, confirmed by antiquity as well of
doctrine as outward state, reaching to the Apostles, wounds not Master
Calvin: but shows how much you are degenerate, who are able at this day to
show no succession of bishops in your church agreeing to the description of
Saint Augustine. And this Father in that very place Quae quidem (veritas) si
tam manifesta monstratur, vt in dubium, venire no^ possit, praeponenda est
omnibus illis rebus quibus in catholica teneor.
, affirms; that manifest truth is to be preferred before succession, and all
outward means, whereby he was holden in the Church; and therefore he makes
not personal succession principally or alone, a note of the Church.

T. W. Our uninterrupted succession is infallibly euicted by our Adversaries
acknowledgment of the continual visiblenesse thereof, since the one does
reciprocally imply the other, etc.

Answ. Your visibility may prove some kind of outward succession, but it
proves not lawful succession, as appears by the Greeks Stapl. doctr.
princip. l. 13. c. 6. Nec vbi adhuc durat talis personalis successio,
catholicae tamen successioni, quicquam habere affine, aut simile: quia propter
haereses quas tenent, and schisma quod faciunt, legitima illa successio non est.
, whose Church has always been visible, and yet according to your censure,
their succession is corrupt.

Untruth 30. Concerning Master Luther his life and manners.
T. W. Whereas the Doctor becomes Luthers Encomiast, and much labors to
free his life and death from obloquy and infamy, affirming, that whatsoever
touching his life, may seem worthy of reprehension, is only forged by his
Adversaries: I will by delivering the confession of Luther himself, and the
testimonies of learned Protestants convince the shameless untruth, etc.

Answ. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. 1. ad Eunom. (...). page 196.
, reports of the Eunomians, that they were deficient in maintaining their
opinions, and thereupon labored to credit themselves by defaming their
Adversaries the Orthodoxe professors: and even as flies fasten upon galled
backs and sore places, so they fixed themselves upon personal infirmities to
deface right doctrine. T.W. ( Quaelibet in quemuis opprobria dicere saeuus Hor.
li. 1. ep. 15
,) observes this method: After many calumnious reproaches formerly darted
against D. White himself, and other Ministers, he closes up the train of his
second part with certain stale abuses against Martin Luther.

His pretext of libelling against him is a speech of my Brothers, wherein he
reproves the malicious deportment of Coclaeus, Lindanus, etc. against Luther,
and produces Erasmus and some other, giving testimony of his integrity. But
Doctor White did not so highly commend Luther, as though he had been a
celestial Angel, and inculpable in all his sayings and deeds, or free from
whatsoever might seem worthy of reprehension, as T. W. having a loose tongue,
pretends. S. Hieroms speech Cont. Pelag. l. 1.
is remarkable, Where shall you find any, in whose manners some blemish, like a
wart or mole in a fair body, may not be espied? And if the Prophets Esaias,
Daniel, etc. Esa. 6.5. and 64.6. Dan. 9.5. and the Apostles of Christ confess
their frailty, Romans 7.24. 1. Ioh. 1.8. Let it be no reproach to the Protestants
that Luther was a sinner.

T. W. I will insist only in two points: 1. In displaying Luthers sensuality.
2. His pride.

His lust and incontinencie is proved by his words and confession. He gives
counsel: If the wife will not, or cannot, let the maid come.

Answ. This speech being divorced from the occasion whereupon it was uttered,
and from the other parts of the discourse, seems gross: But the whole
contexture being laid together affords no more but this: That if a
disobedient wife refuse to live with her husband according to the Apostles
rule, 1. Cor. 7.3. And by her obstinacy give occasion of adultery, the
husband may threaten her with divorce, and cutting her off from his flesh.
Eccles. 25.26. And terrify her with the example of Queen Vashtai, who being
rebellious was put away, and Hester a maid was chosen in her place. Hest. 1.12.
And if upon admonition of her husband and others, she still continued
obstinate, Luther esteemed this to be a kind of desertion. 1. Cor. 7.15. And
judged it a lawful cause of divorce Luth. tom. 6. de vita coniug. par. 2. de
diuort.
. Now although this opinion of his concerning divorce, be not so justifiable:
yet the Papists do shamefully abuse him, in detorting his words to a giving
liberty Bo^de sig. l 12 c. 3. Fas esse decernunt cum ancillis concumbere, etc.
Serrar. Jesuit. co^. Hest. 1. q. 12. Campian. rat. 8. Coccius thesaur par. 1.
de sig. eccles. page 1125.
to adultery and dishonestie, which he never intended.

T. W. Luther has these speeches: As it is not in my power that I should be no
man, so it is not in my power that I should be without a woman. It is as
necessary, as to eat, drink, purge, etc. I am almost mad through the rage of
lust and desire of women. Eight days are now past, wherein I neither write,
pray, nor study, being vexed partly with temptation of the flesh, partly with
other trouble, etc.

Answ. 1. Some of these speeches are taken out of a counterfeit Treatise
Colloq. mensale.
, going under the name of Luther, 2. Other of these sayings are perverted to a
false meaning: for Luther intends no more, but that in regard of such persons
as are not called by God to a single life, and have not received the gift of
continency, the obtruding of forced chastity is a violence to nature: a
resisting of Gods ordinance, and a cause of intolerable filthiness. And
against them which by external bonds and laws did endeavor to make men
chaste, being indeed inept thereunto: he says truly, It is no more in the power
of man to alter the constitution of nature in this kind, then in other natural
conditions: as eating, drinking, purging, etc. Martin Luther lived in a time
wherein the contagion and sulphurean smoke of Papisticall whoredom, darkened
the Church, and infected all the world with filthiness Summa Praedic. de
Luxuria, lect. 7. Fatui leccatores, and specialiter sacerdotes illas (ancillas)
infatuant dicentes illud peccatum (luxuriam) minus esse quam si^ and se non
esse sacerdotes nisi quando sint in Missa.
: and therefore he was more vehement in reproving then hypocrisy, which for
the maintenance of this tainted single life depressed matrimony: and in his
zeal against this horrible hypocrisy; he uttered some broad speeches, which
being set upon the rack, may seem inconvenient.

But could our Adversaries produce out of Luther any such positive doctrine as
we read in some decretall Epistles of the Popes Clem. Romans ep. 5. Communis
vsus omniu^, quae sunt in hoc mundo omnibus hominibus esse debuit, etc. In
omnibus autem sunt sine dubio coniuges.
: to wit, that all things in this world, and among the rest, men's wives ought
to be common: we should suspect Luther in such sayings to have been guided with
no good spirit.

T. W. Luthers pride is accused by sundry learned Protestants; Zuinglius says:
Behold how Satan labors wholly to possess this man. Oecolampadius
admonishes him to beware, lest being puffed up with arrogance and pride, he be
seduced by Satan. Vrbanus Regius: God by reason of the sin of pride,
wherewith Luther was puffed up, has taken away the true spirit from him as he
did from the Prophets, 3. book of Kings 22. and in place thereof has given
him a proud, angry, and lying spirit.

Answ. 1. It falls out many times that holy men in the heat of contention do
censure each other over hardly Hierom ag. Rufin. 1 Epiphanius ag. Chrysostom.
, and yet charitable censors use not to balance their lives in generalll by
the reproach and accusation of their Adversaries.

2 It is possible for a good man at some times to be elated with pride. 2.
Chron. 32.25. transported with anger. 1. Sam. 25.13. And David a man of a
perfect heart, was guided by Satan in one of his actions. 1. Cron. 21.1. The
holy spirit of God forsakes just men in some actions, and corrupt affections
may transport and blind them, until divine grace reviving in them, they are
restored, and delivered from the tentations of Satan. And our Adversaries
acknowledge, That just men may fall into mortal sin Lomb 4. d. 14. A^bert.
ib. d. (...). ^ichard. ib. ar. 8. q 2. S^^t. q. d. 22. q. 1. (...) 4 d 14 q. 3.
ar. 3. d. ^. Almain q. ^. ar. 2 Cochan. M^rsil. Durand. ^o. Medina. V^^qu. etc.
, and although they cease to be just, during the time that such sin has
dominion over them: yet when they are recovered by repentance, their former
justice is reimputed unto them.

This might befall Luther and any other godly man; and during the time he
persisted in error, other Protestants might admonish and reprove him, and yet
again, upon his ceasing from his froward ways, acknowledge him to be the
servant of Christ.

T. W. Now having displayed in part, Luthers deportment, etc. I refer to the
Readers consideration: 1. Whether our Doctor did auerre an untruth or no in
justifying, that whatsoever could be produced against Luthers life and
conversation, was malignantly forged by us his enemies.

Answ. 1. Doctor White never intended to justify Luther, or any other servant
of God in every personal Aug. de Ciuit D^i l. 14. c. 9. Nunc satis been
viuitur, si sine cumme, sine pecc. ante^ etc.
action (but it is common with you, to magnify sinful men A^ton^um. hist p 3.
c 7.. 11 Coram Deo testisicor, ira purum inueni, sicut puetum quinque a^^^m,
qui nunq ^^ sensit s^^e carnis contagium, ^ec habuit alicuins mortalis criminis
in voluntate consensum. Tho. Aquin. Nunquam hab^^ motum inan^s gloriae. Surius
de S. Francisc c. 14. Tanta in eo carnis ad spiritum erat concordia, tanta
obedientiae promptitudo, quod cum ille ad omnem niteretur sanctitatem
pertingere, ipsa non solum non repugnaret, sed praecurrere niteretur.
in this manner.) The sum of that which he professes, is; That Luther was an
holy man, free from the foul and grievous crimes objected against him, and
that many Roman Popes have lived and died worse then he. And against this T. W.
P. has brought nothing, but endeavoring to do his worst, produces only a
few broken sentences, divorced from the body of his discourse, and perverted
against his meaning: and alleges some Protestants, who in an opposition which
happened between Luther and them, reprove his deportment in that particular
business. And from hence it appears, that in truth you have nothing to except
against him, and that he was a most worthy man, considering that
notwithstanding your wicked eye which has searched every corner to detect him,
you cannot find where to fasten your nails.

T. W. The second, (and that much more importing) whether it stands with
probability of reason, or the accustomed course of Gods proceeding; to make
choice for the restoring and replanting the truth of his Gospel, of a man,
whose course of life, writings, and doctrine, do breathe only pride,
contumacy, sensuality, Sardanapalisme and luxury.

Answ. Although God at sundry times by the preaching and ministry of wicked
persons, do plant grace in others; even as he fed Elias by Ravens, 1. King.
17.6. being unclean birds, Deuteronomy. 14.14. and according to Saint Augustine, Such
is the power of divine grace, that by evil men it wins good, and by such as
be reprobate and wicked, it gathers the just: Yet I assent her^in to T. W. P.
that it scarce stands with the accustomed order of Gods providence, to make
choice of a man, whose course of life, writing, and doctrine, does breathe out
only pride, luxury, etc. for the restoring and replanting of the truth of his
G^spell. And from hence I infer two things: 1. That it is improbable, that
the frame of religion should lean upon the shoulders of Popes, and that
conversion of countries has been wrought by them, considering, that (as D.
Stapleton Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 5. ar 3. pa. 158. Ad reliquas vexationes
accesserunt enormia and borre^d. Ro^. Pont^fic^m peccata and flagitia: vix enim
vllum peccatum ola haer^si excepta, excogitari pote^^, quo illa seeds turpiter
maculata non fuerit ^axime ab anno 800. and infra, etc.
affirms,) There can scarce any wickedness (heresy excepted) be devised, or
named, where with the Roman Sea has not been defiled in a shameful manner
since the 800. year. And before him Papi^ius Masson: No man at this day
looks for any sanctity in Popes. They are reputed exceeding good, if they be
good in any small measure, or less wicked then other men use to be Papir.
Masson. de episc. Vib. l. 6 ^n Paulo 3. In Pontificib^s, nemo hodie sanctitatem
^equirit. Optimi putantur, si vel leuiter bom sint, vel minus mali quam caeteri
mortales esse s^leant.
. 2. It is probable, that Luther was an holy man, because God by him did
restore and replant the truth of his Gospel.

But whereas in your conclusion, you defame Luther with sensuality,
Sardanapalisme, and luxury: I do not a little marvel, that you are so
profuse in words, and so sparing in proofs: for you have only produced
testimonies of unseemly words uttered by Luther: but you are not as yet able
to tax him for any lewd or vicious deed.

T. W. I will end with Luther, from whom you did originally suck your lying
doctrine: only since you are entered with our vulgar multitude into the number
and catalogue of our Evangelical Prophets, I would wish such your followers,
to entertain an impartial view and consideration of this, and other your
forgerie and sleights: which if they do, they shall find you are guided by
the ghostly enemy of man's soul, who once said, I will go forth, and be a
lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets.

Answ. Whosoever does impartially consider your proceeding, may perceive that
you rail well, but reason badly. D. White was a plain teacher, and brought up
in no forge. And whereas you thwart him with the ghostly enemy of man's soul,
beware lest your self be this enemy his interpreter, or carry his train. To
the Reader I will multiply no words, only thus much I affirm, that if he
indifferently compare your cauils and Whites answer, Inueniet conuicta
conuitia, He shall find railing convinced by verity.

Finis secundae partis.
An Answer to the third part of T. W. P. his objections, concerning
Impertinencies and absurd illations.
T. W. P. Having in the two precedent parts, set down many corruptions and
lies (coined by your self, and not) by M. White. It now follows, according
to my intended method, (of impudency and calumniation) that I (being more fit
for a stage, then the Doctors chair) display diverse of his absurd and
impertinent inferences, (which are made to seem so by your deprauing.) For
these three points, to wit, corrupting, lying, and idle or absurd disputing,
are the three several heads (the threefold basis, whereupon the frame of
Popery leans) whereof the whole work of this Treatise is wouen.

Now touching those his Impertinences, the Reader is to conceive, that they
consist in his alleging of such testimonies, both of Scriptures, Fathers, and
Catholic writers, as being truly set down, do not nevertheless impugn that
point of our Catholic doctrine, against which they were by him so urged.

Answ. 1. It seems the Doctors illations are more sufficient then you pretend,
because you decline the weight of them, as you find them in him; and have your
self, according to your black mystery, distorted and misshapen them, to
make them appear absurd.

Publ. Mimus.
Nihil est, quin male narrando possit deprauarier. 2. Your self in every
passage, transgress in the same kind of absurd reasoning, wherewith you charge
your adversary; and your whole Treatise scarce affoordeth one tolerable
consequent.

Let the Reader consider these few examples, among many:

God is not a God of dissension, but of peace, 1. Cor. 14 33. Ergo, the
Protestants Church, because there is some discord in the same, is a false
Church.

Psalm. 19. He has set his tabernacle in the Sun. Ergo, the Church teaching
incorrupt doctrine in all points, is evermore gloriously visible.

The Church of England has altered the Service book of King Edward. Ergo it is
mutable and inconstant in the substance of religion.

Pope Julius claimed authority and voice in the Council of Antioch: Ergo the
supremacy of the Pope, according to the present tenet of Jesuits, was
received in the Catholic Church in Julius his days.

The Church has always been visible: Ergo it has always had a lawful
succession of Bishops and Pastors. Witness the Greek Church.

3. If you can so clearly discern insufficient arguing, and wrong connection
of conclusion and premises in D. White: how happens it, that you and your
fellows are as blind as moles in observing the foul impertinencies of your
own Popes and Doctors, even where they maintain the weightiest articles of
your faith?

B^niface Extr. de mayor. and obed. c Nos Sauctorum.
8. reasons for the supremacy, the grand article of your superstition, as
follows: Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep: Ergo the Pope is universal
monark of the Church.

The disciples say, Here be two swords: Ergo the Pope has spiritual and
temporal jurisdiction.

Christ commanded Peter, to put his sword into the sheath: Ergo the temporal
sword must be at the Popes command.

Paul says, All power is of God, and the things which be of God, are ordinate:
Ergo the temporal sword is subject to the Popes authority.

Moses says, In the beginning, not in the beginnings, God created heaven and
earth: Ergo there must be one universal monarch of the visible Church.

Pope Innocent Ca. per venerabil^m. ^. 4. tit. 17. c. 13. decretal
3. proceeds in the like kind, as follows: Deuteronomie is a second law,
and causes of blood, in Deuteronomie, came before the Priest: Ergo, in the new
Testament, which is a second law, they must be decided by the Pope.

Pope Alexander De consecr. d. 3 ca. Aquam sale, etc.
profoundly argues for holy water, from the ashes of a cow, Numb. 19. etc.

Siricius and Innocent Siricius ad Hinem. Tarracon. to. 1. council. Great. d. 31.
c. Tene. Bellar. de matrim. l. 1. c. 5.
from Leuit. 11. Be ye holy, because I am holy; and from Romans 8. They that be
in the flesh, cannot please God; infer, Ergo Priests marriage is unlawful.

The Schoolmen and Jesuits illations out of Mat. 16. and Ioh. 21. for the
supremacy, are so dissolute, that one may as easily make ropes of sand to hang
together, as the conclusions and premises of such arguments to cohere.

4. The testimonies of holy Scripture and other Doctors, produced by M. White,
are not therefore impertinent, because Romists by Chrysostom. sermon. 2. sup. Romans Ea
est ratiocinationu^ natura, vt labyri^tho cuidam ac Gryphis similes sint,
nullum prorsus finem habentes, ne que permittentes sermonem super petrae
certitudinem consistere, radicem and principium ex arrogantia ducentes.
color and shift of wit can euade them: for if these hucksters might have the
hammering of Christ and his Apostles illations, their skill and conscience
would serve them (the Catholic cause so requiring) to make the same a nose of
wax: and had the Sadduces and Pharisees been trained up in the Jesuitical
form, our Saviors consequent about the resurrection, Math. 22.32. or
concerning his dominion, Math. 22.45. or his proof against the Pharisees, Ioh.
8.39. If you were Abraham's children, you would do the works of Abraham, would
easily by these hypocrites have been defeated. A serpentine wit, attended with
superstition and malice, can easily find euasions to escape, and weapons to
oppose against the truth.

T.W. But howsoever it is, I am to advertise the Reader, that in perusing such
authorities produced by Master White, he would ever recurre to the true state
of the question; and particularly, that he would apply the said sentences to
that very point, or touch, wherein the life of the question consists: and
then he shall find, how rouingly and wandringly they are directed, still
glancing by, upon some wilful or ignorant mistaking or other, never reaching
the mark intended.

Answ. I entreat the Christian Reader, in all disputations between Papists
and us, to observe this admonition, and to fix his understanding upon the true
state of the question: which if he perform, he shall find that verified of the
Romists, which Saint Augustine said of the Donatists: Right sayings,
illustrious for verity, do these men obscure with perverse expositions.

T. W. That we may the better behold how valiantly our Minister impugneth all
Traditions, we are here to call to mind what the Catholic Church teaches in
this point.

Answ. In your very first entrance you depart from the state of the question,
and falsify the Doctors Tenet: Who impugneth not all Traditions, but admits
such as are subordinate and homogenious to the Scripture, yea all those which
you are able to prove Apostolical, by the general testimony of the Church.

T. W. Then it teaches, that the word of God is to limit and confine our
faith, and that nothing is to be accounted matter of faith, but that which
receives proof from thence.

Answ. Your great Doctors say otherwise. Bosius Bosius de sig. l. 16. c. 10.
Scimus articulos, esse veluti principia quaedam, quibus prae cunctis habenda
fides: at Scriptura non refertur inter eiusmodi principia, etc.
: The Scripture is not to be placed among the principles of faith. And
Stapleton Stapl. Rel. c 4. q. 1. ar. 1. ad. 4.
, Our faith depends not upon the sole word of God, (either written or
unwritten) but upon the voice of the Church speaking unto us. And Bellarmine
Bellar. de council. l. 2. c. 1.
; The definitions of general Councels, and the decrees of Popes are principles
of faith, with the holy Scripture. And Gretser Def. Bellar de verbo Dei, l. 3.
c. 10.
; The definition of the Pope is as authentical as the Scripture. And the
Council of Basil Basil. Council. resp. Synodal. to. 4. Council. Surij, page
143. 145.
; The custom of the Church is of equal authority, and to be received with the
same pious affection with the Scripture.

T. W. Hereupon it teaches, that the word is either written, namely the
Scripture: or else delivered by Christ and his Church, namely Tradition. Both
these we believe to be of infallible authority; because they proceed from
them who were immediately inspired, etc.

Answ. There is a riddle in your words. For conioyning Christ and the Church,
if you mean that Christ and the Church of his Apostles delivered this
traditionarie word which you stand for, I freely grant you every part of this
word, if you can reduce it (which is impossible) by the current of all
precedent ages to Christ and the Apostolic Church n^hir. Col. expos. symb.
Puritas doctrinae expendenda est, non secundum traditionem praeientis, aut
huius vel illius particularis ecclesiae, huius vel illius, interpretis sed
^ecundum traditionem, ab initio, a temporibus Apostolorum, con^ordi Patrum
sententia, ad nos v que deductam.
. But if by the Church you understand the present Roman Church Grets. def.
Bellar de verb. Dei, l. 4 c. 9. page 1713. 1715. Bo. de sig. l. 3. c. 6.
, and will have those Traditions Chrysostom. in Gen hom. 14 Videte quanta absurditas
and q^anta bla ph^mia, quando quis ipsum diuinae Scripturae c^onem sequitur,
sed suis opinionibus lo^^^ dat, quae mentem disturbent, etc.
a part of Christ's word, which your Pope has brought in, and which want the
vndoubt^d testimony of the primitive Church, I affirm; that this word is so
far from being equal to sacred Scripture, or any part of the rule of faith,
that the same is the doctrine of Devils.

T. W. Written or unwritten are but extrinsecall, and not of the true and
inward reason, of being the word of God.

Answ. Written and unwritten, considered in themselves be many times
accidental: But if the Gospel and Testament of Christ be only written, and
no part th^reof nuncupatiue, then to be written, is a condition essential.

T. W. Our Doctor, to prove that the written word is only the rule of faith,
and consequently that there are no Traditions of the Church, which may also in
part be a rule thereof, urges several places of Scripture. Prou. 2.19. Esa.
8.20. Mal. 4.4. Luke 16.9. Now that the Reader may see, how well these texts are
applied to the point controuerted, I will set some of them down in form of
argument, etc. The Scripture will make a man understand righteousness and
judgment, and equity, and every good path: ergo now in the time of
Christianity there are no Traditions, but the Scripture of the old Testament
is the only rule of faith, etc.

Remember the law of Moses my servant, etc. They had Moses and the Prophets,
ergo no Traditions, etc.

Answ. 1. Doctor White in this place Dyress. 3. page 13.
, produced many other Texts of holy Scripture. 2. Tim. 3.15. 2. Pet. 1.19.
Apoc. 22.18. 1. Cor. 4.6. and proves his conclusion not from any one sole
testimony, but from all the places coniunctly; even as the Apostle, Romans 3.10.
etc. and Hebr. 11. throughout, proves a position by many Texts, which does not
so evidently follow upon any one.

2. Whereas D. White has expressly set down his own consequent, this
Sophisticator in stead thereof, substitutes a misshapen birth of his own
creation. Doctor White argues from the premised testimonies, in manner
following: The holy Ghost speaking of the Scripture, affirms; That the same
is able to inform us to every good work. 2. Tim. 3.15. and to make us wise to
salvation: to teach us Christ crucified, wherein is the sum of our salvation,
to give us light in darkness, to beget our faith: and we are revoked from all
other teachers to the Scripture, Esa. 8.20. Luke 16.29. And there is no
counsel, no comfort, no doctrine, no resolution needful for us, but there it
may be found; and the holy Ghost delivers the like concerning no other
doctrine; ergo, the Scripture is the only rule.

T. W. What reference have these Texts with the rule of Faith, the which is not
so much as glanced at in any one of them?

Answ. 1. Bellarmine Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 1. c. 2.
himself produces many of these Texts, to wit; Esa. 8.20. Math. 22.29. John.
5.39. 2. Pet. 1.19. etc. to prove, that the holy Scripture is a rule of faith,
and therefore they have reference thereunto.

2. That is a rule of faith, which is appointed by God as a doctrine and law to
direct and govern our belief and spiritual actions. But according to sundry
Texts alleged by Doctor White, the sacred Scripture is such a doctrine and
law, ergo, etc. Esa. 8.20. Mal. 4.4. it is called a Law, 2. Pet. 1.9. the most
sure word, whereunto we must attend as a light, etc. 2. Tim. 3.15. It
instructs and makes wise to salvation. It is written, that we may be
certain of that wherein we are instructed, Luke 1.4. and that we may (by a
right faith) believe in Christ Jesus, Ioh. 20.31. Christ referred him that
desired to be saved, to the Scripture for direction, etc. Math. 22.29. etc.
Hence it follows, that the Scripture is a doctrine and law appointed by God,
to direct our faith and manners, and so is a rule, etc.

T. W. Why should the old Testament be a pattern for the faith professed in
the New Testament? Since all Christians do grant, that the time of grace is
enriched with many privileges, whereof the old law was altogether deprived?

Answ. 1. You were best to demand of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, why
they alleged so many testimonies of the old Testament, and permitted their
doctrine to be examined by the law and the Prophets, Ioh. 5.39. Act. 26.22. if
the Old Testament be no part of the rule of the faith professed in the New?

2. The Apostle Paul speaking of the whole Scriptures, whereof the Old
Testament is a moity, says: They are able to instruct or make wise to
salvation through faith, which is in Christ Jesus. And Saint Peter writes to
Christians, We have the more sure words of the Prophets, whereunto you do well
to attend, (...).
as unto a light shining in a dark place. 2. Pet. 1.19.

T. W. After these and such like Texts of Scripture, he descends to prove the
foresaid point from the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, etc. He alleges
Tertullian, saying; The Scripture is the rule of faith: which we grant, that it
is regula partialis fidei, a rule of our faith in part: but hence it follows
not, that it is a total, entire, and sole rule of faith, without Traditions,
etc.

Answ. If according to Tertullian Tertull. cont. Hermog. c. 22.
in the foresaid book, nothing may be received as dogmaticall in Religion, but
that which is written, then the holy Scripture is the only rule: but
Tertullian says; Officina.
Let the new forge of Hermogenes teach, that this is written; and if it be not
written, let him fear the woe denounced to them, which add or take away.

T. W. He alleges Saint Augustine Aug. de nupt. and concupisc. l. 2. c. 33.
, thus writing: This controversy depending between us, requires a Judge: let
Christ therefore judge, and let the Apostle Paul judge with him, etc. As if
Christ and his Apostles could not as well speak in Traditions as in writing:
or granting, that that particular controversy there meant by S. Augustine, was
proved from the writings of Saint Paul, therefore all other Articles of
Christian religion should thence also receive sole proof.

Answ. 1. The Jesuits deny that Christ and Saint Paul are a judge of
controversies, as they speak by the Scripture, but as they speak by the Pope
Grets. def. Bellar. de Script. l. 3. c. 4. Spiritus sanctus, etc. non est iudex
controuersiarum vt per Scripturam loquitur, sed vt per ecclesiam eiusque caput
loquitur.
2. Saint Augustine in the place alleged, produces our Savior and Saint
Paul, giving judgment by the Scriptures. And he names sundry places of
Scripture, Math. 26. Romans 8. Romans 4. Math. 19. but makes no mention of
Traditions, or of the Pope.

3. Whereas you restrain Saint Augustines words to that particular
controversy only: my brother in his book joined another sentence of this
Father Aug. ep. 112. ad Paulin.
to the precedent, wherein he yields the privilege of indubitate verity to
Scripture only, saying; If a matter be grounded upon the clear authority of
holy Scripture, etc. It is to be believed without all doubt: as for other
witnesses and testimonies, upon whose credit any thing may be urged to be
believed, it is lawful for thee to credit or not to credit, according as
thou shall perceive the weight and desert, etc.

T. W. Gregory Nissen calls the Scripture a straight and inflexible rule for
those points it proves, not generally.

Answ. Gregory's words Greg. Nissen. orat. de ijs qui adeu^t Hierosolyma.
are, Si ad regulam ipsam respiciamus, etc. If we have respect to the very
rule, which God has given us, etc. And then he alleges holy Scripture, where
observe; first, that he mentions no more rules but this one. 2. adding the
word ipsa, to rule, he declares the same to be an adaequate and only rule.

T. W. S. Augustine saying; whatsoever thing it be that a man learnes out of
the Scripture, if it be hurtful there it is condemned, if it be profitable
there it is found: speaks of virtue and vice, of both which the Scripture
most fully discourses: But how it may condemn Apostolical Traditions, which
may deliver supernatural and high mysteries of faith, I leave to the censure
of any judicious man.

Answ. Then it seems you acknowledge the perfection of the Scripture in things
concerning virtue and vice: but herein you disagree with your fellows Greg.
Va. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 7. Doctrinae quaedam dogmata, aut morum instituta.
, who make things moral as well as doctrinall, the object of Tradition. 2.
Saint Augustine Aug de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 41.
in the ninth Chapter of the same book, expressly opposes your restriction,
saying; In the things which are plainly set down in holy Scripture, all those
things are found which contain faith and good manners.

T. W. Thomas Aquinas, who says; the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is
canonical, because it is the rule of our understanding: speaks not
peculiarly of the Scripture, but in general of the doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles, which whether it be written or unwritten, is canonical.

Answ. Thomas in the place alleged Th. Aqu. com. 1. Tim 6. lect. 1. Si quis
aliter docet, etc.
, speaks of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, whereunto Moses, Deuteronomy.
4.32. and Saint John, Revel. 22.18. commands that no man shall add or put to
any thing: but this word of Moses, and of Saint John was written, Deuteronomy. 31.9.
Revel. 1.19. and 22.18.19. Therefore Thomas of Aquine by the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, understands their doctrine written in the holy
Scripture.

T. W. Again he urges Saint Thomas the second time; Our faith rests and
staieth it self upon the revelation given to the Apostles and Prophets which
wrote the Canonical books, and not upon Revelation, (if any such have been
made) to other Doctors. But who denies that the Prophets and Apostles did write
the Canonical books? or who teaches Grets. tract. de agnosc. Script. can.
Haec testandi de Scripturis canonicis authoritas, nec a Prophetis est in
ecclesia, nec ab Apostolis etc.
that our faith ought to rest upon the revelation of other Doctors, then the
Prophets and Apostles?

Answ. 1. Aquinas Aq 1. q 1. ar 8. ad. 2. Authoritatibus canonicae Scripturae,
vtitur proprie ex necessitate argumentando: authoritatibus vero aliorum
doctorum ecclesiae, quasi arguendo ex proprijs, sed probabiliter. Innititur
enim fides nostra reuelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae qui canonicos
libros scripserunt: non autem reuelationi, si quae fuit alijs doctoribus facta:
vnde dicit Aug Solis Scripturarum libris, qui Canonici appellantur, didici hunc
honorem defer, vt nullum authorem eorum in scribendo errasse, aliquid
firmissime credam: alios autem ita lego, vt quantalibet sanctitate and doctrina
praepolleant. non ideo putem verum, quod ipsi ita senserunt vel scripserunt,
etc. Aug to. 2 ep. 19.
in the place alleged, speaks of the books of Canonical Scripture, and not
only of the Writers of those books. Solis scripturarum libris, etc. To the
books of holy Scripture only. 2. He attributes infallibility of doctrine to
those books only, and makes the arguments taken from thence to be necessary.
3. He excludes from this prerogative and perfection all other authorities
whatsoever. Read his words in the margent.

T. W. Who teaches, that our faith ought to rest upon the revelation of any
other Doctors then the Prophets and Apostles?

Answ. Doctor Stapleton writes thus Stapl. Rel. c. 4. q. 1. ar. 1. ad. 7.
: Even as we believe God revealing us any thing, because he is true and cannot
deceive; and if any man demand why he is true, we make no answer, etc. Even so,
we altogether believe the Church, teaching and testifying any truth to be
believed, etc. And if it be demanded, wherefore it is so infallible a witness
of truth: we answer, because God speaks by the same, and has constituted it
an infallible witness; and here we stay our selves and do not answer: because
the Church seems to speak things consonant to the sacred Scripture, etc. And
Bosius De sig. l. 16. c. 10.
; The Church by reason of the near conjunction it has with God, is not
builded upon truth, but contrarily, truth leans upon it, as the column and
fortress thereof.

Now according to this doctrine, our faith rests not upon the revelation of
the Prophets and Apostles, but upon the present Popish Church.

T. W. Show any reason why the Revelations of the Prophets, and especially the
Apostles may not as well comprehend Traditions, as the written word?

Answ. 1. The Revelations of the Prophets comprehended no doctrinall
Traditions, because the Prophets themselves, and after them our Savior and his
Apostles who were the guides and Pastors of the church, did at no time mention
any such, or refer people unto them, or allege and confirm any part of
their doctrine by them.

2. If the Revelation of the Apostles had comprehended Traditions: 1. The said
Traditions would have been homogenious to their written word. 2. The same would
have been generally received and believed in the first Churches planted by the
Apostles. 3. The Apostles would have left behind them some certain rule,
whereby to know them, and have taught the faithful from whence they should
receive them.

T. W. He brings in Gerson, saying; The Scripture is the rule of our faith,
which being well understood, no authority of men is to be admitted against it,
etc. We willingly acknowledge, that the Scripture is the rule, but not the sole
rule: no authority of man is to stand against the Scripture; but what does
this impeach Apostolical Traditions, which are no more the bare authority of
man then Scripture it self?

Answ. Gerson in other places declares his meaning to be, that the holy
Scripture is the only rule; for thus he writes Gers. de exam. doct. p. 2.
consid. 1.
: The Scripture is given unto us, as a rule sufficient (not a rule in part) and
infallible, for the government of the whole Ecclesiastical body, and all the
parts thereof, to the end of the world. And all revelation is to be suspected,
which the Law and Prophets with the Gospel does not confirm.

T. W. Traditions are no more the authority of man then the Scripture it
self, both equally proceeding from the holy Ghost.

Answ. This assertion is your own, but not Gersons, who affirms not, that
Traditions are of the holy Ghost, equal with the Scripture: but he says Gers.
p. 3. de spir. vit. anim. lect. 2. in princip.
contrary to this, That your Prelates by their Traditions destroyed the
commandments of God. 2. You are never able to justify your Popish Traditions
to have proceeded from the holy Ghost, by authentical records of the primitive
Church.

T.W. He comes in with Perisius, writing, that the authority of no Saint, is
of infallible truth: for Saint Augustine gives that honor only to the sacred
Scripture. But here Perisius Perusinus.
and Saint Augustine speak of particular Saints and private Doctors: and our
question is, only touching the Traditions of our Savior and his Apostles, and
the whole Church.

Answ. You slip over the latter part of Perusinus De ratione, concionand. l 2.
c. 19.
his words, To be of infallible truth, is the honor of the sacred Scriptures
only. Now if it be the honor of sacred Scripture only to be of infallible
truth: Then Traditions, which are no part of sacred Scripture, have not this
prerogative of infallible verity.

T.W. Such unprofitable and waste testimonies, Master White is accustomed to
heap together in his book, the which that they shall not so easily be espied,
he subtly mingleth them with other authorities more pertinent, like a good
captain who rangeth his worst and weakest Soldiers in the midst of other
more experienced, only to increase the number, and not the force.

Answ. You are unable to put off the weakest of these testimonies, but by
coining distinctions, which the author himself was ignorant of.

2. It was not Doctor Whites intent to argue singly or distributiuely from his
testimonies, but he produced many witnesses, whereof some auerre one part, and
the rest, another part of his position: and his conclusion, proceeds jointly
from them all, as a stream flows from many springs.

3. It being granted, that some weak testimonies are found among diverse which
are strong: Is it not cowardice in you to let the maine battle stand
vnshocked, and to fight with a few straggling Soldiers, which whether they
fall or stand, is nothing to the maine cause?

Paragr. 2. Concerning the Scripture having the outward authority, whereupon
faith is built, and not the Church.
T.W. The next subject of this loose kind of inferences, is touching the
absolute and supreme sovereignty of the Scriptures, in determining of
controversies, without any needful explication of Gods Church. This assertion
being indeed a head theoreme or principle with the sectaries of this age.

Answ. Your assertion, that the Doctor and other Protestants exclude the
explication of the Church, is false. We affirm Whitak. de scrip. q. 3. p. 204.
and duplic. cont. Stapl l. 1. c. 8.. 7. Zeaeman. de col loq. Ratisb. p. 2. m.
1. c. 1 page 62. Read my answ. to the first part.
, that the teaching of the true Church is the ordinary means to determine
controversies, and to propound and explicate the object of faith.

T.W. For the better vindicating us from all calumnies, touching our supposed
contempt of the Scripture, as also for the discovery of M. Whites arguing, the
Reader is to take notice, that the Catholics do ascribe all due reverence,
etc. to the Scripture: acknowledging it to be Gods ambassador, unfolding to
man on earth, the sacred will of our heavenly King: the spiritual tenure, by
which we claim our celestial inheritance: It is the word of God, before it
receive any approbation from the Church, and this or that, is the true sense of
any particular text, before the Church confirm the same.

Answ. We do not calumniate, but truly report the sayings of your Doctors, who
if they speak not contemptuously of the sacred Scripture, let the Reader judge.
Andradius Defens. orth. fid. Trid. l. 2. page 2^7.
says; There is no divinity in the very books themselves wherein the sacred
mysteries are contained, which may tie us with any bond of religion to believe
them. Gretser Grets. def. Bell. de Script. l 4. c. 12.
; We should have had fewer Controversies if we had no Scriptures. Stapleton
Rel. c. 4. q. 1. ar. 1.
; The word of God is no formal object of our faith, nor any part thereof.
Costerus Enchirid. de Pontif. page 135.
; The scripture is a thing without any soul or sense. It is like a nose of
wax and Lesbian rule: affirmed by Pighius Pigh cont. loc. 3. page 92.
, Turrian Turrian. apud Sadael. p. 382.
, Mulhusinus Mulhusin. disp 2. de fide.
, etc. It is rather an occasion of Controversies and discord about the doctrine
of faith, then a remedy; says Gregory Valence To. 3. d. 1. q 1. p. 7. page
164.
. The Church is not subject to the word of God, says Stapleton Rel. c 4. q. 1.
ar. 1. ad. 2.
: It is in a manner a dumb and feeble writing, unless the mind of the Church
(Roman) be present to it: says Bosius Bos. de sig. l. 16. c. 10.
: And your Doctors do not acknowledge, that the Scripture is Gods Ambassador,
they say Stapl. dupl. l. 1. c. 7.. 9. Deum quidem in Scripturis loqui, sed non
per Scripturas nos alloqui.
it is dumb, and speaks not unto the faithful, and a dumb Ambassador is no
Ambassador. Neither do you make the same the spiritual Tenure, whereby you
claim your inheritance, but only a part and piece thereof, and yet such too as
has no force in it, in regard of any profitable use for us, but according to
the prompting and unfolding of your Church.

T. W. Seeing the true sense of the Scripture is as it were the very soul
which informs the body of the letter: and that the Scripture is to be
understood by the spirit with the which it was written, to wit; with the spirit
of the holy Ghost: therefore we hold, that so far as concerns our taking
not^ce, that this or that is the Scripture, or this is the true sense of the
passage thereof intended by the holy Ghost, we are to recurre to the authority
of the Church, which we believe to be directed and guided therein by the same
holy Ghost, according as the Scripture it self assures us. 1. Tim. 3.15.
Math. 18.17.

Answ. 1. We agree in this, that the true sense of the Scripture is as it were
the soul, etc. And Hilarie Hilar. ad Constant. Aug. p. 281
and Hierom Hieron. cont. Lucifer. p. 67.
have truly said, The Scriptures consist not in the bare reading, but in the
right understanding.

2. We believe that the Scripture is to be understood, by the same Spirit
whereby it was written; but this Spirit rests not in your Popes breast, who
is a man subject to error Bos. de sig. l. 18. c. 6. Sentire, dicere, docere,
scribere, haeretica potest.
, but in the very Scripture it self, from whence the Pastors of each Church
must receive the same, and not from any new Revelation.

3. We acknowledge, that people must recurre to the true Church, speaking by
the Scriptures, to be directed in the sense thereof.

4. Your last assertion, that the Church (meaning your present Roman) is guided
and directed by the same holy Ghost, (according to the same manner and degree
of direction) is false. And the places of Scripture, 1. Tim. 3.15. Math. 18.17.
make very much amongst you, because they give the same privileges which you
would appropriate to your Roman Church, to every true particular Church of
Christ on earth. For 1. Tim. 3.15. the Apostle speaks of the Church of
Ephesus: and Math. 18.17. our Savior speaks literally of the Church of the
Jews; and consequently, of every particular Christian Church, wherein there is
the lawful exercise of outward jurisdiction.

T. W. Let us now come to the proves and testimonies produced by Master White
to convince, that the Scripture so far forth as we are to take knowledge
thereof, needs not any authority or approbation of the Church: and he
produces 1. Pet. 1.23. 1. Cor. 2.4. Heb. 4.12. etc. Now let vt see how
towardly our Minister can conclude from these Texts against our former
doctrine: The Scripture is an immortal seed, etc. therefore it ought to
receive no authority, touching the manifesting of it true sense to us from
Gods church, which is guided by the holy Ghost, etc. What inferences are these?
who would think that a learned Minister of Gods word, the via Lactea, a Doctor
made only for desert, etc. would thus extrauagantly conclude, etc.

Answ. You have quit your self like a man: first, to frame a Maukin or Giant
of straw, and then to let drive at it; and having beaten it down, to proclaim
a conquest. But proceed as you lust, and let your fautors run after you. Doctor
Whites position is; The Scripture has that outward authority, whereupon our
faith is built, and not the Church (he means) the holy Scripture is the sole
outward principle and formal object, whereupon our faith is built, and not the
Church. And thus much (to trouble the Reader no further) his very first place
taken out of S. Peter, 1. Pet. 1.23. evidently proves.

The immortal seed whereby we are regenerate and made faithful, is the only
formal principle of faith: the word of God alone is that immortal seed: Ergo,
the word of God alone, is the only formal principle of faith.

And even as in husbandry, although diverse instruments and means be requisite
and necessary, to wit; plowing, sowing, etc. yet the seed is the beginning,
and sole immediate cause of the grain springing up. Even so in the spiritual
plantation of faith, in which our souls are agri animati, living fields Clem.
Alex.
: the immortal seed which the Apostles first preached, 1. Pet. 1.25. and
afterward committed to writing Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
, produces faith, as the sole principle, immediate motive B^^an. 3. l. 24. q
2. Loquimur de obiecto fidei secundum propriam acceptionem: pro^t sig^^f^cat
obiectum quod habet rationem motiui, etc. omnia quae in sacra Scriptura
continentur, tenent rationem obiecti proprij and motiui, respecta ipsius fidei,
etc. quia sacra Scriptura est edita a veritate increata, and a Spiritu sancto.
and formal object of believing: and the ministry, authority and calling of
the Church, produce the same as the adiuuant and isntrumental cause, or as the
means of applying the word and seals thereof, but not as the first principle.

And the subsequent testimonies of Stapleton Lib 8 d. ^^ pri. cip. c. 20.
, Ambrose, etc. conclude this assertion of D. White.

The authority of the Church (says D. Stapleton) is a thing create, and
distinct from the first verity. Hence it follows, ergo, it is not the formal
object or first principle of faith: because the formal object of faith is
divine and prime verity revealed by inspiration Read Bo^^uenture cit^^
immed^^tly before, lit. z. Aq. 2. 2. q (...) A^ex. (...) q. 88. ^n. ^ ^^^be t.
3. d. 23. ar. 7. 12. ^urand ib q. 7. ar. 1 2. Capreol. ib. d. 24 q vnic. ar.
c^n^lus 4. Caietan. 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 1. Caniloc. l. 11. c 3. Alusiod. l. 3. su^
tr. 3. c. 1. q. 3. Marsil. 3 q. 14. Rich. 3. d. 23. ar. 4. q. 3. Gabr. 3. d.
23. q. 2. ar. 1.
. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. 2. Tim. 3.16. etc.

It is needless to insist upon the other testimonies of Ambrose, Augustine,
Saluianus, etc. because the Priest has either mistaken or perverted the state
of the question, pretending that Doctor White alleged these Authors, To
exclude the Churches ministerial authority from being an instrmentall cause
of faith, which he never maintained. For let us have Gods written word to be
the sole object of our faith, and give us a true Church which prefers not
her own hests, before the sacred law of Christ, and which observes the holy
means prescribed by the Apostles and primitive Church, in searching out and
delivering the truth revealed in the Scripture: and we are ready in all things
to hear this Church, and to submit our selves to Gods truth delivered by it.

But if Satan change himself into an Angel of light, and Antichrist ascend
into the throne of Christ; or false Prophets come unto us in sheep clothing,
and with glorious pretexts of antiquity, succession, visibility, etc. will
seek to lead us away from the integrity of truth and godliness, we cry
anathema against them, and will as soon credit the Devil in his own
likeness, as such hypocrites and carrions, who under the cloak of Religion
make a prey of the bodies and souls of men.

An observation, concerning the object of faith.
The Schoolmen divide the object of faith, into obiectum quod; that is, into
the material object, and into the formal D. Bannes. 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 1. Greg.
Val. to. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p 1.
.

The material, are the articles and things believed Gabr. 3. d. 24. q. vnic.
not. 2. Obiectum fidei est veritas credita, etc.
, as that God is one essence and three in persons; that Christ rose again the
third day, etc.

The formal object, is the foundation and last and maine principle whereupon
faith relyeth Greg. Val. ib. Ratio formalis obiecti fidei, est id, quo, vel per
quod, fides alicui assentitur, and quo nititur tanquam fundamento. In quam
assensus vltimo resoluitur.
, or that whereinto the assent, which faith yields unto the matter believed,
is resolved.

Example, when I believe the resurrection, etc. this article is a part of the
material object of faith. But the cause and maine reason, wherefore I give
assent to this and all other articles, is the authority of divine Revelation:
and this is called the formal object of faith.

Many former Papists speaking more plainly then the Jesuits do; Have made the
formal object and last resolution of faith to be the authority of the Church:
Durand, Scotus, Gabriel, Almain, Michael Medina, Azor. instit. mor. p. 2. l. 5.
c. 24 who cites these Doctors.
etc.

The modern Papists in substance hold the same, yet to color the absurdity
of the former Tenet, they say; that God revealing divine truth, is the formal
object, etc.

But for as much as God works mediately, and reuealeth no truth unto us but
by external means; and divine authority in it self is hidden and unknown:
therefore the thing whereinto our faith is resolved, must be some thing
externally known which we may read or hear. And our adversaries must either
yield us an external foundation and formal object of faith; or else lead us to
secret revelation, which in terms they pretend so much to defy.

But rejecting the Scriptures, whatsoever they gloss in words, they neither can
nor do name us any, other indeed, but their Roman Pope and Church Stapl. Rel.
c. 4. q. 1. ar. 1. conclus. 2. page 415. Testimonium ecclesiae Cath. (Rom.) esse
obiectum fidei Christianae externum, sapienter scripsit Waldensis doct fid. l.
2. c. 21.
.

The Protestants believe, that the canonical Scripture is the foundation and
the principal external cause and formal object of Christian belief.

And the verity of this our doctrine is proved by these reasons.

1. The formal object of faith must be something, which is purely and simply
divine, admixt with no error, yea subject to no error: the indubitate word and
revelation of Christ. But such is the holy Scripture only; for the Roman
Church and Pope are subject to error Gers. de potest. eccles. lect. 11. Summus
Pontifex est peccabilis and potest potestatem in destructionem conuertere:
similiter collegium quod ei datum est, etc. non est in gratia confirmatum. Lira
super Math 16. Multi principes and summi pontifices, and alij inferiores,
inuenti sunt apostatasse.
, Romans 11.20. neither have they any truth immediately, or by divine inspiration,
but by second means.

2. Whatsoever credit the Church has, it receives the same from the
scriptures, as is acknowledged by some of our principal Adversaries Azor. inst
mor. 2. l. 5. c. 24 Ecclesiae fidem non habemus, nisi quia ex Scripturis
docemur, ecclesiae esse credendum.
, and confirmed by the Apostle, who says; We are built upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles Greg. Val. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 1. Super aedificati
super fundamentum Proph. and Ap. id est, vt commentarius Ambrosij
interpretatur, super vet. and nou. Testam ab Apostolis conscriptum.
, Ephe. 2.20. Chrysostom Chrysostom. imperf. Math. hom. 49.
says; We know the Church only by the Scriptures. And Augustine Aug. tom. 2.
ep 116.
: In the Scriptures we learn Christ, in the Scriptures we learn the Church.
And in another place De unit. eccles. c. 16.
; Let them demonstrate the Church by nothing but by the Canonical books of
the divine Scriptures: And Expos. ep. Ioh. tr. 3.
; The Church is our mother, and her breasts are the two Testaments of divine
Scripture.

3. The present faith of Christians, is of the same kind with the faith of the
Prophets and Apostles. Ephe. 2.20. But the faith of these holy men was founded
upon immediate divine revelation, and not upon the authority of the Church.

And yet when we yield this pre-eminence to sacred Scripture, making the same
the sole formal object of faith: We do not deprive the Church of that
prerogative and office which Christ has given it, to be an adiuuant and
administering cause in producing faith. Romans 10.17. (as this Adversary
ouer-reacheth.) But the Papists and we differ in these two points.

1. We maintain, that the office of leading men to faith, belongs to every
true Church as well as to the Roman.

2. We affirm, that no Church brings people to faith by it own doctrine or
Tradition, but by the doctrine of the holy Scripture. Neither is any Church in
the world of right to be believed in matters which are merely of faith or
divine verity, further, then it maintains the doctrine taught by it, by
warrant of sacred Writ, and teaches and commands things consentaneous to the
Scriptures Aug. l. 3. cont. Petil. Don. c. 6.
.

Paragr. 3. Wherein are examined some of Doctor Whites proofs, against the
visibilitie of the Church.
T. W. Another passage, whereupon our Minister spends his frothy and
immateriall proofs is, touching the inuisiblenesse of the Church, first
bearing the Reader in hand, that by inuisibilitie he means not an utter
extinction or disparition of the true Church and faith: and yet after in effect
he recalleth the same, and thus writes; When we say the Church is invisible,
we mean that all the external government thereof may come to decay, in that
the local and personal succession of Pastors may be interrupted, the
discipline hindered, the Preachers scattered, and all the outward exercise and
government of religion suspended; whereby it shall come to pass, that in all
the world you cannot see any one particular Church, professing the true faith,
etc. by reason persecution and heresies shall have ouerflowed all Churches, as
Noah's flood did all the world, etc.

Ans. If the Reader confer this 3. paragr. of the P. Priest, with D. Whites 17.
digression, he shall observe that he has proceeded most dishonestly.

1. My brother in the same Digression delivers three positions, wherein he
comprehends a sum of our doctrine concerning the Churches inuisibilitie;
and yet T.W. rehearses only one of the three, containing but a part of our
doctrine.

2. Alleging this second branch, he leaves out the most material word in the
sentence. And whereas the Doctor says: It may come to pass, that in all the
world you cannot see one particular Church publikly professing the true faith,
etc; he has left out the word publikly. And from the latter end of the
sentence, he pareth off other words, to wit, or obscured their light, as the
Sun is eclipsed, or corrupted the sincerity of religion, as a leprosy or
scab ouergroweth the whole body of a man, and hides every member, etc. Which
words being added, show the true meaning of my brothers assertion, and which
without them, seems other then it is.

3. He ouerreacheth in charging him with saying, that Catholics do generally
teach the like inuisibilitie of the Church. For speaking indefinitely, in
materia contingenti, to wit, Papists say, that the Church is invisible; he
charge only some Papists with saying thus.

4. Whereas my brother alleges Pererius and Ouandus, only to prove the
smalnesse of the number of professors, and adioyneth their testimony to the
first member of his three assertions; the Priest cauilleth against the same,
pretending that they were produced to prove an extinction and general
inuisibilitie of the Church.

5. Omitting his detorting of the testimonies, of Bosius, Soto, Gregory
Valence, etc. which are alleged to one purpose by my brother; and the Priest
makes his illations from them, as though they had been uttered to another: He
says, page 162. After our Doctor has ended with Catholic Writers: he
begins to prove the inuisibilitie of the Church from the authority of the
Fathers, Chrysostom, etc. Now in all this Section he alleges neither
Chrysostom, nor any other Father. In the 18. Digression he produces
Chrysostom, to prove that the Church is tried by the Scriptures, but not to
show the Church is invisible.

6. Our Adversary himself having egregiously played the Fox or Goose-eater,
breaks off full gravely, and as beseems a Catholic Priest, with a conceit of
a Lancashire dish, intending, it seems, to let the Reader understand, that he
is better qualified for the chair of a scorner, then the office of a Divine.

T. W. Now if the discipline may be hindered, the Preachers scattered, etc.
then shall not the word be preached, nor the Sacraments ministered, which are by
our Adversaries principles, inseparable marks of the true Church; and they
being taken away, the Church for the time be utterly extinct.

Answ. These two assertions; The true Church shall never be extinct, and the
discipline of the true Church may be hindered, and the Preachers scattered,
inuolue no contradiction, as the examples following do show. In the Acts of the
Apostles, chap. 8.4. the Preachers were scattered, and in the days of Cyprian
Cypr de lapsis. Aug. cont. Parmen. l. 3 c. 2.
the discipline was hindered: In the times of the Arrians, godly Pastors lurked
in woods, caves, deserts Hilar. cont. Auxent.
, etc. and yet the true church was not extinguished.

That which is hindered, is not utterly destroyed, and Preachers may be
dispersed, and forced to cease from open preaching in public congregations;
and yet exercise their function of preaching and administering Sacraments in
secret, to such of the faithful as will join with them.

And I entreat the Reader to consider, whether Suarez the Jesuit do not upon
the matter, deliver as much touching the inuisibilitie of the Church in the
time of Antichrists reign as my brother; setting aside only the difference of
longer and shorter time?

1. He says Suar. in 3 to. 2. d. 54. sect. 6. Sotus in 4. d. 46. q. 1. ar. 1.
Suar. def. fid. Cath. cont. sect. Angl. l. 5. c. 5. Tribulatio Antichristi erit
ita magna, vt nulla similis antea fuerit, vel futura sit postea. p. 658.
Ludolph. vita Christ. p. 1. c. 46. Ib. In sanctis and Christianis incredibilem
desolationem efficiet.
; That the persecution moved by Antichrist, shall be far more cruel,
tyrannical and bitter, both in regard of the end, and means, then any
precedent persecution of heretics or tyrants.

2. This persecution shall principally bend it self against the very faith and
profession of Christianity, and it shall compel Christians to deny Christ,
publicly to forsake all the worship of God, and all rites and ceremonies. And
he produces Irenaeus, Hippolitus, etc. saying: That through the acerbity of
this persecution, all divine worship, accustomed to be exhibited by Christians,
and the principal part thereof, Ruard. Tapper. artic. 16. de sacrif. Missae.
to wit, the sacrifice of the Eucharist, shall cease.

3. The said persecution shall be the most universal of all other.

4. The greater part of the faithful shall fall away by Apostasy from Christ.

5. The faithful which remain and many confessors, shall continue in caves
and secret places, and in them exercise the use of Sacraments.

6. Bartholomew Iandonesius D Bannes 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 10.
taught; That the Church in Antichrists reign, should consist only of Infants
baptized.

7. It is probable, that in the miserable days of Antichrist his reign, Suar.
l. 5. cont. sect. Angl. c. 21.
The Pope himself shall profess his faith in secret.

Now if Antichrists persecution must exceed all others in tyranny, in
universality, and in effect or prevailing: it shall make both a greater hauock
and destruction of faithful persons and religion, and also a greater latency
and dissipation of the Church, then any former persecution ever did. But in the
days of Antiochus Epiphanes, and under some persecuting Roman Emperors, and in
the great persecution of the Arrians Hieron. in Psalm 133. Ante viginti annos,
haeretici omnes ecclesias has possidebant, etc. Basil. epist. 69.
, the visible state of the Orthodoxe Church, was so obscured and betrampled,
that outward religion, preaching, etc. in public view and toleration of the
world, was interrupted and suspended, and the Church exercising religion, by
preaching, Sacraments, etc. was latent. Therefore in the persecution of
Antichrist, so far exceeding all the former which are named, there shall be a
greater inuisibility of the Church.

Lastly, concerning the perverse and absurd illations which our Priest
proposes, the Reader is to be advertised, that the same are the misshapen birth
of his own pate, and not one of them extant in D. White.

He indeed affirms, that the true Church publicly exercising Christian
religion, D. Fulke against Rhem. Math. 5. n. 3. The Church can never be hid
from them which will diligently seek her in the Scriptures. And Act. 2 n. 13.
No papist is able to prove that there was any visible Church for five or six
hundred years after Christ, that maintained all the chief points of Popery,
wherein we differ. In Col. 1. n. 1. The meetings of Christians, were as obscure
in time of persecution, as they have been since the tyranny of Antichrist,
usurped the temple of God. Upon Apoc. 12. n. 2. The true members of the Church
were known, though not always to their enemies. D. Whitaker. de not. eccles.
cont. Bellar. q. 3. c. 2. page 160. Iun cont. Bellar. l. 4. c. 15. Brad^. Act.
mon. The Church is visible to them that will put on the spectacles of Gods word
to look upon her.
by preaching and Sacraments, may at some times be respectively, (that is, to
the enemies of religion, and greater part of the world) unknown and latent:
but also he teaches, that at the same time it is visible to such of the
faithful as have communion therewith. And to this scope he has alleged the
testimonies of his authors.

Now T.W. pretends, and accordingly to every testimony, annexeth a sequel,
that Doctor White holds the Church may be absolutely invisible, and that all
profession of faith, (yea, he shameth not to charge him with saying, all true
faith) may cease to be. And this abusiue demeanor is so much the more iniust,
because my brother in the very place whence these things are taken, has
expressly delivered the contrary, saying; That the true Church never ceasseth,
either in regard of being, or profession of faith, nor is simply and generally
latent and invisible at any time, but respectively only, to Infidels,
Heretics, and Tyrants, who have not spiritual prudence to know and discern
it.

Paragr. 4. Concerning the Protestants marks of the Church.
T.W. Master White p. 104. etc. undertakes to prove, that the true doctrine
of faith, and lawful use of the Sacraments, are the proper and infallible
marks, whereby it must be judged which is the true Church. And in proof
hereof, he produces diverse passages of Scripture, Ioh. 10.27. etc. But from
these places, my sheep hear my voice, etc. what Alchymist can extract that
sense or meaning, which shall prove, that true doctrine is a sufficient mark
to us, whereby we may infallibly discern which is the true Church of God?

Answ. 1. In stead of proper and infallible marks, which my brother says, you
foist in the word, sufficient. It is possible for a thing to be proper and
infallible, and yet not sufficient of it self without other means, to apply
or declare it.

2. Doctor White Digress. 18. Numb. 3. declared how his assertion was proved by
the said places, Ioh. 10. etc. which you dissemble and shape no answer to.

3. It is no Chemical feate, but a proper and solid manner of concluding, to
demonstrate the subject by the actions and properties. Thus a wise man and a
just man are notified and described, and thus the tree is known by the fruit.
Even so our Savior and the Apostles deliver certain operations and properties
of the Church and people, whom they call by the name of a flock and house,
Luke 12.1. Tim. 3. and Doctor White by the same proves and differenceth the
Church in this or the like manner of reasoning.

Those are the notes of the Church, which make people to be the sheep of
Christ and household of God, and demonstrate them to be such. But hearing of
Christ's voice, and building themselves by faith upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, make people the sheep of Christ and household of God, and
demonstrate them to be such, Ioh. 10.27. Ephe. 2.20. Ergo hearing Christ's
voice, and building themselves by faith upon the foundations of the Prophets
and Apostles, are notes of the Church.

Object. 1. But this proves not true doctrine to be a note.

Answ. The voice of Christ and true doctrine are equipollent, and of the same
notion. Ioh. 17.17. 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. Iam. 1.18.

Object. 2. It proves not true doctrine contained in the Scripture to be a
sufficient note.

Answ. Presupposing the Scripture to be the only object of Catholic faith,
(which Doctor White has elsewhere confirmed) it proves, that true doctrine
contained in the Scripture is a sufficient mark.

T. W. How shall we know who are Christ's sheep? you will say, by their hearing
of Christ's voice, or profession of true doctrine. But how can we know,
abstracting the authority of the Church, who have true doctrine, and which are
they that hear Christ's voice?

Answ. Christ has set this brand upon his sheep; that if they hear his
voice, they are of his flock. Now there be two means to know that they have
true doctrine, and hear his voice. 1. One principal, to wit, the Scripture
Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 2. Sed quid si non credit ille Scripturae? Tu posthac ipsum
auer^eris velut furibundum and mente captum.
, which by it own authority demonstrates the same. 2. the other isntrumental,
to wit, the ministry of the Church, which by declaring the doctrine of the
Scripture, as an adiuuant cause, leads unto the knowledge thereof.

Object. Before Luther there was no other Church but the Roman, and the same
described Christ's sheep by doctrine and marks, which Protestants refuse.

Anw. 1. Besides the Roman, there was the ancient primitive Church, whose
testimony the faithful might from their writings inquire.

2. In the Church Roman there were some firm members, which maintained the
same doctrine in the principal parts which we now do.

3. True doctrine in the foundation, believed with a right faith, is a note of
Christ's sheep, and many in the Roman Church professed that doctrine, by whose
ministry the Protestants received the said fundamental truth; and also these,
by searching the Scriptures, and by the ministry of such as departed from the
corruptions of the Roman church, attained a farther increase of truth, and
freedom from errors.

T. W. How should I be ascertained that people do hear the word truly
preached, and enjoy a right administration of Sacraments? Here my answerer is
at a stand, and flies for sanctuary to his Apocalypticall and revealing
spirit, etc. Thus it is clear in what circles and mazes Master White walks.

Answ. You must first know the doctrine before you can be ascertained hereof by
infused faith: even as before you can know a just and wise man, you must
understand what justice and wisdom are.

2. It is the absurdity of the Roman Church to rely upon an Apocalypticall
and revealing spirit Stapl. Rel. c. 4. q. 2. not. 4. In conclusione est
prophetica and diuina, etc. Grets. def. Bellar. de Script. l. 3. append.
Authoritas summi Pontif. est humana diuinitus inspirata.
, to wit, the Popes spirit. But Protestants, 1. In regard of the object of
faith, rely upon the public doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, revealed
in the Scripture Greg. Val. to. 3 d. 1. q. 1. p. 1. Supra fundamentum Proph.
and Apost. Ephesians. 2. o id est, vt commentarius Ambrosij interpretatur, supra
nouum and vetus Testamentum, ab Apostolis conscriptum.
. 2. And in regard of the means of receiving and understanding of that
doctrine, they rely (as upon the rules of a skilful and faithful master) upon
the Ministry of the present Church wherein they live, when the same is not
evidently corrupt: or so far as it is incorrupt: And in apparent corrupt
times, upon the ministry of the firmest members of the Church: and if they
cannot have access to such, upon the ministry of the precedent orthodoxe
Church. And lastly, in case of necessity, to wit, when they are solitary (as
Joseph in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon, etc.) upon the holy Scripture it self,
and true doctrine thereof, which by their own meditation therein, God inableth
them to find out Suar. def. fid. cath. cont. sect. Angl. l. 1. c. 10. Neque
negamus interdum Spiritum sanctum priuatim docere aliquos de mysterijs fidei,
vel de vero sensu Scripturae, tali modo, etc. Stapl. Rel. c 4. q 3. ar. 3. 2.
ad. 1. Sola interna reuelatio, ad fidem aliquando efficaciter induc^t: cum
externa media non contemptus docentis ecclesiae, sed articulus necessitatis
excludit. See the example of Antonius the heremite, in August. prolog lib. de
doctr. Christ. Castand de offic. boni viri, 49.
.

And our Adversaries, when their facing is past, are feign to rely upon a
private spirit as much as Protestants do. Bannes 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 1 concl. 6.
says; This is the reason of believing, that Christ is God, because we have
received the testimony of God within us. God himself illuminating our minds.
And Stapleton Stapl. Rel. c. 4. q. 3. ar. 2. ad. 3.
: The last resolution of faith is God, inwardly revealing in the heart.

And as the Popish Priest demands of me, how I know that this is the
Scripture, or the sense thereof; so I demand of him, how he knows by divine
faith, that this is the Church, or that the Church teaches truth? And in his
answer (rejecting divine illumination by the Scripture Stapl. ib. ad. 5. Omne
lumen and alia demonstrat and seipsum. Peers. A^ala de Trad. p. 3. Sicut sensus
vi^us, per ipsum lumen videt ipsum and alia, etc.
) he shall either resolve his faith touching these things, into humane
authority, to wit, the general opinion of former ages, the multitude of such
as believe the same, his forefathers belief, etc. or else puzzle himself in
mazes and circles which he can never unfold Grets. tract. de agnosc. Script.
canon. c. 4. page 1888.
.

T.W. He produces Epiphanius To. 1. l. 2. haeres. 45.
saying of an heretic, This man is found altogether different from the
Scriptures, etc. If then he be dissenting from them, he is altogether an alien
from the Catholic Church. Here we grant, that he which in faith dissenteth
from the Scripture, dissenteth from the Church; but it proves not, that the
doctrine of faith and ministration of Sacraments, are marks to demonstrate the
Church.

Answ. That is a mark of the Church, the want whereof makes one altogether an
alien from the Church; but want of true faith does this according to
Epiphanius. The mayor is proved from the description of a mark or note
belonging to spiritual things, which is some thing proper to them, and which
being present does demonstrate them, and being absent proves their not being.

T.W. He produces M. Reinolds Caluinoture. l. 4. c. 9 page 859.
his words, saying: The true Church and the true faith are so knit together,
that the one infers and concludes the other: for from the true Church is
concluded the true faith, and from the true faith, the true Church. But these
words prove not that faith is more known to us then the true Church, or
serves as an evident mark as well to learned as unlearned to point out the
Church.

Answ. If according to Master Reinolds, true faith concludes the Church, then
it is better known to them to whom it serves for a proof; for in concluding,
the orderly proceeding is from better known, to less known.

Object. It concludes it not to the ignorant and unlearned.

Answ. No more does any thing else. And it is impossible for such as are
altogether ignorant of the doctrine, to know the Church by divine faith, until
they attain knowledge; even as until a man have some wisdom, he is unable
to know a wise man, as such, but only by opinion.

T. W. Doctor White produces Picus Mirandula Pic. Mirand. ap. Posseu. bibl. l.
de Ciceron. c. 11. page 18.
, saying: That the Scripture is known unto us before the Church, etc.

Answ. My brother produces this author, to prove, that the Scriptures may be
discerned to be Gods word, (of such as with wisdom and use of the means
converse in them) by certain characters and qualities existing in themselves;
and that therefore our belief of them, depends not solely or principally
upon the authority of the Church: but also upon the very Scriptures themselves.

Paragr. 5. Concerning the examining of the doctrine of the Church.
T. W. Master White laboring to depresse the Churches authority, etc. gives
the raines to every private and ignorant fellow, under the tecture and pretext
of Gods secret illuminations, to judge his own judge, and so to call in
question the reputation and honor of the Church, etc.

Answ. 1. Master White acknowledges the lawful and healthful authority of
the Church, and believes the same to be no less needful, then the Pilot in a
ship Cypr ep. 31. Extorto gubernaculo na^^m ecclesiasticae salutis in scopulos
illidat, etc. I^en. l. 5. c. 20. Confugere oportet ad ecclesiam, and eius sinu
educari, and dominic^s scripturis enutriri.
, and the watch of a shepherd in a flock; but even as each ship and every
flock are to have their several Pilots and shepherds: so the Churches of
England, Rome, Denmark, France, etc. must have Bishops and Pastors to govern
and feed the flock, which depends upon them; and the government of each
national Church, is perfect and absolute in it self Gers. de aufer. Papae,
consid. 8. Marsilius de Padua, sentit que^libet episcopu^ in sua dioecesi,
aequalem esse Papae.
: we do not therefore oppose the authority of the Church, but the usurpation
of the Pope, who transgressing the bounds of his own dioces, inuadeth the
rights of other Churches Gers. de Circumcis. consid. 3 Papa vsurpauit omnia
membro ^um officia, etc. Z^barel. de schis. page 56. Ex hoc in^initi secuti
su^t errores, quia Papa occupauit omnia ^ura in feriorum ecclesiarum.
.

2. You over reach, in saying; that Doctor White gives the raines to every
private and ignorant fellow, by a secret illumination to judge the Church. For
he maintains, both, that all judgment of doctrine must be made by the rule of
faith, and the holy Scriptures, in the plain passages thereof, with other
convenient helps and means, and not by any private spirit and illumination.
And also, that the trial and examining of doctrine in the Church, belongs to
the faithful Basil. reg. contract. 235.
respectively, according to their gifts and calling. A blind man cannot judge
of colors, and a rude and ignorant person is less able to examine
Controversies and deep points in religion. But Doctor White maintains, that
such of the faithful in Christ's Church, as by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5.14. Coloss. 1.9. Romans 15.14. have
a right O Bilson. subject. par. 2. page 353. Chrysostom. 2. Cor. hom. 13. Quomodo
non absurdum propter pecunias, alijs non credere, sed ipsas numerare: pro rebus
autem amplioribus, aliorum sententiam sequi simpliciter, praefertim cum
habeamus omnium exactissimam trutinam, and gnomonem, and regulam, diuinarum
legum assertionem, Ideo obsecro, and oro vos vt relinquatis quidnam huic aut
illi videatur, deque hijs a Scripturis omnia haec inquirite.
, To use that kind of judgment which is called the judgment of discretion,
whereby they may be enabled with understanding, to yield assent and obedience
to the right faith propounded unto them by their Pastors, and to eschew the
poisoned doctrine of heretics and deceivers.

It is the manner of our Adversaries in disputations, to decline the true state
of the question, and to impose some absurd Tenet upon us: and thus they deal
in this matter; for the purpose of the Protestants, in the same, is only this,
to maintain against the Romists, The right of every true Church, in examining
the doctrine which they receive or profess, by the holy Scripture, and other
helps and means of true judgment: and to oppose the Popish tyranny, who
would have all Churches like a blind Millhorse Cusan exercit. l. 6. Sicut
iumentum obedit Domino suo. Bonauen, and Sur. vita Francisci, c. 6. Caeca
obedientia vt quis sit sicut corpus exanime, quod requiescit vbi quis posuerit
sieve motu.
, ready to receive whatsoever faith a proud and unlettered Pope shall obtrude
upon them.

Against this usurpation we defend, that every national Church has a right
within it self, to try and examine by the lawful rule, the doctrine which it
receives and professes. And every member of the Church respectively to his
calling and gifts, (not otherwise) has a proportional share in the same.

But it is far from us, to place each presumptuous and ignorant fellow in a
Consistory of judgment, or to set a blind horse to go before others, or to
suffer any vulgar person to be his own caruer, in receiving or refusing public
doctrine according to a private humor, but we assign to every member of the
Church a function fitting for him, and no other; observing in this matter
especially the Apostles precept, Let every thing be done in good order, 1 Cor.
14.

T. W. Catholics teach, that the bond of subiecting ones self to the Churches
authority, is properly incumbent upon Christians who are baptized, and not
upon Infidels or Jews.

Answ. We acknowledge, that Christians are subject to the Churches authority,
but with these limitations. 1. The authority thereof must be lawful, and
builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. 2. The
Roman Church has no greater authority then other Churches: And Christians
are subject to the Church when they obey the laws of their own national or
provincial Church, directing them according to godliness and truth, etc.

T. W. Although Heretics sin in doubting of the Churches authority: yet they
do not evil to examine the doctrine of the Church, if they proceed herein
with a desire of finding out the truth.

Answ. What if the Pastors of the Church be Heretical, Act. 20.29. and all or
some of the people orthodox; shall it not be lawful for believers to examine
the doctrine of these corrupt and blind guides? Luke 6.39. Indeed your
Cardinal Tolet Tolet. inst. sacerd. l. c. 3.
affirms; That it is meritorious for a vulgar person to believe heretical
doctrine propounded to him by a Popish Bishop, until it be manifest to him,
that the same is against the Church.

T. W. To prove his former positions, Doctor White urges these places of the
Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Math. 7.15. Act. 17.11. etc. But these
places, some of them only prove, that such persons as by their calling, are
appointed watchmen over the house of Israel, namely Bishops and Pastors, are to
examine doctrine and spirits, and not every particular member of the Church.

Answ. 1. But you will permit no Watchmen in the house of Israel, to try or
examine your Popes spirit; and although he draw innumerable souls after him to
hell, no man may say, Our Lord Pope why do you so? And if you will be constant
in this you have spoken, touching the watchmen of the house of Israel, and
permit the Bishops and Pastors of the Church of England to try and examine your
Trent doctrine by the rule of holy Scripture, and model of the primitive
Church, and to refuse the same so far, as it is repugnant to right faith:
Master White will give you leave to abound in your own sense, about the other
branch of your assertion, about the plebeitie and vulgar people.

T. W. Christ says, beware of false Prophets; therefore every private man is
to examine the doctrine of all the Prophets and Pastors of the Church assembled
together in a general Council.

Answ. Silence would have honored you, (Prou. 17.28.) rather then this impudent
belying your Adversary. Gods Prophets are our judges Aug. de verb. Apost.
sermon. 29.
, Ioh. 5.45. we presume not to judge them, but without farther inquisition, we
presently submit our faith to their doctrine, when it is manifested unto us by
the true Church. But indeed we examine and refuse the Councels which your Pope
at these days assembleth, upon these grounds. 1. Your Cardinal Bellarmine De
verb. Dei, l. 4. c. 10.
says; That without question the clear testimonies of holy Scripture, are to
be preferred before all decrees of general Councels: But we have clear
testimonies of holy Scripture, that many things are false which are decreed in
your Trent Council: and by name communion in one kind, Math. 26.27. Service in
a strange tongue, 1. Cor. 14.15. etc.

2. Ludouicus Viues Sch. in Aug. de Ciu. D. l. 20. c. 26. Espenc. co^. Tit. 1.
p. 42. Factum est posterioribus seculis, vt quod merito in Basiliensi Concilio,
Ludouicus Arelatensis querebatur: in concilijs id demum fiat, and necessario
fiat, quod nationi placeat Italicae: vt quae sola Episcoporum, qui and ipsi
soli vocem illic decisiuam habent, numero nationes alias aequet, vel superet.
Haec illa est Helena, quae nuper Tridenti obtinuit.
a famous Papist, speaking of your Councels, says; Those only seem Councels
to them (Romists) which make for their advantage: they esteem the rest no
better then a covent of women, in a weauing house or common bath.

T. W. The men of Berhaea (who were no Christians, were allowed to try the
doctrine of Saint Paul: Therefore every Christian may examine, controlle, and
reject the public doctrine of the Church.

Doctor like inferred, as though there were no difference between him, that is
no Christian, and consequently acknowledges not any submission to the Church,
and another, who is a Christian, and in his baptism does implicitly resign
himself and his judgment to the authority of the Church.

Answ. How many turnings and windlaces are our adversaries forced to make, Aug.
Vt retia effugiant veritatis: that they may slip besides the net of Gods truth?

1. Doctor Stapleton Antid. Act. 17. v. 11. Istos Thessalonicenses ante hoc
scrutiniti ex Scripturis factum vere credidisse: verba Lucae manifestum
faciunt, etc.
and the Rhemists Rhem. annot. Act. 17. n. 3.
affirm; that the Berhaeans were Christians, and already believed S. Paul's
doctrine, and they searched the Scriptures only to confirm their faith: but
this answer is refelled by the letter of the Text, which says; they searched
the Scriptures, if these things, or whether these things were so (...). old
transl. Si haec ita se haberent.
. Cardinal Caietan Caietan. com. Act. 17. v. 11.
says: They searched the Scriptures of the Prophets, to see whether the
Gospel was conformable to them.

2. This Popish Priest has another device, mentioned by Lorinus Lorin. com.
Act. 17. v. 11.
the Jesuit, which is, that the Berhaeans being not as yet believers, and
thereupon owing no subjection to the Pastors of Christ's Church, had a liberty
of examining S. Paul's doctrine by the Scriptures, which believers have not. But
against this I object.

1. That the Berhaeans being before Proselytes and Jews by profession, were
implicitly obliged to the same obedience of the church of Christ, when the
doctrine thereof should be preached unto them; as baptized Christians are:
because the Prophets and Moses whom they believed, commanded the Jews to
follow Christ, whenever he should come, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Ioh. 1.45. Act. 3.21.
and 7.37.

2. Baptism does not absolutely tie Christians to obey the Roman Church, but
to believe the faith of Jesus Christ, into whom they were baptized, and to
embrace the doctrine of that or any other Church, so long as they preach that
faith, Mar. 16.15.16. 1. Cor. 1.13. But if they deliver a contrary doctrine,
then the Sacrament of Baptism, like an oath of allegiance, obliges us to
adhere to Jesus Christ our King, and his written law; and to renounce
Antichrist and other traitors, who under the cloak of subjection to the
Church, seek to make us rebels to Christ.

3. If the Berhaeans, men not instructed in the religion of Christ, were able
to examine and discern the truth of doctrine by the Scriptures, with
spiritual profit to their souls: how much more may others do the like?

4. If it were commendable in the Berhaeans, when they doubted of Paul's
preaching, to try the truth of it by the Scriptures; why should it be a
disco^mendation for Christians, when they are not assured of any doctrine, to
make a like trial by the same means?

5. One principal reason why the Papists will not allow the faithful to
examine the Churches doctrine by the Scripture, is, because they have only a
private spirit. But the Berhaeans spirit was in like manner, and equally
private: therefore they could have no greater liberty of examining the
Churches doctrine, then baptized Christians.

T. W. With the like want of connection or true reference, M. White presses the
testimony of certain ancient Fathers; and by name Chrysostom, etc: but the
scope hereof, is only to refute the doctrine of every new sectarie, even from
the Scriptures, a course which we willingly admit and allow. Thus you see, our
Minister is not ashamed to pervert and detort the grave authority of this
Father.

Answ. 1. You omit a clear testimony of Basil Basil. sum. moral. des 72. c. 1.
, which expressly affirms; That it behooves the hearers that are learned in
the Scriptures, to try those things which are said by their Teachers, and
receiving that which agrees with the Scriptures to reject the contrary. And
your own Gerson affirming the same, is also slipped over by you. Thus you have
eyes and see not, etc.

2. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 33 in Act. in morali. Venit Gentilis ac dicit, etc.
Cum Scripturas accipimus, and illae sunt simplices and verae, facile tibi
(Gentilis) fuerit iudicare, etc. Dic mihi, mente^ ne habes and iudicium?
Quomodo possum nesciens, vestra iudicare? Discipulus fieri velle^, tu me
doctorem facis. Si empturus vestem, etc. non haec verba dicis, etc. Recta
ratione inquire a Deo, and omnia tibi reuelabit. Si regula esset, secundum quam
omnes dirigi oportebat, non multo opus praetextu, sed male metiente^, facile
deprehenderemus ita and nunc, etc. Chrysostom. prol. ep. ad Ro^. Et vos si lectioni
cum animi alacritate volueritis attendere, nullo alio praeterea opus habebitis.
Verus enim est sermo Christi, cum dicit: Quaerite and inuenietis, pulsate and
aperietur vobis. Mat. 7.
pursues you harder then you will be aknown of. You wipe him off, Leui
brachio, with a slent a tow side: saying, his scope is only to refute the
doctrine of every new sectary, even from the Scripture, etc. But he comes
point blanke upon you, and teaches, 1. That a Gentile by searching the
Scriptures, may judge of the truth of the doctrine of Christian Religion.

2. Amidst the diversity of opinions, a man having a mind and judgment, may
by hearing and reading be a teacher to himself of that which is the truth. 3.
That by the rule of the Scriptures, and by prayer to God, who will reveal
things to them that seek him, people may easily find out deceivers, and such
as lie. 4. He earnestly exhorts lay men to search and use the Scriptures,
saying; I beseech you to be in the rank of teachers Hom. 8. in Genes.
, and not only hearers of our sayings, etc.

T.W. Master White, under the shadow of ascribing all honor and reverence to
the Scriptures, etc. impugneth the venerable authority of the Church, and
declineth the force of all authorities, deduced from the unanimous consent of
Fathers, and oecumenicall Councels, etc.

Answ. 1. It is marvel you will boast of an unanimous consent of Fathers, when
in many questions you have not one evident testimony of any ancient Father:
also, why do you so shamefully counterfeit and corrupt Fathers, if of
themselves they be so clear for you? 2. The fourth oecumenicall Council
Chalced. Council sess. 16. Aequa sanctissimae sedi nouae Romae (Constantinopoli)
priuilegia tribuerunt, etc.
, verbally and unanswerably controlleth the supremacy of the Pope, which is the
basis of your Roman faith.

Paragr. 6. Concerning unity of Papists, etc.
T. W. Master White as well knowing the force of unity in faith, seeing it is
true that God is not the author of dissension, but of peace, goes about to
show, that Papists enjoy not any unity and concord in their doctrine.

Answ. Unity of faith in the primitive articles, after they be once revealed,
is simply necessary, necessitate medij, as a requisite means to salvation:
and unity in other articles is needful, in desire, necessitate finis, as a
mark whereunto Christians must aim, and come as near as they can. Howsoever
it is possible, that among holy men Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. 15. c. 5. and in Psalm
83. Chrysostom 2. Cor. hom. 18.
difference of judgment may be, without the maine breach of unity in faith:
neither is every difference of opinion a dissolution of unity Cyprian and the
Romans disagreeing about baptism. Aug. de bapt co^t Don. l. 1. c. 18. Aug cont.
Julian l. r. c. 2. Greg. Naz. apol. fugae. Chrysostom. 2. Cor. hom. 27. Sicut
bestiae dissidemus. Arboreus Theosoph. l. 5. c. 10. Saepenumero contingit vt
inter viros pios atque doctos, non conueniat de eadem re, etc.
.

T. W. If Master White or any other man can prove, that Papists have no unity
in doctrine, it greatly aduantageth his cause.

Answ. Doctor White in his 24. Digression, has proved this. 1. By the
confession of some of your Doctors, charging the Schoolmen with as great
discord as was among the Heathen Rhenanus. Auentin. annal. l. 5. page 386.
Facilius inter horologia, quam inter theologos eonueniet.
. 2. By particular examples of the adverse and contradictious writing of your
Doctors one against another, in sundry questions. 3. By your purging of former
Papists works, of such assertions as be repugnant to your modern style. In
doing whereof, you have not spared Thomas Posseuin. appar. Tho. Aqu. Expuncta
sunt in ijsdem commentarijs, etc. Bellar. de amiss. great. l. 5. c. 5. Sanctus
Thomas, quem imprimis Catholici sequuntur. Innocent. 3. ser. Ecce plus quam
Solomon hic. Scriptoribus cunctis exceptis Canonicis praeponit.
himself, the grand pillar of the Lateran Church.

Now in his answer to this matter of discord, 1. The priest omitteth such
testimonies as are pregnant, and concern the principal and weighty articles.
2. He salues the former imputation of discord, saying; that the contentions are
in points scholasticke, and not defined by the Church.

But against this Apron of fig-leaues, I oppose the examples following.

1. These positions: The Pope cannot err in his definitive sentence; and the
contrary, The Pope may err in his definitive sentence, contain a weighty
article of Popery; and yet each of these positions, are contradictiously
maintained by the Popish school Can loc. lib. 6. cap. 1. Alph. Castr. cont.
haer. l. 1. c. 4. Gerson, Adrian. Almain, Tho. Walden. Gratian. cited by Azor.
p. 2. instit. mor. l. 5. c. 4. Bellar. de Pontif. l. 4. c. 2.
.

The Church was builded on Peter, the Church is not builded on Peter but upon
the rock, are contradictiously maintained Arbor. Theosoph. l 5. c 5 Ecclesia
fundata est super petram, non super Petrum.
.

2. The Popes temporal authority over Kings and Monarchs; his dispensations
and prohibitions about the oath of allegiance; his banning, bulling, binding,
blading, suborning, and the rest, are more then scholasticall litigations. The
falling and rising of the greatest powers in Israel; the safety or confusion
of Commonwealths and States depends thereupon: and yet in this matter (being
plainly determined by the written word of God, and by the tradition and
unanimous consent of the primitive Church, and all Catholic Doctors in the
world, until the age of Hildebrand, a famous incendiarie and root of the
galle and wormwood of rebellion in the Clergy) both our homeborne and
foreign Babylonians, are rent and divided.

And omitting others, Master Blackwell the Archpriest, and the scarlet roabed
Jesuit have lately been in open conflict, concerning this question; and M.
Briarly Apol. praefat.. 20. 21. 22. etc.
, washing his hands from the powder treason, solemnly propugneth the royal
authority against the priestly usurpation: but in this assertion he is
opposite Sander visib. monarch. l. 2. c. 4.
to D. Stapleton Rel c. 3. q. 5. ar. 2. concl. 3. p. 393. Bellar. de Pontif. l.
5. c 7. Azor. inst. mor. to. 1. l. 8. c 12. and p. 2. l 12. c. 5. Greg. Val to.
3. page 570. Victoria. Bannes Sixtus Senent. Bosius de sig. Baron. annal. tom.
11. pa. 802.
, and sundry other English Priests, and also gainsayeth the most accomplished
Doctors of the modern Roman Church, in Italy, Spain, Germany Stapl. Rel. c. 4
q. 2. ad. 5. and qu. 5. p. 495. Grets. def. Bell. de Script. p. 1515. 1042.
1443. etc.
, etc.

3. Our Adversaries thwart and contradict each other, concerning the authority
of the Church and Scriptures. Some, and those most respected, give the
precedence to the Roman Church; others prefer the Scripture Dried. de dog.
eccl. l. 2. c. 3. Concedimus maiorem esse authoritatem sacrae Scripturae, quam
Ecclesiae quae nunc est in terris, etc.
.

Some Papists esteem the original texts of Scripture, and make them the
authenticke-rule Dried. ib. p. 55.
. But a great number exalt the Latin vulgar, etc.

Suarez, Henriquez, etc. maintain the divine adoration of the Sacramental
Elements Suar. to. 3. d. 65 Henriq. sum. mor. l. 8. c. 32. Greg Val to. 4. d 6.
q. 11. p. 2.
, but Stapleton Stapl. Prompt. Cath. p. 3. ser. Epiphan. p 29.
denies. And in the question of justification, merit, satisfaction, freewill,
etc. the discord between them is such, that some of their Tenets differ
nothing from us, but only in terms and manner of speaking; but according to
others, the difference is so wide, that it admits no reconciliation.

I omit your different Tenet concerning the conception of the virgin Marie,
and touching reprobation, sufficient grace, adoration of Images.

T. W. Against prayer in an unknown tongue, he alleges Contarenus Contaren.
Christ. instr. p. 212.
, saying, The prayers which me^ understand not, want the fruit which they
should reap. But what kind of Logic is this, Prayer for some particular
reasons, is better in a vulgar tongue then in a strange, ergo, it is absolutely
unlawful in a strange tongue?

Answ. In stead of your conclusion, Therefore it is absolutely unlawful, I
pray you substitute Doctor Whites conclusion, which is, Therefore the same is
unlawful, as it is commanded by the Roman Church: and the Authors produced by
him, will in good Logic confirm his assertion: For thus I reason.

That form of prayer is unlawful, which depriueth people of the fruit of
their particular intention to God, and their own edification. But prayer in an
unknown tongue, prescribed by the Roman church, does thus: Ergo it is
unlawful.

The mayor proposition is Saint Paul's, 1. Cor. 14. as he is expounded by the
primitive Fathers, and by Haimo, Lira, etc. The assumption is upon the matter,
delivered by Cardinal Contarenus, Caietan, Thomas Caietan. com. 1 Cor. 14. Hac
Pauli doctrina habetur, quod melius est ad aedificatione^ ecclesiae, orationes
publicas, quae audiente populo dicuntur, dici lingua communi clericis and
populo, quam Latin. Tho. Aqu com. 1. Cor. 14. lect. 3. Plus lucratur, qui orat
and intelligit, quam qui lingua tantum orat, etc. Chrysostom. de fide Annae hom. 2.
Illa potissimum est deprecatio, quu^ ab intimis voces sursum feruntur, hoc
praecipue mentis est exercitatae, non intention vocis, sed animi feruore
precationem absoluere. Vide Cassand. Leiturg. c 36.
, etc.

T. W. He brings in Thomas Aquine and Caietan affirming, that it were better
for the edification of the Church, if prayer were in a vulgar tongue: but what
Catholic denies this, if he have only respect to the edification and
instruction of the hearers, and nothing else? But public prayers are directed
to other ends.

Answ. 1. It is certain, that Caietan opposes the practice of the Roman
Church, because Catharinus Sixth. Sen. bibl. l. 6. annot. 243. who cites
Catharinus.
the Archbishop does so grievously censure him, saying; that the doctrine which
his words imply, was invented of Luther and the Devil. 2. Thomas and Caietan,
by edification, understand not only instruction, but also inflaming of the
desire and affection unto devotion; and those prayers which have both these
effects, are more profitable then prayers in a strange tongue, wanting the same.

T. W. For the euacuating of the force and operation of confession of sins,
he brings in Caietan, saying; A man by contrition without any confession is
made clean, and a formal member of the Church.

Answ. D. White in this place speaks not of euacuating confession, but only
affirms, that Papists have diverse opinions about the same, which is true. For
some say, that it is only an institution of the Church Great. de poen. d. 5. c.
conuertimini. and ca. Quamuis. Glossa. Panormitan. B. Rhen. sup. Tertul. de
poen. Al. Hal. 4. q. 18. citat quosdam, etc.
; others, it is not prescribed in holy scripture but by tradition Scot 4. d.
17. q. 1. ar. 1. Gabr. 4. d. 17. q. 1.
; others, it is of the law of nature; and others, that it was ordained in the
old law Petr. Oxom. quem citat Suar. 4. d. 35. s. 1. Hug. Vict. de Sacr. l. 2.
p. 14. Tho. Wald. de Sacr. to. 2. c. 135. Will. de Rabion. 4. d. 14. q. 1.
. But if the institution thereof and precept of God Suar. 4. d. 35.. 1. Neque
in ipsa contritione includi votum confessionis, secluso praecepto.
, concerning the same be uncertain, then the necessity of a desire and
purpose thereof to be inclucluded in contrition, is uncertain.

T. W. Touching justification by works, which according to our Catholic
doctrine are to be done in the state of grace, and derive their worth not from
the worker, but from the promise of God, as also from the blood of our Savior,
etc.

Ans. The learned of your Church deny, that works receive dignity from the
promise of God, affirming it to be Catholic doctrine, that they have their
perfect value and dignity by their first production, before any promise of God
be added unto them Read before part 1. chap. 1. paragr. 2.
.

T. W. The several opinions of (Roman) Catholics, about secondarie questions
of Transubstantiation, are only points of indifferency, philosophical
questions disputed in the schools, and by several men, severally maintained
without any breach of faith; whereas divisions in doctrine among the
Protestants are such, as do wound the soundness of faith.

Answ. Our Adversaries are in extremities; for many times they will have the
smallest matter in religion an article of faith, to wit; That Tobias his dog
had a tail Tanner. Jesuit colloq Ratisb. fess. 11. page 353.
, but at another time, great differences Flores. Theo log. quaest. in l. 4.
sent q. 5. ar. 1. An panis in corpus Christi conuerratur? Resp. Qua tuor sunt
opiniones. Prima est Durandi, qui omnino negat Transubsta^t. etc. Caietanus
affirmat panem tra^substantiati in corpus Christi, concedit nihilominus, rem
quae erat panis, manner, and esse corpus Christi. Haec est omnino sugie^da; ex
ea enim sequitur conuersione^ ista^ in corpus Chr. no^ esse
transubstantiatione^.
in maine questions of Theology, are but scholasticall contentions. And thus
it is verified of them, which Augustine says of the Donatists, Quod volumus
sanctum est, and quando volumus, etc. They make our differences in accessory
points, fundamental, and their own in the same kind, accidental.

But in their doctrine of Transubstantiation, there is a real difference
between the elder and modern Papists.

The elder affirmed, that the flesh of Christ was made of the bread Lomb. 4. d.
8. Ex pane fit corpus Christi, and vinu^ fit sanguis. d. 10. De pane fit caro
Christi.
; and the substance of bread and wine, were converted into the substance of the
body and blood of Christ Extr. de sum. Trin. tit. 1. and ca. Cum Marthae.
. And hereupon they called a Priest a Creator of his maker Biel in Can. Miss.
lect. 4. ser. discip. s. 111. cited by B. Jewel. repl. ar. 21. page 452.
. Yea, the Trident Council Trid. Council. sess. 13. c. 4.
says: There is a conversion of the whole substance of bread into the
substance of the body of Christ, etc. But the Jesuits affirm, that the bread
is not made the body of Christ, and the conversion thereof into Christ's body,
is by way of adduction Bellar. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 11. and l. 3. c. 18. and de
Missa. l. 1. c. 27. Becan. de Euch. Cath c. 2.
, and not production.

But this opinion changes the old definition of Transubstantiation, and in
stead of a conversion of one substance into another, brings in a
translocation or position of one substance in the room of another Suar. 3. d.
75.. 4. Per solam actionem adductiuam reuera non explicatur vera conuersio
substantialis and transubsta^tiatio, sed solum translocatio quaeda^. Quando vna
substantia solu^ succedit loco alterius, non potest proprie dici, vna conuerti
in aliam.
, and conioyneth Christ's body with the signs, but transubstantiates not the
signs into his body.

2. The old Popish faith concerning the real presence, was, that the body and
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, are verily, and indeed handled and broken in
the Priests hands, and ground or chewed in the teeth of the faithful De
consecr. d. 2. c. Ego Berengar. Sensualiter non solum sacramentum: sed in
veritate manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri.
, and not only the Sacrament hereof: but Bellarmine denies this faith De
Euchar. l. 1. c. 11.
, saying; That attrition or grinding of Christ's body in the teeth, is not
necessary, but only the taking thereof into the mouth, and swallowing it down
whole into the stomach. And if they will color Pope Nicholas his definition,
saying with the Glossator, that his speech is figurative, they depart from
their own principles; who when we speak of admitting a figure in the
Sacrament, exclude the same with all reproach, calling us Tropists
Sacramentaries, etc.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A
ABsolution of sins. page 271 Adoration of Images. 237. 327 Adoration of the
virgin Mary. 235 Adoration of sacramental signs. 346 Augustine of inherent
justice, that it is imperfect. 12 Custody of Angels. 58 Adoration of the
Cross. 60 Appeals. 127 Antichrist. 279. 384 Author of sin. 225. 311
B
Bellarmine about merits. 10 Bernard no Trent Papist. 313 Bishops and Priests
remit sins. 273 Bishops to appoint and direct the means for expounding
Scripture. 149
C
Candles in day time at burials. 76 Canonical hours. 71 Church may err. 80
Churches visibility and inuisibility. 88. 90. 274. 321. 383. 384. Churches
perpetuity. 95. 323 Churches notes. 97. 102 Churches authority. 162. 133
Churches office in expounding Scripture. 145 Churches ministry in delivering
scripture, and leading people to it. 263. 380 Concord of just men imperfect.
285 Conversion of England and other countries. 331. 332 Concupiscence. 24
Controversies in Popery. 159 Contrition. 205 Council of Eliberis. 248
Confession auricular. 306 Councels made subject to the Pope. 335 395. Cross
whether adored. 6 Sign of the Cross. 61 Cyprian touching Appeals. 127
Cyprian contemns the Popes judgment. 127 Cusanus touching Scripture. 134
D
Discord of Papists. 287 Devils tormented. 62
E
Englands conversion. 331 English Leyturgie. 275 Eucharist. 338. 346
F
Fathers. 255. 258. 259. Fasting. 69. 70. 191. 307 Friar Francis his wounds.
320 Friars prodigious habit. 68 Formal cause of justification. 5. 7
G
Gregory the Great about Images. 245 No Trent Papist. 280 He denied supremacy.
295

H
Whether Hierom a Papist. 50 Hypocrisy of Popish fasting. 70 Hairecloth. 67
I
Ignorance and implicit faith. 185 Judge of Controversies. 135. 161 Images.
237. 327 Inherent justice. 23. and 19. 20 formal cause of justification. 5. 7
Invocation of Saints. 53 Inherent justification forsaken by Papists. 31. 32
Justification. 19
L
Lives of Protestants not detected. 299 Lay men no expositors of Scripture. 43
no judges of Controversy. Lay men reading the scripture. 43 Luther his life
352
M
Merit of condignitie. 36. 38 primitive Fathers of merit. 40 confidence in
merit. 9 Merit of condignity. 37 Mass. 337. 341. Matrimony of the Clergy.
193. 325 Marks of the Church. 97. 102 Mortal sin destroyed as well as
pardoned. 16 Monastical life. 63 Miracles. 201. 241 Francis his Miracles. 315
feigned Miracles. 316
O
Object of faith. 378
P
Papal usurpation over Princes. 181. et Epist. dedicat. Paphnutius of
Matrimony. 189 Peter's chair. 128 Perpetuity of the Church. 93. 323
Pilgrimage. 59 Popes wars. 150 whether the Pope may make a creed 121. Popes
authority. 124. 335 Popes supremacy. 289 Popes judgment. 141 Popes vicious
deeds. 138 Popes unlearned. 142 Promise of grace, whether universal. 270
Protestants faith perpetual. 265 Providence of God about sin. 219. 224
Poverty. 65. 66 Private spirit. 391. 393
R
Rhemish Translation. 1 Reward of works. 3. 35 Remission of sins. 15. 18
Relikes of Saints. 62 Roman Church changed into a temporal monarchy. 181
Reprobation. 231 Rome in what sense a principal church. 129. Reading Scripture.
See Scripture.
S
Sanctity. 112 Satisfactions. 208. how far admitted by Protestants. 211. and
by primitive Fathers. 212 Some Papists reject satisfactions of co^dignitie. 214
Sacrifice whether it agree to the Eucharist. 339 Sacraments efficiency
according to the Jesuits. 272 Scripture, and the reading of the same. 42. and
78. S. Hierom requires reading of scripture. 45 Roman Church depriueth people
of reading Scripture. 47. 48 Scriptures edify al sorts of people. 42. no cause
of heresy to lay men more the^ to Priests. 42. 43 Scripture acknowledged the
only rule by Papists. 165. in what sense the only rule. 153. 164. the sole
principle of faith. 376 Service in a strange tongue. 77 Schisms of Popes. 119
Profane speeches of Papists about the Scripture. 136. 373 Scriptures contain
the grounds of their own exposition. 152 Their perfection. 365. etc. Single
life of the Popish Clergy, and the impurity thereof. 196. 305 Sins venial
and mortal. 28. 73. 217 Difference of sin acknowledged by Tertullian. 17
Some sins never forgiven until they be forsaken. 17 Succession. 109. 113.
349 Synesius a Bishop his marriage. 188
T
Temporal punishment of sins. 269 Traditions. 164. in what manner admitted by
Protestants. 168. 262. See 363. 370. etc. Transubstantiation. 203. 328. 405
Translation of Scripture. 281 Trial of doctrine. 388. 397.
V
Pardon of venial sin, by what means procured. 17 Visibilitie of the Church.
90. 274. 321 Unity. 110. 268. 284 Universality. 112 Voluntary poverty. 65
W
Wafer Cakes. 345 Protestants faith about good works. 32. etc. Works whether
meritorious. 2 They impetrate divine favor. 33. in what manner they purge
sin. 34
Women reading Scriptures. 45 Worshipping of Saints. 51
Z
Zuinglius and the Heluetian Ministers touching marriage. 301
ERATA.
PAge 14. line 3. for quality read quantity. page 29. line 20. for matters
read mattins. page 149. in the title, for Pastors read Bishops. page 32. line
12. put out the before blessed Peter. page 14. line 23. put out to before
revile. In the answer to the Epist. Dedic. of T. W. page 5. line 20. for Sure I
and, read Sure I am.


