AN EXAMINATION OF M. DOCTOR VVHYTGIFTES CENSVRES, CONTAINED IN TWO TABLES,
SET BEFORE HIS BOOK,

Entitled, THE DEFENSE OF THE AVNSWER TO THE ADMONITION. etc,

I. COR. XVI.14. Let all your things be done with Joy. 1575.

AN EXAMINATION OF Censures contained in two Tables set before book entitled
The Defense of, etc.
THE EXAMINER TO HIS FRIEND IN CHRIST JESUS.
YOUR importunity rather then any other Argument, has moved me to yield unto
your request. For what am I, that I should take upon me to be an Arbiter between
two so renoumned Clerks? You know a great number I am suer, both wise and
learned, which favor the cause of reformation, that might better satisfy you
with there learned judgment, then I can pleas^^ you with my simple opinion.
Beside this, it is not otherwise lyklie, but that T. C. (if God spare him life)
will make answer in his own defense, as one that knows his own meaning
best As for me, I can but conjecture, how an indifferent man without affection
unto either party, or desire of cont^^tion might reasonably and charitablie
Judge of those matters, supposed by M Doctor Whytgifte to be dangerous pilates
of doctrine, or falsifications and untruths How be yt in one thing, I can
not but think as you do, that M W. in premisinge these-two tables in the
first face of his treatise, and after placing^ them in the beginning of his
book, has used a very prejudicial policy. For his volume being so large,
his style so unpleasant, and his matter for the most^ part such, as no man
without great pa^ience, can abide to read him over, although he favor his
cause never so much: he might well think, that as he should have many curious
vewers of the first leaf: so he should have few diligent readers unto the
last ve^se. And (...) this polycye were commendable, but that divine matters
require to be handeled rather with sincerity, then with sub^litie, For such
defacinge of the adversary may perhaps procure a ^^daine ac^lamation, but a
strong defense of the cause obtains a suer victory. And therefore M. W. (in
mine opinion) (...) have done better, to the furderiage of his purpose, if on
s^e^de of these two Tables of Dangerous points, and untruths, that tend to
none other end, but to deface his aduersarie^: he had made one Table of short
and sound arguments whereby either his cause were confyrmed, or the contrary
confuted. For in so doing, as well his plain dealinge, as the strength of his
cau^^, should have clearly appeared to all men^. But as he has omitted, that
so I will let it pass, and show you what I (...) of every one of his Censures
severally.

TO THE READER.
THou haste here (gentle Reader) an examination of D. W. Censures, contained in
the two first Tables set before his book, written by a godly and learned
man to a friend of his, wherein may appear, with what conscience, he has
charged his adversary, and with what grounds he goes about to persuade thee
to his opinions. No doubt but T. C. (if it ^e please God) shall more fully
satisfy thie expectation, in making a just and full answer to all his
Cauill^. In mean time use thi^ to thin profytte, and accept of it, with the
same mind that it is communicated unto thee Thou should have had it sooner a
great while, and so was, it meant but it could not conveniently be brought
about.

Fare well.
NOTE OF (...) poinctes of doctrine, as are (...) T. C. in his replye and
quoted, as they are to be found, etc.
1 He sayethe that certain of the things which we stand upon are such as
if every heart of our head were a life, we ought to aforde them for the
defense of them: whereby he would insi^uate that this Church of England
does maintain some damnable doctrine Page 44.

1 The first dangerous poincte is gathered by insinuation: but direct and
plain dealinge doubtethe of no such danger. Suerly if there be any truth on
T C. side be it in never so small a matter, yet being the truth of God, and in
Gods matters it ought not to seem a tryfle in man's eyes. There is great
diversity of matters uttered in the word of God, in degrees of weyghtines,
but the holy Ghost instructs us of no tryfles No man that considers the
majesty of God, doubts what he ought to suffer, rather then to break the
^^st of the commandments: our Savior says, that no jot nor title of Gods
law, shall pass, until all be fullfilled, and whosoever breaks one of the
lest of the commandments, and teaches men so to do, shall be called left in
the Kingdom of heaven.

Then let every indifferent man judge, whether we ought to aforde ten thousand
lives, rather then to be excluded out of the Kingdom of heaven. But God will
not deal so hardly with us for so small matters, true nor yet for breach of
the greatest commandments. But the assertion is of the justice of God and
the duty of man, not of man^ frayelty and God^ mercy. As for the damnable
doctrine supposed, although it be no part of the assertion but an
uncharitable collection, yet the Church of England is no^ to be charged
therewith For in as much as both the parties that hold these controversies are
members of the Church and a great many others ^lso which take no part in
these disputations: the doctrine of the Church is that which is truth in
those questions, whether the same be held by T. C. and those that be of his
judgment, or by Io. Whitgifte, and all that be of his mind. For if T. C and as
many a^ take his part be deceived, the Church of England may not be said to
be deceived No more if Io Whytgift, and his side be in a wrong opinion, may
the Church of England bear the blame of their error. To conclude, a damnable
do^^ryne may by said in two senses, first generally any (...) (...) is
damnable, because it deserves (...) sin is of yt self damnable, then
specially such falls doctrine as is blasphemous, and holds contrary to the
foundation of our salvation and so all reasonable men mean, when they speak of
damnable doctrine, but so does not T C. chardge his adversary much less the
Church of England.

2 He says, that if the Church be considered in the whole and general
government and outward policy of yt, yt may be pure and unspotted: which
smells of an Anabaptisticall fancye page 50.

2 The second dangerous poyncte is affyrmed by M D to smell of Anabaptistry*
Suerly they that have there senes exercised to discern good from evil as well
as he and have better cause to know the stynke of Anabaptistry then he,
because they have been nearer to the dounghill of them, then ever he was, can
perceive no such savor in the assertion. For first he affirms yt not
absolutely, but for any thing he knowethe, which words should have been
added in this accusation, if yt had been framed with indifferencye. Secondly he
adds if men would labor to purge yt of the abuses, which ought to be
according to the word of God, now what lets the purity?

But either the word of God teaches not how to purge the Church perfectly,
or else that men can not follow the rules prescribed by the word of God
thoroughly.

If you grante imperfection in the word, all men know whereof that smellethe,
if there want ability in men, then the rules were not rightly framed for man:
yt will be answered, that the like is objected of the law by the Pelagians
and Papists: if no man can keep the law then the law was given in vain: but
this objection is soon avoided For the law and these rules are not ryghtly
compared, because they differ in the end for which they were, given. The law
was not given that men should fulfill yt but to show them there sin.

These rules were given because God would have his Church in the outward
pollicye to be well governed. But M D will have an example of this purytie:
what thinks he of the Churches planted by the Apostells so long as they
contynewed in such order, as the Apostells established in them, were they not
pure and unspotted as touching the general government and outward pollycie
of them? were the Apostells also ignorant or unable, or unwilling, to bring
this thing to pass? as for the spots in the Church of the Corinthians and
Galathians (...) were not left by th'Apostell, when he (...) but cast in by
falls Apostells that came after (...) they were the f^ultes of the men not the
imperfection of the orders, which if they had been ryghtly observed he neded
not to have written to the one for excommunication of the adulterer, nor to the
other for confutinge of there heresye: wherefore by these examples may be
inferred that although the order of government and outward pollycie be never
so pure and perfect, yet if men be negligent to observe yt, great enormities
may grow in the Church, But that there can be no perfect order for the
right government of Christ his Church requires some other facultye then
Logike, to frame a good argument of these examples Finally men muse why this
opinion should be compted so dangerous in T. C which is so stoutly defended
by the accuser him self in both his books. For if there can be no Church pure
and unspotted in the whole government and outward pollycie, why does he so
boldly defend the Church of England, as he pretendethe in her government and
outward policy, that he will acknowledge no spo^te nor blemishe thereof, but
either he defendethe yt as bewtyfull, or else remouethe yt as being in the men
and not in the order of government?

3 He affyrmeth, that many things are both commanded and forbidden, of
which there is no express mention in the word, which are as necessary to
be followed or avoided, as th^s whereof express mention is made which
soundethe to the confirmation of the very foundation of all papistrie. page 77.

3 The third dangerous poyncte of doctrine in M. Whytgifte ears soundethe to
the confyrmation of Poperye* but this his Censure in other men's judgment
soundethe more malicyously then godly or learnedlye: for yt is well known how
far T C is fled from all Papistrie. And his meaning in those words is
evident to any man that is disposed to understand him. That many things are
commanded and forbidden in the word of God by general precepts, which are
not expressed particularly in there special names and kinds. Why should this
be noted in the margent for a Papisticall assertion? but afterward it is
term^d most ciuily an unadvised assertion because M Whytgyfte counts
(expressed) as yt pleases him, which he may well do when he interprets his
own words, but who made him a dictator to determine the sense of other men's
words. Every man is best interpreter of his own words* (...) fallw, hen a
man is accused for speakinge (...) he shall not be admitted to expound his
(...), yet by law his adversary shall not be his expounder, but vir bonus a
good and indifferent man. If lawyers be sumwhat captious they are to be born
withal when doctors of divinity permit unto them selves such liberty of
wranglinge*

4 He holdethe, that the doctrine of free will is not repugnaun^ to salvation:
and yet is yt a doctrine clean contrary to f^^e (...) by Christ. page 82.

4 In the three former Censures though uncharitably yet in this behalf he has
dealt more vprightlye, in that he has set down near the very words of T.
C but in the fourth Censure he has set down nether his words nor his
meaning for his words be these And if you mean by matters of faith and
necessary to salvation those without the which a (...) can not be saved then
the doctrine that teaches there is no free will or prayer for the dead is not
within your compass. For I doubt not but diverse of the fathers of the greek
Church, which were great patrons of free will are saved holdi^ge the
foundation of the faith which is Christ. T C does not hold that the
doctrine of free will is not repugnant to salvation, but only obiecteth against
that, which he supposes to be M. D meaning by matters of faith and
necessary to salvation, for he him self so meanethe by matters of faith and
necessary to salvation as he countethe the doctrine that teaches there is no
free will or prayer for the dead to be within the compass but yet he is
persuaded (you will say) that many patrons of fre will are saved. M D is of
the same mind nevertheless he says, that he that dies in the opinion of
free will holds not the foundation, by which words yt semethe he has had
no great conferens with the free will men of our time, and that he imagines
that those fathers of the greek Church dyed not in the opinion of free will.
But who is able to affirm that? I doubt not but they repented before they dyed
and desired pardon of all there errors and ignoraunces, as of all there secret
and unknown sins: but yet it is most like they dyed in this opinion that
they thought free will to be no error. A Christian man must desire forgiuens
of those sins which he has committed not knowinge they were sins and
likewise of those errors which he holdethe not knowing them to be errors,
wherefore they dyed not without repentance although they did not revoke that
particular error.

5 He says, that all the commandments of (...) Apostells, are needful for
our salvation: which is a (...) error page 103.

5 The fyfte poincte is defyned to be a notorious error and in page 103. it is
quoted for a gross error, and in the text T C is said grosslye to have erred
in affyrminge that all the commandments of God and the Apostells are needful
for our salvation, with good store of the like Rethorike, but what need all
this insultations* I would require of M. D not a charitable as of a Christian,
but a reasonable interpretation as of a man, to these words of T. C. All the
commau^dements of God and the Apostels are needful for our salvation For what
man (except he were blinded with malice) would not understand this saying of
such commandments as God and the Apostells in Gods name have given to us,
and then what absurdity is in the saying? For such commandments as were
given to others are they no commandments to us?

6 He utterly denies, that any Magistrate can save the life of blasphemers,
contemptuous and ^^uberne idolaters, murderers, adulterers, incestuous
persons, and such like which God by his judicial law has commanded to be
put to death: whereby he byndeth the civil Magistrate to the obseruinge of
the judicial law of Moses, and condemns this state and government (now used
in this realm of England) of manifest impiety. page 120.

6 The syxte poyncte is accused of two heinous cryme^^ the one of bringinge in
of Iudaisme, the other of condemning this state of manifest impiety. but in my
judgment without just cause. For T. C. requires not the observation of that
law, but the substance and equity thereof as the marrowe, which is nothing
else but true justice. Is Gods justice eternal, now become Iudaisme? be not
blasphemers, incestuous persons, murderers, traitors, etc. as worthy of death
now as they were in times past? Suerly my think if M. Whytgiftes divinity be
not able to rule his judgment in these cases, yet humanity yt self and the
light of nature shyninge unto all nations should instruct him, that the
horrible crimes are woorthye of death by the justice of God. And if it be the
justice of God, how is it lawful for man to alter yt? But let us consider M.
D. reasons. First all the^ laws of this land that be contrary no the
iudicialls of Moses, as he says (but he should say to the justice of God for
he must not mock men with the ambiguous and odious term of the judicial
law of Moses) must be abrogated. Suerly they that are studious of the laws,
confess as you (...) must be consonant to the justice of God* (...) poyncte
they be not, that they ought to be re^ormed. And every Parliament, payns is
taken to bring them as near thereto as can be obtained. Much rather a divine
should require that all laws be squared according to the justice of God. The
second reason: the Prince must be abridged of the prerogative of perdoninge.
The question in mine opinion, is not whether a Prince may forbear the
execution of a sentence upon good respects, but whether he may make a law
contrary to Gods eternal justice. The third reason: punishments of death
for fellonye must be mitigated, etc. Suerlye such may be the circunstaunces
that in some cases in conscience they ought to be mitigated, and in some cases
they may be increased. when David pronounced sentence of death, according to
the case that was put unto him by Nathan the prophet 2. Sam. 12. he increased
the punishment of fellonye, yet he decreed not contrary to the justice of God.
The rest that follows of lawyers casting away there books, and priests
becomminge judges, I take to be but Iestinge, unseemly for so serious matters:
as for the auctorities he alleges out of Musculus, Hemingius, Calvin, etc.
read them who will with any indifferencye, and he shall find nothing in them
contrary to the assertion of T.C but rather agreeable to the same: wherefore in
my simple judgment, this doctrine tends not to the overthrow of states of
Commonwealthe, etc. But rather this assertion of M D printed in great letters
("That the judicial law is lest to the discrescion of the magistrate to add
to yt or to take from yt, or to alter and change yt as yt shall be thought most
fytt, etc.") tendethe to the settinge up of all tyranny and confusion, and to
the overthrow of all well ordered common wealths. For if there be no certain
rule of justice in that law, which is immutable (as there be infinite
circunstaunces mutable) it is in the discrescion of the magistrate be he wise
or unwise, godly or wicked as yt shall be thought fytt by him (for who must be
judge of the fyttnes but he to whose discrescion yt is left?) to decree all
things at his pleasure, then may he punysh a trespass of three halfpence
damage by treble torments of death, and assesse a parricide at three
halfpence fine: he may punyshe an incestuous person with a fyllip and persecute
a fyllyp given with fire and faggott. He may chastise an horrible blasphemer
with a check and for a word of small reproach put a man to death. I know
M. D. abhors these absurdities, but when he is so hard an interpreter of
other men's words you may see what may be collected of his own.

7 He affyrmeth, that in the Churches of Christ (...) dr^n^kards, nor
whoremongers, at the least, which (...) which assertion sends to
Anabaptisme. page 176.

7 The seventh assertion is said to tend to Anabaptisme, which affyrmeth
that in the Churches of Christ, there be no dronkards, nor whormongers at the
least which are known. Truly if T. C had added no reasons of this assertion,
yet me thinks an indifferent reader would have understand his meaning to be
of such Churches where discipline is exercised. But when he joins the
reasons, namelye, that such offenders are there restored by repentance, or
cast out by excommunication, and so are to be accounted either as no offenders,
or as no members of the Church: I can not see what occasion is left to a
Sophister to cavil* and therefore I marvel that M. D. Whytgifte has no
more regard of charitic then upon every vain surmise to accuse his brother of
Anabaptistrye.

8 He says, that whatsoever aparell the Magistrate commands the Mynister
to wear, the commandment can not be without some iniurye done to the
Mynister: which is to debar the Magistrates from appointinge any kind of
aparell to Ministers. page 265.

8 The eighte poyncte is chardged though not in words, yet in deed with
suspicion of Anabaptistrie: for if it abridge, the lawful authority of the
Magistrate, it favors the Sect. But in mine opinion yt derogateth nothing
from the lawful authority of the Magistrates. For (as I conceive) he means
not, that it is unlawful for Magistrates to appoyncte distinction of apparel,
to all degrees of men for civil respects: but that the Magistrate ought not
to think so evil of the elders of Gods Church) which are woorthye of that
office and so of doble honor) as that they can not order them selves in sober
and decent apparel, except they be instructed and enforced thereto by law.
As for example even of those Justices of both the benches whom M D. obiecteth,
being approved for there wisdom and gravity, before they be admitted to that
office, if they were forbidden to wear white feathers in there cappes, or to
sytt in short Ierkens or to use barrel bretches, and commanded to use sadd
collors and sober fashions in all there apparel, think you they would not be
sorye, that they should be so ill thought of that theye cold not consider
these things without commandment. And I am persuaded (...) D. Whytgifte him
self, if he were in ^^nest, by any that has authority specially forbidden to
were doble ruff^s, or yellowe hose, drawn out with blewe and commanded to
wear his garments of such color and making as becomes a man of his
calling: he would, think a piece of-wronge were offered him* in that he were
no better thought of, but that he needed such kind of commandment to keep
him in order But you will say, that all mynisters be not of such wisdom and
discrescion that they can order them selves without commandment. I answer
that T. C. speaks not of such as are, but such as ought to be, and of the
reverent opinion that the magistrate, as well as others, ought to have both of
the office of the mynistery, and of the mynisters them selves.

9 He says, that those mynisteries without the* which the Church is fully
builded, and brought to perfection and complete unity, are not to be retained
in the Church: which is a very dangerous assertion, and may give occasion
to diverse errors page 307.

9 The nynthe is compted a dangerous assertion, giuinge. occasion of diverse
heresies, and in the page 307. it is said to tend to the shuttinge out of the
Civil magistrate, and to be the very argument of the Anabaptists against
Christian magistrates. But if it were sufficient to accuse, who should be
innocent? especially if M. Whytgiftes Censure were a sentence, T.C. were in a
woeful case But, if you will credit me, when I examine the words of T C. as
stronglye as I can against him, this ac^^sation seems to me to have less
collor then any of the former. For what can be collected of th^se words.
(Those mynisteryes without the which the Church is fully buyld^d, and
brought to perfection and complete v^itie are not to be retained in the
Church.) but that all superfluous and needles mynisteries are to be removed?
How does this assertion exclude the Civil magistrate? except you will make
him an Archbishop or Archdeacon, or sum such Ecclesiastical mynister, It will
be said that the Civil magistrate has authority in causes Ecclesiastical.
It is true, but that makes not him an Ecclesiastical mynister, or his office
a mynisterie Ecclesiastical. if T.C had said these offices without the which,
etc. there might perhaps have been left some collor of quarrellinge, yet he
might reasonablye have been understand to mean of such offices as in his
whole discourse he speaks of, that is Ecclesiastical, but when he says
mynisteries, by which word men do comonlye without any further addition,
understand mynisteries of the Church, I can not see what accusation M D can
have against him. As for the differens he puts of bringinge the Church to
perfection and preserving yt therein, is needles in this place, for T, C
speaks not only of layinge the foundation of the Church, but of bringynge
it to perfection and complete unity in Christ the head, which of force
imports continuance to the end.

10 He holds that it were more safe for us, to conform our indifferent
ceremonies to the Turks which are far of, then to the Papiste which are so
near: which can not be so, for the Turks utterly deny Christ, and be void
of all Christian ceremonies. page 475.

10 The tenthe assertion is not chardged with any dangerous doctrine but only
said that yt can not be so, and therefore it should have been placed among
the untruths rather then the dangerous poynctes of doctrine: but perhapes he
would insinuate that T. C. favors the religion of the Turks, rather then of
the Papists. Truly I think he favors them both alyke and yet in some
poynctes there is less hurt in the one then in the other. I had rather abhor
all images with the Turks, then committ idolatry with the Papists, and yet I
like nether of both. Such comparatiue sayings do not employ a simple
allowinge of either of the things compared, as when they comonlye say: I had
rather be combred with an ague then with a curste wife, they mean to cherishe
another the one nor the other, if they may choose. So I am persuaded that T. C.
wysheth nether Turkysh ceremonies nor Popish, and yet there were less hurt in
Turkishe ceremonies, then in Popish. to be used of us, because of greater
offense growinge in the use of one, which is near and known, then in use of
the other that is far of and unknown. M D notes in the margent that
Gentills and Papists are not like in all respects: nether two kinds of
milk, nor two eggs are like in all respects. yt suffices in simillitudes if
they be like in those things in which they are compared. But from Gentiles and
Turks we differ wholly in matter and substance of relligion, from the Papists
we differ not wholly in matter and substance. Truly if Antichrist differ wholly
from Christ in matter and substance Antichristian religion differs wholly
from Christian religion in matter and substance. And I trust M. Whytgifte
will not say otherwise but that the Pope is Antichriste, and Popish religion
is Antichristian, But yet you may say we confess the twelve (...) of faith,
and all the holy Scripture to be true which the Papists hold also,
therefore we differe (...) wholly from them. So does the dyuels as well as the
Papists in an historical belief, and yet they are both void of true
faith. Therefore as we differ wholly in matter and substance of our Religion
from the dyuells, so do we from the Papists. And in my simple judgment,
there is more danger in this assertion of M. D. we differ not wholly in matter
and substance of Religion from the Papists (then this of T C.) yt were more
safe to conform our ceremonies to the Turks then to the Papists. Finally, T
C. says, that as far as may be, the Religion of God should differ from the
Papists in form and fashion, not that we may not have any thing common with
them: ot like to them which M D. urges so earnestly and yet proves so
slenderlye.

11 He affyrmeth, that not only the dignity, but also the being of the
sacrament of Baptism depends upon this, whether he be a Mynister or no,
that does mynister yt: which if it be true, then be there nombers not
baptized, that are supposed to be baptized, and it must of necessity follow,
that they ought to be rebaptized which is plain Anabaptisme. page 518.

11 Concerning the eleventh assertion which is heynously accused of
Anabaptistrie as I do not plainly understand how it is meant by T C so do I
not see how it is substauncially confuted by M. Whytgifte for whereas he
alleges some auctorities to prove that baptism mynistred by Popish
priests is good and sufficient, the same is also granted by T. C. who
compteth them for mynisters, though they be not good and lawful mynisters,
but usurpers and intruders: the like may be said of such as without
ordinary calling counterfayte them selves to be mynisters, and so deceive the
Church. In these the secret consent of the Church receyuinge them for
mynisters until there wicked usurpation be espied may be sufficient to
auctoryse, there mynisterie, toward others, although they have no ground of
there calling in them selves. Now, it is another question, whether a woman,
or a lay man which professes him self to be no mynister, if he presume to
baptize do mynister the Sacrament, or in deed abuse the Sacrament. In this I
will determine nothing my self, but only I will let you see by certain
reasons that the matter is not so clear as M. D. would seem to make it First
it is manifest that T. C would have no rebaptization: because he c^^pteth the
baptism of women to be utterly no baptism: and therefore the first being
none at all the next is no rebaptisme. Secondly I am thoroughly resolved that
nether any lay man or any woman ought to take upon them to baptize. For there
is no such necessity of the outward element that the institut^on of Christ
should be broken for yt. But if a woman have presumed to break the ordinance
of God, whether she have mynistred the holy Sacrament is all the doubt. I
would ask of M. Whytgifte (if I were acquainted with him) if a woman presume
to mynister the Communion whether she give the body and blood of Christ or
no, if he say no. I would know why she should rather give the one Sacrament
then the other, for I suppose he rejects the Popish opinion of the
necessytie of Baptism, and yet I may doubt, because of the auctorities which
he alleges out of Tertulliane, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine and Zwinglius
where he was not best advised. Moreover, because he affirms that the only
essential form of Baptism is to baptize in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. I would have enquired also whether if the
element be changed as well as the mynister yet the Baptism is allowable: as
there is great question among the Papists, if Baptism be mynistred with
wine, milk, brothe, and other more vile liquor whether yt be sufficient: but
that he seems to allow the Baptism of sand in the fabulus storye, so water
were afterward sprinkled on and then aryseth another dunsicall question: if
those wo^des with are the form of Baptism be pronounced a twelumoneth before
water be powered on whether this be a good Baptism or no? howbeyt in that
example of him that was baptized with sand, a man would think the byshope of
Alexandria might as well have dispensed with the lack of water, as he did with
the lack of a mynister, or rather he might have added a mynister as he added
water. For I see no reason why one may not be baptized as well without water
as without a mynister. Furdermore fot any thing that I can perceive the
judgment of D. W. seems to be repugnaunt to the book of common prayer, where
it prescribes the order of Baptism for them that are baptized in private
houses, In which the minister is willed to examine them that bring any child
to the Church which is baptized at home of these syx interrogatories. 1. By
whom the child was baptized? 2. Who was present when the child was baptized?
3. Whether they called upon God for grace and succor in that necessity? 4.
With what thing or what matte^ they did baptize the child? 5. Whith what
words the child ^as baptized? 6. Whether they think the child to be
^^wfully and perfectelye baptized? By which the judgment of the book very
godly and soundlye appears to require six things unto lawful and perfect
baptism. First, one that has authority to baptize, for else the question
were in vain, if all men and women might lawfully baptize, secondlye witnesses
or a congregation, which baptism ought to be ministered, thirdly, invocation of
Gods name, which as it does consecrate all holy actions so yt ought not to
be severed from the admin^stration of the Sacrame^t^: fourthly, the element of
water according to the institution of Christ, and not sand, milk, or such
like baggadge. Fyftlye, the words of Christ's institution that baptism be
mynistred in the name of the holy Trinity. Lastely faith in them that have
mynistred the Sacrament, that they may be assured they have done all things
required by the word of God, for what so ever is not of faith is sin. And if
the mynister shall prove by the aunswers of such as brought the child, that
all things were done as they ought to be, then shall he not baptize the
child again, but receive him as one of the flock of Christ, But if they make
an uncertain answer to those questions and say they can not tell what they
thought, did, or said, in that fear, etc. He is appoincted to baptize him in
this form, if thou be not baptized already then I baptize the in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: you see by the judgment of the
book, that the outward ceremonye not used as it ought to be, or not certaynlye
known, whether it has been rightly used, may be repeated again, and yet no
rebaptisation committed, nor Anabaptistrie allowed. As for example, if answer
were made to the fourth question, that the child was baptized with sand or
with ashes, milk, wine, or with any thing but water, if I were mynister I
would no more doubt to baptize the child by the word of God, and the
direction of the book, then any that has had no ceremony of Baptism used
toward him. And if answer were made to M. D. in the fyfte question, that the
child was baptized into the name of God and our lady, I suppose he would not
think yt to be rightly baptized, but would baptize it him self into the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And if unto the last
question it were answered by them that took upon them to baptize, that they
could not tell whether the child so baptized by them were lawfully and
perfectly baptized. I think he would baptize it him self, at least wise in
the conditional form before rehearsed. By this you may see that the matter
is not so plain against T.C. as M. D. would seem to make it by the judgment
of the book, which requires mo^^ things to the being of the Sacrament then
M.D. do^he, (...) prescribes a conditional form of Baptism, for those of
those baptism it may be doubted for want or ill using of any of those things
before showed.

12 He says, that with what lawfullnes men may offer them selves to the
prayers and hearing of the word of God, they may also offer them selves to
the Lords supper: which is a palpable error. page 532. and page 604. he
affyrmeth directlye to the contrary.

12 The twelueth is calls a palpable error but if I may say as I think the
Censure is a palpable cavil for T. C. has these very words ^her ^he speakethe
of this matter able inoughe to express his meaning (I speak of those which
are of the Church and of discrescion to examine them selves.) M.D would make
him contrary to him self, because he says in another place that Papists and
excommunicate persons must be compelled by the Magistrate to hear sermons, and
yet not admitted to the communion so that by his censure these be two
assertions directlye contrary on to the other. Such as be of the Church may
as well offer themselves to the communion as to the prayers and hearing of the
word, and this: they that be not of the Church, must be compelled to hear
but not permitted to receive. Secondlye he makethe instan^ of such as be weak
in faith. corrupt in judgment, ignorant in the right use of the Sacrament,
not knowinge how to examine them selves: but T. C. excludes all those that be
in any such respect unmeet to examine them selves. I am sorye I have
troubled you with so many words in so plain a matter.

13 He denyethe, that the Church or any man, may restrain the people from
bodily labor, in any of the six days: which i^ to draw from the Magistrate
his lawful a^ctoritie, and to give carnal liberty to the people. page 541.

13 The thirtenth assertion is condemned of Anabaptisme in abriging the
Magistrat^ lawful authority and of libertinisme in geuinge the people to
much carnal liberty. But good Lord how unjustly? Has the Magistrate
lawful authority to command the people to be idle which God expreslye
forbyddeth, or can any man ordeyne a religious rest such as God ordained one
the Sabbat in the Law? For it must be either ydlenes or a Sabbat that these
Magistrate should institute. For if the Magistrate or the Church will
co^mmaunde men to (...) from there (...) labors that they may be employed in
publik affairs, or given to holy exercises. T. C. will not gaynsay it, as not
many times before this assertion he affyrmeth playnelye. Now towchinge the
carnal liberty that this assertion geuithe* ^s M D. says) I promise you I
can not imagine what should be mente thereby for I cold never conceive that
plowinge, cartinge and other laboringe of men in there vocations, whereof T. C.
speaks, should be compted carnal liberty.

14 He says, that the life of the Sacrament dependethe of the preachinge of
the word: which if it be true, then is the sacrament of Baptism not to be
mynistred to infantes, because they can not hear the word preached, and in
deed this is the gr^^^de of Anabaptisme. page 566.

14 The fourtenth assertion is myghtely pressed with the accusation of
Anabaptistrye partlye because the metaphor of life is urged so vehemently by M
D and partlye because the speech of T C. in this place is sumwhat improper or
else perhaps corrupted in the pryntinge. But first it is nether charitable no
reasonable to expound a metaphore too stronglye against him that used it, as
if a man should say my life is in your hands, it were hard to conclude
against him, ergo it is not in your body, and so you are dead and then you
must be buried, etc. Likewise where T C says the life of the Sacraments
depends of the preachinge of Gods word, it is an hard conclusion of M. D
ergo the Sacraments ministered without a sermon are dead, and being ministered
to infants which can not understand the sermon is not effectual But where he
says that the life of the Sacraments depends of the preachinge of the
word of God. I suppose he meanethe of the word of God preached and declared,
and peradventure so his words were but altered by the prynter. For M D
assertion of the life of the Sacraments, if it be not charitablye expounded is
as foul an error as he would seem to chardge T. C withal, and would bread as
great absurdities For he sayethe "that the life of the Sacraments dependethe
upon Gods promysses expressed in his word, and n^ther upon preachinge nor
readinge." For if the life of the Sacraments dependethe upon Gods promises,
expressed in his word: although the same be never read nor preached and
declared the Popish mass may be counted the Lords supper although the
Lorde^ death be not therein preached and declared, nor yet read to the
edifeynge of the people. Again if the life of the Sacraments dependethe
altogether upon Gods promysses expressed i^ his word, and nothing at all of
preachinge or declaring^ of the same, they may be mynistred to infidells, for
there can be no fayeth where there is no preachinge of Gods word. They give
life ex opere operato, of the work wrought as the Papists say to all that
receive them, whether they be worthy or unworthy, within the couenaunte or
without it. But I know M D. will answer that he does not exclude preachinge.
The like may be said of T. C. that he does not exclude the promysses of Gods
word, but joins preachinge to them although he does not of necessity
require preachinge immediatlye before every action of there administration, but
that of necessytie the word of God must not only be read, but also preached
and declared unto the people amongst whom the Sacraments are mynistred, or else
they may be ministered among the Turks and Jews So that if the assertion of
T. C. ^e weighed with indifferency it tends no more to Anababaptistrie, then
the assertion of Iho^ Whytgifte to Papistrie.

15 He doubts, whether he may call him mynister or no, that can not preach,
which being (...) with his former (...), that the mynister is if the being
of the Sacrament, it will fall out, that he counts all those not baptized
which have bee^ baptized by any other than by preachers. page 568. and 6^^.

15 The fyften Censure is a mea^e cavil, taken up by ^^^kinge a phrase of
speakinge contrary to the speaker. Although it seems that either M.D. or his
printer ^athe left out some words page 568, which T. C is chardged to use by
the Censure in the table. For in the page 568. he is made to speak th^s, That
there should be in stead of a preachinge mynister (if I may so call him) and
in stead of preachinge readinge, etc as though he doubted whether a
preachinge mynister were a mynister which is clean contrary to that he is
burdened withal in the Censure: But let it be as the Censure reports that
his words are of a mynister that can not preach, does he doubt whether he
be in any respect a mynister? because he says (if I may so call him) In
deed this manner of speakinge declares that he iudgethe him that can not
preach a man unworthy to be a mynistre, but he does not deny him altogether
Or (...) what say we to these speeches? Nero a most cruel man* if I may call
him a man, which is so far from all humanity? Did he tha^ so spoke, doubt
whether Nero was a man in nature? Josephus sayethe of Christ in those days
there was a man called Jesus (if I may call him a man) does Josephus doubt
whether he were a natural (...) One sayethe to his servant, thou wicked
servant (if I may so call thee which behauest thy self more like a master
then a servant does he doubt whether he be his servant or no? A man
speakethe to his wife thou art a disobedient wife, if I may call the a wife,
which carest so little for they husband. Does this man doubt whether the
woman were his wife? you see what a childish cavil this is, to ground so
great a slander of Anabaptistrie upon it. The like fond quarellinge he uses
page 583. where T. C. has these words* What reason is there that it should be
granted to one that can not preach (being as they call him a mynister (to
mynister both the Sacraments when as the same (...) not permitted to a Deacon
(as they call him) which is able to preach. M. W. notes in the margent why?
do you account him no mynister? this gear would be marked. In deed it would
be marked or else M. D. would (...) away all with cauillinge and
slaunderinge. For who seethe not although he have but one eye that T. C.
speaks of the improper vsinge of these terms Mynister and Deacon* which
signifye all one and yet are commonly used for diverse offices, and that which
is proper to the one as he says made common to the other: not denying, but
affyrming him to be a mynister where he says, being a mynister (as they call
him) for these words only (as they call him) should be enclosed with the
parenthesis, as in the next member of the sentence, where he speaks of the
Deacon (as they call him) where the phrase is all one.

6 He seems to be of this judgment, that only those which be of the famelye
of God ought to be baptized: which is a dangerous error, for not all that be
baptized are of the famelye of God. page 621.

16. The syxtene assertion is counted a dangerous error, and affyrmed in M. D.
opinion to savor very stronglye of heresye, but what heresy he shows not. T C
says that baptism is an entrye into the house of God* whereby only the
famely of God must enter, and those he countethe to be of the famely of God,
which be clean, holy, and within the covenant M.D. replyethe, that no man can
tell who be elect and who reprobate: therefore let him baptize, the children
of Turks and Jews, yea the Turks and Jews them selves, without conversion
unto the fayeth, because no man knows whether they be elect or reprobate.
But it seems he forgettethe what S. Paul writes 1. Cor 7. For there he
teaches us to know who be clean and who unclean, who holy and who unholy,
who within the covenant and who without it, and where he says that all that
be baptized are not of the famelye of God, he is contrary to him self in other
places, where he countethe all them that are baptized to be Christians page 518.
and else where: and if they be Christians they be of the famely of God, yet all
that are baptized with external baptism be not the elect of God, but only
such as are baptized with the holy Ghost yet all that are baptized may be
counted of the famelye of God, which is the Church so long as they nether
depart from it nor are iustlye cast out of yt.

17 He secludeth the children of excommunicate persons, and of professed
Papists from the sacrament of Baptism, until they be able to make a
confession of there faith: which smells very strongly of Anabaptisme, and it
is a manifest error page 622.

17 The seuententh assertion is chardged to smell very stronglye of
Anabaptistrye, and to be a manifest error. Surely if it be an error it is not
so manifest as M. W. affyrmeth, but whether yt be an error or no it is far
inoughe from the savor of Anabaptistry, except it be in such a man's nose that
has raked so long in the puddle of Anabaptistrye to espy if he could find
his brother drowned in it, that his head is so stuffed with the stink of it,
that he imagines all things where he comes to savor of it, For allthough
T. C. affirm that the children of heretykes and other excommunicate persons
ought not to be received to baptism before there parents repent yet if they
be receued, he denies not there baptism nether would he have them rebaptised,
if they embrace the Christian religion which there parents rejected. if a man
affirm that matrymonie ought not to be solempnised without the consent of
parents, he does not deny the matrimony which is already solempnised or give
the partis leave to marry others or will them to be married again. m. D.
houldeth that baptism ought not to be ministered without a surples yet he
would be loathe to be counted an Anabaptiste as to deny that the baptism
mynistred without a surples is lawefull, and to say that therefore yt must be
mynistred again. Now concerning the error which is made so manyfeste and
affyrmed to be void of all Scripture, reason, and authority* suerlye if it
have not Scripture (as if it be an error it (...) not) yet it has great
appearance of Scripture, and such as might move as great a clearke as D.
Whytgifte (...). For Math 18. Christ wills that an excommunicate person^
should be as an heathen or publicane, where upon by reason a man will infer.
But the child of an heathen man (...) not to be received to baptism,
therefore nether the child, of an excommunicate man should be admitted But
the judgment of Beza is contrary, I grant, but yet his reasons are not so
clear that they can satisfye every simple man which buyldeth upon these
words of our Savior Christ math. 18. if he refuse to hear the Church let
him be to thee as an heathen and publicane. Notwithstanding I hope that for
as much as T. C. is now at Geneua with M Beza (as I hear) of whom he is
judged to be one of the best learned in Europe, that by godly conferens had
between them either T. C. shall be willing to acknowledge his error in this
matter, or if he be able to defend it by the word of God M Beza him self will
revoke his judgment.

18 He says that princes must remember to subject them selves unto the
Church, to submit their Scepters, to throw down there crowns, before the
Church, and to lycke the duste of the feet of the Church: And by the Church
he means the presbyterye and eldershyp: so that he would have Princes in as
great bondage to his seniors, as ever they were to the Pope. page 645.

18 In the eightenth assertion T. C. is grievously chardged as though he would
set up a new Popedom, because he says with the prophet Esaye cap. 49. that
Princes must worship the Church with there ^aces to the earth, and lycke the
duste of her feet. I marvel what he may speak without danger of heresye M
D. being his judge if he may not speak the words of the Scripture. But M.
D. improueth not the saying, for then the devil were on him but his meaning,
for by the Church (sayethe he) he meanethe the Presbytery or Eldership. But
who made him so preuye of his meaning? forsoothe the page 140. by the words
of Christ, Dic Ecllesiae, tell the Church, he means the Eldership, therefore
always wheresoever he speaks of the Church he meanethe the Eldershippe: a
proper conclusion. So though he speak never so well if M. D. may interpret
his meaning he can not escape suspicion of heresye. Howbeit in this place as I
could never have imagined any such meaning, so it is evident to all men that
he has no such meaning for his words, his reason, the authority of the
Prophet whom he cyteth do all testifye that he meanethe the Church in the
most common and usual sense, and as it is the body of Christ in whose
respect being her head she ought to have all this honor that is spoken of.
But m. D. will have a Prince in no respect subject to the seniors, nor yet to
(...) calls in scorn, whose name and office is yet auctorized by God. And
whether he would have him exempt from discipline I do not plainly see, but
as far as I can perceive he would. And then he condemns Ambrose for
excommunicatinge the Emperor Theodosius for the murder committed in
Thessalonica, and many other godly fathers which did exercise discipline upon
Christian princes. And verily the reasons that he uses may serve to set a
Prince above the doctrine, Sacraments, discipline and all. But he is
altogether deceived for the subjection that is required of Princes is
spiritual and not carnal* unto God and not to men, derogatinge nothing from
there princelye majesty, nor from the^e authority, no not from that
authority which they have over persons Ecclesiastical, and in causes
Ecclesiastical. If a Prince submitt him self to the doctrine of his Pastor*
to learn that he knows not, to reform that wherein he is iustlye reproved,
to receive the Sacraments of his hand, to be blessed of him, to have his
sins forgiven by him (I speak but as Christ speaks) he is not made as M.
D says a servant no master, a subject no Prince, under government no
governor in matters perteyninge to the Church: but remaynethe still a master
of men though a servant of God, a prince of people yet a subject to the King
of Kings, a governor in matters pertaininge to the Church though under the
government of Christ. Right so, if he submitt him self to the discipline of
the Church, which is no authority of men, but as S. Paul callethe it 1. Cor
5. the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, he abaseth not him self otherwise
then he ought to do. For those textes. Quicquid ligaueritis and quicquid
ligaueris, matthew 16. and 18. whatsoever you shall bind and whatsoever thou
shall bind, whose sins soever you reteyne John 20. If any that is called a
brother 1. Cor. 5 be so general, that in mine opinion they make Princes as
well as poor men subject to the discipline of the Church, which is no
earthly, civil, or humane authority, but the power of our Lord Jesus Christ
for the salvation of there souls 1. Cor 5 As for the auctorytie of master
Galter and other Heluetians is of small weight in this case for they do not
only exempte princes but all other men from discipline of excommunication,
whose gross error seeing it is contrary to our state which allows discipline
Ecclesiastical though not such as T C requirethe I marvel what master D.
means to publishe for good authority.

12 He says, page 646 that the government of the Common wealth must be
framed according to the government of the Church, even as the hanging to the
house: and he affyrmeth that the government of the Church is Aristocraticall
or populare: which is a dangerous error, and springs of this that he does
not distinguyshe betwixt the essential points of the government of the
Church, and the accidental points of the same: for the essential points of
Ecclesiastical gouernement^ may well agree with any lawful state of common
wealth, and civil kind of gouer^ement: as the gospel may be truly
preach^d in them all, the Sacraments ryghtly mynistred, discipline duelye
executed and such like: but the accidental points of government (as the
manner of electinge mynisters, the kind of discipline, accidental ceremonies,
and other such like rytes and circu^staunces) may be varied according to
time, place, and persons, and are so to be framed, as they may best agree with
the state and government of every common wealth The ignorance of this
distinction has ^ast T C into a great and perilous error

19 The nynetenth assertion is so violently drawn into an odious calumniation
that I am loathe to leese any time in aunsweringe, but only to satisfy your
request T. C. says that the common wealth must be made to agree with the
Church, and the government thereof with her government which is all one as
if he had said the common wealth must be made to agree with the word of
God* and the government thereof according to the doctrine of the same:
wherefore if there be any thing in, the common wealth that agrees not with
the word of God, the same must be reformed according to the word of God, is
not this a perilous doctrine? In deed it has always been accepted so by
Epicureans and Atheistes but I never heard a divine mislyke it before: but I
herd a friend of mine once say that malice is a most subtle sophister. As
for the cavil of M D how vain it is experience it self does prove, for
even that government of the Church which T.C requires may stand with any of
the three good states of a common wealth, whether it be Monarchye,
Aristocratye, or Democratye The realm of Scottland is ^ Monarchye, and there is
established this government of the Church, the like also is intended by the
Palsgraue which is a Monarche in his territorye, the cytties of Sauoye be
partlye Aristocraticall and partlye Democraticall in which this government of
the Church has long time been practiced: wherefore it is nether so strange
nor so dangerous a thing as M* W. would seem to make it* As for the Censure
of ignorance that he so proudlye obiecteth to him, were more then needed
although yt came from a far better learned man the M. D. shows him self to
be.

20 He both joins with the Papists, in taking from the Civil magistrates
authority in Ecclesiastical matters, and also in confyrminge that error by
their arguments, and none other^ page 694.

20 The twentieth is belyke no assertion of T C. for then he would have set
down his words but one of M. D. collections, which because we have tried
them so charitable before there is no great cause why we should now be much
moved at them: sauinge that my think M. W. should not obiecte to T C. the
confirminge of his opinion by the arguments of the Papists But to the purpose
T.C is accused to take from the civil Magistrate authority in Ecclesiastical
matters. Yt is well that he leaves him authority over Ecclesiastical
persons. But what authority or in what matters does he take from the civil
Magistrate? Has the civil Magistrate authority to preach, to mynister the
Sacraments to excommunicate? I am suer he will say no. What is left then,
but to provide that these things may be done to the glory of God. I am suer
that T C. will not deny this authority. But how shall he provide? by laws,
decrees, constitutions How shall these laws, decrees constitutions be
directed? by the word of God. Of whom shall the civil Magistrate be
instructed in the word of God, what and whereof it is expedient that
Ecclesiastical laws, should be made? by his godly and learned Clergy:
except in these matters he be wyser and better learned then all his Cleargye in
which case he may and ought to ordeyne whatsoever is agreeable to the word of
God for the benefyte of his Church not only without, but even against the
consent of the state Ecclesiastical. All this T. C. yeldeth unto and of there
by any thing else that M. D. can prove to be the lawful authority of the
civil Magistrate in causes Ecclesiastical I doubt not but it shall be likewise
granted In the mean time let M. W. give to the civil Magistrate what he
will T C. for any thing that I can perceive by his wrytinge will take nothing
from him, that is due to him by the word of God.

21 He affyrmeth, that the readinge of the Scryptures without the preaching,
can not deliver so much as one poor sheep from destruction, etc. ^herein he
is also contrary to him self. page 784.

21 In the last place it is noted for a dangerous point of doctrine tha^ T.
C. affyrmeth that bare readinge of the Scriptures without preachinge can not
deliver one poor sheep of destruction. You must understand that he speaks
not of attentive readinge, weyinge, and conferringe, of the Scriptures joined,
with humble and hartye prayer, but of readinge such as is used in the Church
service, and yet he excepteth the extraordinarye workinge of God. The best
confutinge of this error had been for M. D. to have brought in some instance
of some on Papiste converted to the Gospel by only readinge in the Church,
or of any wicked man become a godly man that has had none other
instruction, but as he has heard the Psalms and chapters read in the
service at Church, which if he can do I will not defend T.C. error in this
point. But whereas he makith him contrary to him self he does him wrong
For in the place which he quoteth 158. T. C. prefers readinge of Scriptures
in the Church before readinge of homelyes. And that which he says of the
playnnes and easynes of understanding of Gods word is auctorized by the
Prophet: which is spoken of the nature of Gods word (as I take it) and not
of the aptnes of men's, understanding which is gross and blind. The son is
not light to a blind man, no more is the word of God plain to the natural
man For my part I see no contraryetie in these matters.

A NOTE OF CERTAIN Untruths, and falsefyed auctorities contained in the
Reply of T.C. and are to be found out to his book according to the
quotation.
NExt followethe a note of untruths and falsefied auctorities, etc. whereof
some be ouersightes and humane slippes which in a brother should not so
egerlye be persecuted, some be doubtful and disputable matters and therefore
not to be so rashlye condemned: the most part are cauills and wrestinges
such as has been detected before. But if they were all such as M. D. would
have, yet his cause is not overthrown by them therefore no great victory
obtained of them. This nombringe of untruths in the B. of Sarum. parlye for
the synceritie of his Censures, partlye for the noueltye of the matter, and
partlye for the odiousnes of his adversaries cause was worthily well thought
of, but I can not tell how it commethe to pass that in M. W. it semethe
stale, prejudicial, and inuidious. The examininge of these notes requires the
judgment of one, that has diligently read over the Doctors, or at the least
has a good library of them by him, whereof I have nether: wherefore you
might do well to require the same of some other your friends that are divines
who can better satisfye you. But because you have so importunatlye required my
simple judgment, I will do the best I can to show you my opinion.

1 He says, that it appears in the eighte chapter of the book of Nehemias,
that the feast of Tabernacles, which was commanded of the Lord to be
celebrated every year, was not celebrated from the days of Joshua the son
of Nun, until the retourn of their captivity: which is a manifest untruth
as it is evident 1. Esdras 3.. and it is also against the opinion of all the
interpreters. page 8.

1 If the residue of his Censures be like the first by which as by a gate he
lets us into the rest, there is more truth in T. C untruths then in M. W.
judgment of vn^truthes T. C. sayethe that the feast of Tahernacles (...) not
kept from the days of Joshua the son of Nun, until the return of the
people from there captivity. M D. says it is a manifest untruth, as it is
evident 1. Esdr. 3. truly if he have no better evidence to uphold his cause
then to alleadg that which was done after the return to prove that it was
done before there retourn^* his cause will sone fall to the ground. In deed
it is recorded 1. Esdr. 3. that the feast of Tabernacles was celebrated, but
all men will confess that it was after there return and not before Then see
the boldness and bytternes of this man, and according to this welcome, look
for good entertaynement at this table of untruths of his furnishinge. Yet he
sayethe it is against the opinion of all the interpretors: suppose you that he
has read all the interpreters? for my part I think not for I hear say
that he is utterly ignorant both of the Greek and Ebrue tounges though he
make some show of both in his book. And it is not to be thought but some
learned Grecians have commented upon these books of Esdras and Nehemias, and I
think you remember what our friend M. N said of a certain Rabbine that is an
Ebrue interpretor called Rabbi salamon Iarhii, who thinks it possible that
nether in the days of David, nor in the days of King Salamon, that feast
was celebrated until the days of Esdras: but if the place be to be
vnderstaunde as M D with all his interpreters expound it, yet the words
sound otherwise until the contrary be showed. for it may be that Esdras and
Nehemias speak both of one time and the other exposition seruethe T. C.
purpose even as well. For in that place the former ages are reproved if for not
omitting yet for not so solemplye kepinge, that feast as they should have
down by the Law.

2 Josias is alleged for Ezechias. page 10.

2 This might be the fault of him that coppyed out thee first wrytinge, or the
fault of the prynter, or if it were the fault of T. C. it is confessed by M D
to be a light oversight, and such as he him self has triped in once or
twyse.

3 This word (especially) is added to the text 1. Cor 10. page 86.

3 Yt is a great fault to add any thing to the Scriptures. But he that
gives the true meaning in other words does nether add to the Scriptures
nor change them. His words (...) these. "That they offend not any,
especially the Church of God." S. Paul says. Be such as give no offense
nether to the Jews, nor to the grecians, nor to the Church of God Now whether
those that are weak in the Church of God are especially to be considered
rather then Jews or Gentills which are out of the Church, is all the
question. M. D. says they that are out of the Church are especially to be
regarded. But he only says it without other reason or auctorytie. For
reason of the contrary side this may be said: that as charytie is the chief
rule in auoydinge offenses and charytie regards especially those that are of
the how should of faith, so we must have especial care not to offend them.
The Apostle also speaks most of them teachinge to avoid offenses calling
them thy brother, thy weak brother, those for whom Christ dyed, etc Rom 14 1.
Cor 8.

4 He opposes Ignatius and Tertullian, to Ambrose and Augustine, as though
Ambrose and Augustine should think it to be lawefull to fast on the Lords
day, and the other two should writ the contrary: whereas Ambrose and
Augustine fullye agree with Ignatius and Tertullian in that matter page 99.

4 The words of T. C. be these. I will not enter now to discuss whether it
were well done to fast in all places according to the custom of the place
you oppose Ambrose and Augustine. I could oppose Ignatius and Tertullian,
whereof the one says that it is nefas a detestable thing to fast upon the
Lords day, the other that it is to kill the Lord, and this is the
inconvenience that comes of such unlearned kind of reasoninge Saint
Ambrose sayethe so, and therefore it is true. In the 99 page this is noted to be
an untruth procedinge of ignorance, but in deed this a false and a proud
Censure proceeding of malice and arrogance, as though T. C could not tell what
difference is between the Sabbat and the Lords day I should have read these
words an hundredth times, and never understood that he opposes Ignatius and
Tertullian to Ambrose and Augustine, but to M. D. Whytgifte, and his kind of
reasoninge as M. Whytgifte opposes Ambrose and Augustine to his aduersarye.
For if the auctoryties of Ambrose and Augustine be irrefragable for fasting
one satterdaye, then the auctoryties of Ignatius and Tertullian are the like
touching fasting one Sunday: which notwithstanding are meare absurdities But
as it is not so haynouse an offense to fast on Sunday, because Ignatius and
Tertullian say so: So no more is the rule of fasting one satterdaye true
because Ambrose and Augustine say so.

5 He mangleth saint Augustines words both before, behind and in the midst
page 107.

5 This is a frivolous quarellinge for T. C. pretends not to recyte the
words of Augustine, nor to translate them into Englysh, but only to give the
sum of his meaning. which he does sufficientlye to show that M. D. has
no great ground in that epistell ad Ianuarium, etc.

6 Page 144 he falsefyeth the words of saint Paul 1. Tim 3. and vntruelye
translateth them.

6 Yt is no small offense to falsefye the word of God, and therefore M. W.
should be well advised before he accuse his brother of so horrible a crime.
God forbid that every one which erreth in translation, should be a falsefyer
of Gods word much less he that gives such a translation as the original
word will bear, which I think T. C. does in this place: his words are
page 144. And being tried let them execute there functions, as long as theye
remain blameles. First he translateth not word for word, for then he would
have said, and let them be tried first, and then let them minister being
blameless. So that it may well be, that he mente only to gather an argument
of the Apostles words, who if he will not have Deacons admitted to minister
before they be tried, and in try all found blameles, no more would he have
them permitted to remain in that office if they do not contynewe blameles.
What falsefyinge is here either of the words or of the meaning of the Apostle.
But if he meant to translate those words 'anegclytoi 'ontes so long as they
remain blameles: Theye are better Grecians then M. D. is compted to be that
think it may stand both with signification of the word, and with the
circunstaunce of the place, for S. Paul does not only speak of election of
Deacons: but also of such qualities as should contynewe in them after they be
chosen. Therefore if it be an error (which will be hard for M. D. to prove) it
is no error in matter, but in translation and no falsification: except M. D.
will be compted a falsefier for reading out of the 12. of the Apocalypse verse 11
and expoundinge it also according to his readinge "by the word of his
testimony," where he should have said by the word of there testimonye Yt is
like he did read it out of Erasmus translation, which is, propter sermonem
testimonii sui, which if a man mark not the reciprocation of sui, may
deceive him, being not a very cunninge Grammarian. This was uttered within
these two or three years in a sermon at Paul's cross, and noted by many
learned man, which had there greake Testaments, whereof one syttinge by me
said, that before that time he thought M W had been a very good Grecian* but
now he perceived the contrary that he could not so much as read his text
in Greek, which if he had done he could not have been deceived. And yet in
my conscience as I am suer he did err in translatinge, so would I not judge
him to be a falsefier of Gods word, because I think he erred of symplicitie
and not of malice.

7 He says that Israelites when they worshipped the Calfe said, that they
would keep holly day to the Lord Iehoua: which is not true. page 151.

7 I pray God nether T. C nor Io. Whytgifte never err more then T. C has
erred in this point, for then I trust they should never be deceived but what
is the error? Aaron said so but not the people, but Aaron was then the head
of the people, and they all consented to keep holy day the next morrow
according to his proclamation, therefore the people said so, as well as Aaron
But M W. obiectethe: the people said these by thy Gods o Israel, which
brought thee out of lanee of Egypt They said so in deed, but they said not
so to control Aarons proclamation, and so to deny that they would keep holy
day to Iehoua. But contrary wise even those there words declare that they
purposed not to change there God, but to worshipe the same God which brought
them out of Egypt in that visible form of a calfe. And because M. D. thinks
there is no wrytter that so does take it let him read Calvin both in his
Institution lib. 1. cap. 11, sectione 8. and in his Harmonye upon Exodus 32.

7 He cites a place out of Justinians Code, which can not as yet be found
there, nether does he faithfully report, but subtly suppress the words
which explane the matter, as they be set down by Illyricus of whom he
borrowed them. page 184.

8 Saying he does acknowledge that he has the place of Illyricus collections
it is no fault in him, if it be wrong quoted, as for the surmyse of
suppressinge sum of the words is without grownde, for he alleges that
constitution only for this end, to show that the consent of the Church in
the election of there mynister may stand with the time of a Christian
magistrate, because Justinian a Christian Emperor, decreed, that so often as
a mynisters place was void, the inhabiters of the Cyttye should choose three,
etc. This is nether untruth, nor falsification in alledginge auctoritye, to
leave out that, which perteyneth nothing to the purpose for which
th'auctoritye is cited.

9 He says that Platina wrytteth, that L^dowicke the second^ commands the
Romans to chose there own Byshope: which is not true, for he only commended
them for so doing, he did not command them. page 186.

9 Commaundinge and commendinge differ but in one letter, and therefore this
might be the fault of the wrytter or prynter: or if it were lapsus memoriae
forgetfulness of the auctor, yet the matter for which it is alleged is true,
he commends them for chusinge a good Byshope, non expectato aliorum voto,
etc. not lokinge for others men's voices, which being strangers cold not so
well tell what was done, or to be done in the common weal were they where
strangers, and that it apertaineth to the citizens (all which M D slyely
passes one) rhet will I not s^ye that ye is a falsefyer for carpinge at that
which is not material, and suppressinge that matter which is principally to
be regarded for that which is in question.

10 He says, that these which write the Centuries suspecte the council of
Lacdicea, which forbids the election of mynisters to be committed to the
people, and doubt whether it be a bastard or not which is untrue, for the
Authors of the Centuryes make no such doubt. page 188.

10 The matter is not worth the wagginge of a straw whether they doubt if
this canon were a bastard* or else decreed against the truethe, and those
words of there is, which M. D alleges concerning this Canon, Mirum qua
veritare, it is maruayle by what truethe, for any thing that I see, may be
taken, that either they think the Canon connterfeyted, or else they erred that
made it. The one sense is as good for T C. as the other.

11 He says, that Jerome wills that the people should have power and
a^ct^^iti to chose Clerks and ministers, which is not so, for Ierom wills no
such thing. page 203.

11 Here is nether falsification, nor untruth for Jerome words are not
alleged by T C. therefore not falsefyed, and where he sayethe that Jerome
wills: he means, that Jerome allows the people there right in election.
As those words do show, which M D. alleges, out of Jerome Cum ad
perfectam ^^atem veneris, si tamen vita comes (...), and te vel populus vel
Pontifex ciuitaris in clerum elegerit, agito quae cleri sunt: when thou shall
come to parfect age, but so that good life be a companion^ and that either the
people or the byshope of the city, choose thee into the clergy, do those
things that belong to a clerk By these words it aperithe, that he would
not have Rusticus intrude him se^fe, without lawful election, and that he
compted that a lawful election, which is made by the people, and confyrmed by
the byshope: but whereas M. D. should make it indifferent, whether he were
chosen by the byshope alone, or by the people, because Jerome says, either the
people or the byshope, it is without color of reason For he may no more
gather by those words, that the byshope might choose without the people, then
that the people might choose without the byshope. But the cause of that
distinction is, that in that age, sometime the people would choose a minister,
whom they thought mere and afterward bring him to the bishop to be admitted
by him, as appears in the work of Chrysostom De sacerdotio, of the chusinge
of Basil when Ihon Chrysostom him self gave him the s^ypp Sometimes the bishop
would espy a mere man him self, and require the consent of the people to
choose as it appearethe by Augustine in the election of Eradius to be his
successor. Wherefore this Censure, as many other might well inoughe have been
spared.

12 He alleges Musculus his words in stead of Ieromes^ and that which
only Musculus says in his common places, (...) ascribes to Jerome in his
Epist to Nepotian e^d.

12 Here be the words of Musculus alleged for the words of Jerome, which was
in deed an ouersght, but it may be excused by the lack of books. If M D. had
charged him with great negligence, it had been suffycient, but when he
vpbraydeth him with gross ignorance, it is more then needs except he
accompteth it gross ignorans in T.C. because he can not say all Ieromes
works without book. But touching the substance of the matter, th'exchaunge
of Musculus for Jerome is no great loss, for Musculus is as well learned, and
of sounder judgment them ever Jerome was.

13 He says that Nazian. ((...) oration that he writes at the death of his
father) confuteth these reasons, that seem to (...) der the election of
Mynisters by the Church, and yet is there no such thing to be found in that
oration. page 205.

13 M D. him self confesses page 206 as much as T.C. requires to be proved
by this oration, that is, that the people in that time had interest in the
election of mynisters. No man (says he denies) but that the people at this
time had interest in the election of the mynister in diverse Churches. Therefore
the conclusion of T. C. is void of untruth or falsification. These were
learned fathers, and yet thought not that the election of the Pastor or Bishop
perteyned to one man alone, but that the Church had also her interest.
Therefore you see all the learned fathers are not of that mind you say they
are.

14 He refers the reader to the 6.3.7. book of Eusebius, for examples of
elections of the people and clergy confyrmed by the Christian Magistrate,
namelye in the byshope of Constantinople: and yet there is ^o such examples,
in these books, nether any mention of any byshope of Constantinople. page 207.

14 For the election of the Clergy and people mentioned in these two books of
Eusebius lib. 6 cap 10. and lib. 7. cap. 30. Which M. W him self has found
out, although he pycke many quarrels unto them, yet for as much as he
g^aunteth in the end, that the people in that time did gave there consent in
the electinge of there Byshope, it shall be needles to say any more of it. But
herein he tryumpheth excedinglye that there was no such election confyrmed by
the Christian magistrate, namelye in the Byshope of Constantinople In this
Assertion are three things to be considered: one of substance, and two of
circunstaunce. Of substance this: whether an example may be found, of the
whole Churches election of a Byshope confyrmed by the magistrate? Of
circunstaunce these two: one whether he were a Christian magistrate, another
whether it were the byshope of Constantinople. And as concerning the first
which is the matter of substance: in the 7. book of Eusebius cap 24 there is
to be seen an example of the election of one Domius which was chosen by the
whole Church, and confyrmed by the Emperor Aurelianus. Now for the
circumstaunce there is some error to be confessed, but such as semethe most
probable to proceed of the prynter, rather then of the Aucthor For Aurelianus
although at that time he favored the Christians, and as Eusebius says
decreed most hollyly in that request that was made to him touching the
Byshopes house, yet can not properlye be called a Christian magistrate, and
that T C knows very well, affyrming that Constantine was the first christian
Emperor except Phillip. Wherefore this word Christian semethe to be added by
the prynter, to fill up his line at the latter end of a page. The other is
misnaminge of Constantinople for Antioche, and this is like to be the
mysreadinge of the prynter, if the copye were hastelye written in a ronninge
hand, because Antino with is a part of this word Constantinople, has some
resemblans with Antioche: some letters before and behind being blotted and
put out. But whereas M. d. iesteth so vnsa^earlye, of the buyldinge of
Constantinople, Anno 335. and the byshope of Constantinoples confyrmation
fourtye years before Constantinople was: notinge in the margent, a gross
ouersighte of T.C. peradventure it bewrays as gross ignorance of Io. W. for
Constantinople was not first builded by Constantine anno 335 but bewtifyed and
enlarged being before a very auncyente and noble cyttie called Byzantium, and
had bishops as Nicephorus wytnessethe ever since the Apostles time, lib 8. cap.
6. among whom was one Dometius, brother of the emperor Probus. Who succeeded
Aurelianus, which Dometius had two sons that succeeded him in the
byshopryck. First Probus, and then Metrophanes, which was byshope, when
Constantine began his great buyldinge at Constantinople Wherefore it may be
that T. C has read some wheare, of the electinge and confyrminge of these
byshopes, that were so near of Kynne to the Emperors. (...) hereof I can not
pronounce.

15 He fathereth a manifest untruth upon Eusebius lib. 6. touching Origens
admission into the mynisterie. page 209.

15 He speaks never a word of Origens admission into the mynisterie, as M.
d. understands the word mynister, to be the same whom he calls priest,
and which of the common people be called priests and mynisters. But he
sayethe that Origene Was admitted not of one byshope, but af many byshopes to
teach, which were reproved by Demetrius byshope of Alexandria, because they
had admitted him without the election of the presbytery of the Church.
countinge him but a lay man, which was not so elected, although he were
admitted by many byshopes. Therefore all that M. d. brings in to prove that
Origene was afterward made a mynister, etc. is to no purpose for T.C. sayethe
not, that he was admitted a mynister at this time, but a teacher, and yet
counted a lay man by Demetrius, because he lacked the election of the
presbytery. For if he had been lawfully chosen to be but a reader, he could
not in that time, have been iustlye compted a lay man, much less if he had
been lawfully chosen to be a teacher, and instructor of the Church. Wherefore
it appears that Demetrius called him a lay man, because he demed him not to
be lawfully elected And the Bishops them selves defend not there election, but
show, that lay men being learned, have been required of sundry byshopes to
teach the people in presence of the bishop Wherein they answer de facto out
not de iure, that is they show what has been done, but not what ought to be
done. Nevertheless the chief matter that stycketh in M. W. stomach is, how it
may be proved, that Demetrius comp^ed him a lay man, that was admitted
without the election of the presbytery. Fot he askethe whether there be any
thing soundinge that way. But if he had read Eusebius in Greek, for that
which he has turned (when as yet he was not ordained mynister) he might have
given it an other sownde and translated it: when as yet he had not obtained the
election of the presbytery, for the words are th^se, Kai toi tes tou
presbuteriou xeirotoneias. Oud^po te^uxekota, auton* and where is then this
manifest untruth fathered upon Eusebius touching Origens admission into the
mynisterie? But it seems that M. D is better acquainted with the sound of
Lattin then of Greek for he discusseth not any translation so it will serve
his turn.

16 He leans ^ut the words of the council of Chalcedon, that open the
meaning of the council. page 222.

16 Those words that he leaves out open no matter against him. The words
craftelye left out as M. D. says be, he Marturio, he Monasterio which
signifye, or in some Church builded in the memory, of a martyr, or in a
monastery. For (sauinge M. W. authority) these were pastoral charges as well
as the other, for monasteries in that time, though they were exempt places
from other congregations, yet did they conteyne a multitude of men, and
therefore were a congregation, which had need of a pastor. And Martyria
whether they were Paryshe Churches, or colleges, or hospitalles, they had also
some people pertayninge to them, and were comp^ed several congregations.
Wherefore these words do rather confyrme then impugn the saying of T. C as
you shall better perceive by the whole Cannon. The Council decrees, (That
none be louslye or absolutlye ordained Elder or Deacon, or in any
Ecclesiastical degree, except he that is to be ordained, be pronounced
specially or properly, in a congregation of some city or town, or in a
martyrie, or in a monastery. And as for such as are ordained absolutely, the
holy Synod has decre^d, that such imposition of hands be compted void,
and that they may mynister in no place, to the shame of him that ordained
them.) I blame not M D. wit though by cau^llinge at words, he would draw
men from consyderinge the matter of this Cannon. But I maruayle what he mean^th
to seek the understanding thereof, out of the rapsodies of Graciane the Popes
proctor, which groundeth his exposition upon a false translation of komeis for
possessioni^, which M. D. translated truly him self, page i of a town or
village.

17 He again ascribes Musculus his words to Jerome. page ^adem.

17 And yet Jerome in the same Epistle, complayneth that there is no regard of
the election of mynisters. The authority of Musculus is as good as of Jerome,
but that he is not so ancient.

18 He denies that Chrysostom makes a distinction betwixt Bishops and
Elders, when as his words be plain. page 226.

18 M. W. in his former book, alleges Oecumenius expoundinge the presbyteri
that S Paul speaks of 1 Timothy 4. to be such Elders, as were also called
byshopes, and affyrmeth that Chrysostom says so in like manner. T. C.
answers, that by Elders, he means Byshopes, not to sever those that had
the government of the Church together with the pastor, but to make a
difference between Elders by age, and Elders by office. M. D. for Oecumenius
has nothing to replye, and therefore having said or seemed to say that
Chrysostomes words, quotinge no place of his works, were all one with
Oecumenius his words. T. C. might well think that in aunsweringe Oecumenivs
he had answered Chrysostom. But now he brings other words of Chrysostom,
saying that Elders did not ordain the byshope, which in my mind must be
vnderstaunde with some distinction, or else they be contrary to the words of
S* Paul, who affyrmeth that Timo^hye received imposition of hands by the
Presbytery or Eldershipe, which word as the learned in the Greek tongue do
testifye, is used Luke 22. and Act 22. for the company of Elders, that had
government of the people.

19 He does untruly and corruptly allege Theodore^^. page 268.

19 T. C. says, (that the place cited by master Bullinger makes mention of a
goulden cope, and that used by byshopes of Jerusalem, and soulde by Cyrill a
good byshope, whereby he declared suffycientlie, his mislikinge of such
garnmentes in the ministry of the Sacraments.) m. doctor affyrmeth, that
Theodorete compteth it but a fable, that Cyrill should make any such sale.
But what if he dream of a fable, where none is talked of if Theodorete be well
understand? But be it that he compteth it a fable, yet he makes mention of
sellinge a cope, and therefore no falsification And maste^ doctor confesses,
that some writers (and namethe Sozomenus) affirm that he soulde it* but he
declares that it was not for any disalowinge of the vesture, but for
necessity of the poor in time of famyne. But where does Sozomenus declare
that it was not for any disalowinge of the vesture? Let master Whytgifte take heed that he falsefyeth not Sozomenus, otherwise then he can prove that T.C
falsefyeth Theodoretus. For although Cyrill bestowed the price on the poor,
yet he showed by the sale, that he thought it not necessary, and that is a
suffycient myslykinge, to iustefye the words of T.C.

20 He says page 280. that the two treatise^ called the Admonition were
written by diners persons, the one not knowinge the others doings: the
contrary whereof is manyfestly declared.

20 It seems that T.C. was not pryuie to there wrytinge, and therefore
speaks as far as he knew, and the matter is not worth a Ryshe whether the
one knew of the others doings or no.

21 He cites Nicephorus coruptlie. page 326.

21 Nicephorus was a Greek writer, and therefore if master Whytgifte, had
alleged his words in Greek, he should better have showed the corruption he
speaks of. But if it were an ouersyght of T. C. to make Nicephorus say, that
Victor in glory passed all the byshopes before him, where as he should have
said, that Victor in glory went before all the byshopes of his time, yet it
is all one to his purpose For it is untrue that Nicephorus says, because
other byshopes were even as glorious as Victor byshope of Rome, and in true
glory many went before him.

22 He falsefyeth a place in the first of John, by a false interpretation, to
make it serve his turn. page 302.

22 Yt would make a man to quake, to hear such terrible accusations of
falsefyinge the words, or meaning of the holy Ghost, if he were not
a^quainted with the wayght of master Whytgiftes censures I have read Calvin,
Musculus and other, upon that place of John, and they expound it even as T. C.
does, and especially Calvin which allows this to be a good reasone of the
Pharesies: if thou be nether Christ, nor Elyas, nor a Prophet, why do thou
baptize. For if he had been none of these, he might not have instituted a new
ceremony in the Church. But they were deceived in this, that they knew not
John to b^ Elias promised by Malachy, though he were not that Elias whom they
dre^med of As for m^ster doctors conjecture that they mente the Prophet
promised deuteronomy 18. like to moses is friuolus* for there Moses forbyddeth the
people to ask council of wytches and con^ure^s, because God would from time
to time raise up a Prophet among them: which should be inspired of God as
Moses was, of whom they should be instructed in all things that were meet
for them to know. As for the place math 11. were Christ affyrmeth, that John
was a Prophet is answered by Calvin, and Musculus. For John says he was no
Prophet, to tell of things to come. Christ says he was more then a Prophet,
because he was sent of God, to show that Messiah was present.

23 He says that the Centuryes allege a place of Ambrose, out of his book
De dignitate sacerdotali, to prove that the office of an Archbyshope was nor
then come into the Church: which is untrue, for the Centuries allege no
such place ^ut of Ambrose for any such purpose. page 337.

23 Because the place in the Centuryes is not quoted by T. C. I can say little
to it, but that I think he is not so impudent, as master doctor would make
him, to allege that which is no where written For it is like inoughe that the
Centuryators, although they show in the fourth Centurye, that there were
Archbyshopes in S. Ambrose his time, and show also how much they dyffered
from the Archbyshopes that followed in the Popish times: yet in some other
place, they might allege the authority of Ambrose out of his book de
dignitate sacerdotali, to prove that in his time the degree of an Archbyshope,
was not distinct from the degree of a Byshope in dignity, but only for order
sake, because he there deuideth the Clergy into no more degrees, then these
three, Byshopes, Elders, and Deacons.

24 He says, that Jerome and Augustine speaks of Archdeacons in those
places, where they only speak of Deacons page 346.

24 Undoubtedly Jerome speaks of an Archdeacon in the place quoted by T.C
that is in his Epistle to ^uagrius. Where first he fyndeth great fault that
any Deacon should be preferred before the Elders or Priests, which by the
Scriptures he proves to be equale to the Byshopes, and afterward shows how
the Byshope came to be preferred, namlye by consent of the rest of the Elders,
for auoydinge contention, as if the Army choose a Captain, or the Deacons
choose one among them selves whom they know to be a diligent man, and call him
Archdeacon. So that by Ieroms judgment the Archdeacon was preferred above the
Deacons, but not thereby pre^erred before Elders. So the falsifycation of
Jerome is not to be aduouched. The like may be said of Augustine for saying
the Archdeacon in those times, was but the chief Deacon, and so but a Deacon,
whatsoever was spoken against the presumptions of the inferior deacons over the
Elders may be also said of the Archdeacons or chief deacons. I think master
Whytgifte (howsoever he would seem to walk under a cloud in this matter) yet
he will not say for shame that the Archdeacons in saint Ieroms and saint
Augustines days, had authority over the Elders and mynisters as they have
now, which is the thing in question, and which T.C. denies.

25 The words of Socrates are falsefyed page 350.

25 The words of Socrates be not falsefyed for they be not alleged nor
translated, but his meaning is faithfully and truly rendered, (that the
Bishops of Rome and Alexandria, leauinge the sacred function were degenerated
into a seculer rule or dominion,) which master doctor translateth: that they
were passed the limits of priesthode to an outward dominion. What difference
is here in the seen. If T. C. take upon him to translate out of Greek into
Latin or English, by all lykelyhod he well do it as well as master doctor can
do. It is happy, he can not say but that the sense is all one though the
words be not the same. And yet there is no great difference between passing
and degeneratinge, the limits of priesthode and the holy ^unction, seculer
dominion and outward dominion.

26 He untruly reports the words of Cypriane. page 257.

26 He reports no words of Cypriane, but only affyrmeth a truth out of
Cypriane, that, 90 byshopes of one province condemned Priuatus an heretic.
master doctor quareleth at the name of province wherbye T. C. means that
t^ac^ of the country which was near about the City, where these bishops
did meet. For if the diocesses had been so large, as commonly the diocesses
of byshopes are now, so many could not so often meet in council, as it is
manifest in deed, by that epistle of Cyprian* with master doctor cites lib 1.
Epist 3. and many other: that 40.39.66. byshopes met in council, commonly
every year, and peradventure more then one in the year, which could not
be, if they had dwelled so far a sounder as byshopes do now. As for that he
alleges out of Masseus of the patriarche of Antioche, to prove the lardgnes
of one province is to little purpose, for there were but four Patriarchs in
the world, under the byshope of Rome, as appears in the council of
Laterane, therefore every one of them must have a great many provinces under
him. Besides that he expresses not, what time there were so many bishops
subject* to him, saving that he seems to say, that they are now and T C.
speaks of Cyprians times, thirten hundredth year ago.

27 He falsefye^h the meaning of Tertullian, alludinge that to ceremonies,
that Tertullian meanethe of faith, and of salvation. page 370.

27 I never knew a man of such learning, so far to ouershoote him self, as
master Whytgifte does in this place. For he alleges a work of Tertulliane
to prove that his rule as to be understand only of matters of faith, and not
of ceremonies or matters of discipline, where he speaks only and manifestlye
of a ceremony, and a matter of discipline, namelye the coueringe of Virgins in
the congregation, according to the doctrine of saint Paul. For whereas the
contrary custom was crept into the Church of Carthage, that Virgins came
bar headded into the congregation, and had long continued, he declares,
that Christ and the truth is most ancient, and before all customs, and
therefore that to be followed, which was first, in this matter. And whereas
master doctor would gather a difference out of Tertulliane, of matter of faith
and matter of discipline. he is much deceived For Tertulliane wrytinge of
them, that held one true says which is immutable, and erred in this matter
of discipline, shows that although they retained the rules of faith
unchangeable, yet discipline also* if it were corrupted by evil custom,
must be reformed according to the word of God. And this is the true meaning
of his words, which are alleged by master Wgytgifte (this law of faith
remaining, other things of discipline and conversation admit newnes of
correction, the grace of God woorkinge and goinge forward even to the end.)
He says not, that they may be changed newely every day, but that they may
be newely corrected, if they be grown into abuse, and reformed according to
the Scriptures Now let master doctor take h^de, that he falsefyeth not the
meaning of Tertullian, which interprets his meaning clean contrary to
the scope of his whole book.

28 He keeps back the words of Theodoret that explane his meaning. page 412.

28 The words here spoken of in the Censure, are afterward in the probation
page 413. said to be one word Tavten This Well put Tavten to that which T.
C. says, and what is the matter mended? Theodoret says that Chrysostom had
the same care of the church of Thracia Asya and Pontus, that he had of the
church of Constantinople, erge he had the same rule and authority. What
lodgike is this? But Theodoret says in plain words, (he governed the
Churches in Pontus, with those laws.) M. D confesses the Greek to be
katekosmei tois nomois, that is, he garnished or bewtefyed with laws But does
he falsefye Theodoret because he leaves out Tavtois there? Suerlye there is
as much subtlety in leauinge out the other, and greater prejudice, in
translatinge katekosmei, he governed, then in ^matting Tavtois these Yet you
will say, yt can not be avoided, but that he had auctoritye in that Church,
which he garnished with laws. I will not discuss what authority he had, but
I think this garnishinge with laws* may be expounded by that promeitheian,
or prospection, which he speaks of before, and that the one does open the
other. That is, that he procured through that credit which he had with the
Emperor, that such Ecclesiastical laws should be established in other
Churches, as he saw to be profitable in his own, having a special chardge
of his own flock, and a general care of all Churches.

29 An untruth concerning Ire^aeus, aucu^he^^ out of the fyfth book of
Eusebius cap 3 and 4 page ^adem.

29 The untruth supposed, is that T.C. affyrmeth, that Irenaeus was sent of
the french Churches into Phrygia. M D. says he was sent only to Rome, and
not into Phrygia. But it is strange to see, that such a diligent reader of
Ancient writers, as master Whytgifte would be thought to be, by carpinge of
others, should so much forget him self. For even in the place of Eusebius
quoted by T C. it is manifest, that the long Epistle, written by the Churches
of Vienna and Lions, was sent not only to Eleutherius the byshope of Rome,
but principally to the churches of Asya and Phrygia, and a special cause
alleged, because that Montanus did then spread his heresye. Now seeing master
doctor confesses, that Irenaeus carried the letter to Rome, what should lead
him to think, that he carried it not further into Asya and Phrygia?

30 He peruerteth the words of the Greek scholiaste. page 413.

30 M doctor should better have reproved this peruertinge, if he had alleged
the words of the Greek scholiast in greek. But let the words be as he
translateth, ^^gulas civitates suum habere pactorem, that every city should
have her own pastor, then follows it of necessity (which T C. says) that
every pastor should have his own city for his chardge. What peruertinge is
this Every wife must have her own husband, therefore every husband must
have his own wife. For if it be once granted* that every flock must have
there own pastor, it must needs follow, that every pastor must have his
own flock. For there may be a flock without a shepherd, but there can be no
shepherd without a flock.

31 He avouched aea untruth of Theodoret. page 415.

31 T C. says, (that the emperors Theodosius and Valentinianus wrytt unto
Dioscorus byshope of Alexandria, that they had commanded Theodoret byshope of
Cyrus, that he should keep him self unto his own Church only: wherebye it
appears, that he meddled in more Churches then was me^re he should.) Master
Whytgifte says, this is an untruth, and a foul oversight, and that he has
dealt very corruptly in this matter. For the Emperors meaning was nothing
else, but that Theodoret shoud keep him self at home, and not come to the
Synod, except the whole Synod would admit him You shall hear the very
words of the Epistle, whereby you may judge what there meaning was, and what
corruption is used by T. C. in this matter. (Sacerdotalem enim conuentum, non
nisi quis ma^^ propria conscientia sauciatus eu^^at. Theodoretum san^ Episcopum
Cyri ciuitatis, quem pridem ^ussimus suae soli vacare Ecclesiae, sancimus non
prius ad sanctam Synodum conuenire, nisi vniuerso sancto placuerit conuenienti
concilio, and ipsum concurrere and pariter interesse.) For none will avoid the
assembly of Priests, except he be wounded with his own evil conscience. In
deed Theodoret the byshope of the city Cyrus, whom before this time we have
commanded to attend upon his own Church only, we decree that he come not to
the holy Synod, except it shall please all the whole holy council, that is
assembled, that he shall be compted one of them, and be present with them. Here
you see that Theodoret is not only forbidden to come to the council at such
time as it was sommoned, but also commanded to attend wpon his own Church
only before that time* whereby a reasonable man may gather reasonably, that
he meddled with more Churches the^ his own, before he was commanded there
contrary.

32 He utters a very uncharitable untruth, of the worthy man M. Jewel
byshope of Sarisburye. page 422.

32 If that which T.C. teaches be the doctrine of the Gospel, as he is
persuaded, then the B. was to blame, to call it wantonness. And when M.
Whytgifte has proved that it is not the doctrine of the Gospel he may count
it wantonness also. But until this controuersye be decided, the matter of
untruth is in suspense.

33 He says, that in the council of Antioche, it appears that the byshope
of the Metropolitan seat called Synodes, and propounded the matters, which
were to be handled, and that it was his office to see, that the byshopes kept
them selves within there own Diocese: and he quoteth the 9. Canon where no
such thing is to be found. page 435.

33 It is true that T. C. says of the council of Antioche* and appears in
diverse Canons, although the quotation be untrue, which is like to be set out
of place, by the printer, because that sone after it should come in, where it is
said* that the 34 Canon falsely called of the Apostells, is borrowed of the
council of Antioche, which is in deed the 9 Canon. As for this that T. C.
says the Metropolitan did call Synodes appears in the 14, Canon, and did
see that byshopes should keep them within there own diocese in the 13. Canon.
The same may be gathered also by other Canons of that council, and master
doctor confesses that these things pertain to the Metropolitan office,
therefore it is a poor spyte, that he utters against the quotations in the
margent.

34 He h^the add^th and detracteth from the 34. Canon attributed to the
Apostells. page 439.

34 The words of the Canon be not recited, and I can not perceive any addinge
or detractinge from the meaning. The words of the Canon be, (The byshopes of
every nation ought to know who is chief among them: whom let them esteem as
there head, and do nothing without his knowledge, beside those things only,
that pertain to every man's own Parish. And the towns that are under it
nether let him do any thing in there Parishes, without the knowledge of them
all.) Of this Canon. T. C. gathers, that the Metropolitan in ancient time,
might do nothing in other byshopes Parishes without the consent of all the
byshopes of his province, and that every byshope might do that which
appertains to his own parish, without the Metropolitan, and he nothing to
do with him in it. These last words (And he nothing to do with him in it,)
are said to be added to the Canon. The detraction is laid to be of these
words, (And the places subject to it,) so that where as T. C. said that every
byshope might do that which appertained to his own parish, he should have
added, (and the places subject to it.) I must confess, I can not understand
such insensible collections. Judge you whether the meaning be changed or no.

35 The 17. Canon of the council of Antioche is untruly alleged. page 440.

35 A great untruth. The printer in the margent has set Canon 17. where he
should have set Canon 14. But master Whytgifte says there is no mention of
equality in voices, but only of disagreinge in judgment among the byshopes
in that 14. Canon But yet that equality of voices, must be intended, in case
where a byshope stands to be judged, For if the greater part did either
absolve him or condemn him, there were no need to call byshopes out of an
other province to judge him.

36 He should say an Epistle of pope Zacharye to Boniface, and he says an
Epistle of Zacharye to pope Boniface, In the which Epistle he says that this
cause s^il. least they should wax vile through the multitude, it alleged why
there should not be a byshope in every village or little city, which is
untrue: for there is no such cause alleged there. page 443.

36 Here again T. C. must abye for the printers fault, which master doctor
might have seen in the margent, when it is called an Epistle o^ pope Zacharye
to Boniface, and yet there is an erratura in the margent, for ^ it quoteth To.
3. in stead of To. 2. O matters worthy of master doctor Whytgiftes Censure.
But now is the epistle falsefyed, the words whereof be as (master doctor
says) For you must remember what we are commanded by the old Canons to
observe, that we ought not to ordain byshopes in villages and small cities,
least the name of a byshope should wax vile T. C. reports that it is written
in that Epistle, (that it has been oftentimes decreed, that there should not
be a byshope appointed in every village or little city, least they should wax
vile through the multitude, whereby it both appears, that there was wont to
be a byshope in every parish, and upon how corrupt and evil consideration one
byshope was set over a whole diocese) First master doctor accuses him (as he
does often) for falsely alleging the words, when he does not pretend to
rehearse the words but the meaning. Secondly he asks how he gathers that
there was wont to be a byshope placed in every parish? belyke of this, that
the Canons whereof the Pope speaks, were made to forbid that which was wont
to be down, and not that which never came in any man's head to do: and
further because it was not one Canon, that so decreed but many But who
falsefyeth the Popes Epistle? When master doctor translateth Menunerimus you
must remember, and in sacris Canonibus by the oulde Canons. It is a good h^rse
that never stombled. And sometime Homer him self takes ^ nappe. Suerly these
translations are as f^rre from the words of the Epistle as the report of T. C:
lest they should wax vile through the multitude: from these words of the
Epistle, lest the name of a byshope should wax vile. But multitude is not
named, true, but yet multitude is employed, for if every village or little
city had a byshope, there should be a great multitude more then are, and
multitude also makes things contemned.

37 He alleges the fyfth Canon concilii Tyronns. for that that can not be
found in it. page 446.

37 Howsoever the quotation in the margent be untrue* master doctor can not
deny, but that Counsels have decreed against the immoderate feastinge of
byshopes, which is the matter of the text, and therefore this fault is scarce
worth the fynding. Master doctor him self has alleged a work of Basills
such as never none was, etc.

38 He says* that another Council (quotinge the council of Affrike) decreed
that the Christians, should not celebrate feasts on the birth days of
Martyrs, because it was the manner of the heathen: which is a ma^^fest
untruth, for there is no such decree in that Council. 479.

38 There is a decre which master doctor him self reports page 479. (This is
also to be desired (of the Emperors) that such feasts as contrary to the
commandment of God are kept in many places, which have been drawn from the
error of the Gentills (so that now Christians are compelled by the Paganns, to
celebrate them, whereby another persecution in the time of Christian Emperors
seems covertly to be raised) might be by there commandment forbidden, etc
especially saying they ate not afraid to committ such things in some cities*
even upon the birth days of blessed Martyrs, and in the holy place.) Now who
but master Whytgifte would say, that Christians are not forbidden by this
Canon to celebrate feasts one the birth days of Martyrs, after the manner of
the heathen. He will say the Pagans are forbidden. True, but not only the
Pagans. He will say all times they are forbidden. True, but especially on the
birth days of Martyrs. He will add, that for other causes they are forbidden,
and not only because the heathen used them* I grant, but yet for that cause
also, because they were drawn from the error of the Gentills. So that here is
no untruth* aduouched by T. C. for he says not, that only the Christians, were
forbidden to hold those feasts only on* birth days of Martyrs, and only
because it was the manner of the heathen, but his words are as they are
reported in the Censure. (That Christians should not celebrate feasts one the
birth days of Martyrs, because it was the manner of the heathen.

39 He says, That Tertullian would not have the Christian^ to sit after they
had prayed, because the idolaters did so: and he quoteth his book De anima.
where there is no such thing written. page ^adem.

39 The place is confessed by master Whytgifte to be in the book of Tertullian
de Oratione, and therefore it must needs be the error of the copyer or
prynter. But whereas M. doctor page 480. will not seem to acknowledge that
cause, which T C does allege, you shall understand, that the words of
Tertullian be these (Potro cum perinde faciant nationes adotatis sigillaribus
suis residendo, vel propterea in nobis reprehendi meretur quod ^pud idola
celebratur.) But whereas the Gentiles do even the same in syttinge down after
they have worshipped there puppetts even therefore this custom deserves to be
reprehended in us because it is used before the idols.

40 He fathereth an untruth of Augustine touching baptizinge by women, or in
private howses. page 522.

40 He fathereth no untruth upon Augustine. Only he says that Augustine does
not allow either of baptism in private howses or by women, but when there was
danger the women hasted to carry the children to the Church which it is like
they would not have done if women might have baptized, and in private howses.
Now comes master Whytgifte and asks where saint Augustine does disallowe
it? But if he will prove T. C. a falsefyer, he must show where Augustine does
allow it T. C. does not say that Augustine does dissallow it, but that he does
not allow of it.

41 He alleges M Beza in his annotations, for that which can not be found
in them. page 584.

41 Though master Whytgifte nor none of his searcher^ can find it yet I am
persuaded, that it is not forged by T. C. there be diverse editions of that
work perhaps master doctor has not thoroughly sought them all, and the place
it not material, for this is Beza his judgment that a Deacon^ should nether
preach nor baptize, but only provide for the poor.

42 He says* that if we will take the nature of the Sacrament so straightlye
(...) Augucti^e does, and that there be no Sacraments, but when as to the
element there comes the word^ the^ circuncision can be ^o Sacrament, which
is a gross untruth for in circuncision there is both the word, and the element
page 618

42 Master doctor says the foreskinn is the element, it may be answered that
is unaptly compared, with water ^reade and wine, for they are given, and the
foreskynn is taken away. But it is nether to nor fro, for the word of God
added to an external sign, whether it be an element or no, makes a
Sacrament, except Augustine by an element in that place understand an outward
sign.

43 He says that the Eldership was most florishinge in Constantines time but
he notes no place, where we may find his saying to be true. page 651.

43 He notes no place where his saying may be found true therefore this is
the three, and fourteth untruth or falsyfication: a sound argument and meet
for a doctor to use.

44 He is greatly deceived about the excommunicatinge of Apollina^ie, and
shows manifest tokens that either he has not him self read the storye, or
that he has read it very negligentlye as it is plainly declared in the
defense. page 669.

44 He is no more deceived then master Whytgifte in the same place mistakinge
Theodoretus for Theodotus. For although he mistake the circunstaunce of time
concerning the excommunication of Apollinaris yet those phrases which he
alleges out of that chapter serve to prove that although the byshope alone
did pronounce the sentence of excommunication yet it was not decreed against
any man by one byshopes only authority as is most manifest to them that
know the history of that time, although it be often said that such a
byshope did excommunicate, which is none otherwise to be understand, then
these sayings the Emperor or the Prince has made a law, which n^uertheles
is made by the Senate or Parliament, of which the Emperor or Prince is chief.

45 He falsefyeth Ambrose, page 670.

45 If T.C have not rightlye collected out of Ambrose* that which makes for
his purpose yet he can not be iustlye accused to have falsefyed Ambrose, there
is great difference between a falsyfication and a wrong collection. But letting
master Whytgifte have his uncharitable terms, I see not but that T C does
gather as probably out of Ambrose, that he did not alone of his o^ne auctorytie
excommunicate the Emperor Theodosius and more probably too, then mast^r
Whytgifte does affirm that he did it alone, because all the praise is given
to him by Theodoret and So^omene. For if a Synod were gathered about that
matter, as T. C shows out of Ambrose, it is not like that it was only to
lament and take the matter in evil part (as master doctor says) but rather
to consult hereof, and by whom discipline should be exercised toward the
Emperor to bring him to repentance, and to take away the offense and the same
may be gathered also out of those words of Ambrose, for any thing that
master Whytgifte proves to the contrary. (Non erat facti tui absolutio in
Ambrosii Communione) The absolution of thy fact was not in the communicatinge
with Ambrose. Moreover the practice of that time, favors the collection of T.
C for at that time and long after, excommunications were decreed by Synodes.

46 He alleges a place of Tertullian very deceiptfullye. page 673.

46 After Tertullian has showed the manner of the Congregations in prayer and
preachinge he comes thirdly to declare what is there discipline in these
words. In the same congregation are used exhortations, reprehensions, and the
divine Censure. For judgment is executed with great waighte, as among them
that are suer they be in the sight of God And it is the greatest conclusyon of
the last judgment that shall be, if a man have so offended that he is banished
from the communication of prayer, and of the assemblies, and of all holy
affairs. Approved seniors do govern (this action) which have obtained this
honor not by monye but by good report. T. C. says, (If there be any that has
committed such a fault that he is to be put away from the partakinge of the
prayers of the Church, and from all holy matters. There do bear rule, or be
presydents certain of the most approved Ancients or Elders which have
obtained this honor not by monye, but by good report.) What deceyte is here?
Forsoothe Tertullian makes a full point of these words (all holy affairs)
and beginning a new sentence, says (approved seniors, etc.) T C. has joined
these into one sentence O craftye conue^^nce, it is pity that he lives. But
shall I be plain with you? if ever any man did go about to peruerte a
writers meaning, master Whytgifte does so here. When he says th^^ it can not
be gathered of these words that these seniors did excommunicate. I had as
leise he told me the son does not shine when it is noone tide. But what
nede-furder proffe when he him self gives it over afterward, and says he
will not deny, but that they had to do in excommunication. Then why does he
quarrel before, and chardg T.C. with untruth for saying that which he him
self will not deny.

47 He says, that Augustine in his books De bapt. contra Donatistas, shows
that if the most of the people be infected with the faul^e with is to be
punished, that (...) no excommunication ought to be attempted, for because a
suffycient number of voices will not be obtained for the excommunication*
whe^as these words. For because a suffycient number of voices, etc. are not to
be found in these books of Augustine. page 675.

47 Master doctor is always harpinge upon the words when T C. stands only
upon the matter, and reports not the words. For although be can not find
those words yet he has not showed the contrary out of those books, but that
saint Augustine is of that judgment which. T C. reports him to be.

48 He makes a^ untrue report of the 10. Canon of the council of Antioche.
page 682.

48 This is a very false Censure concerning the 10. Canon of the council of
Antioche as every man that reads that Canon will confess, and master doctor
him self also if it please him to read it over once again. But page 682 is
showed that he did mistake the 13. Canon of the Ancyrane council for the 13
Canon of the council of Neocesariense, which error he might easily fall into,
because it is both one number of the Canon, and both the counceles were held
near about one time, and no greater error then master doctor falls into even
in the same place while he accuses him to have erred in reporting the council
of Antioche where he should have said the Ancyrane council.

49 He alleges that for making Ecclesiastical laws and ceremonies, which
is (...) of buyldinge and repayringe of Churches* ^ut of Eusebius lib. 2. De
vita Constantini. Epist. ad Eusebium. page ^98.

49 T C. alleges other auctoryties then that of Eusebius as Sozomene and the
counsels for prooffe of that he wry^teth, and therefore master doctor does him
wrong (...) press him with that only place. And yet perhapes the Greek
words may be taken otherwise then they (...) commonly translated. But whether
they may or no, there be words plain inough^* to show that Churches were
then governed by byshopes, Elders, and Deacons, which being a part of T.C.
assertion peradventure is as much as he would have proved out of that Epistle,
and the rest to be confyrmed by the other auctoryties afterward cyted Therefore
I can perceive no such gross ouersyght as is supposed.

50 He affyrmeth that this practice continewed still in the Churchs of God,
scil. that nothing was brought into the Church to be read, besides the
words of God, whereas the contrary is manifestly proved of the same time,
whereof he means. page 718.

50 He affyrmeth that this practice continewed from the Apostles time until
the time of Justinius Martyr, as it appears by his apollogie, where Justinius
purposynge to make open to the Emperor, whatsoever was done in the
congregation of the Christians (for so much as they were shamefully slaundered
concerning there assemblyes) declares, that they did read the monumente of
the Prophets and Apostells, whereby T. C. gathers that they did read
nothing else which is not an argument ab autoritate negative, if you consider
the purpose of Justinius to purge the Christians which he did not sufficiently,
if there were any thing else said or donn among them, then that he utters.
As for that which master doctor alleges out of Eusebius of Dionysius writing
to So^er, was after the time of Justinius Martyr, and therefore no reproffe of
T. C. affyrmation. For Justinius was in the days of Antoninus pius and Soter
was byshope of Rome* in the time of Lucius Commodus the son of Marcus
Aurelius which reigned eightene years after Antoninus.

51 He says that saint John in the Apocalypse reprehending the mynisters of
di^res Churchs, did not put to his name unto his book, which is a manifest
untruth, for he adds his name both in the beginning and in the end; thrice
in the first chapter and once in the last. page 806.

51 T.C. I trow is not ignorant of that, therefore I think^e he means not of
his name John, but of his addition or surname whereby it might be known which
John it was, for ^her were diverse at that time, and learned men do not a^ree
which John it was.

As for the resydewe of untruths and falsyficatio^ that are not nombered you
may well think they be such as these. In which I have satisfied your request
to show you ^yne opinion and simple judgment, leauinge the cause in
controuersye between them as I found it. I pray God it may be ended to his
glory There be godly men and learned on both sides I wyshe. they might all
agree in the truth: in the mean time I would have malice and vnsyncere
dealinge hated on both parts.


