THE Whole Book of Psalms. Collected into English meeter by T. Sternhold, I.
Hopk. and others: conferred with the Hebrew, with apt notes to sing them
withal.

Set forth and allowed to be sung in all churches of all the people together
before and after Morning and Evening prayer, as also before and after Sermons;
and moreover, in private houses, for their godly solace and comfort, laying
apart al ungodly songs and Ballads, which tend only to the norishing of vice
and corrupting of youth.

Printed for the Company of Stationers. 1614.

A Treatise made by Athanasius the Great, concerning the use and virtue of the
Psalms.
ALl holy Scripture is certainly the teacher of all virtue, and of the true
faith: but the book of the psalms does express after a certain manner the
very state and condition of the soul. For as he which intends to present
himself to a King will first compound himself to set in good order both his
gesture and his speech, least else he might be reputed rude and ignorant: even
so does this godly book inform all such as be desirous to lead their life in
virtue, and to know the life of our Savior, which he led in his conversation,
putting them in mind in the reading thereof, of all their affections and
passions whereto the soul is inclined.

Moreover, the psalms inform and teach every man with diverse instructions,
whereby he may not only spy the affections and state of his soul, and to
win a good pattern and discipline how he may please God, but also with what
form of words he may amend himself, and how to give God thanks, least if he
should speak otherwise then were convenient, he should fall into impiety by
his vnreuerent estimation of God: for we must all make account to the Judge,
as well of our idle words as our ill deserts.

IF therefore thou would at any time describe a blessed man who he is, and
what thing makes him to be so, thou have the 1.32.41.112.128. Psalms.

2 If thou would rebuke the Jews for their spite they have to Christ, thou
have the 2. psalm.

3 If thine own familiars pursue thee; and if any rise against thee, say the
3.143. Psalms.

4 If thus in trouble thou have called on God, and have tarried upon his help,
and would give him thanks for that he has heard thee with his help sing the
4.40.116. psalms.

5 If thou see that evil men lay snares for thee, and therefore desire
Gods ears to hear thy prayer, sing the 5. psalm.

6 If thou feel Gods dreadful threats, and see thy self afraid of them,
thou may say the 6 38.88. psalms.

7 If any take counsel against thee, as Achitophel did against David, if thou
be admonished thereof, sing the 7. psalm.

8 If thou in beholding the grace of our Savior spread on every side, especially
for the restoring of mankind to salvation, would speak thereof in meditation
to God, sing the 8. psalm

9 If so again thou will sing in giui^g thanks to God for the prosperous
gathering of thy fruits, use the 8. psalm.

10 If thou would have thine adversary, kept, back and thy soul saved,
trust not in thy self but in the Son of God, singing the 9. Psalm.

11 If thou perceiuest God to be wroth with his people, as though he regarded
them nothing thou have to pacify him, to complain thereof, the 10, 60, 74
psalms.

12 If any man would put thee in fear, have thou thy hope in God, and sing the
11. psame.

13 If thou behodest the pride of many men, and see malice to abound, so that
there is no godi^es among men repair then and sing the 3 6, 21, Psalms.

14 If thine adversary lie long in wait against thee, despair not as though
God had forgotten thee, but call upon the Lord, and say the 14, 55, psalms.

15 If thou hear any to blaspheme God in his providence, be not partaker
with them in wickedness, but make have to God, and say the 12. psame.

16 If thou desire to know who is a Citizen of heaven, sing the 15, psame.

17 If thou have need of prayer for such as be against thee, and have closed
thy soul on every side, sing the 16, 17, 86, 141, psa.

18 If thou have escaped from thine enemies, and art delivered from them who
pursued thee, sing thou the 18, 9 psames.

19 If thou do wonder at the order of things created by God, considering the
grace of the divine providence, sing the 19, 24.

20 If thou ^eest any man in adversity, comfort him, and pray for him with the
20. psalm.

21 If thou perceiuest thy self to be defended and fed by God, and to live
prosperously, rejoice therein, and si^g the 23. psalm.

22 If thine enemies conspire against thee, lift up thy soul to God, and say
the 23, psalm and thou shall espy them to labor but in vain against thee.

23 If thine enemies cluster against thee, and go about with their bloody hands
to destroy thee go not thou about by man's help to revenge it, for all men's
judgments are not trusty, but require God ^o be Judge, for he alone is judge,
and say the 26, 35, 43. psa.

24 If ^hey press more fiercely on thee though they be in numbers like an
armed host, fear them not which thus reject thee, as though thou were not
anointed and elect by God, but sing the 27. Psalm.

25 If they be yet so impudent that lay wait against thee, so that it is not
lawful for thee to have any vocation by them, regard them not, but sing to God
the 48, Psalms.

26 If thou will exhort and p^ouoke Kings and Princes to submit their power to
God, and regard his honor, sing the 29. 82. ps.

27 If thou renew and build thine house, both of thy soul, whereto thou
receiuest God to host, and of thy temporal habitation, sing the 30. 48, 127
psalms.

28 If thou see thy self had in hate for the truths sake of thy friends and
kinsfolk, leave not off thy purpose, nor fear them which be against thee, but
think on them which follow, and sing the 31. psalm.

29 If thou beholdest such as be baptized, and so delivered from the corruption
of their birth, praise thou the bountiful grace of God, and sing the 32,
psalm.

30 If thou delightest to sing among many, call together righteous men of godly
life, and sing the 33. Psalm.

31 If by chance thou fallest amongst thine enemies and yet have fortunately
escaped them if therefore thou will give thanks, call together meek men, and
sing the 34, psalm.

32 If thou see wicked men contend among themselus to do mischief, think
not that their Nature does impell them by necessity to work si^ against their
will, as certain heretics suppose, but consider the 36 psalm, and thou shall
perceive that they be to themselves their own occasion of sinning.

33 If thou see how wicked men do much wickedness, and that yet simple folk
praise such, when thou will admonish any man not to follow them to be like unto
them, because they shall be shortly rooted out and destroyed; speak to thy
self and to other the 37 psalm.

34 If thou have decreed to take heed of thy self and see thine enemy
approach nigh thee as against one whom the adversary, is more provoked to come
with assault, and therefore wilt prepare thy self, sing the 39, psame

35 If thou see many poor men to beg, and wilt show pity to them, thou
may both thy self receive them to mercy, and also exhort other to do the
same, saying the 41. psalm.

36 If thou have a desire to Godward and hear thine enemies to vpbraid thee,
be not troubed, but consider what fruit of immortality rises to thee for this
desire, comfort thy soul with hope to God, and so therein relieuing and
asswaging the heaviness of thy life, say the 42, psalm.

37 If thou will remember Gods benefits which he did to thy fathers both in
their out going from Egypt and in the desert, and how good God was unto them,
but they unthankful to him. thou have the 44, 78, 89, 102, 114, 117. psalms.

38 If thou have made thy refuge to God, and have escaped such trouble as was
prepared against thee, if thou will give thanks and show out his kindness to
thee, sing the 46. psalm.

39 If thou will know how to give thanks to God when thou do resort to him
with sound understanding, sing the 47, 48.

40 If thou will exhort men to put their trust in the living God, who
ministers all things abundantly to good men's use, and blame the madness of
the world, which serve their God Mammon so inordinately, sing the 49, psalm.

41 If thou would call upon the blind world for their wrong considence of
their bruit sacrifices, and show them what sacrifice God most has requited of
them, sing the 50. psalm.

42 If thou have sinned and art converted, and moved to do penance, desirous
to have mercy, thou have the words of confession in the 51, psalm.

43 If thou have suffered false accusation before the, King, and see the
devil to triumph thereat, go aside and say the 52. psalm.

44 If they which persecute thee with accusations would betray thee, as the
Pharisees did Jesus, and as the Aliants did David, discomfort not thy self
therewith, but sing in good hope to God the 54.57, 69. Psalms.

45 If thine adversaries which trouble thee do vpbraid thee, and that they
which seem to be thy friends, speak most against thee, whereupon if in thy
meditation thou art somewhat grieved thereat thou may call on God saying the
55. psalm.

46 If persecution come fierce on thee, and unawares chance to enter into the
cave where thou hidest thy self, fear not: for in this strait thou have
expedient words both to comfort thee, and to put thee in remembrance of his old
mercy, with the 57, 142, psalm.

47 If thou will confound Hypocrites which make glorious shows outwardly,
speak their conversion with the 58, psalm.

48 If thy pu^suers command thy house to be watched; when thou art escaped,
give thanks to God, and grave it in the Tables of thine heart for aperpetuall
remembrance, and say the 59. psalm.

49 If thine enemies cruelly assault thee, and would catch thy life, offer thy
subjection to God against them, and be of good comfort: for the more they
rage, the more shall God subdue the^, and say the 62 psalm.

50 If thou flyest persecution, and gettest thee into the wilderness, fear thou
not, as thought thou were there alone, but having God nigh unto thee, rise to
him early in the morning, singing the 63. psalm.

51 If thine enemies would put thee in fear, and never cease to lay trains
for thee, and pick all manner quarrels against thee, though they be very many,
give no place to them; for the darts of babes shall be their destruction, if
thou say the 61. 68, 70 71, psalms.

52 If thou will laud God with a psalm or hymn, sing the 65 66. psalms.

53 If thou have need to confess God, sing the 67. psalm.

54 If thou would sing to the Lord, thou have what to say in the 96.98.
psalms.

55 If thou have need to confess God with thanks, sing the 71, 75, 62, 108,
117, 118, 136, 138, 139. psalms.

56 If thou see wicked men prosper in peace, be not offended thereat, but say
the 113. Psalm.

57 If thine enemies have beset the ways whither thou flyest and art thereby
in great anguish, yet in this trouble despair not, but pray, and if thy prayer
be heard, give God thanks, and say the 77. psalm.

58 If they persevere still, and defile the house of God, kill the elect, and
cast their bodies to the Fowls of the air, fear not their cruelty, but show
pity to them which be in such agony, and say the 29. psalm.

59 If thou will inform any man with the mystery of the refurrection. sing the
8. psalm.

60 If thou will sing to the Lord call together Gods servants on the feastiuall
day, and sing the 81, 95, 34. psalms.

61 If thine adversaries flock together on every side, and threaten to destroy
the house of God, and make their conspiracies against thy Religion, let not
their number and power trouble thee, for thou have an anchor of the words of the
83, psalm.

62 If thou castest an eye to Gods house and to his eternal tabernacles, and
have a desire thereto, as the Apostle had, say thou also the 84. psalm.

63 If Gods wrath be ceased, and the captivity ended, thou have cause how to
give thanks to God with David, recounting his goodness to thee and others,
with the 96, 85, 116. psalms.

64 If thou will rebuke Paynims and heretics, for that they have not the
knowledge of God in them, thou may have an understanding to sing to God the
86, 115. psalms.

65 If thou will see and know the dissent that the Catholic Church has from
schism, and would convert them; or to discern the Church concerning the
outward appearance and sins thereof, thou may say the 87, psalm.

66 If thou would know how Moses prayed to God, and in his meditation,
recounting the brittle state of man's life, desired God to direct so his short
life that he might follow wisdom, read the 90. Psalm.

67 If thou woudlst comfort thy self and others in true Religion, and teach
them that hope in God, will never suffer a fool to be confounded, but make it
bold and without fear of Gods protection, sing the 9 psalm.

68. If thou will sing on the Sabbath day* thou have the 92. psalm.

69. If thou will sing on the Sunday in meditation of Gods word, desiring to
be instructed therein, whereby thou may rest in Gods holy will, and cease
from all the works and doctrines of vain men, reuolue that notable psalm 119.

70 If thou will sing in the second day of the Sabbath, thou have the 95.
psalm.

71 If thou would sing to the Lord, thou have what to say in the 69.98.
psalms.

72 If thou will sing the fourth day of the Sabbath, sing the psalm. 94 for then
when the Lord was betrayed he began to take vengeance on death, and to triumph
of it: therefore when thou read the gospeil, where thou hear the Jews to
take council against the Lord, and that he stands bodily against the Devil,
then sing the foresaid psalm.

73 If thou will sing on Good Friday, thou have a commendation of the 63.
psalm, for then was the house of Gods Church builded and groundly founded,
though the enemies went about to hinder it for which cause sing to God the
songs of triumphant victory with the said psalm, and with the 98. and 129.
psalms.

74 If there be any captivity wherein thy house is laid wast, and yet builded
again, sing the 96. psalm.

75 If the land be vexed with enemies and after come to any rest by the power
of God, if thou will sing therefore, sing the 97 psalm.

76 If thou consideredst the providence of God in his governance so over all,
and wilt instruct any with true faith and obedience when thou have first
persuaded them to confess themselves, sing the 100 147. psalms.

77 If thou do acknowledge in God his judicial power, and that in judgment
he mixeth mercy, if thou will draw nigh unto him, thou have the words of the
101 psalm. to the end.

78 If for the imbicil^ty of thy nature, thou art weary with the continually
miser^e and griefs of this life, and would comfort thy self, sing the 102.
psalm.

79 If thou will give thanks to God, as it is most convenient and due for all
his gifts: when thou will so do, thou have how to rejoice thy soul thereunto
with the 103 and 104. psalms.

80 If thou will praise God, and also know how, and for what cause, and with
what words thou may do it, consider the 113, 117 13^ 1^6. 147. ^^8. 149. 150.
psalms.

81 I^ thou have faith to such things as God speaks, and beleeuest that
which in prayer thou vtterest, say the psalm 116. to the end.

82 If thou feel thy self to rise upward in degrees of well working, as
though thou said with S. Paul, I forget those things which be behind me,
and set mine eyes on things which be before me, thou have the 130. psalm.

83 If thou be holden in thraldom under straying and wandering thoughts, and
see thy self drawn by them, whereof thou art sorry, then stay thy self
from henceforth, and tarry where thou have sound thy self in fault, set thee
down, and mourn thou also as the Hebrew people did, and say with them the 137.
psalm.

84 If thou perceiuest that temptations be set to prove thee, thou ought
after such tentations to give God the thanks, and sing the 139. psalm.

85 If yet thou be in bondage by thine enemies, and would saine be delivered,
say the 140. psalm.

86 If thou would pray and make supplication, say the 141, 142, 143. psalms.

87 If any tyrannous enemy rise up against the people, fear you not, no more
then David did Goliath, but believe like David, and sing the 144 psalm.

88 If thou art elect out of long degree, specially before other, to some
vocation to serve thy brethren, advance not thy self too high against them in
thine own power, but give GOD the glory, who did choose thee, and sing thou the
11^. psalm

89 If thou will sing of obedience, praising God with Alleluia, thou have the
105. 106. 107. 111, 112. 113. 114. 115. 117. 135. 136. 146. 147. 148. 149. 150.
psalms.

90 If thou will sing specially of our Savior Christ, thou have of him in every
psalm, but most chiesly in the 25. 45. 100. psalms.

91 Such psalms as show his lawful generation of his father, and his
corporal presence, be the 11. 69 psalms.

92 Such as do prophecy before of his most holy Cross and passion, telling
how many deceitful assaults he sustained for us, and how much he suffered, be
the 2. 129. psalms.

93 Such as express the malicious enemies of the Jews, and the betraying of
Judas are the 21. 50. 55. 69. 72, 109. psalms.

94 Such as describe his agony in his passion, death and sepulture, be the 22.
28 psalms.

95 For his dominion and presence in the flesh, read the 116. ps.

96 Such as show the glorious resurrection of his body, be the 99 psalms.

97 Such as set out his ascension into heaven, are the 93. 96. 98 99 psalms.

98 And that he sits on the right hand of his Father, the ^10. psalm makes
manifest.

99 Such as show that he has authority of his father to judge expressing his
judicial power, both in condemning the devil, and al wicked Nations, are the
50. 72, 82, psalms.

Finis.
Veni Creator.
^ COme holy Ghost etrrnall God,
proceeding from above,
both from the Father and the Son,
the God of peace and love:
Visit our minds, and into us
thy heavenly grace inspire,
that in all truth and godliness,
we may have true desire.
Thou art the very Comforter
in all woe and distress:
The heavenly gift of God most high
which no tongue can express.
The fountain and the lively spring
of joy celestial:
The fire so bright, the love so clear
and unction spiritual.
Thou in thy gifts art manifold
whereby Christ's Church does stand
In faithful hearts writing thy law,
the finger of Gods hand:
According to thy promise made
thou give speech of grace:
That through thy help the praise of god
may stand in every place.
O Holy Ghost into our wits
send down thy heavenly light:
Kindle in our hearts with fervent love,
to serve God day and night.
Strength and stablish all our weakness
so feeble and so traile:
That neither flesh, the world nor Devil
against us do prevail.
Put back our enemies far from us,
and grant us to obtain:
Peace in our hearts with God and man,
without grudge or disdain.
And grant O Lord, that thou being
our leader and our guide:
We may eschew the snares of sin
and from that never slide.
To us such plenty of thy grace
(good Lord) grant we thee pray:
That thou may be our Comforter,
at the last dreadful day.
Of all strife and dissension
O Lord, dissolve the bands:
and make the knots of peace and love
throughout all Christian Lands.
Grant us O Lord through thee to know
the Father most of might:
That of thy dear beloved Son,
we may obtain the sight.
And that with perfect faith also
we may acknowledge thee,
The spirit of them both always,
one God in persons three.
Laud and praise be to the Father,
and to the Son equal:
and to the Holy spirit also,
one God coeternall.
And pray we that the only Son,
vouchsafe his spirit to send:
To all that do profess his name,
unto the worlds end.
The Humble suit of a Sinner.
M.
^ O Lord of whom I do depend
behold my careful heart,
and when thy will and pleasure is
release me of my smart:
Thou see my sorrows what they are,
my grief is known to thee
And there is none that can remove,
or take the same from me.
But only thou whose aid I crave,
whose mercy still is pressed:
To ease all those that come to thee
for succor and for rest.
And since thou see my restless eyes,
my tears and grievous groan:
attend unto my suit O Lord
mark well my plaint and moan.
For sin has so enclosed me,
and compast me about:
That I am now remeddilesse,
if mercy help not out.
For mortal man cannot release,
or nuttigate his pain:
But even thy Christ my Lord and God,
which for my sin was slain.
Whose bloody wounds are yet to see,
though not with mortal eye:
Yet do thy Saints behold them all,
and so I trust shall I.
Though sin does hinder me a while,
when thou shall see it good:
I shall enjoy the sight of him,
and see his wounds and blood.
And as thine Angels and thy Saints,
do new behold the same:
So trust I to possess that place,
with them to praise thy name.
But whilst I live here in this vale,
where sinners do frequent:
Assist me ever with thy grace
my sins still do lament.
Least that I tread in sinners trace,
and give them my consent:
To dwell with them in wickedness,
whereto nature is bent.
Only thy grace must be my stay,
least that I fall down flat:
And being down, then of my self
cannot recover that.
Wherefore this is yet once again
my suit and my request:
To grant me pardon for my sin,
that I in thee may rest.
Then shall my heart my tongue, and voice,
be instruements of praise:
and in thy Church and house of Saints
sing Psalms to thee always.
Venite exultemus. Psalm. xcv.
T. S.
Sing this as the Benedictus.
O Come and let us now rejoice,
and sing unto the Lord:
And to our only Savior,
also with one accord.
O let us come before his face
with inward reverence:
Confessing all our former sins,
and that with diligence.
To thank him for his venefits,
always destributing:
Wherefore to him right joyfully,
in psalms now let us sing.
And that because that God alone,
is Lord magnificent:
And eke above all other Gods,
a King omnipotent.
His people does not he forsake,
at any time or tide:
and in his hands are all the Coasts
of all the world so wide.
And with his loving countenance,
he looks every where:
and does behold the tops of all,
the mountains far and near.
The Sea and all that is therein
are his, for he them made:
And eke his hands has fashioned
the earth which does not fade.
O Come therefore and worship him
and down before him fall:
and let us kneel before the Lord.
the which has made us all.
He is our God, our Lord and King,
and we his people are:
His flock and Sheep of his pasture,
on whom he takes care:
This day if ye will hear his voice
then harden not your heart:
As in the bitter murmuring,
when ye were in desert.
Which thing was of their negligence
committed in the time
Of trouble in the wilderness,
a great and grievous crime.
Whereas your Fathers tempted me,
and tried me every way:
They proved me and saw my works
what I could do or say.
These forty years I have been grieved,
with all this generation:
And evermore I said they erred
in their imagination:
Wherewith their hearts were fore cumbred
long time and many days:
Wherefore I know assuredly,
they have not known my ways.
To whom I in mine anger swore,
that they should not be blessed,
Nor see my joy celestial:
nor enter in my rest.
Gloria Patri.
All laud and praise be to the Lord
O that of might art most,
To God the Father and the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost:
As it in the beginning was,
for ever heretofore,
And is now at this present time,
and shall be evermore.
The Song of Symeon, called Te Deum.
^ WE praise thee God we knowledge thee,
the only Lord to be:
And as eternal Father all
the earth does worship thee.
To thee all Angels cry the Heavens
and all the powers therein:
To thee Cherube and Seraphin
to cry they do not lin.
O holy, holy, holy, Lord,
of Sabbath Lord the God:
Throughout heaven and earth thy praise is spread,
and glory all abroad.
The Aposties glorious company
yield praises unto thee:
The Prophets goodly fellowship,
praise thee continually.
The noble and victorious host,
of Martyrs sound thy praise:
The holy Church throughout the world,
does knowledge thee always.
Father of endless Majesty
they do acknowledge thee:
Thy Christ thine honorable, true,
and only Son to be.
(...)
