THE most pleasante HISTORY, of ALBINO, and BELLAMA. A Poem. To which is
annexed the Vindication of Poesy. by NW.

London printed and are to be sold by Nicho: Fussell. 1639.

engraved title page

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT worthy, and truly ennobled Hero, JOHN, Lord
Loveliss, Baron of HURLEY, N.W. S.P.O.
THE Law-enactors, whilst time feared the rod.
Faign'd in their laws, the presence of a god,
Whose awful nod, and wisdom grave should b^
As hand and signet unto their decree.
And such commanding aw that sacred name
Struck in the vulgar breasts, it teen'd a flame
Of Love and duty to their pious hefts.
Thus Rhadamanthus in his laws invests
Him, whom prophaner times styled Heavens King.
Minos and others strike the selfsame string.
The Moral's mine: for in this quirking season
When pride and envy steer the Helm of reason,
It is, has with Presse-taskers been in use
To press the issue of their prose and Muse
Under the Ensigns of some worthy Peer,
Whose very name unsatyr can a jeere,
And lock detraction up in beds of clay
To sleep their suns as Reare-mice do the day.
Then do they bravely march with honor armed,
Which, as the gods, the people, charmeth, charmed,
On this known priveledge feet I these lines,
In which, though dimmer then your native, shines
Your worth, en-fired by my kneed quill,
Which claims the scale not of deserts, but will,
In your acceptance and the worlds surmise
Then Cynicks bark and Critckes beam your eyes.
My quill's no pensill to emblason forth
Your stainlesse honor and your matchless worth,
As dust-borne flies, which 'bout the candle play
Glide through its arch, en-circle, fan, survay,
Wink at the presence of days beamy blaze,
Pur on the glass, or on hearb-pillowes laze,
Just so my downy Muse in Distiques dare
Feet the perfection of a silklesse fair
Pumex each parr so trimly that her foe
Swears her cheeks roses and her bosom snow,
Nay has strewed flowers of desertlesse praise
TO adorn the Tomb of good Sr worthy Crayse,
Under this (ah me) stone is laid (alas!)
A man, -- a knight -- the best that ever was
His prowess war, his wisdom state did prove,
His kindness kindred, and the world his love.
But when she should with her weak feathers soar
To court a star, or with her feeble oar
Strike such a sea of worth, ride honors ring.
She dares not touch, or snaffle, sail or wing,
Only as he which limbed those tears and sighs,
Which Iphigenias death, from hearts and eyes
Of kindred drew, but ore her father's brow
(Telling the world he mournd without an how,)
He drew a veil spoke sorrow in excess,
So with a -- must my muse express
Your sacred worth, concluding it to be
Too high for any Bard, if not, for me,
Beside, the world of late has nicknam'd praise
Calls it an elbow-claw and scraping bays,
Then pardon (Sir) this dearth, and judge the why
Is your worth soared above Parnasse's eye
Let not your slights or nescio's (though most just)
Condemn my muse to be en-seild with dust,
Nor let presumption hoyste to your embrace
But rather let your honor bate its place
And stoop unto my measures, since the name
Of Patron awes often times the breath of fame
And by this honor shall you ere en-gage
The knee, hand. duty, air and thriving age.
Of your honors ever humbly devoted, N. W.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader: For to such I write,
With native candor view this checkred white,
Be truly eandid to a candidate,
Whom importunings force to ante-date
The travails of his quill, and like a grape
Ere ripened, press it, yet if I escape
The censure of these times, this Critic age,
My Muse (like Parrats) in a wire cage
Shall not do penance; but I Will not promise it,
Cause't does too much oth' lips of greatness sit.
And it is a fault for me to sympathize,
I bring no anticke mask in strange disguize,
No sharp invective, nor no Comic mirth,
Which may to laughter give an easy birth.
Though it is in use with them that seek to please
These humorous times (it being a disease
half Epidemicall, to keep a phrase
Or fancy at staves end, naught merits praise,
Unless with quibbels every staff does end,
Conceited jests, which unto lightness tend)
Though every page swells with ingenuous ^lots,
Yet cry our carpes, the Authors are but sots.
An Elbow-pillow or a motley coat,
With them are now the chiefest men of note,
But I, nor am, nor hope that name to gain,
Of Panto mimick yet did nature daigne,
The Optic glass of Humors to descrye,
Each man's rank humor only by the eye,
I would have tuned my Muse, that every page,
Might swell with humors suting to this age,
This leaf should talk of love, and that of state,
This, of alarums, that of wonders prate.
This of Knights Errante, of Enchantement that,
This to the itching ears of nouels chat,
But -- since my starved Fortunes mist that, I have drawn
A picture shadowd ore with double lawne,
Lest some quick Lyncist with a pearcirg eye,
Should the young footsteps of a truth espy,
Yet something I confess was borne of late,
(Which makes me age it with an ancient date,
But let no antick-hunter post to Stow,
To trace out truth upon his even snow,
Annalls are dumb of such and such a Lord,
Nor of our amorous pair speak half a word,
Monastic writs do not Bellama lim
Nor Abbey-roules do teeme a line of him,
This story has no syres (as it is the use)
But weak invention, and afeeble Muse,
These are the parents, that abortive birth
Give to this Embrion of desired mirth,
Which in the authors name, does humbly crave
A charitable censure or agrave,
The purest-boulted sloure that is, has bran.
Venus her Naeue, Helen her stain, nor can,
I think these lines are censure-free, empalde,
By th'muses, and against envyes Iavelins mal'd,
Yet where the faults but whisper, use thy pen
With the quod non vis of the Heathen men.
And if the crimes do in loud Echoes speak
Thy sponge, but not with lashing Satyrs break
That sacred bond of friend ship, for t'may be
I may hereafter do as much for thee,
Nor do thou think to trample on my Muse,
Nor in thy lofty third-ayre braves accuse
My breast of faintness or the ballad-whine,
For know my heart is full as big as thine,
And as pure fire heates my octavo bulk
As the grand-folio, or the Reamish bulk
If but opposed with envye but unless
I truly am what these few words express,
Thy ready Friend, N. W.

TO THE RIGHT virtuous and equally beautiful, Sra Inconstanza Bellarizza.
FAIREST,
WHEN by much gazing on those glittering beams,
Which (if unmaskt) from days bright Henchman streams,
The Rascians eyes do gain the curse of years,
The Load-stones swarfie hue their tapers cleares.
When Unicorns have gluts or surfets taine
By browsing Lycoras, they to regaine
Their stomachs, and a cure, crash bitter grass:
I leave the application, it is a glass
Wherein the dimmest eye may plainly see
What Is due to me from you, to you from me.
But -- I Will only tell the world, that for your sake
My willing Muse this task did undertake
At hours of recreation, when a thought
Of your choice worth this, and this fancy brought.
Some to the bar will call the truth hereof,
Some wonder why? some pass it by, some scoff,
Because in this full harvest of your sex,
I'mongst such thousands gleane your name t'annex
Unto, and usher in these wanton verses,
Some will be apt to think my pen rehearses
Love passions' twixt your self and some choice he,
(The world I know will not suspect it is me)
And that I age it, lest quick eyes should see;
But in this thought I Am silent, thoughts are free.
Indeed your worth does just proportion hold
With this high worth which of Bellama's told,
And well my knowledge can inform my pen
To raise a spite in women, love in men.
And if the Fates befriend me, that my thread
Out-measures yours (your worth asleep, not dead,
For such worth cannot dye) I then will say,
You equald her, and was -- (but truth away)
If these, dull melancholy, grief, or sleep,
From any prone thereto, at distance keep,
Let unto you their tribute thanks be paid,
For my invention by your worth was rayd,
My fancy raised, enliv'ned and enspir'd,
That my quick Muse my agill hand has tired,
Nay more, me thinks I might unchidden call
You, subject, object of this Poem all,
And all in this acknowledgement may trim,
You pros'd this Poem, but 'twas versed by him
Who styles himself your servant, N. W.

THE AUTHORS APOLOGY.
SOme rigid Stoic will (I doubt not) shoot:
A quipping censure at this wanton fruit,
And say, I better might have used my tallants,
Than t'humour Ladies, and perfumed gallants.
Know such, that pamphlets writ in meeter, measure:
As much invention, judgment, wit, as pleasure,
All learning's not locked up in si's and tum's.
Roses, Pinkes, Violets, as well as gums,
Some native fragour have to equal Civet,
Minerva does not all her treasures rivet
Into the scrues of Obs and Sols: but we
Are sea-borne birds, and as our pedigree
Came sailing ore from Normandy and Troy,
So we must have our pretty Ermine joy.
One part Italian, and of French the other,
Stout Belgia be her Sire, and Spain her mother.
So our apparel is so strange and anticke,
That our great grand-syres sure would call us frantic
And should they see us on our knees for blessing,
They Would scue aside, as frighted at our dressing.
We pack so many Nations up, that we
We are Spain in waste, and France below the knee.
Thus are our backs affected, and indeed
Our brains do travaie with the selfsame meed.
Wee're Chaldees, Hebrews, Latins, Greeks, and yet
But few pure Englishmen are lapt in Iet.
We scorn our mother language, and had rather
Say Pater noster twice, than once Our Father.
This makes our Pulpits Linsey-wolsey stut,
When buskind stages in stiff satin strut.
Nay clownes can say, this Parson knows enough,
But that his language does his knowledge blough:
Is it not time to polish then our Welsh,
When Hindes and Peasants such invectives belch?
Then English bravely study, it is no shame
For grave Divines to win an English same.
I Have heard a worthy man approved for learning,
Say, that in Plays and Rithmes we may be earning
Both wit and knowledge, and that Sidney-prose
Out-musickes Tully, if it escape the nose
Then purged from gall (ingenuous friends) peruse,
And though you chide the Author, spare the Muse.
N.W.

The Author to his Book.
Go gall-lesse infant of my teeming Quill,
Not yet bedewd in Syracusa's rill,
And like a forward Plover gadst abroad,
Ere shell free, or before full age has strowd
On thy smooth back a co^te of feathers,
To arm thee against the force of weathers,
Doomd to the censure of all Ages,
Ere m^l'd against the youngest rages,
Perchance some Nobles will thee view,
Smile at thee, on thee, like thee new,
But when white age has wrinkled thee,
Will slight thy measures laugh at me,
At first view called pretty,
And perchance styled witty
By some Ladies, until thou
Wearest surrowes on thy brow.
Some plumed G^llants, may
Vnclasp thy leaves and say,
Thou Art mirthful, but er^ long
Give place unto a Song.
Some courteous Scholar
Turg'd from all choler,
May like, but at last,
Say thou spoylst his t^st,
First, Lawyers whl
Commend thy skill,
Last, throw thy wit
With Trin^ts writ
Chamber she is
On their knees
will thee praise,
and thy bays,
At first,
till thirst
of new
death you,
then all
men shall
Flee
thee
Be
me.
THis is thy doom, I by prophetic spirit,
Presage will be the guerdon of my merit:
Yet be no Burre, no trencher-flye, nor hound,
To fawn on them whose tongs thy measures wound.
Nor beg those niggards eyes, who grudge to see
A watch unwinded in perusing thee.
And if state-scratchers do condemn thy jests,
For ruffling sattens, and bespangled vests,
Tell them they are cosend, and in vain they puff,
Thou neither aim'st at halfe-ell band or ruff;
And if thy lines perchance some Ermins gash,
It Is not thy fault, it was no intended lash.
Thy pensill limbs Don Fuco's portraicture,
And only do his native worth immure
Within these tilick rindes: nor is thy rage
Against the Cow lists of this youngest age.
Thy rithmes cry Pax to all, nor do thou scatter
Abuses on their shrines, their Saints, or water;
And if some civil Satyr lash thee back,
Because he reads my title, sees my black,
Answer in the Poets phrase, and tell them more,
My tale of years had scarce out-sum'd a score
When my young fancy these light measures meant
The Press: but Fate since canceld that intent,
Nor claimed the Church as then a greater part
In me than others, bate my title Art --
But now the scean is changed? confessed it is
Must we abjure all youth, borne, bury this?
Such closet death's desertlesse, in this glass
Read not what now I am, but then I was:
In this reflection may the gravest see
How true we suite, I, this, and this with me.
These thorns picked out, whose venom might have bred
A gangtene in thy Reader, struck thee dead,
Thou may perhaps invited be to court,
And have a brace of smiles t'approve thy sport.
Those, whose grave wisdoms, Wise do them entitle
(Whose learned nods loud ignorance can stifle)
Some of times numbers on thy lines will scatter,
If not called from thee by some higher matter,
Laugh out a rubber, like, and say it is good
For pleasure, youth and leisure, wholesome food.
Some jigging Silk-canary, newly bloomed,
When he is crisped, bathed, oyld, perfumed,
(Which till the second chime, will scarce be done)
Upon thy feet will make his chrystals run,
Commend the author, vow him service ever,
But from such things his Genius him deliver.
Some sleeked Nymphs, of country, city, court,
Will, next their Dogs and Monkies, like thy sport,
Smile, and admire, and wearied will (perhaps)
Lay thee to sleep encurtaind in their laps,
Oh happy thou! who would not wish to be
(To gain such dainty lodging) such, or thee?
Say, to please them, the Poet undertook
To make thee from a sheet thrive to a book,
And if he has to beauty given a gem,
He challenges a deck of thanks from them:
And if some winning creature smile on thee,
She shall his L. and his Bellama be.
Betwixt eleven and one, some pro and con
Will snatch a fancy from thee, and put on
A glove or ring of thine to court his less,
Twixt Term and Term, when they are turned to grass.
Some Titius will lay by his wax and books,
And nim a phrase to bait his amorous hooks.
But stay, I shall be chid, me thinks I hear
A censure spread its wings to reach my ear.
Tell me I am conceited: then no more,
Go take thy chance, I turn thee out oth' door.
Mart. ad lib. suum. Epig. 4. Aetherias lascive cupis volitare per auras, I,
fuge, sed poter as tutior esse domi.

Mart. lib. 4. Sivis auribus Aulicis probari
Exhortor, moneoque te libelle,
Vt docto place as Apollinari,
Nam si pectore te tenebit ore,
Nec ronchos metues maligniorum
Nec scombris tunicas dabis molestas
Et cum carmina floridis Camoenis,
Litesque, gloriam canas poetum
Non est pollicom capitis veraris.
To his loving friend the Author.
TO laud thy Muse, or thee, to crown with prayse'
Is but to light my Tapers to the rays
Of gold-lookt Phoebus, since the Scheame
Of fabled truth, thy waking, seeming dream;
Thy ever-living-loving fame in Arts,
Of Arts, to us in whole and part imparts.
In Arts, thy judgment, phrase, invention,
Of Arts, thy Poets Vindication.
In mourning Elegies I admi'd thy skill,
In mirthfull Lays we now admire thy quill.
Let Albine, Bellame, by thee live in fame,
Riv'lezzo, Beldame Pazza live in shame.
Lash on and slash the vice of shaved crowns,
In thy Bardino, Nuns, and Sylvane clownes.
Give virtue beauty, beauty desert and praise,
And that thy Monument of Brass shall raise.
To the Reader.
REader take heed, complain not of the sting,
Lest others of thy galled sores do sing.
No faulty person, partie-here is meant,
Only the vice oth'age and place is shent.
He that expounds it of himself, does show
Some guilty fault, or vice from him does flow,
If touched to th'quick, conceal and them amend,
So against thee shall all scourging Satyrs end.
William Purisey Rector Ecclesiae de Markefield.

To his loving Kinsman the Author.
WHen first I viewd the travailes of thy quill,
I liked, approved, admired thy nimble skill,
In sudden raptures, phansies, judgment, phrase,
Invention, quickness, life, detraction, praise,
So that I favored their conceit which faignd
The soul to be an harmony, and raignd,
Amongst the senses with accounts and measures.
All which thy lofty Poesy en-treasures,
That quaintest warblers cannot with delight
Out-worth the Poet in his Lyrick height,
As those which with quick eyes where judgment sits,
Thy Vindication of Poetic wits
Do read, may see, whose swelling meeters teach
All Aliens such high English, that to reach
Is harder than to like, or belch forth scandals,
Witness thy journey, Somnus, Morpheus, Sandals,
The Orbs, Gods, Muses, Critickes, accusation,
The Poets names, employments, vindication,
These silenced my pen, it dared no more
Till voyc't by thy Bellame again, her store
Of suitors, one approved by Friends, not her
Rivelezzo's wrath (wherein most Parents err)
Her grief, encloystring, entertainment high,
Albino's heart and hers met in their eye,
Their whispring, dalliance, Piazzella's care,
Pardino's falsehood, their affections rare,
Her dif-encloystring: and his Nunning plot,
The Nuns thick bellies, his repentant grot,
His freedom, flight, encountering with his Saint,
His conjuration, prodegics, and plaint,
The Shepherd lout, Bellama's second quest,
His Ghosting, coming from the Elizian rest.
Their parles, his dis-enghosting, her denyals,
His rage, her kindnsse, both their loves and trials,
Conrades immuring, Piazzlla's fury,
His freedom, Foppo, and his Monkish Jury,
The Lovers Alehouse cheer, bed, course apparel,
The Monks strict quest, their finding, mirth and quarrel,
Their escape, fear, Raddle, kinsman, and at length
Their nuptial Tede, when malice lost its strength.
How thou have shown (dear cooz) thy Art in Arts.
Let them express who brag of abler parts
Than I, which have a bigger part in thee,
Thy love, and blood, till Being cease to be.
JOHN WHITING. Master of Arts, Clare-Hall, Camb.

Amicosuo charissimo N. W. hujus Poematis authori Collegii Regnalis Canta, in
artibus magistro.
PAN petat Arcadiam Druides effundite cantus,
Et juvenes flores spargite, Bardus adest.
Tu qui struxisti memoranda Trophaea Poesi,
Dicere multatibi nescio, nolo nihil
Vota, preces, calamus, cor, carmen, singula, lauds,
Vltro perdignas, concelebrare siudent.
An decus ingenium, tua laus, tua facta perilunt.
Dignum laud virum musa perire vetat
Corpore defuncto te candida musa sequetur,
Admiratur opus, primitiasque tuas
Fata precor, faustae plectant tua stamina vitae,
Vt scribas opera plurima dignatua.
IACOBUS BERNARD sacrosanctae and individuae Trinitatis Collegii in artibus
magister.

In Authorem, amicissimum suum, Encomiasticon.
THE privilege that pen and paper find
Amongst men, falls short, reflecting to the mind.
Virtue herself, no other worth displayes,
Than eankred censure, leaves behind, as rays.
But mental Cabonets, are they, that yield
No forfiture to battring Critickes shield.
If thoughts might character deserts, I dare
Challenge my peasill for the largest share:
But when the Vultures of our age must gnaw,
I Will cease for modesty, and say, it is law.
It Is safer far, to fail of debt, than t^be
Soaring in terms that badge of slattery.
I hate the name, and therefore freely give
My verdict thus, as may have power to live
Against calumny. If wit and learning may
Pass with applause, the author has the day.
Crowned be those brows with everlasting Bays,
Whose worth a pattern is to future days.
It Is not a Poem dropped from strength of grape,
That Is debtor to the wines inspiring sap,
He to himself alone. Cease urging, earth,
The father well deserve, so fair a birth.
And if a witness may be lawful, then
I Will undertak't shall fear no vote of men.
But where-in Artis bold it self to glory
Is that which crowns the verge of Whitings story.
Io. Resse.

To his friend, a Panagericke upon his lovers Albino and Bellama.
THough I have vowed a silence, and as yet
Resolved not to travel out in jet,
Chiefly in Print, yet your intending press
Makes me, my thoghts with courage, language, dress
With smooth straind meeter, that the world may know
My strict engagements, and how much I owe
To you your worth, which may command a line,
From him which swears against all, but what is divine,
The highness of your slile, the quickness, life,
Will in judicious readers raise a strife,
(More than the Ball amongst th'engoddest three)
Which gains the best, but all are best by me,
Matchless in my conceit: add then to these
The neatness of your plots, and swear a please
To the grim Stoic, and the Satyr'd brow
Forces delight, through strictness, neatness, vow,
Grow abler still in fancy, impe thy quill,
Write any thing, if something, fear not ill,
If poesy be thus revenged by thy dream,
How will it flourish when'ts thy morning theme?
Sleeping or waking, let us have thy quill,
And sleep and Vigils shall admire thy skill.
I. Pickering.

THE PLEASING HISTORY OF ALBINO AND BELLAMA.
WHen British I sles begirt with moistened sand
Neptunes blew palace, and the Tritons walk,
Albania hight, her name who first did land
Of all the Sisters, or from rocks of chalk
From sad oppression had unyoakt their necks,
And paid obedience unto Adell's beckes.
Then in those Halcyon days of peace and joy,
Avercuous Lady most transcendent creature,
Fairer then her whose beauty cyndar'd Troy;
Grace decked her mind, her mind grace her feature,
So that each part made Helen out of date,
And every grace a goddess could create.
Virtue and beauty both in her did strive
Which should in worth and grace surpass the other,
Nor age of consistency, both did thrive
Fill this Dian' out-rayde, that Cupids mother.
Nay men by beams of her clear beauty might
Scale Titans Chariot, and out-ray his light.
Amongst Natures precious things we find a jem,
Blushed and purpled ore with Amathistes,
Which fiery Carbuncles with sparkles hem,
And which the Emrauldes purest vert entwists,
Meeting so well that Lapidaries wist,
'Twas Emraulde, Carbuncle and Amathist.
So in this precious Pair, pure Agathite,
Aurora's purpling blush was clearly seen,
Saba's bright Rose, and Leda's Swan-like white,
The true proportion of Adoms Queen.
Blended so well, that in this curious frame,
Aurora, Saba, Leda, Venus came.
And as the hony-making waxen thigh'de
Inhabitants of Hyblaes fragrant vailes,
Whom only Natures dim instinct does guide,
Choose their commander with their tunefull hailes,
Pay homage, honor him, and fear his frowns,
With same observance, as the people, Crowns.
So by the same instinct the blushing Rose,
Veiled bonnet to her cheeks admired red,
The Lillyes to her bosom, brow and nose,
The Phoenix stripped her self to Crown her head:
The chirping Choristers with willing choice,
Sat silent to admire her warbling voice.
Persum'd Arahia with her Spice and Gummes,
Paid homage to the odours of her lips;
To her with fawning postures, lickes and hummes,
The yellow Lion and the Tiger skips:
Fire dares not scorch her face, nor winter chill her
And death himself looked pale when called to kill her
The amorous Sun if she walked out by day
Would vein his jennets to behold her face,
And wrapped in admiration, by his stay
Had rather melt the Orbs than mend his pace;
And if the middle Air in walls of jet
Enjoyde his beams, he thawed into wet.
If in the reign of silent night, abroad
She ranged, the Empress of the lowest Sphere
Amazed at her perfections, left her road,
And ranged about, where she appeared to appear
Nay mournd in darkness if denide her sight,
As when days Hanchman does deny her light.
The curled capers of the Firmament
Did cease to twinke, but gazed with fixed eyes,
In their own Orb refusing to be pent,
And strove to leap upon the lower skies:
Nay did oth' second Air like Comets hang
To dart their crispes at beauties only spang.
The Sea-borne Planet popped out her Lamp,
And to see her ^elie out-shind by her, did rage,
The marching War-god did remoove his camp,
With fair Lady Curtain war to wage:
Hermes by Jove being of an errand sent,
Stayed on her face, in her embraces pent.
Dull-aged Saturn (on whose sullen brow
Nere dwelt a Smile since love usurpt his Crown)
To gaz^ on her his wai^ here head did bow,
And with a smile un plaited every frown;
Nay love himself descended from his chair
To take a ^ull survay of this -- this fair.
And more, her winning looks disperc'd such charms
All eyes commanding, and all hearts surprising,
That Venus bad her Son provide him arms,
Fearing his setting by this bright Stars rising:
For though men say loves eyes are more then dim
Yet her fair beauty did enlighten him.
But with entreaties he had beat the Air,
And on the Tawney-moore his waters cast;
For having pow're to conquer, being fair,
Sh'ad pow're not to be conquered, being chaste:
So that his amorous sleights and winged arrow
Could not have op't her breast o^ pierced her marrow.
This Phoenix was Bellama called (a word
Well fuiting her deserts) she daughter was
And heir apparent to a wealthy Lord,
Who had more acres, then an acre, grass:
He loved his lands, and hugd his minted treasure,
Yet his Bellama was his soul of pleasure.
His place of residence was in a Chase
Checkquerd with thick-growne thorns and sturdy oaks,
Wherein majestic Stags and Buckes did pace
That scornd the hounds, and dard the barbed strokes;
'Twas called Riuelount, not distant far
From Starley, of that shire, the metro-Star.
The neighboring swains were pauld with coaches thunder,
And loud curvaitings of their foaming Steeds,
Whose irond hoofes did crash the rocks in sunder,
Happy was he, who (sheathed in costly weeds)
Could win admission to this happy place,
Where Natures wealth was locked up in a face.
Each glance she sent the object did engem,
And he that wan a smile possessd a mine,
A hair was prized at a Diadem,
A ribban made the tread the ecliptic line;
A ring outface a thunder, but a kiss
Was the elixar, heart and soul of bliss.
Some, of their lands, some, of their valors spoke
Some, of their Falcons and their merry bells;
Some, read the price of such a fuite and cloak,
And one of hounds and running horses tells;
All speak of something, yet but few with wit,
All aimed at wise, yet few could purchase it.
Some spoke in oaths, as if they thought the earth
Was peopled ore with faithless infidells,
Another swore, because he feared a dearth
Of other Language, yet in oaths excells:
All swear enough, and he that did it least
Might be grand swearer at Ven- Bacchus feast.
Others there were that could not bigly prate,
Who did their evidences bring with them;
One brought his halls to plead, one his estate,
This brought a Watch to court and that a Gem;
One brought a large descent white and black,
Which derived from old Pergams Sack.
One brought a reverent Sire, whom he called Father,
To be the tongue of his reserved Son;
Others with much expense of wax did gather
Some printed Rimes to speak when they were gone^
All had their speakers which unclasp'd their graces,
Yet their court-language dwelt on plaits and places.
One of these Suitors was appr^ov'de to be
A match whose thousands aequr balanced hers,
The parents often would say, this shall be he,
The mother then a bill of love prefers.
But still Bellama faults, and vows, that gold
Shall never force her love to have and hold,
The testy Father with a furrowed brow
Comes to Bellama with demanding why?
Says mine own girl thou must be ruled now,
Each tener pays duty to Don Fuco's eye:
And age well knows Bean-mannours, lands and treasures
Do cement lovers hearts, and enjoy their pleasures,
Thou must not Wench be coy, alas! we find
Beauty as easily bought when money bids,
(Though It be reh' Non-such of the female kind,
As Horse or Cow, the Lamb, or frisking Kids:
If he be rich, we bear his witless brags,
A wealthy foole's more worth then witty rags.
Bellama with a look fraught with disdain,
(Though hatred did not make her anger bold)
Says Sir, I Am sorry you do entertain
Such high conceits of folly hemde with gold:
Think you no marriage good if equal lands
Be not match-makers and do join their hands.
Don Fuco has ten thoussand pounds a year,
With weighty titles would oreloade a Mule,
A piece of Arras finely wrought and dear;
But does he square his life to vertu's rule?
With vice, as wealth to count-lesse sums he thriues
But is, in virtue, full as poor, as wives.
He knows to steer an horse, and holloe hounds,
But not to guide his actions, less his tongue:
He speaks in state, but every sentence sounds
Of Comic fragments, or some Tavern song.
And shall I him, hailed by unworthy pelf,
Take to rule me, who cannot rule him self?
Shall I see other female vessels thrive
With mine own Nectar, and they fee'd with money,
Whilst I, like careful Be, do keep my hive,
And work the comb for them to suck the honey?
No, I Will no sharers have in my delight,
I Will have it one, and only, else good night,
It Is a fine thing to see a Satin paint
That fears to loose her beauty in a press,
That only cares to be precisely quaint,
And spends a twelve-months pleasure on a dresser,
To see this stroke his honor, and he clip her,
Span every part, and unresisted lip her.
But I do not in a rank humor rail
Against sober purples, and discreeter robes,
Nor lock up virtues in the paper-jayle
With Ink-hornes, Pens, Spheres, Globes and Albo-globes,
Religion on my heart does love en-neale
To those bright Tapers of our Commonweal.
Yet where, in stead of state, proud looks do dwell,
Where wit and wisdom are unlockt with oaths,
Courte-ship and comeliness are in the shell,
And honor only sits upon the clothes.
Pardon, if unto such I plait my brow,
And steer my thought unto a virgine-vow.
Fie, says the father, you are a foolish girl,
Against Ermins with that heightened spleen to rail,
Do think there is vice and folly in an Earl?
Then virtue sure does penance in the jayle.
To kiss and sport with us is held no sin,
If that our dalliance do not pass the skin.
Perchance it is not a point of state to have
To large a stock of wisdom in this age,
The Epithete to greatness is not grave;
Those that the Muses in their celles incage,
Let them speak oil and civet: but we are Lords
Can speak by signs, and not expres't by words,
Wherefore do we to Sable give the room,
And greater numbers far of Adels stampes,
Then to our Stewart, or our Ladies groom,
'Cause with reproofs he our choice pleasures damps?
No, cause indedications he should name us,
And by some witty pamphlet make us famous.
Our moral virtues are no guiding rule
To high Nobility, or looking glass,
No more then t'earth the ne plus ultra's Thule,
As before America was found, it was.
It Is fit for those, whose bosome-friends are lice,
To know the pain, not sweet delights of vice.
Do see you' tender webs Arachne spins,
Through which with ease the lusty Bum bles break,
But to the feeble gnats that mesh their gins,
So those sage precepts which our Sophies speak,
Fetter the passions of each worthless slave;
But over us no sovereign awe they have.
My Lord, the name of Father strikes, quoth she,
An awful dread, and makes my ear obey,
Yet slip my duty down unto the knee,
And in my silent thoughts, check, chide, and say,
Can they that taste forbidden waters, thrive?
My chaste demeanor I will never survive.
To Avoid the doom of -- therefore I Will make choice,
Of one, whose virtue outs all love to vice,
Not those sleek skins which amorous are in voice,
Lip-love, which as soon borne, dies in a trice.
Our loves reciprocal shall be still dust,
Which into exile packes unlawful lust.
As they discourst, Don Fuco entredi^,
With stately garbes besitting such an one,
His body shelled in a Satin skin
Of a zure dye, bestar'd with Topaz stone,
A milk white Bover, with an Ostrich plume,
His very rowels spoke a loud perfume.
Having composed his hinged looks, he glanced
With piercing eyes upon her curious face,
And steeping sighs in tears and sweat, advanced
Himself to plead with courtly garb and grace.
But Fucus lead by most mimetick Apes,
Could not depinge Don Fuco's antic shapes.
Such were the postures of his hands and eye,
That had he treasured up his mirthfull tones,
They were ingredients for a Comedy,
Would into laughter change a widows groans
And since that time ( Bellama smiled so then)
Love in her dimpled cheeks has found a den.
Madam, says he, be pleased to trutinate,
And wisely weigh your servants graceful voice,
Give due attendance to the airs of state,
I have engraven you Don Fuco's choice.
Give free assent, and let the scornful no
Be quite expunged from the Chrisse. cross row.
Alas, IN me not beholding unto letters,
Wherewith our Rabbis stuff their swelling books,
I have a way of complementing better,
To win thy love with comely garbes and looks.
And if these fail, the name of Countess will
Speak with a power above the Sidney-skill.
I hate long-winded sentences, which do
Vnbreath a man, and hazard much his bellows,
Or pocket-flashes, which instruct to woo,
The only virtues of some Ink-horne fellows.
I scorn their trothes, indods, their ifs or ands.
Or their O Lord sir, when their wit's oth' sands.
A fluent Rascal that can speak in oil,
And cloth his words with silken eloquence,
I know may give a virgin strength the foil.
But a blunt Earl, that scarcely speaks in sense,
Whom thousands honor with the cap and leg,
Beats down a Fortress like a Roaring Meg.
He needs no Roscian language, but does send
His velvet-coated Herald to proclaim
The noble Titles which his worth attend:
For honor is the ambitious Ladies aim.
Feature and spiced words but lead the Van,
Honor the Front, the Noble is the Man.
My Lord, says she, your valor I approve,
That with three Selves thus warranteth your suit.
With Self-conceit, Selfe-confidence, Self-love,
Such trees will bear your Lordship glorious fruir,
It well befits your greatness not to think,
There can denyals dwell in air or ink.
Your trencher-clokes, and your Recognizance,
Your coat of Arms with noble Ermines dight,
Your Russian Satin, with the cut of France,
Your talking rowels, and your feathred white,
Are battring rams, and guns, that speak in thunder,
To crack a breast, and split a heart in funder.
But my mind is, Diana's chastest seat,
Over which the breath of greatness has no power,
The quiver-bearing boy sounds are treat,
And Jove availes not with his yellow shower,
The vestall fire ou^-shines blind Cupids flame,
Which oft's eclipsed with sorrow, dampt with shame.
And, troth, my Lord, had I but wit enough,
T'assist your Lordship in your nuptial tede,
Your Lordship should not play at blind man's blough,
(Else heavens should renounce their Ganimede)
For they that purblinde are, may plainly see,
You grossly hoodwinkt are in courting me.
The faults of state I cannot Virtues name,
And bear my self upon the wings of pride,
Nor light my Taper at another flame,
Or use the Art at beanties eventide.
I brook not dalliance, or the Venus kiss,
That way of am'rousnesse, or that, or this.
I cannot seal a welcome with an oath,
To those whose absence I had rather have,
Nor venture hundreds at that paper-sloath
Of Mistress Isbel and the Pennell-knave.
I know no masking postures, nor with grace,
Can tread the Brawles, or true Currantoe pace.
I cannot at the feast of riot sit,
When sea, land, air, are served up in plate,
Nor like Tripherus, with a carving wit,
Read precepts this and this to dissecate,
Nor in dear Murrin charged to the brim,
Health it about until our mullets swim.
I do not love to have my husband be
Discreet by Proxee's, by his Chaplains wise,
Nor do I like the too much cringing knee,
Whose formal bends his black conceits disguise.
Those fawning sharkes I cannot call to table,
Which into Ermins change your Lordships sable.
To have my usher press his masters saddle,
In my opinion cannot pass for good,
I do not love to have my pillow addle,
Mean while my woman lets your Lordship blood.
I am no Androgyne, nor do delight
To diet Pages, or your Catamit.
Madam, what passion does untune your mind?
What fiend (says he) in you thus rails on greatness?
Who viceth honor, lies, and he is blind
That says Court-sattens are not trimd with neatness.
Speak then in Balmes, forget the peevish, why?
And to the Will thou have this? -- answer I.
No, no, says she, yet might I know your Saint,
If my endeavors can advantage you,
With your endowments I would her acquaint,
And limb your rare perfections in her view.
In this one act I may my self approve
More loving, then in entertaining love.
I Will say with what dexterity you can
Run over the postures of the court-salute,
How trimly you can kiss a Ladies Fan,
And neatly manage an embroydred suit.
How finely Spanish leg-shells you can plaite,
And tune your rowels at the court retraite.
I might say you are witty, if 't be true,
That jests and gingles are in brotherhood,
I Will speak your skill in Hawks, at flight in mue,
And at all hunting ceremonies good:
How gracefully you wave your gallant plumes,
And deeply are engaged to deep perfumes.
How kind you are unto our chamber-shees,
How to our Marmosets and trencher-pages,
How oylie-fingerd unto supple knees,
How feign to th'musick of our wire cages,
How quaintly you supply the Vshers room,
How sweetly you can act the privy-groome.
Much more in blazoning your matchless worth,
And counting all your specials, might I say
But nature never a second did bring forth,
Which to such known perfections can say nay.
I Will cease to praise them, lost my praises make
Your veins of pride with self-conceit to ache.
I will perform what I have promised, Sir,
Please you t'impart your Lady to my maid,
I see my words your liver-wort does stir
Into your face, which in your channels straid.
No more of trouble then, my Lord adieu.
This courteous door divorceth me and you.
Away flings she, and leaves my Lord alone,
More pen sive then a widow, which bedewes
Her husbands corpse with tears, a woman's moan,
Or then the Lupa of diseased stews:
So that who saw his jigging head would swear,
Wisdom nor wit did never inhabit there.
Don Riuelezzo sent a smiling glance,
That they might his consent read in his eye;
But seeing Fuco in a stupid trance,
He was possessed with equal phrentezy,
The mother came to the rescue, and well nigh
Sent her own wit to bear theirs company.
Feign would he tell the cause of his disasters,
And eagerly her parents strove to know it,
Yet strangely, them this passion over-masters,
That neither they could ask, nor he could show it,
As though an Incubus with vaprous throngs,
Enclaspt their bosoms, and un-voyc'd their tongues.
Ar length Don Fuco cried, Bellama cruel,
What evil planet revelld at thy birth,
Or what incensed god provided fuel
To make me feel hells tortures upon earth?
Was there no way to punish me for sin,
But by a maid? No, there our woes begin.
When I with admiration viewed her face,
I boldly durst give any tongue the lie,
That dared to say, with such supernall grace
There dwelt one Atom of this tyranny.
But -- if that virgins Hierogliphicks be
Of love and mildness, take them all for me.
I Will make a casement with this steely blade,
In my full breast, through which my soul shall peep,
And make my heart in sanguine liquor wade,
And intrals all in juice of liver steep.
Nay, straightway give hells Ferry-man his pay,
For wafting me over black Cocytus Bay.
Or unto Proscrpine I Will post a sprite,
To setch m'a cup of moist oblivion,
Wherewith the Fairy Queen exiled quite
Fury from her stout knight, and Oberon,
That I not only may forget disgrace,
But quite forget I ever saw her face.
Let not, says Rinelez, a peevish girl,
Hang fetters on your heart, untune your soul:
Dwells there not courage with a worthy Earl,
Blind Cupids bow and quiver to control.
My Lord, take heed, the squinting boy works treason,
By passions to divest your soul of reason,
He by his slye insinuations often
A good opinion in the heart does win:
The most obdurate are by him made soft,
And homage pay to Love their sovereign sin,
Fire's in, nor hurts the Flint, but Cupid can
With flames to cinders waste the Flinty man.
A wily sisher-man has store of baits,
Wherewith for Amorists he wisely angles,
With glittring pomp he for the ambitious waits,
The greedy Carle with silver twists entangles:
The silke-lascivious with a wanton eye,
The austere Stoic with a modest Fie.
The studious Templant he with Ergo calls,
The grave precisian with a matrone grace,
The virtuous mind with virtue he enthralles,
A landed heir with a blusht-lilly face.
For Epicurean love he wisely trowles,
With spiced rarities and frothing bowls.
The crosse-adorers he with crossing catches,
Yet strange it is that crossing should join hands,
But to Sir Love-all, all are equal matches,
Grace, beauty, feature, honor, virtue, lands,
This has a dainty hand; that, lip, or eye,
This chaste, that seeming, that will not deny.
None are love-free, unless incapable
Of those choyce'blessings Venus sole-sonne proffers,
None, whom age, fortune, nature does enable
With peevish noes, neglects Hymen's offers.
All are inclined to love, and all must bow,
If Cupids arrow do but write, Love thou.
Invest your noble thoughts with courage, Don,
Let reason, maugre love, triumphant ride,
Millions of Ladies breath in Albion,
Have more Rose-lillies, and less store of pride.
I Will warrant, though Bellama now say noe,
She Will find ere long, denial was her foe.
Hah! quoth Don Fuco, with a far-setcht sigh,
Which all that time was drencht o're-head in grief,
Am I to black Cocytus yet drawn nigh?
Where are the Elizian shades, thou tottred thief?
Call Rhadamanthus forth, justice I Will have,
Or in his breast my steel shall dig a grave.
Call forth the Furies with their snakie hairs,
Pale-cheekt Erynnis, and her sister Hagges,
Tell Nemesis I Will fetch her down the stairs,
And try what truth dwells in her wrathful bragges
Dispoyson Vipers, Toades, and crawling Adders,
And with their venom stretch her spacious bladders.
Bid Cerberus belch from his triple jaws,
A barking thunder which the earth may shake:
I Will fetch the Dragons and the Scorpions paws
From the full Zodiaque, her face to rake.
Come forth Demagoras, thy cunning try,
To masque all beauty with a leprosy.
We will no more our Lilly-stems transplant,
And set our Roses on their cheeks and lips,
Their fairness shall not hence surpass the Ante,
Their crymson dye, the brick or writhled hips.
Beauty shall be exilde, despite shall end her,
Or else we will change her to another gender
The Thracian Harper was a silly Ass,
That for his wife past through the Stygian stench.
The Olub-mans foolerie did his surpass,
That spun and carded for a Lidian wench,
The Greeks were fools, that for a light-skirt strumper,
Changed the still vial to a lowd-mouthd trumpet.
Jove's Blacksmith was no privy Counselor,
To many Venus for the sore head flagge,
The Jolly Huntsman sure did something err,
To see a goddess, and become a stagge.
Jove was no golden shower, sure 'twas a gull,
Nor e're transformed himself into a Bull.
Peace good my Lord, Don Rivelezzo says,
What unco^h passion does your seule en-trance,
Your words are like the Bacchinalian lays,
Wherewith the Priests their god of wine enhance.
What, man, though this fond she from you did start,
Another I say, My Lord, with all my heart.
Observe the practice of Doves masculine,
Which woo their females, with I come to woe,
Not in a fit of woman cry and whine,
Straight to another haste, if she says noe.
If to one face, our stock of love we open,
We pinion Cupids wings, and fetter hope.
Bellama slights; what then? shall we conclude,
All women will deny you their assent?
A strange induction; Call all Ladies lewd:
Cause Flora and some few to Venice went
Amongst a thousand maids, there is scarcely two,
As coy Bellama now has done, will do.
Wherefore created were those glorious lights,
Which in the azure firmament appear?
Why was days Charrioter with luster dight?
Only to guild with rays his proper Sphere?
No, to lend brightness to the borrowing lamps,
And clear the earth from nights obscuring damps.
Why has Dame Nature so much brightness lent
To Diamonds, Topazes, and other gems?
Only to enrich themselves? no, to augment
The glory o our rings and Diadems,
The Ostridge for himself wears not his plumes,
Nor for's own nose the Civet Cat perfumes.
So on our sprucest Ladies, matchless graces
Were not bestowed, to delight themselves.
Pandora was not treasured up in faces,
To bring con^en^ unto possessing elves.
But 'cause our Hero's should the comfort find
Of winning beauty and a willing mind.
The maid of Babylon, I know, was fair,
And rich in all the lineaments of beauty;
Yet was she kind, which did not them emp^ire,
But showed to Natures hestes her forward duty:
For Natures bounty best requited is,
By yielding free assent to Hymen's bliss.
The Queen of Carthage dear respects bestowd
Upon the straggling Prince of ruined Troy.
Choice love unto Leander, Hero showd:
The Cyprian goddess wooed her sappey boy.
All fraught with pity, but that peevish girl,
'Bout whose sleek waste hels vipers wind and twirle.
Nor such examples wants our latest age,
Of virgine-lovers these to parallel
Who, every way, those former equipage,
With whom records and modern pamphlets swell.
Then courage Don, fear not to find a face,
That has more pity, and more lovely grace.
Much ease (quoth Fuco) to my lovesick heart,
My Lord, is by your sage advisement brought,
For I supposed, the Idalian yonkers dart,
Had festred so, no easement could be bought:
I on her looked through such a pleasing glass,
As though that sex in her contracted was.
I thought to have sent my Physic Doctor forth
Unto his Herball, to address my ill,
T'ask Aesculapius for some earth-borne worth,
Which might accomplish my intended will.
But that it is said, Apollo once complaind,
No herb to cure loves fevers could be gaind.
Whilst an opinion of her matchless grace,
Scorched my bosom with affections gleames,
Mine eyes never straggled to another face,
Nor could I bathe my thoughts in Lethes streams;
But now I Will sound retrait, reclaim my mind,
Not catch a falling sta^re, nor graspe the wind.
This said, with sparkling sack he washed the lane,
Which to the Limbeck of his body leads,
Health to Bellama, and a health again,
Till, where his feet, his winged Bever treades,
So well he took his sack without a tossed,
That 'stead of kissing her, he kissed the post.
Dispassiond quite, as in a breathless calm,
Don Rivelezzo bids Don Fuco diew,
But hooted lowdly like a shrill-ton'd shalme,
When his swift steed took farewell of his view.
Accursing Fate, and railing on his daughter,
Which might beget in Heraclitus laughter.
Have I (says he) such Crassian heaps of gold,
Condemned to sleep in iron-ribbed chests?
Did I delight in vestments course and old,
Wherein Anthropophoges have dug them nests?
Nay, wished there were no taverne-juyce, or sports,
Or change of fashions, but in Princes Courts?
Have I sat brooding over my treasured plate,
And sum'd the surplusage of each years rent,
Confined my spendings to a weekly rate,
Enjoynd a penance when th'allowance spent?
And when an Earl tuned every grace to win her,
She slights his vows, nor gales nor gold can pin her.
But since she slights my matches, I will match her,
She shall of peevishness the harvest reap,
Since this Dons matchless fortunes could not catch her.
I shall ere long make her affections cheap.
Her love shall stoop to court a common Farm,
A Lordship then shall scorn to fold an arm.
My Lord, her mother Lady Arda said,
A parents ire ought not to force assent,
Wealth blend with vice can never disheart a maid,
'To whom blessed virtue is the choice content.
There Is other things do maids affections stir,
Beside a Manor, and a Please you Sir.
Madame (quorh he) in vain you do excuse
Your daughters folly with your friendly air,
The next I offer she shall not refuse.
Sirrah, go harness straight my wheeling chair
I Will try if less content and pleasure dwells
In Princes courts, then in Monastic cells.
When he was coach'd, the Lady Arda went
To fair Bellam', bedewed with streaming tears,
The gods, said she, have ravel'd thy content,
Sorrows uncomfort will thy virgin years:
For unto Da^w^y does thy father haste,
Where he will vow thee everlasting chaste.
Madam, says she, I feed on naught but gall,
Aloes and Rue, 'cause of my fathers wrath,
The Occasion though of his displeasure, shall
With Bays, in stead of Cypress, strew my path.
When virtue seals the contract, welcome Hymen,
But till that, ever shall my heart deny men.
Thus sat they parling: Lady Arda urged
Producing reasons to enforce assent:
Bellama answered, begged, excused, and purged
Herself from blame, by urging love, content.
But urging and excusing, let them sit,
And see the father champing on the bit.
Who coming to the cage of virgine-pride,
Knocked at the wicket with the iron ctow,
To whose small neck white phillets nere were tide
Which in more ancient days did childbed show.
He rapt so hard, the sound did fright the air,
Yet still none came, none was not locked in prayer.
At length the Ianitor, of stature large,
With Crozier stuff, girt in a hair cloth Frock,
Whose meagre looks did call for Charons Barge,
And all whose body was a saplesse stock,
Ca^ue, and with chu^lish voice, demanded who
With such sh^ill ho^'s rejoyc't their civil croe?
Friend, says my Lord, my errand wings my speed,
Speaks high importance with the Prioresse:
Thou in these Angell-lookes my haste may read;
Help me to the presence of the Abbatesse.
The Porters heart soon stepped into his eye,
Tuning his language to a quick reply.
My Lord, says he, obedience is my duty,
Whilst your commands speak in so high a tone,
Yet lest your smooth chind youths lay ^ege to beauty,
Your Lordship spite of state must walk alone.
I am an Eunuch, else in vain I vowed,
I had mistook my pillow in a crowd.
Him he conducted to the Kitchen, where
Store of Anatomies employed was;
Some did the candle-stickes, some lavers clear,
Some scowred pewter, some reburnisht brass,
Don asks the cause: the Porter him acquaints,
'Twas against a Feast of high account, All Saints:
Within the Hall, a younger sort of Girls,
Yet course enough, did brush vermilion looks,
Some, crosses rubbed; some, ropes of praying pearls:
Some dusted vestments; some, their gilded books.
Some kneaded wafers, and his effige stamped,
Whose purple streams the Dragons sulphures dampt.
All at Don Rivelezzo were amazed:
And, looking, one rubbed off a nose of wax,
A second razed a cheek, another gazed,
And plucked from ^ath' her periwigge of slax.
One blinded Serrut, and did rend her silk,
One broke the cruze, and spilt the virgine-milke.
Don past through these into an inner room,
Where was another rank of virgine-fry,
Some weaving Arras on the nimble loome,
And inter-twisting gold with tapestry,
With silk of Naples twisted in small ropes,
Some did the Gowles embroider, some the Copes.
At last he came into an upper place,
Climbing thereto by richly gilded stairs,
Where sat another troop of nobler race,
On quilted Cushions, and in Ivorie Chaires.
About the center, in a robe of state,
The matrone Vesta of the Virgins sat.
These were employed about far nobler things:
For some of Sainted hair did bracelets twine.
Others strung Beads to stint the knees of Kings:
Some trimmed with costly Gems the Ladies shrine.
One tuned the music, and a witty other,
Footed an Ave to the Virgine-mother.
The grave old Matrone crawling from her throne
Of Indian teeth, archt over with cloth of gold,
Upon her aged knees with zealous tone,
Says, Heavens messenger, what is it you would?
Th^amazed Lord with wonder quarreld long,
E're he could unvoyce his silenced tongue.
Madam, says he, why pay you reverence?
Why are you guilty of th'adoring sin?
It Is a delusion of your weakened sense,
I am no Cherub, Pow're, nor Seraphin:
The Heralds style me Rivelezzo's Don,
Your friend and servant with a cap and con --
My Lord, quoth she, excuse my fond mistake,
For over my sight I wear a duskish glass,
My zeal in pious actions sure did make
Me give you more respects then civil was.
But take your seat, and if my power or skill,
Can crown your wishes, be you sure I will.
Madam, says he, I have a scornful Less,
Whom Nature has enricht with special grace,
To whose perfections her reflecting glass
Is parasite; adds pride unto her face:
So that, though Earldomes court her, her disdain^
Non-suites their service, and her brow un-plains.
Into your number of chaste-zealous she is,
Entrance unto this girl vouchsafe, I pray,
Unto your order, I the constant fees
Of gold and acres, and of vows will pay:
Since she Don slighted, I have vowed to see
How long she will honor the religious knee.
Quoth she, those virgins which my hallowd roof^
Does canopy, my prudence does protect:
I make blind love and folly stand aloof,
And all loves paper-plots I do detect.
Great ones have often assayd, but yet my care
Has buried their entreaties in the air.
With godly precepts I enrich their minds,
And make them (which is rare) at eighteen good,
I'dmit no Roysters, only Maids and Hindes
To do them service, and prepare us food.
Please you to send your daughter, she shall be
Crowned with delights of most transcendent glee.
Heavens, says Don, crown your ensuing days
With all delights which wait your holy orders:
May the sad Cypress, and the Bridal Bays,
Never sprigge nor blossom in your quiet borders.
I Will plume my swift endeavors, I Will make haste,
T'invest Bellama with your habits chaste.
When Dons farewell had ceast to move the air,
Says Piazzella to her virgin train,
We, with th'enjoyment of this Lady fair,
Shall stuff our Carkanets with mickle gain.
We Will frolic it, and taste the choycest pleasures
Nor shall our joys be listed in with measures.
'The credulous world we gull with silver shrines,
Our grave behaviors, and retired lives,
When we in naked truth are Libertines,
And taste the pillow-joyes of sprightfull wives,
When through the vault our lusty shavelings pace
All the choice measures of delight to chase.
Thus leave them with their haire-lacke crowns,
And see Rivelezzo now ariv'd at home,
Who by that time had plaind his brow from frowns,
And all be-calmd with sugared words does come:
Then tells his Lady he had found a tower,
Would guard Bellama from Jove's yellow shower.
Servants are posted to the old Exchange,
Others to sellers of the silke-wormes spoils,
Some to brisk Proteusses, smirke Tailors range.
Some to the Stationers, some haste for oils.
One carves the image of a martyrd Saint,
Another breathes a soul with gold or paints.
None must be idle, till in marshald ranks,
All things be ordered for this virgine-vow.
Farewell ye spongie teates, and puft-paste flanks,
Bellama's brid all tede is lighted now.
Her husband is Vlrginitie, yet look,
Her beads for rings, for songs she will change her book.
The Coack is harnessed, Bellama come,
The father says, Hence with that dew of grief,
Give not a sad adieu unto our home,
But in thy thoughts let comfort rule as chief.
She craved a blessing on her globe-like joints,
Then coached thither where her Sire appoints.
As the sweet-voyced Philomele does sit
In The piked Eglantine, with sorrow dressed,
'Cause some rude Sylvane in a raging fit,
Snatched her faint chickens from their downy nest.
So did the Lady Arda dight with mourning,
Deplore Bellama's loss with her returning.
As when slye Reynald in his widened jaws,
Is seizing on the nimbly-frisking lamb,
Or when the Tiger with his sharpened paws,
Has caught the infant of the becking damme,
And then the Shepherds care prevents the sharks,
One lowdly howles, the other hoarsly barks.
So semblably, when as the waiting crew,
Saw the departing of their golden age,
One gives Bellama, with eye-dew, adieu,
Another grief unlockt the phrenzie cage
Some tore their hair, some rent their shouldring bands.
Some thwackt their breasts, and wrung their oily hands.
But all in vain, their Indian Mine was gone,
'Their minting house deprived of the stamp,
Their costly gemmes were changed to pebbell stor
Their Hemisphere forsaken by their lamp,
Gaturne's exilde, Jove awes this massy Ball,
And now the Iron age un-goldeth all.
The wandering wheels be-stud with Iron knobs,
Posted Bellama to the Virgin-tower,
Which freed her from the noise of servile throbs;
Is entertained like a goddy power,
Led by the seeming Saints, unto the place,
Where sat Pazzella with a Matrone grace,
If Rivelezzo's presence frighted them,
Much more they at Bellama were amazed:
They called her Phoenix, beauties only gem,
And all with fixed tapers on her gazed:
Some had a mean, some curious were before,
But her first sight showed self-conceit the door.
For as when Tithons bride breaks out a far,
And through th'expanse spreads forth her yong^ lig^^
She by degrees, pops out each twinkling star,
And dims at length the mistress of the night.
As winter Chappel-clarks, when prayers are do^
Dis-light each flazing wax, or tallow Sun.
So when Bellama brightly did appear,
With mourning rays in the Monastic hall,
She veiled each face that moved in that sphere:
And further, by degrees un-faced all.
Nay, at the last, the mistress of the train,
Looked like pale Phoebe in her darkened waine.
And as days Prince, light lustres archy-beame,
Lends to the Moon her silver midnight rays,
As from the Ocean warry current stream,
Though every cadent to that Chaos strayes,
As to a room be-fog'd with mists of night,
The Incensed weeks do lend a midday light.
So to each brow, Bellama's brow gives white,
To every cheek, Bellama's cheek gave rosies:
To every eye, Bellama's eye gave sight:
To every breath, Bellama's breath gave posies:
To every part, Bellama's part gave grace:
To every face, Bellama gave a face.
Some called her goddesle of the Cyprian I Will,
Some said Troyes ruin was untombd again,
Some her the selfe-enamourd boy did style,
Some said the Boat-boy did dehide their train.
One named her thus, one said she was another,
But all confessed sh'exceeded Cupids mother.
The aged Patroness with palsi'd lips.
Muttred a welcome to her lovely guest,
But at that time the Moon was in eclypse,
Which with en-feebling fears did them arrest.
Some shrilly screamd, some brazen pans did clang,
To ease her travel, and abate her pang.
And when the monthly-horned Queen had got
Her face again with silver glitter rayd,
Save only what the Dragons tail does spot,
On their pale Lillies blushing Clarret strayd:
Then did the aged voice repeat again,
Welcome fair Lady to my Mayden-traine.
Her instauration was somewhat strange,
Led by nine vestals (for th'odde number was
Highly esteemed in their sacred range,
As by the Poet in his quassing glass)
Each of her joynted Lillies one did hold,
Save only that which waits the wedding gold.
Adornd with vestures, white as bleached snow,
A Cypress mantell, over which was cast,
So lightly hung, 't would not abide a blow,
A milk white Ribben locked unto her waste,
Graced with a crucifix: her slender wrists,
With praying beads were wreathed on sable twists.
Grave Piazella usherd her along,
Bravely attended with her choysest Nuns,
Without Drum, Trumpet, or an armed throng,
Or champing coursers, or the wide-mouthed Guns,
Each held religion in some holy right,
With holy water, which the devils fright.
Into the place of holy worship, they
Entered, where gawdie superstition was,
Saints, Altars, store of crucifixes gay.
Whose stately worths my weak expression pass.
Scarce was there known a canonized Saint,
Which carving did not there beget, or paint.
With strong devotion all the virgins prayed,
At the direction of the praying Bead,
Their Ave-Maries, Santo, Salve's said,
Invoking every Saint to intercede.
Piezza then, Bellama kneeling down,
Did wreath her temple with the virgine-crowne.
These rites performed, behind an iron grate
Appeared breathing cowles, and walking copes,
Whose wri^hed looks their births did ante-date,
And change the ciphers girdled in with ropes.
Their hair had purchased wings, and flew away.
So did their brains as some did whispring say.
Unto this Monastry in gloomy shades,
From Crostfull Priory these shavelings pace,
Distant from hence not two Italian stades,
Earths bloudlesse womb was wimbled all the space,
Under the craggy rocks and champian did
A road-way lie, from vulgar prying hid.
This darksome path they usually did tread,
T^ traffic with their she-sequestred zeal,
With whom for curtaine-dalliance often they plead,
But their success my muse dares not en-neale.
These loving sportings are not faults, the sin
Is, when our walls keep not the scandal in,
Amongst the holy men that hither came,
To join their issue with the sister-hood,
A votary, Albino called by name;
Not Fortunes white-boy, yet of Abby-bloud:
His great-grand-father some few ages since,
Of Glastenbury Primate was, and Prince.
His stature did not reach the tip-toe height,
Nor with the long neckt Cranes did conflicts wage,
Something complete by nature, not by slight,
Some twenty circled snakes sum'd up his age,
Discreet as Tyro's are, had store of wit,
In that he knew to use, and husband it.
By civil carriage, and his modest look,
He gaind the love of his Lord Priorist,
He bowled, coursed, angled in the brook,
His pleasure was his joy and pleasures list.
Often would he rove (had his content a dearth)
Through th'hollow belly of th'un-boweld earth.
Sometimes permitted, sometimes by command
From his Lord Prior to the holy mother,
Convaying voices, or the paper-hand
Oft-times alone, scarce sorted with another.
The Matron did with courteous eye respect him,
Knowing no ill of him, did not suspect him.
She often would praise his Monkship to her train,
Calling his breast blessed virtues choyces shrine,
And vowed she seldom saw such beauty reign
Upon a face that's purely masculine.
And 'twas not common at his years to find
So neat a person with so pure a mind.
H^e'd freedom of discourse, not privacie,
Jests, sporting, laughter, and lip-dalliance;
Often on Bellama would he fix his eye,
And she to him would answer glance for glance.
They gazd so long and often, till they did tie
Their hearts together only by the eye.
Loves fever at the casements of the soul
Entering, enflamed every secret part,
That passion now his reason does control,
And with the gyves of Love en-chaines his heart:
And walking with Bardino, seeking pleasures,
He did Bellama sing in lofty measures.
To his Companion in praise of BELLAMA.
Do see you towering hills, you spreading trees,
Which wrap their lofty heads in clouds? do see
Yon house of little worth, undlesser height?
Do think a Jewel of ten thousand weight
Can dwell within that sootie Carkanet?
Do think the gawdie Sun each night does set
And rises from yon roof? Do think the Moon
With double horn, and glittring tapers, soon,
Will issue thence? Did ever see an eye
Which checked the beams of awful Majesty?
Do think an earth-borne beauty can be found,
Which darts forth luster from the sullen ground,
To kiss the glorious skies? or can thou think
The Queen of beauty dwells in such a chinke?
Do think? it is poor, why do I question so?
Thou dare confirm all this by oath, I know,
Since my Bellama's there, all life, all breath,
Whose presence can enlive the soul of death,
Despite of sickly Nature: she is all fair
And truly meriteth Bellezza's chair.
All those fair treasures which dispersed lie
'Twixt Poles and Parallels pay to her eye
And, with her span, contracted in her meet,
As radiant, red, white, smooth, soft, rich, and sweet,
She is the worlds Epitomy and soul,
And with her inch of earth, out-worths the whole,
She Is beauties Archy-fount: as riv'lets small
Borrow from greater currents, and they all
Pay tribute to the Ocean, just so
The dimmer shafts of winged Cupids Bow,
Borrow from brighter, the brightest pay
Homage unto Bellama, beauties day.
I tell thee, there is not one small worth of hers,
But loudly says, that foppish nature erres
In other beauties: nor is this all, for why?
Her thoughts pluck stars, and dark th'imperiallskie,
Virtue and Beauty both: why it is as rare
As frosts in June, or Comets in the air,
As Crows in Africa, Aeolus want pusses,
Or she-precisians want Geneva russes.
Yet my Bellam' alone, and one unites
The beauteous colors, noble red and whites,
With heavens issue, Virtue: dare then diny,
If not divine, her halse a Deity?
Tip Cynthia's horns with wonder, wind aloud,
And mount the saddle of awinged cloud:
Then circle earth, and see if thou can find
Half such a feature with so rare a mind.
I know when thou returnst thou wilt say with me,
Bollama's beauty is a A percee.
Thus he to rocks and bushes did discover,
The secret flames which scorcht his heated breast,
Though he as yet was not a vocal lover,
But shrouded his close love in smiles and jest;
Yet Fortune frentimes does Venus grace
He got lip-freedome in an eye-lesse place.
For there a Turks Elyzium was the stage
Whereon the Virgins acted parts of mirth,
Which Nature did with nobler gifts engage,
And decked more than other parts of earth:
And Bellam's breath was such a powerful thing
It here did keep an everlasting spring.
The angry puffings of congealing East,
And sturdy North, cold Winters stoutest roysters^
Durst never of curled locks the trees divest,
Nor e're were heard to whistle in their cloisters.
Such vernall blasts came from Bellama's mouth,
Kept here Favonius, and the dropping south.
And if sharp frosts did in her absence steal
Into this place, and glazed the tatling streams,
Then into ch^ystall would the springs congeale,
And ev^ry flower was rayd with silver beams:
Yet if Bellama did but glance her eye,
The crystal and the silver thence did fly.
Nay, strange it was to hear the purling wet,
The saucy frost with angry murmures chide,
And with its constant jarres and struglings fret,
Then thaw to tears, and on the Venice slide.
Yet often Bellama would call in her rays,
To view the silver purles, and chryftall wayes^
Into this garden once Albino got;
Yet ah! but once, and met his sovereign fair,
Hoping their hearts should ty the Gordian knot,
He fand her beauty with such courting air:
For though he was a Monk, love did instruct him,
And to Loves palace Fortune did conduct him.
He oftentimes with trembling thombe would press
Her dancing vein, way to her heart to find,
Whilst conscious she her looks with red would dress,
Fearing her pulse was traitor to her mind:
For it is entruth'd by some, that by this vain
We may the knowledge of affections gain.
Such knowledge gaind, he by her pulses touch,
Which leapt to meet, not chide his busy thombes;
That he desired a kiss, and found it such,
Whose sweetness far out-sweets Hybla's combs:
Then cried, give for each lip a cherry-sweet,
And then a third, in which they two may meet.
Such quickening heat was from those kisses lent,
That thawd his voice, and did unfreeze his tongue,
Packt thence despair, exiled discontent,
And made him vent what was concealed long:
For though desire and love each minute bid him,
Yet fear, his habit, and her beauty chid him.
Madam, quoth he, vouchsafe a courteous ear
Unto my words, sent from an amorous heart,
Which has long time bin wrackt with hope and fear,
Grisely despair, and Cupids awful dart:
And till this time (restrained by black disasters)
Could never apply lip-love, or vowell-plasters.
Be pleased to know (yet sure you needs must know it
A beauty so divine, must needs divine,
Though I should want heart, hand, or voice to show it)
When first your beauty in mine eyes did shine,
They slipped into my breast, and told my heart,
The god of love by them had sent a dart.
My heart made quick reply, (if hearts have voice)
You ever have such faithful servants been,
That what you like, I Will freely call my choice,
For beauty brought by you, does fires teen;
Carry this message back, tell her it is best
That hers should heat my bosom, I her breast.
Peace, peace, quoth she, speak not a word of love,
For fear my anger, scorns, and folly writes,
Eagles love Eagles, and the Dove the Dove:
Hawks brook not Buzzards; or the Pheasant Kites,
Equals love equals: but un-equall flame
Is teen'd withfolly, and expires with shame.
True, quoth he, likeness does the heart incline,
Greatness loves greatness, without farther search,
Yet crawling Ivies lo tie Elmes en-twine,
And gall-lesse Turtles with the Eagles perch.
I baulk your greatness; for as good, not great,
I homage pay, and loves alarums beat.
Those airy titles, which ambition swell,
And pusse like bladders, or like bladders burst,
The worldlings goddess, which in chests does dwell,
Is gnawne with rust, and makes the chesters cursed,
Honor is tied unto the Princes eye,
And wealth to Fortunes mutability.
I have not wealth (nor do I want) what then?
Must Hymen stoop unto the nods of gold?
Must I veil Bonnet unto Ermin men?
And Virtue by the Herald be controlde?
No, love does blaze the noblest arms: and she,
That can maintain herself, in love can me.
Stay, stay, quoth she, you will be out of wind,
Me thinks the voice of greatness speaks delight:
Our Poets only then faigne Cupid blind,
When children of the Sun do dote on Night;
Or folly mounted on Icarian wings,
Courts Queens affections, and does gaze on Kings.
No, says Albino, it is the contrary,
Love never is more purblinde then when earth
Joins house to house, and pedigrees do tie
Scutcheons to Scutcheons in pure virtues dearth,
For Regal flames blessed goodness only teenes,
And virtue ought to court the love of Queens.
We all are borne for public good: it is vain
With torch-light to embellish Titans rays,
Or cast our stock of water in the maine;
Such love from laws of love and nature strayes:
But those that Fortune has enricht with goods,
Should darne up natures wants, by mixing bloods.
Was I the Caesar of the Roman stemmes,
(Once only darling to the King of skies)
Did both the Indies pay me tribute-Gemmes,
I Would not unite a double Majesty.
For being no distinction in degree,
She would assume that honor due to me.
She Would chide me sooner than I durst check her,
And as the proverb, quarrel for the breeches,
On some choice mean that honor I Would confer,
Should sue with humble Sirs, and low beseeches.
Thus was she tide to payment of respects,
I licensed with state-love to mix neglects.
Where beauty does indite, and virtues seal,
Greatness is not required to set his hand:
Though greatness here may virtues acts repeal;
Yet virtues acts in Cupids courts must stand.
Then where I find grace, feature, virtues dwell,
I Have greatness, wealth, and honor: tole the bell.
Then with kind aires, life of my wishes speak,
Bid honor know his distance, wealth depart,
And let the day of true contentment break
From thy clear lips, to cheer my misted heart,
O with one circle, let my arms enfold
The soul of honor, and the heart of gold.
Sir, quoth Bellama, wealth is not my aim,
Nor does the gales of honor heave my soul,
I higher prize an action than a name,
And value more a pamphlet than a roll.
Where I with comeliness find virtue mixed,
My love, eyes, thoughts, are on that object fixed:
I speak not much of love, lest you presume;
And speak a little, lest you should despair,
I would not have my words your hopes deplume,
Nor feather them to reach the highest air,
I sum up all in this, when as I say,
I will not with disdaines thy service pay.
Oh happy words! oh more than sacred breath!
Albino live, Bellama says thou must:
Confront dire Fate, and challenge meagre death,
It Is not in them to moulder thee to dust:
Yet be advised, let not proud folly in,
The conquest is as great to hold as win.
Our Anchorist with all the words that joy
Hearting a lover, was acquainted with,
Accosts his Saint, rewards the winged boy,
And congies to the Queen of heat and pith,
Smiled and glanced, paid thanks, desired a kiss,
And prayed time give an age unto his bliss.
But when days lamp had wan the western clyme,
And wrapped his head in Sea-greene Thetis lap,
Our lover must observe the chaunting time,
And bids his Saint adieu oh hard mishap!
Oh it is a hell to think what hellish pain
True lovers by unkind divorcement gain!
Yet by that time the hoary headed Sire
Had sum'd twelve sixty minutes, he again
Returned to his Lady, when bright Tytans fire
Was newly risen from the brackish maine,
And common greetings past a midst their pleasures,
He, in his Ladies hands these lines entreasures.
Upon Bellama's walking in the Garden, and with him.
MY teeming fancy strives (choice fair) to chain
Eternity to time, that nere shall waine;
And make those garden minutes see the Sun
Entombd in darkness, and the earth un-spun
Ere they expire, that all succeding times
May know and tell the subject of these times.
Assist me Flora, that I may with grace
Worthy its honor, shadow forth that place
Of spreading trees, sweet herbs, and fragrant Flowers,
Enricht with pleasing walks, and shady Bowres.
Each twigge with amorous touch embraced his Mate,
Like Bacchus sacred tree his propping state;
Or Ivy, Elm, that neither Sun nor Wind
To his retired conclaves passage find.
Within whose walls a halfe-nights darkness dwelles,
Which Satyrs growing palaces excelles,
Or Anchorets secluding Hermitage.
Here, like a common Theater, or Stage,
Each spiced child of earth in Summer robe,
And Iris mantle, opes his closed globe,
Knows his appearing cue, and freely plays
O the wisht-for presence of your quickening rays:
Such perfect vivifying influence
Dwells in your looks, Lights Chariot driven hence,
That your sole presence can create a Spring,
From Winters frozen bands can loose each thing,
From Earths entombing Sepulcher can raise
Each sleeping Flower to chaunt forth Maia's praise:
This made amazement seize my mind to view
Halfe-aged Winter bid so soon adieu
To this Elyzium of the Pagans joy,
And Chloris with ber new-brusht clothes so ^coy
Before, and hardly to be won, come forth
Crowned with the glory of her springing worth,
To court our eyes: nay more, the barefaced Earth,
Coverd with Carpets green, befringed round
With smiling Rosy trees, with glorious store
Of Dazies, Suckles, Cow-slips, studded ore
Like hunting Vestes of Satonisco green,
Embost with Gems, by Fawns and wood-nymphs Queen
Worn, when the tushed Boar, Bear, panting Heart
Th'unkennell, rouse, dis-franke with nimble art.
And lest your spotless soles should suffer ill,
Airs fleeting tuns Chrystalline streams distill
To wash the grassie-tufted tapestry,
Which whistling winds with murm'rings haste to dry.
And every tender branch whereon you tread,
To make your tracing, pacing, moves its head.
Alcinous Orchard, or that precious root,
Which bo^e old Atlas daughters golden fruit:
The Idalian mount, where Cytherea strayd,
Or that where Ceres ^ucklesse daughter played,
When as the King of shades surprised her.
Nor may the Romans pride with this confer,
For here all Maia's treasures are united,
Which do, which shall, or senses e're delighted,
Yet summer'd by your eye, each Flower does bud,
Bl ssomes, sprouts, opens, bloomes and chewes the cud.
Your presence hearts them all: O be as kind
As unto them, to me! shoot through my rind.
Shine through my heart with one, one smiling ray,
So shall it open, blossom, sprout as they,
Spic't with the choycest sweets e're Venus had,
In all the postures of true service clad,
Trimd with the beauties of the richest spring.
All fertile too, all store of fruit shall bring:
This, choice affection; that, chaste loyalty;
This, vows; that, service; and that, constancy,
Made up into a nose-gay, circled in
With twists of love, which youth and virtue spin.
Then Breath and Ray, make and accept the Posie,
And seal a contract twixt the Lili' and Rosy.
En-spheared thus with virgins, often he would
Tell pretty tales, fraught with conceited mirth,
Discourse of foreign states: sometimes unfold
A sudden jest, may give to laughter birth:
Thus to beguile the time he often would do,
And unsuspected did his Lady woo.
Then privately sometimes with her would walk
Along a paved way, where lofty trees
Bore only witness of their amorous talk,
Plaiting their branched pride, that none might see,
And lest quick envy should their dalliance spy,
Themselves about the trees the brambles tie.
Here in soft whispers did he court her love,
And strove by oath their loves to ratify.
Madam, says he, this reason may you move,
That day and malice have too many eyes,
When my lips are sealed, and I attempt in vain,
To send the children of my teeming brain.
Not half so vigilant the Dragon was,
Which Colchos treasure watched, as is your Dame,
So that they must through Argus head-peece pass,
Which seek here to enkindle Cupids flame.
I know your jealous Matrone does discover
How my faint heart about your breast does hover.
Sir, says Bellama, there is no such haste,
Time will appoint our loves some fitter seasons,
My father must ungirdle first my waste,
Love will not be repeld by force, but reasons.
And more, you know it is in vain to strive,
Here Is no escaping this Monastic hive.
When as the third days Sun, three hours or more,
Our Zenith has behind him left, hither
Return, and I will meet thee; not before:
My thoughts (quoth he) do in your absence wither,
Pincht with the sharpest blasts cold winter breathes
But your, your looks my heart with bl ssoms wreathes
That foolish glass which measures time with sand,
Enough of gravel has to meet a year,
With less^r trouble I could Hermes wand,
Than the sad torture of your absence bear:
Change then those hours to minutes; days, to day,
If you say it shall be so, time must obey.
Alas! quoth she, my faith is not so strong,
To think reality with language dwells,
Nor can I think you count those minutes long,
When you are employed with your Beads and Bells.
Yet to has the face of truth, I Will therefore try
If time will pay such duty to mine eye.
These words have lent my body a new soul,
And shot (quoth she) a fire through every vein,
Doubt not your voice times circle can control,
And make the Sun his hasty Iennets reyne.
Nay more, me thinks m'enlightned eyes discover
'Bout you the gods with veiled bonnets hover.
I Am half persuaded, 'twas not blasphemy
For me to say your nod can ravell Fate,
Thaw into Chaos this firm globe of dry,
Beckon the planets, and their towers un-slate.
Me thinks I see the Sun naild to his sky,
Vn-nath his Carre, and throw his whip-staffe by
Peace, peace, quoth she, Albino, thou do rave,
Why dwells such language on thy wretching tongue?
Will thou just vengeance force to dig thy grave?
Think thou stern Fate will suffer such a wrong?
Pinnion thy words, let them not soar so high,
Lest they should gash the clouds, and open the sky.
We must not play with sharpes, nor kiss the flame,
Dally with heaven, or up-braid the gods,
Lest their just anger make their powers tame
Such saucy scandals with their plagues and rods.
Then wing no more Bellama's name, but let
The Pearl be called Pearl, the Iet but Iet.
Go home in clouds, lest Envy see thy face,
And come not till those minutes task the watch.
Madam, says he, I Will bid them mend their pace,
It Is just with lovers every hair to catch,
That dights occasions brow change date for date,
Entrench sometimes upon the rights of Fate.
Yet your command shall stand, I Will not transgress,
But watch the hand until it joint the hour,
And all my paths with gloomy shades will dress,
That undiscovered I may win this boure:
May all the blessings which a lovers voice
Breathes on his Lady, wait on you my choice.
Here did they meet to rivet fast their heart,
Where not a breath their private joys disturb:
They thought no eye a saucy ray durst dart,
Or any voice had power their loves to curb.
So credulous are lovers, and so feign
To their conjectures would conclusum's chain.
But this bright Sun of joy eclypsed was,
And pitchy clouds their glorious sky did smutch,
Then Venus joys were like to Venice glass,
Poor glasse-like toys, that perish with a touch,
A Guardians anger, or a parents frown,
Nips loves fresh blossoms, and a wish uncrowne.
The jealous matrone from her to wring loft,
O're-lookt the ambitious trees which hemmed them in
Or'e-heard their vows, their sighs, and language soft,
And saw how Cupid leapt from skin to skin.
The tr^ssique of their lips, and how thin balmes,
Did glue and cement fast their melting palms.
When she perceived the progress of their love,
Religious care impanneld straight a Jury
Of thoughts and plots, this stranger to remove,
Soothed with profit, and enflamed with fury,
Vsh'ring her language with a threatening srowne,
She asked her business with that shaved crown.
Why was that sickly voice, whose feeble gales
Can raise no echoes, hand, and elbow chat,
Eye-dialogues discourse, and wanton tales
That way of am'rousnesse, and this, and that?
Speak truth Bellama, has thy heart, as voice,
Decreed that youthful monk thine only choice?
Bellama startled at this sudden news,
Yet did her answers all consist of noes,
But yet, alas! her blood observed the cues,
And called by guilt, her Lilly banks ore-flowes:
So that though she with settled vows denyde,
Yet to the eye her blushes guilty cryde.
When as the matrones busy eyes had read
Love on her cheeks in bloody letters writ,
She asked her why blind folly thus had lead
Her reason, against religion, state or wit?
Or if she needs must love, why did she scowle
Upon state-sattens, and embrace a cowle?
Bellama to excuses tuned her air,
Framing pretenses for her amorous says,
But yet alas! such was Pazzella's care,
From her excuses she withheld her faith.
And with a voice shrill and as fierce as thunder,
Swear she would knap their silly loves in sunder.
Those scarlet gowns, which doom-offenders, death,
Or the proscriptions of the Roman state,
Had not the tithe of that affrighting breath,
Although they weakened hell, and threatened Fate,
As had these words which feeble love did shiver,
Snap his weak strings, and crack his emptied quiver
But all this while, Albino sat with pleasure,
And on his trencher joy and mirth attend,
Nor to delight will he allow a measure,
As, at one sitting, he his stock would spend.
Nay, if he slept, he dreamed of naught but rings,
Gloves, fans, masks, monkies, and such pretty things.
And when the time of his approach, approach't,
His eye did travel with the Dyals hand,
Then started up to see Don Phoehus coach't,
Bad him make haste, and at that minute stand,
That this blessed day may count more moments flight
Than could the stout Alcides geniall night.
But often we see before a sudden dash,
The Sun salutes the earth with hottest gleames:
So here before misfortunes harshest lash,
Joy on Albino shot his choycest beams.
That every thought was crowned with a star,
And rid with Venus in her silver Carre.
Rose out oth'vault, with love and hope adust,
And in conceit fed on his future sweet,
Thinking what most may please, not what is most just.
And with what phrase he should his Lady greet,
Vowing in this full heat of lust and pride,
To try how fast Bellama's girdle's tide.
But as our Alchymists do study much,
Spend all their wits and wealth to find that stone,
Which baser metals does en-gold with touch,
(As he which once did awe the Phrygian throne)
And when they long have dreamed of a mass,
Their silvers's turned to tin, their gold to brass.
Just so our Amorist stuffed full with hope,
Came to this walk for his expected treasure,
The crystal casements of his soul did open,
To let in the object of his joy and pleasure;
But when he thought to have found his lovely less,
His love was Lady-smocks, his Lady grass.
He searched with stricter care, each bush and bower.
Then did the Fairy King, and Hob his man,
Throwing his eyes into each branched tower,
And midst the sharpened pikes of brambles ran.
Pricked forward with desire, enraged with spite.
And venteth here what love and hate endite.
Upon his Bellama using and forsaking the Walk.
WHen walking I sent forth my watchful eyes,
To fetch in objects, like Bellona's spies,
Along this swelling way, which checkerd was
With smooth-fac't pebbles, not with piked grass,
Bellama pac't, whose only pacing set
Upon the paved walk a Coronet
Of Flora's pride, Carnations, Tulips, Lillies,
Pansies, Pinkes, Roses, Daffa-down-dillies:
Nay more, me thought I saw the rubbish way,
Saphirs, Pearls, Rubies, Onix-stones, out-ray
The very channel proud of her blessed weight,
Sweld up with pride unto the ridges height
To kiss her feet, and made the way an alley,
With this choice Fair mine eyes (ah) once did dalles
Natures Epitomy, whose curious brow
Was like a smoothed mount of bleached snow,
At whose clear foot Nature divine did place
Two Diamonds, which did enlighten all her face.
So that it was like those orbs wherein do stray
The planet-lampes, or Cupids sucking way,
And from these gemmes such silver rays were sent,
Which hatched over her light accoutrement.
So that d^ll fancies would have thought she had
In Cambricke, Holland, or pure Lawne been clad.
Nay I, at first, thought it had Cynthia bin
Decked in her brothers sunshine Ermilin.
She shot such glorious beams: but now alas!
She Is gone, she is fled, and lo, the mourning grass
Is hayd already, and th'ungemd stone
At feathers catch to fly where she is gone.
The branched Beech, the Oak, and towering Ash,
Bend both their brows and boughs my face to lash:
The angry thorns, my hands, though armed, scratch,
And testy brambles at my vestures catch:
(Which was before the curse of humane fin,
But now, by her, out-smeld the Eglantine)
I wonder-strucken, asked a holy Thistle
Which with his sharpened pikes began to bristle:
(But know, at first it was but an homely weed,
Her presence made it holy, not its seed)
Why all with irefull looks thus threatened me?
It is supposed Bellama fair (quoth he)
The goddess of this walk, was forced by you
To this benighted path to bid adieu.
Alas! quoth I, (mean while the thistle paused)
Their wrath is undeserved, I never caused
By any ill demeanes that Saint to leave
This place, and widow every branch and greave,
Unto your testates I my self refer.
How choycely I have ever honored her,
Have paid my tribute-complements, and gave
Respects as much as due, or she would have.
But people (worse than those that people flewes)
Whose only joy consists in telling new,
Or Pazzell else with ber envenonidlips
Your glory and my comfort do celypse,
It Is them they ought to chide, for only they
Compel her to forsake this gloomy way.
Yet spite of all disasters, Fate and Hell,
Albino's heart shall with Bellama dwell,
And though chill winter nip both you and me,
(...) shall ere long our Suns and Summers see.
This said, he straight forsook his silent grove,
Trimming his looks which passion did untrim,
And hastes to find the object of his love,
But such an eye the matron cast on him,
That sury on her looks did seem to dwell
And envy to her face transplanted hell.
Heartlesse Albino with much pain did view
How on her looks madness and anger ranged,
And on Bellam he private glances threw,
To bring him word if that she stood unchanged,
If she continued square despite of them,
Whose jealous eyes did all their actions hem.
Bellama knew the language of his eye,
But could not give respect to Cupids law,
For Piazella to her eyes did tie
A constant watch, which kept her eyes in awe,
That she was forced to peep within her vaile^
For there the matrone did her eyes en-jayle.
The ragged crew which are en-wrapt in chains,
Through grates more freedom have of sight than she.
Which in them both produced such griefs and pains
Too sharp and loud to be expressed by me.
Albino now does judge his absence better,
And chose a proxee to present a letter.
One of his order, (deemd a trusty friend
Endeard to him by favors, oath and vow)
Was his Talthibius, ordaind to send
To her, whose beauty makes stiff Atlas bow.
The Monk embraced the office, and did swear
By all our scarlet oaths, faith, truth, and care.
Albino now to every Santo prays,
And for success his hands with zeal does rear,
Courting his Lady in some Irish Lays,
And robbed his singer of its golden sphere
En-neald, (I live in hope) and sure griefs waves
If Anchorlesse, had been it is wishes graves.
To mee's fair Metres, Vandebrad I style of te fine town of Vaschester.
ICk predee metres be not coy,
But intertaune mee's love vit joy:
For me be not a snottee boy.
Vat tough me russell not in silk,
And keep mee's servaunts vit capes ilke,
Yet me be not a sop of milk.
Vat tough me vil not stautly stret,
And ilke de Peacock poudely jet;
Yet me be vary pruce and neat.
Vat tough me vil not lie vit pimpes,
And pend me's coin on light-teale shrimpes,
Yet me can hug, buffe pre^tee nymphs.
Vat tough me hane H^uke ne Hound,
And vil not suare begot, id ^ound,
Yet faith mee's frolique, plumpe and sound.
Vat tough me cannot Maudam say,
And vil ty Fanan Monkee play,
Yet me conflatter vel as they.
Vat tough me connot honor tee
Vit titles laudee Cor D,
Yet tou sault a good Metress be.
Vat tough, vat tough, Ick say, vat tough,
Ick say, udsnigs, in feck I trough,
Yet Ick drive not te Caurt and Plough.
Then pretee, protee, Buxome fair,
Let me not launguish in depaire,
But say me's suits all gaunted are.
Let ne mee's Irish Borrell speech,
In tyne affection mauke o breach,
For me con better say so teach.
And me can be as blyth and free
As auny push or saunten he,
Ton say, and ved, and bed vit me.
Tyne faytfull friend and good servaune, Patrick Applous, te fine, te bave, te
gallaun Irish-mon.

Upon the Ring sent to his Bellama.
GVpid oft-times disdaines to dwell
In lofty palace, but does shell
Himself in straw-thatcht roof; and choice
For novell, a September rose
Before a Diamond to present
Or time in silver seilings pent,
Great gifts enforce, but small ones woo,
And forced respects will never do.
He questions his own worth, that fears
To whisper in his mistress ears
With smallest gifts, since true worth hates
Aboune which for him lowdly prates,
And female worths may justly slight
Those that, but with guilt swords, dare sight.
These make me send this little ring,
(An Emblem of a greater thing)
It Is bruised, hence represents true
My heart bruised, bent and bowd for you,
Anatomists conclude by art,
A vein is stretched to the heart
Froth'smallest finger of the left,
From vein and singer comes this geft:
Hence merits better, since we find
Many send presents, few their mind.
UPON THE POESY I live in hope.
It Is hope that makes me live, and when
My hope's transferred to other men,
Divorc'r from me, health cannot give
A strength to make my rent heart live,
A rented heart it is truly called,
For love of virtues you enthralled
Tenant at will to you, and pays
Large rents of sighs each hour and dayer,
But to what number they amount,
Puzzles Arithme tick to count.
Then courteous Land-lady be please
To seal my heart a life-long lease.
Else every slight and frown of yours,
Will turn your tenant out of doors,
Yet hope persuades me not to doubt
My heart shall not be turned out:
For you have promised to come
An live with it, or exchange home,
So I be Landlord unto thine,
And you be Land-lady to mine.
Say I to this, and only Fate
Shall change the tenor of our state.
Bardino from the Coven posts with speed
Unto Albino's only Polar star,
Laden with blessings, and beware, take heed,
As the great grand-dames son prepared for war,
Or as a widows son, whose only joy
Hangs on the nuptials of her lusty boy.
Like as a Pilot to some floating keele,
When as the bustlers from old Aeol's cave^,
On Neptunes furrowd back make it to reele,
And at his death shoot billow after wave:
So tossed in seas of grief Albino tide,
His loves choice pinnace to Bardino's guide.
But Bishop Guts, tun-belly'd, all-pancht Friar,
In sight of Lesbia's towers split his fair Galley,
Proved a dissembling and persidious liar,
From his foul breast deceit and hate did salley.
The seeds of every sin in him did bud,
Nothing did wither but this one thing, Good.
For to win credit with the Lady-mother
And raise a liking of himself in her,
He proved a traitor to his Abbey-brother,
With Abbatesse in private does confer,
And unto her imparts his amorous news,
She, not Bellam' his vowed service viewes.
But to Albino he returned with faith,
(Yet 'twas an oath) I importuned thy Saint,
Pressed her t'unlock thy secrets; but she says,
What pur-blinde folly does thy heart attaint?
Thou know what offers I refused, and thou'le
Confine my love unto a starved coule.
Away flings she, and leaves me disconsolate,
Nor after dain'd to me a wonted look:
Now is Albino pincht with cruel Fate,
Which is the better, Cupid, or thy book?
Had viewd her beauty with a scornful eye,
Thou had not tasted of her pride and fie.
Hapless Albin', and hapless so much more,
Because Albin', rest quiet with thy lot,
If Nilus overflow his sandy floor
Above twelve cubits, it procures a rot.
When at too high a pitch affections tower,
Fate with misfortunes often their hopes does sour
Wound not the harmless air with mournful hoots
Steer not against Volgo's stream thy feeble keele,
Be not like him who against a whirlwind shoots,
Or like the Cockatrice in pecking steel,
For acts against nature wrought, despite do gain,
And love o're-looking Fortune, reapes disdain.
But let us see what strange effect this news
Writes in his breast (disasters fatal book)
What stronger plot his working fancy brewes,
If's lofty thoughts be at this answer shook,
Alas! they are, so weak a thing is man,
Crasht into Atoms with a slighting fan.
His blood retires unto his throbbing heart,
His wanned cheeks with lawne were overspread,
An aspin trembling loosned every part,
His spirits fainted, and his vitals sled,
And his quick heart with such strong motions beated
That it, though chil'd with fear, his body heated.
Entering his chamber, strewed over with rue,
He leaned his head upon his swelling pillow,
And sighing, cryde, Bellama is this true,
Must I be doomed to the barren willow^
I thought, exempted from my pedants art,
I should no more have felt the willows smart.
Thy eyes spoke love, and every glance you sent,
Writ on my heart, Albino is approved,
When so'ere my eyes unto thy seature went,
And met with thine, they brought me word, you loved
Then can Bellama not Bellama be?
She may Bellama be, but not to me.
Blessed heavens! how have men deserved your ire,
That made you frame this curse, this thing called Woman,
So comely and so useful? giving fire
To sear us men, and yet disdain to know man?
Why on their faces have you placed such charms,
To make us court with sighs the worst of harms?
Paudora's box of woes was opened then,
When first they took in hand to make a woman,
And all the Furies joynd to torture men;
Yet women first were rare, but now grown common,
And mischiefs high, when once they common grow.
Entombe great states, and commons overthrow.
Thou Love, (what should I call thee?) do entice,
Nay checkst rebellion in the awful gods,
Women thy weapons are, of such high price,
That beat with them, they humbly kiss the rods.
No life, no joy, no sweet, without a less,
And yet no sweet nor joy since woman was.
Our eyes do never mistake the day for night,
Nor can the pale-hewd pinkes for roses pass,
But when on women's colors they do light,
Then (bribed) they look as through a painted glass,
So that what women are we never see,
But what we wish and fancy them to be.
Among thousand virgins which do suck this air,
I never knew but one, but one -- one good,
Whom I supposed full as good as fair,
And she was making e're Deucalions flood:
But she alas! what should I say? but she
Is woe to man, a woman unto me.
Thus in his heightened fury he condemns,
Both Fate and Fortune, honor, wealth and worth,
Raileth on virgins and their beauteous gemmes,
And curses nature, that did bring herforth,
But above all, his sharp incensed Muse,
In wrathful Odes Don Cupid does accuse.
An Invective against CUPID.
THou love, if thou will suffer this, be blind,
Dease, dumb, and stupid, and unwisely kind,
More unto slights than merits, and reward
Respects and negligence with same regard.
If Sattens difference, and maids adorn,
Then nature has with beauty, more with scorn,
That they must fligger, scoff, deride and jeere,
Appoint their servants certain hours t'appeare,
Afford by number, kisses, sights by tale,
Command a certain distance, and empale
Loves game from taste or touch, and if at all
Men do transgress, steep all their words in gall:
Check but the least presumption, and with frowns
Strike as much terror unto us, as crowns;
Love, if thou wilt suffer this, and wink at them,
Make us esteem a pebble for a gem,
Stoop, crindge, adore, sue, flatter, and admire,
And in our bosoms teenst thy amorous fire,
May all the haggish Furies soundly lash
And with their snaky whips thy sinews gash:
May all the tortures Hell encloseth, fall
On thee, if not enough, and, more then all;
But we -- we men will be no more thy slaves,
And women's too, we will pack unto our graves:
And in our silent beds of earth will court
The slender-wasted worms, and with them sport,
Dally, hug, toy, and vow their wimbling busse
Is full as sweet as women's was to us.
En-wall'd with dust we will lie, till nature shall
Perceive thy malice (Cupid) and her fall,
And wooes with sighs and tears in loving guise,
For a replantage of the world, to rise,
Then shall our wills un-god thee, and thy mother,
And Cupids be our selves one to another.
Then in thy Temples shall no voice be heard,
But Scriech-owles, Dors, aad Dawes, no Altarreard
Whereon to sacrifice true lovers hearts,
Scalded with sighs, and galled with thy darts,
For we our selves, our selves will temples call,
And make our bosoms Altars, whereon shall
From fourteen to fourscore the females faires
Burn Frankincense of love with sighs and praires,
And change the custom so, that maidens then
Shall court, admire, adore and woo us men.
This said, he strove t'unbillow all with slumbers,
But th'more he strove to rest, less rest he takes,
His watchful thoughts each tatling minut numbers,
Bellama's wakening beauty him awakes.
And having purchased sleep, though they were dire,
Bellama's beauty darted rays at him.
Then starting up, her substance fair to catch,
He lost the shadow, and did rave again,
Can grovelling Brambles lostie Cedars scratch?
Or wadling Duckes o're-top the tow^ing Crane?
Yet virtues imp'd with person, reach a sky,
And to an higher pitch then Fortune fly.
There is a tree, (as our Historians write)
Alpina hight, of fair and glorious glee,
With branches fine, and glorious blossoms dight,
But never tasted by the witty Be,
Fearing death lodges there, and this he fears,
Cause to the eye so glorious it appears.
Not much unlike to these our women are
Whom Nature has in dainty colors dressed,
And of our women likest are the fair,
For with much beauty virtues seldom rest.
Would love all women I had judged to be
Alpina-like, or if not all, yet she.
The Queen of beauty strumpet was to Mars,
Officious Bawd unto lascivious Jove,
A patroness of those that ride in Carres,
And in her Court nor virtue reigns, nor love,
But lust and vanity with wily trains,
That he repentance buys, which beauty gains.
She Has many trulls, like Menelaus wife,
And she such light-skirt things for chaste ones sels,
With whom dissembling and deceits are rife,
Smiles, tears, sighs, looks, with such inch anting spells.
If they but bend their brows, and shoot out frowns,
They crack a scepter, and distemple crowns.
Yet stay: but by the sour we know not sweet,
White's silver hue adjoynd to black, shines best,
How should we know our hands, but by our feet?
Healths only prized, when sickness does arrest.
This principle perhaps Bellama holds,
Summer is known by Winters chilling colds.
Perchance Bellama did not breath that woe
Which by Bardino was conveyed to me;
Nor dwelt upon her lips that scornful No,
'Twas only forged by her Dame and he.
But -- why should suspicion steal into my breast?
Suspect a friend, deceit with friendship rest?
No: Phaeton base son to days bright blaze,
Daring his Chariot felt Jove's thunder fire.
Astronomers, whilst on the stars they gaze,
Oft-times do sink into the durty mire:
Only the Eagle without purblinde dampes,
Can fix his eyes upon the prince of lamps.
The son of Daedalus soared up so high,
That Phoebus plucked his waxen joynted wings;
It was her pride checked my ambitious eye,
True love to hatred changed by slights has stings,
I Will write invectives: no, I Will only try
What virtue dwells in slighting Poesy
To his Bellama slighting him.
I Will bore the heavens, pierce the clouds a vain,
Make them full torrents weep of brackish rain,
To second my laments, me thinks the Sun
Knowing my clue is raveld and undone,
That my Bellama slights, should vexed resign
To His sisters Chariot his Ecliptic line.
Bid Phoebe run horn mad, and lowdly cry,
Froth, howl, as in a fit of lunacie,
Nay, throw a poison on Endimions lips,
Threaten to drown the world, the Sun eclypse,
Keep the stars order still? or can they stir,
And not digress? Know they how not to err?
Sure no: I saw bright Paphos snuff her lamp,
Yet vowed to quench it with eternal dampe,
Hurl all away, if that her servants love
Be had in no regard, and awful Jove
Hurry along the milkie way to find
That snifling deity, that winged, blind --
And vowed to clip his wings as short as Munkes,
Their stubbed beards more short than pained runkes
Unless he shot a dart with more than speed,
To make Bellama's heart affections bleed.
Bold Ocean foames with spite, his neb-tides roar,
His billows top and topmast high do soar.
Nature herself is sullen, keeps her bed,
And will not rise so much as dress her head,
Regardlesse of the seasons, will not see
Loud winds deplume the bush and towering tree.
The Ploughman furrows earth, sowes seed ith'tides,
But nature weeps for me, his pains derides
Copernicus his tenet's verified,
The massy Globe does'bout its center ride.
All things dis-rankt, nothing observes it state,
Change time and tide, or post or ante-date
But thou Bellam' art deaf to me and blind,
Steelst thine affections, flintst thy hardened mind,
And strik'st fire thence t'en flame my tinder hear,
Thou oyl'st the flame, but I endure the smart,
How often have I, when others eyes have slept,
Like sentinels to armies, watchings kept?
And when the thought oth'saints thrice blisful home
(which ah! too seldom) among my thoghts did come
Then spite of goodness blessed E was lost
And you the haven of me tempest-tost:
Have I made envious art admire thy worth,
Touched the Ela of praise, t'emblazon't forth?
Bid sleep good night, quiet and rest adieu,
Made my self no self to entitle you.
And after this sad purgatory, must
My hopes be laid ith'dust for want of dust?
Then know Bellama, since thou aim stat wealth,
Where Fortune has bestowd her largest dealth,
That wealth may puff a clod of earth like leaven,
But virtuous want alone ensouleth heaven.
Know more, I scornd thy fortune, 'twas thy self
I courted, not thy slight adored pelf,
And had not Mortals curse blessed thee and I
Had sweld with honor and nobility,
My love once fixed on virtue, parents hate
In both, might shake, but never everts loves state.
I aim at virtues bliss, and if I find
The heart and bosom good, I slight the rind.
But since Bellama, thou regardst not me,
I scorn to cringe, adore, and flatter thee.
For he that rules his thoughts, has a nobler soul,
Than he that awes the world from Pole to Pole.
Thus, Fair, adieu, with love these measures sean,
And know my love was but a fit of man.
We Will leave Albino in this phrentick mood,
And view Bellama parged ore with fear,
Asking a member of her sister-hood,
(For love and vertves unto her most dear)
Amongst their sportings, and their chaste delights,
Wherefore Albino did retraine their sights.
Barraba (her the Font those letters gave)
Said, I presume, I rightly guess the cause,
Bellama urged (thanks to the pur-blinde knave)
'Twas thus, quoth she, yet made a two-dayes pause,
At length with importunings overcome,
She told her why Albino kept at home.
Bardino did deceive his trust, quoth she,
Told all, yet sung another song to him,
His love came laptin paper unto thee,
He with quaint words did his affections lim,
Vowed service, but Bardino (ah the shame!)
Vnclaspt his secrets to our jealous dame.
Am I an Infidel? or dare I tie,
Quoth fair Bellama, unto this, belief?
Shall just revenge in my soft bosom dye?
And shall I melt my heart with secret grief?
I Will scold with him, Says chaste Barraba, no:
For by that, others will your wishes know.
What she should do (plunged in this depth of woe)
Bellama knew not, nor durst counsel ask,
More dangers waither, if she send or go,
Than if she underwent Alcides task,
Distracted were her thoughts in silence tide,
Till love and honor buzzled, then she cryde,
Ah false Bardino! shame of holy Orders!
Whither, ah! whither did thou send thy troth?
To be grand factor in the frozen borders,
For them whose deckes do make old Ocean froth?
And truthlesse thou, locktin this gloomy Cell,
I'lotst baseness to enlarge the crown of hell.
Unjust Bardin', unworthy of a cope,
Or (whose employments holy) other vest,
Did, oh did thy conscience scour with soap?
And washed all faith from off thy glazed breast?
And faith less thou esteemest less of vow,
Than clownish whistlers, which do steer the plow
Where did incage thine eyes? durst thou behold
(Acting this crime) the castle of the stars?
How stopst thine ears? did hear the heavens scold,
And chide in wind and thunder, threatening wars?
Durst touch the hallowd water, spittle, salt,
The Cross or Pax, and yet attempt this fault?
Those sacred Bagno's wherein Pagans wash
Their sullyd limbs for their Moschea's door,
The pottage-penance, and repentant lash,
The hair-cloth shirt, skin shoes, and thousand more,
The Arch-vicars pardon, and the purging flame,
Can never absolve thy crime, or clear thy fame.
Pack then from humane eyes, and shroud thy sin
Under the curtains of eternal night;
Perfidiousnesse does make thee near of kin
To hels black fiends, with robes of horror dight:
Pack, pack, be gone, the Ferry-man does stay,
To waft thy paunch over the Acherontick Bay.
But peace Bellama, do thou think it fit
To value at so mean a price thy pearl?
Applaud thy selfe' count it a point of wit,
To take a Cowlist, and refuse an Earl.
The world shall be un-centerd, ere 't be said,
Beauty takes lodging in an humble maid.
What then? shall every fashion fashion me?
As in religion, by the Churches eye,
So by the worlds, must I in loving see?
No, I the worlds supremacy deny.
Hence with those loves, which profit only measures
I hate that heart which only shoots at treasures.
The Cyprian goddess is not fed with ploughes,
Nor Cupids arrow guided is with acres:
Vulcan permitted was to shake the boughs;
But Mars sucked in the sweets without partakers.
Youth youth pursues, for with Autumnall looks
Cupid does seldom bait his eighteen hooks.
Who in pleure tick passions does deny
To open veins, to shut death out oth'dores?
Who will not in sharp Fevers Galen try,
To we alcen humors, and unstop the pores?
The quickest eye does want the quickening Sun,
And to the Sea the drilling cadents run.
Who, when Sir Cupid enters at the eye,
With pride and coy disdain shuts comfort forth?
I Will make ambition stoop, now love says I,
And satin thoughts shall veil to Tammey worth:
By lovely maids, the lovely loved are,
And by the fair most favored are the fair.
Thus did she rage, her resolution love,
Which spite of all disastets she will harbor,
Hoping blessed fate will so propitious prove,
T'enclose her Monk and her in Cupids Atbour:
But leave her surfeting with hope, and view
When to Monastic vows she will bid adieu.
Till Cynthia twice twelve times repaired had
Her silver horns, she was incloysterd here,
When some kind planet moved her loving Dad
To fetch her thence, his frosty'd age to cheer;
Hence virgin vow, away black vestments hurld,
Bellama's borne again into the world.
He with his Lady mounted on his Ten.
Net, to the Nunnery, with haste does ride,
Accompanied with troops of harnest men,
And vowed a siege, if Piazzell' denyde,
To batter down the holy walls with guns,
And fright the Hag with all her simpring Nuns.
He in an ambush placed his iron crew,
Bad them prepare when as the trumpe did call,
Dismounting then, the Ianitor him knew,
And lead the Lordly couple through the hall,
Parlours and chambers, to the conclave, where
The pious Nuns their branched Lillies rear.
Bellama craved a blessing, they it gave:
Then Rivelezzo he did softly ask
If the Monasticke roof should be her grave?
If now she grieved for Don Fuco's task?
If after two years bondage now she would
Answer more kindly to the voice of gold?
My Lord, quoth she, with humble knee and voye^,
I am not tired with my nicer vow,
Nor hate I Hymen, might my eyes make choice,
Ask when I Will marry? and I Will answer now.
A man (quoth he) for face and virtue choose,
And on mine honor, I will not refuse.
Piazzella searing that their whispring would
Presage no good unto her huffing waste,
Broke off their parle, and Rivelezzo told
That his saire daughter zealous was and chaste:
And that her mind no evil did attaint,
She almost has attaind to be a Saint.
Such high-priz'd comforts, joys, rewards and glory
Our happy walls en-seele and curtain in,
That we alone survive all praise and story,
Are called Hels tortures, and the whips of sin.
The local motion of our souls in heaven,
We hate blind Turcisme, and the Jewish leaven,
Madam, quoth Don, you need no advocate,
Since you your self can plead your cause so well,
But that my sex does interdict this state,
What your words might essect, I cannot tell;
But sure it does un^crue a virgins heart,
To hear of love, and never feel his dart.
Madam, for sooth, quoth Lady Arda, I
Never found such comfort ith'innupted life,
Nor think the blessings of virginity
Can equal the contentments of a wise.
My voice should not assent unto her vow,
To wreath with willow sprigs her melting brow,
Quoth Piazzella, I am grieved sore
To hear such scandals thrown upon our vow,
To hear Diana, whom all ought ^ adore,
And her chaste votaries depraved now.
I know not what contents attend a wise,
But sure they equal not th'innupted life.
Again, your honors you do much impeach,
To force your daughter from this happy state;
Twixt her and happiness you make a breach,
And pull upon your heads a cursed Fate.
Heavens un-bu^kle will their clouds of rain,
Death or diseases, if you part our train.
The body's better than the sheathing skin,
And ought with greater care to be maintained,
The guest is far more worthy than the Inn,
And ought with greater study to be traind.
The soul mounts heaven, when earrhs aged womb
The Skeleton (her issue) does entombe.
A way with arguments in vain you plead,
Our vow (quoth they) lo^kt not her girdle ever,
I (quoth Pazzella) do abjure the Tede,
Hymen shall never my holy orders sever
But spite of all the tricks the world does nurse,
I Will keep my virgins from the bridal curse.
Without demurres, Don Rivelezzo then
With shrill voyc't trumpet made an echo speak,
Straight was the house environed with men,
Which with their leaden gloabes an entrance break
The air was frighted with the powder-thunder,
The bellowing noise did split the rocks in sunder
Affrighted thus, the Matrone bid them gang,
And to Bellama gave a sad adieu:
Yet in her heart she grypt with Envies fang,
And over her looks a veil of sorrow drew.
The joyful parents having got their daughter,
Gave a farewell unto the house with laughter.
Leaving the Coach and Cloister, we will take part
With poor Albino in his woe and grief,
Who seeing Fortune his designs did thwart,
And Neptunes grandchild brought him no relief:
Did think to win her presence in disguise:
He that but one way tries is hardly wise.
He plotted to invest himself with robe
Might speak him nobly borne, and gallant hair,
To some vaste measures of this wealthy globe,
Seated aloft in honors Ovall chair:
Procure him then some store of laced capes,
To wait on him with servile garbes and shapes
Pretending to be one oth' Spanish court,
Giving strange accents to our modern speech,
And hither came, his wandering mind to sport,
But that he faces lackt to tune each breech.
Besides, he knew the Matrones care was such,
She love untwisted in the eye or touch.
Then a new project did he get on's brain,
And sheard the downy moss from his smooth chin,
Intending to be one oth' Virgine-traine,
Like Jupiter huskt in a female skin:
But that he feared religion could not bridle,
His active heat twixt linen to beidle.
He thought his breaking voice would him betray,
Unless he said, he ever had a cold:
He feared the courtesy and the female play,
Or that his face would make him seem too old:
But above all, he feared he should not lock
His legs within the compass of a smock.
In costly vestures he would be arrayde,
Of high descent, and fearing lest his Sire
Would force him to an hated pillow, strayd
With them to teene the holy vestall sire.
He would be nobly borne, not out of pride,
But to be sheeted by Bellama's side.
He had no treasure, but would promise fair,
That settled there, he should be fed in state,
Hoping to win the porter with kind air,
That with Bellama he might thread the gate.
He all would venture, and upon this plot,
Would place his fortunes, and the Gordian kno^^
In such accoutrement he veiled was,
That to himself Albi^o was not known,
He looked for Albino's face in the glass,
But nothing of himself t'himselfe was shown:
Each way a maid enricht with special grace,
As though he had unslow^'d Adoni^ face.
He styled himself Ph^^^^che, only child
To him, who at that time was Fo^^o's Duke,
And was so like to her whom he was styled,
That she could searcely say it was not her look:
For what is of Issa and her picture writ,
Was found in them, they taskt the Poets wit.
Unto this Virgine-cage she fast did pace,
And knocking at the gate, the Porter came,
Who seeing riches on her back and face,
With humble voice desired to know her name.
My name (good friend) quoth she, Phoeliche is,
I come to taste your choice Monastic bliss.
Madam, Avaro said, our rubbish stone
With cement joynd shall precious straight be made
In that they shall enspheare so fair an one.
Phoeliche smiling at the porter, said,
Has time with Iron jaws eat out this part,
Which now these Masons do repair by Art.
And truth it was, Phoeliche ( Folco's heir)
Flying the disaster of an hated Tede,
Coucht in disguises at a cottage bare!
(But how? when? where? task not my amorous led)
So that Pazzella's faith writ on her brow,
The noble treasures of Phoeliches vow.
Not time it was, but an unhappy hour,
The porter said, we had a virtuous fair,
Daughter unto a man of mighty power,
(So like your self, I think you sisters are)
How laregely fiattry has dispersed its song,
That it does oil and smooth a porters tongue.
Bellama hight, by her uncourteous sire
Fetched hence who when my Lady did deny,
Begirt our holy walls with sulphur fire,
And summond harnest men which close did lye^
They with their leaden worlds at us did play.
And frighted (as you see) these stones away.
Phoeliche knowing that her Adamant,
Th'impulsive cause of this her virgin-vow,
Was vanished thence, and gleames of joy did want,
And wanning for^ow reveld on her brow
Scarce could she speak, and every joynting trembled,
Yet feared the Porter, and her fear dissembled.
Pazzella and the virgins her esteemed,
Seeing her feature, and un-equald grace,
Before they knew his parentage, or deemed
He was descended from high Folco's race;
But knowing that, their joys did swell so high
That grief for sorrow slinkt aside to cry.
But ere the next days Sun, to let out day
Nights Ebon box unlockt, she did not brook
To hear their private whispers, talk, and pray,
Erect the host, and kiss a gilded book:
For, her, Bellama has possessed solely,
So that their water could not make her holy.
In stead of Virgin Mother, she would say,
My dearest Lady, hear my sad complaint,
Nor to she-Saints would she devoutly pray,
'Cause none but her Bellama was a Saint
Unto Loretta, as Bellam' she swears,
And calls their holy water but her tears.
She wondered often how her Bellama did
Two years continue in this hated cell;
And in her thoughts she oftentimes her chid,
For dwelling where but formal good does dwell,
Since in her absence she could scarce abide
To sojorne here a double eventide.
Her brains acquainted was no whit with sloth,
But plotted how she might escape that Iayle,
And to this end she vowed her virgin-oath
Should for her quick returning put in bail:
She thought her breach of virgin-oath no sin,
Because she only wore the formal skin.
She mist, in ransacking her Cabbinet,
A precious jewel far exceeding rate,
Which on her brow the Lady Duchess set,
As a true pledge of her indulgent care,
Far richer than that pearl which Egypts Queen^,
Quaft to her mark dissolved in liquor keen.
But for all this, a curious fit of man,
Did force her, for assay, to enter in,
To see if fasting did their Rosies wan,
Or folly led not in the Paphian sin,
Thinking her wit could manumisse her straight,
From that lank cloister, by some nimble slight.
This she pretended to have lost, as she
(Fainted with fears, and with her travailes tired)
In the cool shade of a well-haired tree,
Threw water on her joints with labor fired:
For heavens parch the air with hotter rays,
When with his flaming tongue the dog star bays
Madam, quoth she, with feigned tears and sigh,
Grant me your license to go seek my Gem,
The place of my reposure is but nigh,
Swore by those fires that did enlighten them.
By her virginity and virgin-vow
Return ere time could pace a triple now.
Quoth Piazzella, I will send a maid
To seek your jewel out with studied care,
Direct her to the shade, wherein you stayed,
For you forbidden are the common air;
Our gardens beautifide with Maya's glee,
Your farthest journey must and ought to be.
She urged again, but all in vain she asked,
The Prioresse remembered still the Earl.
And feared Phoeliche his departure maskt
Under pretense of seeking for a pearl:
And more suspicious thoughts unto her came,
'Cause she so often kissed Beliama's name.
She seeing that this plot did want a stamp
To make it current pass, like lawful coins,
Feared her departure from this lanky came,
And vowed to try the virgins skill at foynes:
Yet ere she would attempt that amorous play,
She would attempt escapes some other way.
She veiwd the casements, and did boldly wrench
With courage masculine, the squared bars,
But they did scorn the vigor of a wench,
Like sturdy Oaks which slight the windy jarres.
Nay more, deep waters did begirt them round,
That from the glass he could not see the ground
Then on the porter did she kindly smile,
And by full tale gave free respects to him,
Thinking to gull Avaro by this wile,
Joined with language, oyld, persum'd and trim,
Quoth she thy trust and sk^l I must employ,
And for thy pains thou shall have treasures boy.
The greedy Porter like a Goshauke seaz'd
With griping tallons on this Pheasant Cock:
Madam, says he, my skill is not diseased,
Nor dwells dissembling with the honest frock.
Disclose your secrets, and be sure, if man
Can do you service, then Avaro can.
Phoeliche then, as prologue to her suit,
Gave him a purse full fraught with pseudo-gold,
Told him her bounty brought no worser fruit,
If in th'at chievement he would be true and bold.
Thou must some evening let me pass the gates,
And straggle half a mile to gather dates.
Madam, I Will do it, it is a small request,
Since you do merit better at my hand;
If fortune be propitious to my hest,
You on the common shore this night I Will land:
My hands have eyes, and only what they see
Will they believe: give me my minted fee.
Phoeliche then plucked out a silken purse,
Great, and as musical as the other was,
Pretending it was stuffed with metal curse,
When It only was with circled rags of glass;
Which purposely she did with Dimonds cut,
To gull the Porters hopes, and sill his gut.
Heavens augment your store, Madam, quoth he,
I Will wait you at the middle age of night;
Come to my lodge, and softly called for me:
This handsome cheat Phoeliche did delight.
To cousen the deceivers is no fraud,
To use a Pimpe, and cheat a rusty Baud.
She scarcely knew what letters spelled griese,
For all her thoghts with regal crowns were wreathed
Yet amongst them all, Bellama ruled as chief:
At time of rest her body she unsheathed,
And house d within the linen walls her lims,
Till night and sleep did their quick tapers dim.
Avaro (when days sisters mistie fog
Had popped out Apollo's searching eye,
And general silence humane tongues did clog,
Locking all senses up with Lethargy)
Stepped to his purses, and began to think
How he should order his beloved chinke.
He Would hang his lodge with Arras, weaved with gold,
That his successor there might sleep in state,
Or else, if some revenues would be sold,
He Would give them Darwey bought at any rate,
That all the Nuns with prayers and holy names,
Might fetch his soul from out the purging flames.
I Will mend highways, or hospitalls repair,
Else build a College, and endow't with mines.
Thus did he build his castles in the air:
For all is not cash that gingles, gold that shines,
His glassie coin leap out of the mint,
Ere on his brow the stamp did current print.
Thus was he guld, as once a king of France
Paid a French Mounfieur for a prauncing steed,
Gave him a purse whose richness did enhance
Th'inclosed gem, supposed a noble meed;
But when for golden mountains he did gape,
He op't the purse, and only found a rape.
Oh what full anger redded ore his looks!
What tides of rage and fury sweld his spleen!
He curses her with candles, helles, and books,
And vowed ere long on her to wreak his teen.
Ah me! quoth he, such brittle things are lasses,
Which one poor letter changes unto glasses.
Phoeliche now perceiving all was quiet,
Hearing no noise, unless a belly-blast,
Which might proceed from an unwholesome diet,
Tide her apparel on with nimble haste;
And coming to the lodge with knuckle knock,
She strove to summon out the lazy frock.
But the grim Tartar was so soundly luld
Without a dram of Opium steept in Ale,
Tired with vexing that he was so guld,
That all Phoeliches rappings naught avail,
Till vexed with demurres she knocked so loud,
It raised a thunder like a breaking clowd.
Just at that instant did Pazzell awake
From an affrighting dream, wherein she saw
A dreadful Lion her Phoeliche take,
And tear her body with his sharpened paw;
And hearing this shrill noise, fear said it was true,
Danger did threaten her Monastic crew.
Her frostied limbs she heaved out of bed,
And sheld her body in her night apparel,
Arming her hands with pistols stuffed with lead,
Which anger firing, with the air did quartell:
And groping in the dark, her foot did slip,
Which out oth' barrels made the bullets skip.
Phoeliche at that thunde-clap amazed,
With haste retired from the Porters cell,
And meeting her, on one another gazed,
The Porter starting up, did ring the bell;
The virgins shreekt, which all made murmures shrill
Like Irish bubbubs in pursuit of ill.
When reason somewhat had becalmd their rage,
The Abbatesse Phoeliche sharply checked:
Madam, says she, I only came t'asswage
Intestine heates, which all my body deck
Inscarlet dye, and being much appald,
With frisking Fairies I the Porter called.
Go, go, you are a wanton girl quoth she,
That fain would tempt my Porter unto folly,
Madam, Phoeliche said, you injure me,
Sure, if lascivious I had been so jolly,
I might have met with many men more able,
Before I did invest my self with sable.
Oh madam, madam, mad Avaro cryde,
Why, do you think she could overcome your frock?
I never did yield, yet have been often tryde,
My courage has withstood a greater shock.
Yet sure she would -- she would have past the gates,
The reason why? forsooth to gather dates.
I am afraid your dukedom, girl does long,
Not for the Porter, he is out of date;
But for an oily Cavalier that is strong,
May teach her virginship a mothers fate.
Madam, look well, see if you miss no glass,
I Am sure with bri^tle coin she guld an Ass.
Then told the story. Piazzella fretted,
This is the Jewel which you would have sought,
When in all haste from hence you would have jetted
What your intendments were, my wisdom thought,
I Will have no gadders; and t'allay your heat,
I have a diet will prevent a sweat.
In a retired room she locked her up,
Devoyd of lustful mates with her to play;
Allowd her pulse, and juice of clouds to sup,
And bad her scores of Ave Mary's say.
Three artificial days she lodged there,
Where every day to her did seem a ye are.
When she had paid this penance for her crime,
Which in her judgment was accounted bad,
She was again amongst the virgins prime,
On promise that she would not henceforth gad:
Yet still she plotted, but where ere she went,
The angry destines thwarted her intent
Then from Bellam' since walls did her en-cell,
She thought t'employ her talent to the best:
One of the vitgines had some vogliarell,
And earnestly desired with her to rest.
Who ere the morn did Piacinto sing,
And wore her blushes on her ruby'dring.
Next night she chose another, then another;
Her curious palate so to novels stood,
That every one had hope to be a mother,
And near of kin, united in one blood
But yet, alas! this pleasure lasted not,
Their virgine-girdles could not keep their knot.
Not many forthnights after they had took
These physic potions from their Doctors reins,
One told her folly by her meagre look;
Another had more blew than on her veins,
Others were qualmish, and another longs:
All spoke their pleasures, yet all held their tongues
One longed for Citrons, and another grapes
That grew on Alps steepheight, others for peaches:
One strangely did desire the tails of Apes
Steeped in juice of Mirtles, holmes and beaches.
Some palats must be fed with implum'd Quails,
And nothing must approach this tongue but rayls.
Some longed for Creevish shrimps, Cods, Plaice and oysters,
One for a Limmond that does grow on tho nes,
Another longs for some blood of Roysters,
Spic't with the scrapings of pale Cynthia's horns,
One on the bosom of the Matrone skips,
And spite of her full nose did gnaw her lips.
One bad them fill an Orke of Baccbus water,
Her thirsty soul she said would dreane a tun,
One from her window bids a poor translater
Cut her a cantell of the gawdie Sun:
But above all, I like that witty girl,
Which longed to feed upon a glorrah Earl,
The jealous matrone which suspicious eye,
Did read their common ill in every face,
Bspyde the breach of their virginity,
And feared a plantage with an infant race.
Yet still supptest her knowledge, till at last
Their beaying bellies hist their thickened waste.
She then with friendly summonings did call
The grave Lord Abbot, and his smooth-chin race,
Who coached came unto the virgin-hall,
But all the rabble through the vault did pace.
Arrived here, the cooked dainty cates,
To (...) the Abbot, and his Tempo-pates.
So called a counsel 'bout her quondam maid,
Each one admiring who durst be so bold,
Since none had entrance, nor the virgins strayd,
And for the Porter he was known too cold:
The Pryor feared lest one of his square caps
Should guilty be of those up-heaving laps.
It was decreed that they all should be
Shreev'd, being sejoyned from each others ken,
But ere that time the teemers did decree,
What answer to return the shreeving men:
Phoeliche did instruct them to deny.
That she gave birth unto their pregnancie.
But they should say, and to that saying seal,
With strong asseverations, that into
Our fast-lockt room a youthful blade did steal,
And with the best of wooing did us woo:
Our cases are the same with Merlins mother,
Woe think our lover was his fathers brother.
It Was one man's act, or clothed with humane shape,
He was Angelical, and this we thought,
Because there was no semblance of a rape:
We gave him our assent as soon as sought.
We judged un-maiding better in the dark,
Than Daphne-like, an husking ore with bark.
The shreevers to their Lords return with smiles,
And on their looks a joy ovall chhriots had,
Said, they confessed them with zeal and wiles,
And by a plain narration knew the dad:
One of those ever-youthfuls came from heaven,
And in the virgins wombes did lay a leaven.
The Abbot at this news did much rejoice,
Since with a kind aspect the virgin Ladee,
Viewing this Nunry, did ordain this choice,
And for the issue did appoint this dadee,
They shall be Prophets, Priests, of high renown,
And Virgins which shall keep their bellies down.
Provide them childbed linen, mantles, swadles,
Rockers and Nurses, all officious she is,
With Rattles, Corals, little Carres and Cradles,
And give them beads to wait upon their knees,
Romes high Arch-vicar shall a testate be,
To the first borne whom nature makes a he.
Take pens, and smooth-strain Anthems write in bays,
Make new Orizons unto all the Saints,
And to Lucina chaunt invoking lays,
To move her pity these young mothers plaints
Say, her fair temple need not fear the flame,
Whilst here she wins her an eternal fame.
Phoeliche smiled to see their studied care
To foster whom she at her pleasure got:
But Piazzella starting from her chair,
Called Phoeliche to survey her knot,
And finding it as at the first 'twas tide,
How escaped you this Goddy Sire she cryde?
Madam, quoth He- Phoeliche, I confess,
I was a party in those spruce delights;
But nature curses some with barrenness,
As I have heard Albertus Magnus writes.
So that though my desires were full as big,
I was not heaved with that curtain jigge.
Reason fortasse's on her words did stamp,
Which did en-truth the^ (though they were but squibs)
This done, the Prior did remove his camp,
And all the Friars with hemp-girdled ribs,
All great with expectation, and as feign
Would be deliverd as the full-flankt train.
They sung Canzone's ere the Sun could rise,
And Ave-Maries out of number said,
Lucina wondered at this strange disguise,
That Nuns and Monks to her devoutly prayed:
All Beads were racled, and all Saints invoked,
Some squeald, some tenourd, and some hoarsly crooked.
With this conceit Phoeliche frolique grew,
And sported bravely in the silenthoures,
Her bed-mates called her Angel, yet none knew
That 'twas Albino which had cropped their flowers:
But though they reveld in the night, the day
Threw hail-storms on their lust, to chill their play.
Yet had their pleasure not a grand-sire life:
For tatling slumbers did their joys untone,
You vowed Phoeliche, I should be your wife,
Says Cloe, ere you loosed my virgine-zone.
But ah! so wak't, and feared her vocal slumber,
Would from her eyelids force a Trent and Humber.
Says Phill', Phoeliche, had I known at first,
You only wore the name of Folco's daughter,
I would have suffered an untamed thirst,
Ere lust had brought mine honor unto slaughter:
But oh! and starring up, she feared her dream,
Would ere it was long, obscure joys mirthful gleam
Well, well, says Floris, it is an happy change,
To loose mine honor for an Angell-mate,
But Angels will not house in such a grange,
This is the offspring of Phoeliches pate:
But ah! so sigh't, and sighing caused fears,
Lest her plump Rosies should be plowd with tears
Yet you must know the virgins did not use.
To blab their private actions in a dream,
But that the cunning Matrone did infuse
Some atoms of the Quiris into cream,
And ere they were enclosed in Somnus arms,
She drencht their phanfies in these liquid charms.
Then with un-sealed eyes she made her ears
Keep privy watch to intercept their talk,
Yet would have washed her knowledge out with tears
And wished it written in her mind with chalk:
One while she thankt the God of slumber, then,
Her curses threw him down to Pluto's den.
But when Aurora in her Tissue vest,
Mantled with blushes, rose from Tithons side,
And through a casement of th'adored East,
Sent Phosphorus to usher in her pride,
Ere Phoebus out horizon did array,
With silver glitter of the blooming day.
She snatched ber termers from the sweet embrace
And golden fetters of deaths elder brother,
Bidding them hence those deadding slumbers chase,
T'implore the favor of the Virgin Mother.
They starting up with more than common speed,
Each sheld her body in her modest weed.
So called to chapel those whose pregnant wombes
The Angels pills had heaved above their wastes,
Like to a surfeit taine of Hybla's combs,
When we are too indulgent to our tastes:
But left Phoeliche out to cut or sue,
Or to embroider with the lankee crew.
Which made a sudden faintness loose each part,
And every joint was like an Aspin leaf,
Her rosy twins retired to her heart,
Her looks were colored like a Sunburned sheafe,
As the stiff bristles of an aged Boar,
Were her smooth locks which ore her cheeks she wore.
And juster cause had none than she to fear,
For as from quiet slumber she awoke,
She heard the ptisick pick Pazzella's ear,
That she had knowledge of what Floris spoke,
And now she doubted all would come toth'scanning
Their longing, swelling, and their sudden wanning.
The Virgins wondered at Phoeliches change,
To see her eyes fixed in a white-lim'd wall,
Each feared herself, and each conceived it was strange
Lest the disease was Epidemicall,
That Merlins uncle changed Phoeliches hue,
And streakt their temples with a purple blew.
But leave her fighing with these sterile Dames,
We Will crowd into the house of sacred vows,
Where consciousnesse begetting female shames.
Spread scarlet carpets on their cheeks and brows,
They looked and blushed, and glanc't on one another,
Each cursed the minute which did dub her, Mother.
The holy brethren through the moldy pipe
At that same time did unexpected come,
To know if th'goddy issue yet was ripe,
To give adieu unto their skin-seeld home.
But viewing still their wombs with zealous hands,
They prayed Lucina to unty their bands.
Their chauntings dead, the Abbatesse began,
Brethren, you see what sad misfortune haps
Unto my virgins by the oil of man;
Witness the heaving of their spongie paps:
We of an Angel dreamed; but if he was,
He shall hereafter for an evil pass.
I made their slumbers vocal, so they told
It Was Folco's Dukes supposed daughters work,
Larv'd with that name, it seems some Royster bold
Them to un-virgin cunningly did lurk.
But since it is so, the proverb shall stand good,
Tart sawces must be mixed with lushious food.
I knew him to be wanton, and to chill
The raging heat of his unbridled lust,
I doomed him three days penance, judged an ill
Would make him saplesse, as the Summers dust.
But since that faild, days shall be changed to years,
Minutes to months, till paid his tribute tears.
I Will try if grief will drean his melting reins,
And hang a crutch upon his able back:
If sorrow will unbloud his swelling veins,
And make his sinews, shrenke with famine, crack.
I Will make a purgatory, where, with hunged,
Frost, flame, and snow, I Will tame my virgin-monger.
I Will give command, a dungeon shall be made,
To whose close womb the Sun shall never pry,
Nor Cynthia dare to peep: for gloomy shade
Like clowdy night shall purblinde every eye:
Bare measure foure-foot broad, and for the height
'T shall make him by constraint, not, court lie slight.
A bed-stead hewn out of the craggie rock,
Not archt with Cedar wainescoat, knobd with gold,
His bed no shrinker, but a sturdy flock:
Swans shall not be dplum'd his linsbes t'in fold:
Nor curtaind with the travails of the Ioome
Of poor Arachne ere she had her doom.
I will not spend the ransom of a crown
For curious dainties to delight his taste:
I Will fetch no fowls from off the Parthian down,
Or Phaenicopter for luxurious waste.
I will no Mullet from Corsica take,
Oysters from Circes, or the Lucrine lake,
I will allow him pottage thickt with bran,
Of barley meal a chenix every day:
A sovereign diet for a frolique man
That is affected with the Paohian play:
And lest his stomach should too cholricke grow,
I will afford him some congealed snow:
The bald-pate crew this penance well approov'd,
And in a trice all things she ready got:
So well she stird her stumps (as it behoov'd)
She being hatcher of this starving plot,
This done, with friendly words and courteous air,
She called Phoeliche to her house of prayer.
It suits not with your greatness, Madam fair,
Being sole daughter to so great a man,
To lodge with those which your inferiors are,
As much as is an inch unto a span,
And I Am afraid the Duke will fume and swear,
Should but your lodging step into his ear.
Madam, quoth she, you harbor needless fears,
Goodness, not greatness, differenceth maids,
My father's no Tobacconist, and swears
In point of honor, like our scarlet blades:
And, by my faith, it more contenteth me,
To sheet with maidens, though of mean degree.
I am surcharged with the black-hew'd cholar,
Which strikes my fancy with most ugly shapes,
I durst not rest a darkness for a dollar,
Without a pillow-friend to scare those Apes:
Let Cloe with conceits my spirits wing,
Or melancholy will my Requiem sing.
You shall says she, have Sesamoidesse,
For all entreats are of too dull a print,
We must respect your fathers worthiness,
His honor must your love and passions stint,
And your own worth must highly be regarded,
How shall I else expect to be rewarded?
Then did she take her by the tender hand,
And led her to her grot in princely state,
She feared not much, nor did her will withstand,
Judging divorcement was her harshest fate:
But when she saw the entrance was so narrow,
A fudden fear did eat up all her marrow.
Pazzella viewing her supposed Less,
Repented her of her intended ills;
But in juries engraven are on brass,
And women's joynters are to have their wile.
And lest remorse should chill her angry mood.
Fuel was added by the brotherhood.
Then, says she, Madam you behold the cage
Which I prepared for your honors good,
Where you may spend the Autumn of your age,
Till age and winter have congealed your blood.
You may retire to ease, for envy can
Nor dares to say, you are not an able man.
When twice ten circled snakes are crawld away,
You shall enjoy companions masculine,
To give instructions in that youthful play
Is fed with Ceres and the god of wine:
And if my virgins shall hereafter be
Lascivious given, I will send for thee.
Into this Coven was Phoeliche thrust,
With bars and locks the entrance sealed fast,
Now must he pay a dear rate for his lust,
His Curtain-vezzo, and the Corrall taste.
Sure, his repentance will be full as dear,
As the Philosophers non tanti were.
Ah foppish Monk! did not Bellama's no,
Give thee a warning-peece, presaging danger,
But thou must headlong rush upon thy woo?
Happy's that man which is to lust a stranger:
If this of dalliance is the constant fee,
Let them d -- dally that do lift for me.
Here, when the barking star his scepter waved,
When in our clyme we feel an Aethiope's heat,
An under-vault the subtle matrone paved,
With fire and flame to force a constant sweat;
That as from flowers, hot Limbecks water still,
So by this stove from him sweat-currents drill.
Then for the winter season she provided
A melting cloud sull fraught with feathred rain,
(Whose curious art the aire-borne clouds derided)
Which through some oylet holes might passage gain
His cabine should have been like Alps cold hight
Mantled and strewed ore with winters white.
And it was so dark I cannot see to write:
Nay, at a nonplus it all pencils sets;
It Was helles epitomy, the cage of night,
Wal'd in with pitch, and roofed ore with jets.
The Linx at midday here would wish for day,
And Cats without a torch, must grope their way.
But leave him labyrinth'd, and thus distressed,
And see Bellama, and examine how
She brooks the absence of her bosome-guest;
If discontent does revell on her brow;
It does: for why she drea nes, and never sleeps:
She feeds, and sats not; laughes, but ever weeps.
Disaster hangs upon Albino gyves,
Says she, else Envy keeps him prisoner,
Or a new Bull does interdict them wives,
So seals the lips of my petitioner;
Else the smirke knave is so devout in prayer,
He has no time to kiss the common air,
But does he love? or is it a fit of mirth?
Which like to childrens fancies soon expire,
Ere language or employment give them birth,
Flashing affections, aged like thunder-fire:
His eyes shot Cupids at my yielding heart,
But his firm breast repeld my feeble dart.
Perchance he judged my forwardness to love,
By too much curtsie and my frequent glances,
So thought in jest my willingness to prove,
Not with that sober passion which entrances:
But with lip-love, which to the heart nere sinkes,
And paper-vowes which take their birth from inkes.
But stay: does greatness use to be denied?
Beauty and bravery command a grant;
Yet might my looks and carriage plumed with pride
His humble and untowring Spirit daunt,
Daunt? no^ his soul's a temper most divine,
Dares soar aloft to kiss the Suns near shine.
Then love he does: but must this action, Woo,
Be tide by patent only unto men?
Some unfrequented paths of love I Will go,
And in some riddles court him by my pen:
Yet first to the Abbey I Will dispatch a post,
To make enquiry where my Monk does host.
The Merchant is not with desires so big,
When as he plowes the Seas for Indian mines,
With slower steps the sons of Bacchus trigge
To Sack-shops for the French and Spanish wines.
Then she to Tagus bids her servant go
To Croftfull Abbey where her wishes grow.
Gone is the messenger, but small success
Waits on his travailes, for he back returns,
With Madam, where Albino's none can guess,
They think his ashes are enclosed in urnes:
For time, say they, has counted forth nights many,
Since his choice feature object was to any.
This answer shot an hail-storme at her heart,
Whose sudden chillness jelly'd all her blood,
Sh'applyed Helco to unscrue the dart,
But her assayments brought her little good:
For but Albino none can cure her ill,
Not Physic potions, or the druggards skill.
Ah me! Has Fate my dear Albino taken?
Then farewell Music, and you sprucing trade,
Either my tears shall body him again,
Or send my ghost to wayt upon his shade:
For she is judged a light unconstant lover,
Whose flame the ashes of neglect can cover.
Have you beheld how, when the moors and marsh
Belch vapors to blemish bright Titans eye,
They with his rays wage conflicts long and harsh,
Confining them unto their proper sky,
(Bribed perchance by envious night to wrap
Day and his champion in his sooty lap.)
So that to us appears nor Sun nor day,
And only faith persuades us there is both,
Till day and Sun call in each straggling ray,
And force a passage s^ight of fume and froth;
Yet then the day but newly seems to dawne,
And ore che Sun a veil of Cypress drawn
Just so diseasing forrow, armed with tears,
Sighs and black melancholy vaild her face,
So that no ray of love linesse appears,
And only faith persuades us she has grace:
Her eyes retired, her double blush was wan'd,
Her locks dissever'd, and her Lillies tan'd.
And as in her which arted looks does ware,
Men look for natures steps, and cannot trace her,
Since she by nature nothing less than fair,
Has purchased from the shops such worth to grace her,
Though foul, now fair and fleek, though age did plow
And made long furrows in her cheek and brow.
So knowledge here was in a maze, the eye,
That knew Bellama, did Bellama seek,
And looking on her, nothing could descry,
Spoke her Bellama or in eye or cheek.
To loves harsh laws she gave such constant duty,
Sh'ad only left an Anagram of beauty.
She threw her self upon her couch of ease,
And marshald all her thoughts in just arayes,
This brought small comfort, that did hardly please,
And in that thought despair the scepter swayes,
Yet thought she not death could a period set,
Unless he did some strange advantage get.
He Is young and lusty, every vein does swell
With Aqua-vitae, corrall juice of life,
His skill in Magic else can frame a spell,
To distance meagre death and Atrops knife:
Yet love gives birth to fear, I Will send to search
The Lions flinty bed, and Vultures perch.
I and my woman will attend the quest,
Vaild in disguises of some country Lasses
No state-distinction, for my humble breast
Shall leave all pride with silks, perfumes and glasses;
And if with non inventus we return,
I Will Venus witchcraft hate, and Cupid spurn.
When as the sovereign of the day had drawn
A veil of brightness ore the twinkling lamps,
And threw on Cynthia's brow a double lawne,
Clearing the welkin from benighting dampes,
They in the habits of a milking maid,
(All but skin-linnen) did their beauties shade.
And in these course attires they hasted out
To seek Albino, through each wood and plain,
Whom we will leave to pace the world about,
And see Phoeliche wet with eyelid rain,
Whose bondage was the greater, since despair
Blasted all hopes which promised her the air.
The brazen Bull, Strappado, or the rack,
The Faggot-torture, and the piked barrel,
Ballanc't with his, degrees of sorrow lack,
It Is with a bull-rush to decide a quarrel:
The famine wherewithal the Thracian knight
Was sent to Pluto wants a little weight.
He that stole fire fro the Chariot of the Sun,
Whose liver's vulture gnawne at Caucasus:
He that the counsels of the g(...) n-spun,
Like wantons eyes stone-rowling Sy'phus,
Hold best proportion with these sharpened woes,
Which stern misfortune on Phoeliche throws.
She that was glutted with most curious cates,
Had every pleasure to content her Just,
Who had command ore Fortune, and the Fates,
Now sups up pulse, and gnawes a fleeced crust.
She that had many girls, is now alone,
And of so many cannot compass one.
Had I a fancy steept in sorrows brine,
Invention witty in the threnes of woe,
Could sad experience dictate every line,
A dearth of words would to my muse say no.
I may as well go fathom all the spheres,
As measure her disasters, count her tears.
Often on remembrance of that harmless bliss.
Which (coaped) she enjoyd, her thoughts would feed
Of on Bellama's beauty, touch and kiss,
Till stricken dead with thought of present need.
Then would she raise her thoughts, and hope for day,
And starting up from silence, bololy say,
Despite of Envies vipers, tricks and wiles,
My cradle-play-mate, Mirth, I Will nere forsake,
But taste Sardinian herbs shall raise up smiles,
Though I was wafting ore the Stygtan lake:
Tortures shall nere un-man me, but I Will be
Albino, malice, spite of her and thee.
Delays oft-times from times secluded parts
Bring help to help less not expecting aid,
Some of the gods will pity these my smarts,
Not suffer them to whet the Sextons Spade.
Or if the gods midst slames then scorpion-like,
I Will gore my breast, and fall on mine own pike.
Yet had I suffered for a courteous one,
These woes should never had power to have raised a sorrow,
But when mine eyes did in my breast enthrone
Her -- her of whom, hell cruelty may borrow.
This is the height of woe, death and diseases,
Nay, hell it self, to this compared, pleases.
Yet stay, say Neptunes palace shall be land,
And this firm ball of earth a liquid brack:
Say the North Pole with Phoebus shall be tand,
And to the South the Lillies shall be black.
Say this, and more, before thou dare to say
Bellama is M^i boun' or M^i bell^i.
No more of this, we will for her freedom plot,
A pious Monk perceiving well her smart,
With diligence assayd to purge each spot,
With holy Creuse from her diviner part.
But still her answer was, nor man nor lover,
Nor she, the virgins ankles did discover.
Alas! my brother, I am not a male,
But a weak Sience of the weaker sex
The Ladies spoke the truth (might truth prevail)
But me with torture Piazell does vex;
'Cause at my entrance I did promise fair,
Yet't proves court-language, merely, purely, air.
But all this time she would not license daigne
That I three yards behind should leave the gates,
And fumed when I would have left her train,
To Have sought a jewel, and to gather Dates.
So that the Duke my father never had ken
Of my encloystring in this hate-light den.
But against it now resolving, I intend
To turn the stream of his munificence
On you dear brother, if you will be my friend,
And plot how I may be delivered hence:
Lend your endeavors, and I Will lend my wit,
Vow faithfulness, and I will warrantit.
I Will woo my father for his free assent,
If to your barren Cowle you will bid farewell.
That Hymen's rites may perfect our content
By joyful eccho's of the marriage bell.
'Cause you in person do resemble him
Whom amongst all men I only judged trim.
The Monk gave ear unto her winning prate,
And gazed on her beauty masculine,
Whose feature might delude a wiser pate,
Assisted only by a tallow-shine:
For by an unctious salve she kept her chin
From the haire-mantle of an aged skin.
Madam, says he, I judge your language true,
And to your vows I dare my credence lace:
Your virgin-blushes innocence do show,
And modesty is printed on your face.
Faith, truth, and honesty reside with me,
My best endeavors shall your servants be.
Well, says Phoeliche, I have now decreed
(Since Phoebus has forsook our hemispheare)
To sheath my body in your holy weed,
Then through the private walk my course will steer.
So from your holy walls I Will take my flight,
Or by permission, or in silent night.
And when I am arrived at Folco's towers,
My Father shall your matchless kindness know,
Who, I am sure, will summon all his powers
To fetch thee from this house of flame and snow:
And who with much contentment will not brook
Some three days penance to be made a Duke.
For by inheritance the Dukedome's mine,
When death unbody shall my fathers soul,
Since no heire-males descended from our line,
The Salique law cannot my right control.
And to assure thee that I Am only thine,
I swear by all the powers that are divine.
Then did she circle with ensphearing arm,
Conrado's neck, and amorously him lipt,
Which did the amorist so strongly charm,
That he with haste out of his vestments skipt,
And bad Phoeliche change, for in good deed,
He should full well become her virgin weed.
Phoelich undrest, and dressed, and having made
Herself a Monk, put on Conrado's face,
And some few minutes with her Monkship played,
Then gave a farewell to that hated place.
But ere here quick dispateh could post her thence,
Her beauty shot a fire through every sense.
Fear now exilde the confidence he tide
Forced by affection to Phoeliche's words,
Revokt his promise now, all aid denyde,
And with majestic looks and gestures lords,
His flaming lust dissolved his pious snow,
And now his loud desires will have no No.
But vows to dis-encloath her, and to break
Her virgine-seale, despite of force or smiles,
Till Folco strove, and made his noddle leake
Sardonick liquor to new-paint the tiles,
So hasted out, and to the Matrone gave
The Iron Porter of Conrado's grave.
Imping his haste, he threads the vaulted lane,
Not wounded by his soles, this many a day,
Like those, which, when arraigned, a pardon gain,
Dare neither at the jail nor gallows stay.
And coming to the posterne gate, he knocked:
Which at devotion time was always locked.
But when the last Amen had silenc't prayer,
The Porter to Alhino entrance gave,
Who straight was brought unto the judgment chair,
Where, furd with state, did sit the Abbot grave,
Who said, Conrade, why was your stay so long?
You mist the Manna of the Even-song.
Pseudo- Conrado answered him, My Lord,
I found Phoeliche so oppressed with grief,
That charity commanded me t'affoord,
By learning, prayers and Anthemes some relief.
And truly on my faith, I am persuaded,
A virgine-lady with these weeds is shaded.
I moov'd to pity by her streaming tears,
Her sighing gales, loud threnes, and sad laments,
Won by her beauty, and her tender years,,
Have promised aid, confirmd by your assents.
And in all haste will tell her fathers grace,
What clouds of woe bemist Phoeliches face.
She promised me, when as her freedom's feald,
When she shall re enjoy the glorious light,
When the sad sentence of her woe's repeald,
She will be mine in spire of envies might.
Nay more, she from the Dukedom will extract
Some Lordships to perform a pious act.
Forth with a Synod of the holy men
Was called to broach the wisdom of their pates,
The questions were proposed, Who? what? and when?
The who is Folco's daughter; what, estates
The when, so soon as she by Folco's powers
Shall shell her body in proud Gurby's towers.
This answer smelt of profit, and did gain
The Abbots liking, and his griping crew,
Says he, Conrado true content does reign
And triumphin our thoughts, we yield to you,
Success wayt on thy voice, for to thy care
Our wishes, hopes, desires, entrusted are.
Fear not, quoth he, my faith dares warrant all,
All things are real, as my words are true;
My self will pace unto fair Gurby hall,
And with emphatick language plead and sue:
So that old Folco's lungs shall crack with laughter,
To hear me chat the travailes of his daughter.
First, she mistrusting that she should be forced
By his proud nod, unto a hated pillow,
From folly, Folco, Folk herself divorc't,
To twist so scorned mayds, some wreathes of willow,
How zealously she prayed, and looked demurely,
She is in thought, and word, a virgin surely.
But the conceit is this, who bridles laughter?
That virgins holy, pure, and Nuns to boot,
Should thicken with the pills of Folco's daughter,
Sing lullaby's, and to Lucira hoot,
To Increase the wonder then, and impe his pleasures,
To Felco I Will present these waggish measures.
Behold, admire, and some contentment gather
From Nuns that teeme, mand by a virgin-father.
WOnder and admiration cease to gaze
On slashing meteors, stars, and comets blaze,
Let not Vitruvius, or the Ichonian beast
Putzol or Aetna slide into your breast:
Open not your ears unto those crackes of thunder,
Whose Canon eccho's split the orbs in sunder.
Lend not your audience to those fond reports
Of Obr'on, Mabell, and their Fairy sports,
Nor tie your credence to the Poets pen,
Which writes the noble acts of warlike men,
Of Monsters, Moon-calves, merry games, and maskes,
Atlas stiff shoulders, and Alcides taskes,
Amazement flies these bables, and does pin
Faith, eyes, and thoughts, unto this curtaine-sin,
That a pure virgin should un-virgine others,
And though a virgin, yet make many mothers.
Make them heave up, be qualmish, pale, and cry,
A Midwife (hooh) a Midwife, else we dye.
It is an A fricke crow, a sable Swan,
To have a vestall puffed up with man.
But that so many Nuns un-maydend are,
B' a Nun without a man, is more than rare.
The Sybils virgin is not worth a rush,
And Merlins mother may with envy blush.
These, though they soard above the pitch of reason,
Yet crossed not natures order, course or season,
For women teemd as women, but a woman
As man, makes virgins teeme, and yet is no man,
This -- this is object unto fame and wonder,
Then make each clime with this Mirandum thunder.
About this time, night summond them to rest,
And each repaired to his sturdy bed.
Albino's fears his hopes and joys suppressed.
But in the rest, content struck sorrow dead:
They slept until the bright enlightened air
With silver glitter called them up to prayer.
But our Albin' took earlier leave of sleep,
And sheathed his body in his Monkish vests,
Knocked at his lodge which did the entrance keep,
Who, that he could not wake himself, protests,
Thou art some Fury, Hag, or Hob, I troe,
That boldly at my lodge do thunder so.
Albiao says, what frenzy dampes thy reason?
Arise, my haste commands a frequent rap.
Begone, quoth he, entreates are out of season,
Worshipful Hob, I Will have another nap,
It Is not mine hour to rise until I hear
The clapper sound a surge in mine ear.
When our young Monk had many minutes spent,
And could not Foppo from his pillow rear,
About that time lights charioter had sent
Days trusty Herbinger his Orb to clear.
He searched the walls, and traffickt with the lock,
But all in vain, he must implore the frock.
The Chappell-clarke as constant to his hour,
As is days Herald, which at breaking crows,
Seeing Aurara did his windows scowre,
And leapt into his chamber, straight arose,
Making the shrill-ton'd bell in echoes speak,
Awake and rise to prayer, the day does break.
Foppo was at that time in Morpheus court,
Where he with apparitions was affrighted,
The Scoene was changed, then came a dainty sport,
Whose sudden neatness every sense delighted,
Then dreamt Albine their runnig ado Monk
Was knocking at his lodge the other Nunc.
Then dreamt he saw a table richly spread,
With all the dainties riot ever felt:
All birds of warrant which in woods are bred,
With Salmon, Mullet, Turbot, Trout and Smelt.
The Princely-pacing Dear entombd in paste,
Enbalmd with spices to delight the taste.
Asparkling wine-drawne newly from the cheek
Of some chaste fair, which blushes colored red,
With brisk Canary, and enlivening Greek,
Poetic Sherry, which can sharpen lead.
This ravished Foppo with a taste-content,
Till to his ear the Bell an errand sent.
When starting up, he deemd the bell did call
His able stomach to a Founders feast,
And with all speed was swogging to the hall,
But that Albino stayed him by the crest,
And lue-warme claret from his hogshead drew,
To make his stomach give the Dear adieu.
Quoth he, thou son of Somnus, drowsy slave
Why did thou not at my loud summons rise?
But in a fit of lunacie did rave,
As though thy wit had taken some new disguise?
I Will be your Hob, your Hag, and though I Am loath,
Will now chastise thee for thy feigned sloth.
But whilst his passion took a breathing space,
The wakned Porter from his fists did creep,
Fixed his goggles on his youthful face,
And then remembered his propheticke sleep.
Tells him he is not Conrado, for he knows
That brow, those cheeks, lips, eyes, Albino owes.
And though your wrath should grind me unto powder,
Without a warrant, I will open no gate,
This answer made Albino's anger louder,
And vowed a passage hought at any rate:
So leapt upon the slave with nimble strength,
And measurd on the earth his ugly length.
Albino hastes to th'posterne, having got
The keys, but amongst so many much was puzzled
To find the right, Foppo mean while did trot
Unto some chambers where the shavelings nuzzled,
And them with our-cryes raised to surprise
Albino, larved in Conrado's guise.
Like penancers, with linen on their backs,
The bald-pates ran to seize upon their pray;
But yet their haste a semi-moment lackes,
Albino through the gate had found a way.
And snatching out the keys, did them encage,
Raising a Bulwark to withstand their rage.
Then thankt his stars, that thus deliverd him
From dangers which did threaten naught but death,
For he by th'verge of Mare mort did swim,
And did expect his latest gale to breath.
Nay, these late troubles had him so dis-harted,
That every shadow 'lmost the union parted.
You, whose disasters some proportion hold,
Help my weak fancy to express his fears,
Teach me my rithmes in Cypress to enfold:
From thwarted lovers horrow me some tears,
Fetch me some groans from the ascending thief,
And from the inquisition fetch me grief.
Without demurres Albino left the wicket,
Fearing the Monks should bribe the faithless lock,
And steerd his course unto a well-grown thicket,
Whose lofty hill was armd with many a rock,
He envies sculls, that wayt on spit and oven,
And vows nere more to see that hated coven.
Have you beheld the stately pacing stagge
Flying the echoes of some deep-mouthed hounds,
How first his brow does wear a ferny slagge,
And with curvaitings beats the quaking ground.
Telling the Fawns and wood-nymphs that he scorns
The hounds, horse, huntsmen, and their warbling horns.
But when he is embost in blood and sweat,
When travail on his swifrnesse fetters hangs,
He then is finghted with the shrill recheat
And fears a pinking with the yellers fangs.
Seeks every where for shelter, and dares rush
Maled with fear into the sharpest bush.
So fared it with Albino, whilst he had
Fate at a beck, commanded fortunes wheel,
Was called by his Donnes active lad,
He thought his joys were walled in with steel,
Slighted misfortune, envy set at naught.
And braving malice dared in every thought.
But when his towering heart was taught to know
Humiliation, and selfe-confidence,
Was stricken dead with famine, flame and snow,
Although his geniall stars had freed him thence.
He fears the Monkish rabble, and he shrowdes
Himself in caves, encurtaind round with clouds.
In his dark house he heard a feeble voice,
Breathd from the corrals of some weakened maid,
At first concealment was his better choice,
Till pitry set an edge upon his blade.
Then guided by the cry, he saw a Royster
Did in his arms perforce a Nymph encloyster.
Yet seeing homespun russet, stopped his pace,
Saying by this, what honor shall I gain?
But in his eye so curious was her face,
Though maskt and blubberd ore with brackish rain,
That he forthwith unsheathd his trusty Turk,
Called forth that blood which in his veins did lurk,
So stepping forward, cries, Injurious slave,
Unto what baseness does thy folly tempt her?
Who answered him, Fond soole, thy foolish brave
From my decreed end shall not exempt her.
Befriend me Queen of Cypress, and in spite
Of force or Fortune, I Will have my delight.
Desist, Albino says, or olse I vow
By all those tapers which enrich the night,
I Will make pale death strew Cypress on thy brow,
And to the infernal shades thy soul will fright.
Cease from thy brutish rape, or else prepare
Thy cursed lungs to draw the Stygian air.
Quoth the rude Sylvan, I am past that age,
Which with Bug-bears the foppish nurse does fright.
Hence curtaine-squire, smock-groom, and urine-page,
I Will have no testates unto my delight.
Pack hence with speed, or by Actaeons head,
My weighty falcheon shall pronounce thee dead.
Well, says Albino, since thou It not desist,
Prove the adventures of a bloody duel,
One of our threads fell Atrops shall untwist,
For to my rage kind pity lends fuel.
To free a virgin from thy gryping paws,
I judge well'pleasing unto natures laws.
They claspt their Helms, and buckled to their fight,
Twixt whom no umpire was but meagre death,
The wooddards green with Tyrian dye was dight,
Who now desires a minutes space to breath,
Albino gave the truce, yet but to breath,
His valor scornd to crowd into the sheath.
Then did his nimble slight and courage show
Faining a stroke, but poynted at his breast,
Which op't a door, where at his spirits flew,
And well nigh set his fainting soul at rest.
With that th'en feebled Sylvan weakly cries
Hold, hold thy hand, or else Sylvanus dies,
Do call for mercy, says Albino, now,
And all thy thoughts erstwhile triumphant rid?
I seek not murder may I save my vow,
That I should joy in blood my stars forbid,
I am content the virgins voice shall seal
Thy death or pardon, if thou make appeal.
Fair virgin, quoth Sylvanus, pity is
The only grace that gives a virgin price.
Remission crowns a heart with greater bliss,
Then to hang iron on weak natures vice.
The rays of your bright beauty urged desire,
Your feature kindled lust, love blowd the fire,
The virgin answered, I did never suck,
The Tigers dugges, the Lioness and Bare.
Nor from a reeking breast an heart did pluck
Never will I in blood with vultures share.
But since submission speaks from voice and knee,
Kind pity thins the fault, and pardons thee.
Then to Albino says, Heroic youth,
May all the blessings which attend on man,
Felicitate thy life, and to buy truth
To words, I dare do more than virgins can.
But above all I wish, may natures pride,
Lillies and Roses inter-twine thy bride.
But yet alas! to recompense by airs
So large a bounty, and so free, is poor:
Yet why may not a spotless virgins prayers,
Wingd with desire, unclaspe high heavens door,
Accept of this, and if the Fates befriend me,
Those blessings which I wish for shall attend thee
Natures sole wonder, beauties only gem,
Quoth he, my valor and my feeble arms,
(If your perfections had not strengthened them)
Could not have freed you from intended harms.
Ascribe the honor to your matchless face,
My courage merits not the meanest place.
Yet had I swom through seas of steaming blood,
And past through Nitre flames, that belch forth led,
Had all the Furies armed with vipers stood
To Have stopped my passage or pronounced me dead,
I would have thrown the dye, my fortune tryde
To Have bought you freedom, though in crymson did.
For when mine eyes sent forth the farthest glance,
To fetch th'Idae a of your beauty in,
That very sight my senses did intrance,
And made my thoughts excuse Sylvanus sin:
For sure your quickening rays can melt a snow,
On which the winds of age and sorrow blow.
But why do I upon the Ela raise
Thy noble worth, and yet intend to woo,
Since beauty often displayes her plumes at praise,
Then by this doing, I my self un-doe.
Yet where I virtues find refinde as gold,
Despair shall never make affections cold.
Be pleased then to think the god of Love
With gilded arrow has transfixt my heart,
And let my purpled breast your pity move,
With Balsame of regard, allay my smart,
Send thy quick eyes into my breast to see
What tortures prick my heart to purchafe thee.
Sir, I am grieved, quoth she, you are allyde
To him, whose quiver crowns a lovers wish,
Else at a twelve score distance might you have spyde
You cast your net to mesh a simple flish.
Your worth and feature does entitle you
To Cytherea with her silver hue.
When I, alas! am but an homely maid,
Borne to a spindle, and to serve a plow,
To milk my spongie-teated cowes, I strayde,
Which here amongst these tender hazels low.
My starved fortunes cannot think of love,
Nor does my envy wound the billing Dove:
This answer silenced Albino's hopes,
Which spoke as loud as though they kissed the sheets,
He in his thoughts commends the quiet copes,
Which taste no sour in hunting after sweets.
Alcides life, quoth he, compared to mine,
Is trouble-free, spic't with contents divine.
Fair maid, what hatred frosteth your desires?
What steames of envy choke bright Venus lamp?
Give some kind fuel to maintain my fires,
A frowue of yours will all my vitals dampe.
Oil ore my writhled heart, or let me know
From what blace heads these bitter cadents flow.
Your favors Sir, have such commanding power,
That it is unjust your wishes to deny,
Accursed with all black tempests be that hour
In which my heart gave credit to mine eye,
Else would I not have been so much averse,
T'a mind so noble, and a feature terse.
But now alas! my self, my self am not,
For heartlesse I, my heart have gin away,
An Abbey-brother has that treasure got,
Albino hight, he is Phoebus of my day.
Your habit speaks you a Monk, Sir, if you can,
Tell me where I may find that (ah me) man.
Be plea'd, quoth she, to tell me where I may,
Or go my self, or else a servant send.
Fair maid, quoth he, it is a gloomy way
Leads to the bed of your benighted friend.
His ashes are in Darwey Abbey laid,
But his faint Ghost walkesith Elizian shade.
But is he dead, says she, and lowdly shreekt,
Which wak't Narcissus hate to second her,
Her rosyes dewd with melting crystal, reeke,
And sorrow did her trembling heart interre.
Symptoms of sad deplorings nere were know ne,
Which were not in her sharp lamentings shown.
Choice maid (quoth he) do not destroy your rosyes,
And blast your beauty with such scalding sighs,
In natures garden there are choycer posyes,
More comely features, and more agile thighs,
What though Albino's dead, another may
Be trulier tearmd the Phoebus of your day.
Oh, do hot stain, says she, his spotless name,
Within his bosom every virtue ranged,
Equals to him dull nature cannot frame,
Though she should labor till herself be changed.
It is a shame to ask more favors, yet
Grant me this one, because my sun is set.
My pity saved, when as your fury had
The rough-pawd Sylvan minced with your skeane,
Oh with same courage let your mind be clad,
With your sharp Cemeter my liver dreane,
Why should I be a liver, since he is dead,
Who was my hope, my health, my heart, my head.
How am I changed, quoth he? my heart does beat,
The fainting summons of the child of sin,
My knees do quarrel, and a chilling sweat
Cold as the dew of winter, oils my skin,
Fear snatcheth from my roseat banks their blood,
And drownes my siver in a sanguine flood.
It Is strange a naked breast of bleached snow,
And crystal mounts, enricht with corrall heads,
(On which the purple violets do grow)
Should dare mine arm, and strike my courage dead.
My steel a breast of iron has unhinged,
And knees of brass have to my fury cring'd.
Had some vaste God, or he whom Tellus brought,
One got by Fury, or Gradivus mate;
Who, but with monsters, never conversed with ought,
Dared with a look, mine arm had weakened Fate.
But at this feeble voice my blood does start,
And into pity melts my swelling heart.
Then name no more those words: for they at once,
Do both un-edge my valor and my steel,
Too safely do your virtues keep the sconce,
My steadiest thoughts, struck with these letters, teele:
My sacrilegious hand shall never stain,
Virtues sole Temple, and the graces fane.
Dry up those furrowing cadents: will you give
Your lovely self in marriage unto him,
If I shall say Albino, yours does live,
And in your view his comely portraict lim?
Say, I to this, and I will tay my skill,
To make him pace along you craggy hill.
It Is th'countenance which my wishes crave,
Naught half so sweet, says she, as Hymen's te des,
Albino then the haired earth did shave,
And hedged two circles in with ropes of beads:
Then quartring them, did take the virgins hand,
And bad her with unshaken courage stand.
Thou must not be surpised with shiveting fear,
Though Cerberus the I anitor of Hell,
Though seven-headed Hydra, Panther, Bear,
The Lion, Tiger, or the Dragon yell,
Although a monster spits forth flashing powder,
Though clouds and winds strive which should bellow louder.
This said, with creuze of holy water he
Besprinkled ore himself, besprinkled her,
And zealously did cross: the same did she,
Like a devout Romezzo conjurer.
This done: fair maid quoth he, if Fates befrend me,
The servant of your beauty shall attend thee.
Then began to invoke, or seem t'invoke,
With uncoth Ianguage, the infernal crew,
Vitz, Allafoun, Trallasht, with elfish poake,
Trollox and Chimchish, with your grisly hue,
Gnarzell and Phrizoll, which in Styx do wade,
Le port Albino from the Stygian shade.
When from his lips these words had taken their flight
A shuffling whirle-puffe roared amongst the trees,
The Affrighted leaves took flight, the grass looked white,
The quaking poplars fell upon their knees.
Jove's sacred tree stood cringing unto it,
And bowd his head, else it was in sunder split.
Then from a breaking clowd a sheet of fire
Encircled them, and dashed against an Oak,
Vshring a thunder, whose untamed ire,
Like dreadful tyrants, naught but terror spoke.
And as unwilling to depart from them,
His irefull cracks the trembling grove did hem.
These suddenly succeeding so the first,
And at that instant when he feigned a spell,
Did make AAlbino judge himself accursed,
Thinking his voice unhinged the gates of hell,
Bellama's rosyes wore as white as snow,
As though the Phyma did upon them blow.
And justly, for though these but common were,
Yet at that time, when faintness kept the wicket,
Which at each shadow op't the gate to fear,
In that dark place, that unfrequented thicket.
I blame not, though her courage hab been colder,
And in Art Magic wish Albino bolder.
But wheo the storm was past, his courage got
The conquest of his fear, made his quick eyes
Stand Sentinel, t'advantage more his plot,
And looking, from the mountain he espies
A man descending, as he told the maid,
Which the loud tempest of his fears allayd,
Then says, behold the object of your hope,
Away springs she from off that gloomy place,
Posts to the hill, forsakes her Magic cope,
Mean while Albino doffes Conrado's face,
And set upon his looks Albino's dye,
So impt with love, unto the mount did fly.
Where he espyde Bellama rove about,
Crying, Albino, do thou fly from me?
The man was but a silly shepherd lout,
That climbd the hill, his fleesie train to see.
And when his eyes had health'd his wealthy flocks,
Trudged to his cote, wald in with sturdy rocks.
Albin' encountering her, says, Lovely maid,
Was It your small voice that did Albino call?
It Was I poor I, the fainting virgin said:
Why was I forced from Rhadimanthus hall?
Who was it quoth he, that with commanding air,
Snatched me forth' arms of Proserpina fair?
It was a courteous Monk, quoth she, whom I
Humbly entreated to deliver thee.
Alas, sweet maid, quoth he, Fates do deny
Freedom from thence, nor can I pay the fee.
Fee, says she, fear not, if an Earldome can
Purchase thy freedom, I will give it man.
Thou can not ransom one from Pluto's jayle,
Should thou lay down the gaudy triple crown,
With steely hearted Fate naught can prevail,
On whose harsh brow there ever dwells a frown.
Speak fair, thy business, for I must begone,
Grim Charon waits for me at Acheron.
Ah me, quoth she, and is it truth I hear?
Then dear Albino, I will wait on thee:
You Are like to find, quoth he, but homely cheer,
If in my diet you partake with me.
Famine's a favor unto me, says she,
Bridewell a brid^-house, if I live with thee.
But prithee, what is Radamanthus fell,
And she whom thou did Proserpina call?
Sweetest, quoth he, he is the judge of hell
That doomes us tortures, or does us enthrall.
For if our innocence do plead for us,
Wee're led to Elysium from dark Erebus.
That other was the Thracian harper mate,
Whom Pluto forced unto his gloomy house,
His divelship with smiler to recreate,
Full bowls of his Nepenthe to carouse.
I Am glad I know, quoth she, for jealous fears
Unto my heart did travel from my ears.
Why, lovely maid, did ever I behold
Before this time, quoth he, your comely face?
How dear Albino, must you now be told.
Who your Bellama is? it is high disgrace,
Sure you of Lethes streams have deeply drank,
Which does the powers of your mind disranke.
Hah! quoth Albino, can my dullness think
That homely russets my Be^lama veil?
I deeply of oblivion sure did drink,
Did I not know her from a milking paile?
Peace pretty fair, do not my Saints profane.
Her beauty has not such course lodging taken.
Well, quoth Bellama, will you me discard,
When for your sake I Have run through all disasters?
Must slights and nescios now be my reward?
Will you make ulcers, and apply no plasters?
Clothed in this course arraay, I roved abroad,
To find the place of thy secure abode.
Sweet, says Albino, let not anger dress
Thy stainlesse lillies in distractions dye,
Let ignorance plead pardon, for I guess,
Some other beauties may Albino cry,
Might now a ghost permitted be to kiss,
My lips should suck from thine a cherry-blisse.
Why, says Bellama, has a ghost no lips?
Is there no pleasure dwells in spirits veins?
This (might a ghost) does all my joys eclyyse,
For now I have my labor for my pains.
Pray, what was Merlins father? is it not said,
Spirits have power a damsel to unmayd?
These words proceeding from Bellama's lips,
Did make Albino Myrrine juice carouse,
To raise an active heat, which nimbly skips
In every vein, like Fayes in Obrons house.
But when he was no ghost, and hoped to merit
Love for love, he found her of another spirit.
Away, fond Monk, quoth she, do think that I
Into a sea of grief will wade with thee?
And drown my fortunes, make an Earldome dye?
Do think humility resides wirh me?
Can think I Will choose a pebble, slight a pearl?
Marry a threadbare cowle, and scornd an Earl?
What door to thy presumption did I open?
What symptoms of affections did I show?
What actions gainful birth unto thy hope?
Or from what vow did thy assurance grow?
Cease then, for I take it in high disdain,
To thy course worth my smallest ray to chain.
Disdain? quoth young Albino, can this be
The voice of my Bellame? Is there such odds?
If not in birth, in worth I equal thee:
Although my Muse shot love into the gods,
Disdain's a pitch too high for maids to reach.
Scarce will the queen of pride such doctrine teach.
Presumption too? Does he deserve that brand,
Who dallies with consent, invited to it?
What firmer seal, then language, lip and hand?
What better warrant, than desired to do it?
Say, he is saucy that with crustyed fists,
Paws a court-silke, and melts her balmy wrists.
Who feeted that aenigma, whose kind air,
Spoke me the only high in thy esteem?
Was I not bosomd more than parents (Fair?
Did not thine own voice that saint-secret seem?
Who bribed your full face-gazings? and what she
Judged none praise, lip, deserving of but me?
Did not you in misterious postures woo me?
And against Bardino levied all your spite?
Nay, by Barraba sent invitements to me?
And dubbed me by your knot the Red-rose Knight?
Did not your wish glue feathers on your feet,
To thread a casement when I pac't the street?
And after these, ah thousand more, and nearer
Seals of thy love, must slights unseele your lips?
A puny-mistres-hunter well may fear her,
When pride at high noone can my sun eclips.
Fury lend me thy poison, rage thy breath,
That I by pride doomd, may doom beauty death.
You pale-fac't shadows of the gloomy Isles,
Fill up my gall, and lend me all your powers,
To torture women, who enricht with wiles,
From their moist eyes send forth dissembling showts
Would Jove the mount had barren been of stones
Whereof old Pyrrha ftam'd the female bones.
Would Sea's daughter that same Queen of faces,
Her alabaster box would daigne to me,
Once Pnao's ferry pay, that gave such graces,
Which till that time the Sun did never see.
That I not only might, as others are,
Be counted comely, but oth' fairest, fair.
Then would I slight those formal tricks of love,
Those fighs, tears, vows, complaints, and folded arms,
Caps, cringes, oaths, and complements to move
The Affections of a Girl expecting charms.
For wealth, wit, wisdom, eloquence and greatness
Are less inducements unto love than neatness,
How now Albino, is your doublet grown
Too strait, says she, that you do pusse and swell?
Peace, peace, let not your choler thus be shown.
A thing impossible, says he, you tell.
In vain we call for peace, and calmnesse praise,
When love and hate intestine wars do raise.
Women have double pupils, so they can,
Kill like the Basilisk, but with a glance,
Their very praise does blast and wither man,
Like frost and winter, or his soul intrance:
They Are all like Glaucus wife whose filthy charms
Won poor Ulysses to her lustful arms.
They Are Holgoy, Africanes, and fiends they are --
Words know not what they are, they are hell to me,
Would Fove I had the Heliostro^bio fair,
To touch all mayds, or if not all, yet thee.
Or had been borne under the Scorpions head,
With Amulets to have struck thy beauty dead.
Ah faithless Polupists! that thus can change
Into an hundred thousand shapes, your minds?
Phaebe to you is constant, tides do range,
Yet back return: more letled are the winds.
Mere Pompholix, which with each breath does stray
Your loves with catch-feathers too, and fly away.
Sometimes a fit of sullens seals your jaws,
In contemplation big, (of Jove knows what)
And then again, as if your tongnes made laws,
You weary time with your eternal chat.
Ah Mantuan, Mantuan, thy pen is not a liar,
Although thy habit says thou were a Friar.
Erst while a sober Nun Bellama was,
Then a Lucretia, at another gale
I know not what, a straggling country less,
A quinque-letterd, 'haps, which set to sale,
Now none more willing unto love than she,
And now more further off from love or me.
Yet call that hasty language back a while,
Bellama is not such, she is Cupids dart,
Teach me, great love, to make Bellama smile,
And with one ray sun her Albino's heart.
Thou purblinde boy, teach me to gain Bellama.
Straight Eccho's voice returned him answer, Ama.
Thanks gentle Eccha; might thy voice divine
Speak truth in this, that love commands love.
I would through every mood and tense decline
Amo, and saint thee too, my Joy, my Dhve:
Nay, thou should be, what ere fond babblers prate,
Albino's goddess, though Narcissus hate.
Oh would to Jove I were in courteous France,
Or else that happy place in France with me,
That with more tongs thou might make ama dance
Within these filent woods, from tree to tree.
Or would thou had imperial power from Jove,
In the imperious mood to bid her Jove!
Quoth she, unworthy of a conquest's he
That for a Canons roar his ensigns vailes,
Unworthy of a Rose, or Rosy glee
Is he, whose courage at her javelins fails,
They Are feeble amorists that for a sye,
Run from their colors, and in silence lie.
It Is our prerogative to have entreat,
With every phrase that slattry does inhance,
To win our loves, though every stroke they beat,
Our hearts beat Cupids march, tune Venus dance.
In their desires they never yet did perish,
Which feed our humors, and our passions cherish.
To prove the truth of thy affections, I
Shot forth that language, headed with disdain,
My heart is thine, which till death close mine eye
With steely thumb, thy bosom shall retain,
Caesar's proud nod shall not command that bliss,
Whose sweets are promised by this melting kiss.
Hah, quoth Albino, dare I trust mine ears
With this blessed air? And am I sure I wake?
Or is it a dream, which wakeneth into tears?
It Is truth: then crawle hence Furies, toad and snake.
The earth her mines, sea vomit shall their pearl,
Ere I leave her, who for me left an Earl.
Then sat they dallying in a shadie bower,
Where Maples, Ash, and Thorn did them embrace,
Whilst her enlivning breath produced each flower
In curions knots to damask ore the place.,
Oh! who would not his soul and substance tenter,
To be circumference to such a center?
Now have our Amorists attaind the height
Of true content, and sat like billing Doves,
She tells her quest, he his monasticke slight,
Whilst both recount their passions, fears and loves,
Till Titans hasting to moist Thet is arms,
Bad them provide against his sisters harms.
Then joining heart and hand, with easy pace,
They travaild to a Pague adjoining near,
Wherein a straw-thatcht roof (an homely place
For such a pair) they entertained were,
And what fine cates old Kathrine could afford,
Was served in state unto an aged board.
Their table with rich damask clothes was spread,
Whose every twist out-vyde the double cable,
The napkins Draper, of equal thread,
The mourning trenchers clothed were in sable:
A curious salt; cut out oth' bolder stone,
And for their plate -- sincerely there was none.
The dropsied Host, like to a Sewre did strut
To marshall every dish: and first did bring
A spacious bowl to scour the narrow gut
of nut-browne Ale, a liquor for a King.
And says, My Bona Roba, drink this boule,
Twill clear thy throat, and cheer thy drooping soul.
Next came the mumping hostess, and set down
A lusty dish of milk, sky colored blew,
Crumb'd with the Iudgets of the lusty brown,
Which two months since was piping hot and new,
Yet it is, says she, as savory in good law,
As wheaten trash, which crams the Ladies maw.
This good old Chrone was troubled so with wind,
Her coats did dance toth' music of her belly:
Next came a barley dumpling, whose harsh rind,
Was oyled ore with a fine tallow jelly,
Brought by a mincing Marget, passing trim,
Whose juycie nose did make the pudding swim.
Next came some' Glotrah (which the plough-man flanks,
Joined with a pudding on a holy day)
Brought by a jetting dame, on whom in ranks
And discipline of state, whole troops did stray
Of -- I for bear to say, lest these rude feet,
With queasie dames, and Lady readers meet.
Last, a tough cheese must lock the stomachs door,
Milkt from a cow that fed on naught but Burres,
Had lain five wintets on spongie floor,
To gain an harness, and a coat of furs,
So neatly peopled too, it was judged a court,
Such herds of gentles did about it sport.
Qualmish Bellama could not eat a bit,
'Cause luscious mears a furfet soon provoke
Albino ventred, but was feign to spit,
Lest those harsh viands should his Monkship choke.
And whilst he hauked, and Bellama laughed,
The trumping hostess stole a thumping draught
Are you so dainty ^oothed, quoth mine host,
That country vittails will not down with you?
You shall be fed with Custards, pyes and roast,
Cannot your chops a bonelesse pudding chew?
I trow far worser is than this your fare,
Unless you kitchen sculs, and lick-spits are.
Ma' gep, ma' faw, the crabbed hostess said,
Let Them even fast, if they will not eat their soul,
Is not my daughter Maudge as fine a maid,
And yet by mack you see she troules the bowl.
I Have dressed a supper sure, has pleased those,
Had wider purses far, and better close.
Pray mother, against the young mon do not rage,
Says full-lipt Maudge, for he must be your son,
We are alike in face, of equal age,
Then hoh, the match is soon concluded on.
Kusse me, my honest Dick, for we this night
With crickle crackle will the Gobblins fright.
Mass, says mine Host, I like the fellow well,
To suckle barnes, He give him tidee Mull,
And my brown Maure, as sound as any Bell,
With ten good shear-hogs to afford him wool:
And if they please me, after me they shall
Sell happy yale within this trusty wall.
Feck, says mine hostess, they shall have a bed
With good strong sheets, to pig together in,
A brazen pot, a kettle and a led,
Flatters, bowls, pailes and an old kilde^kin,
And if they please m', a brace of wheels to spin,
Mantles and clouts to wrap their bantlins in.
Our lovers at this pretty talk did smile;
Then says Albino, there is no such haste,
I like, but yet we will respit it a while,
Thou shall be (duck) some three nights longer chaste
I Will man my sister at days next attiring,
Then back, and give my Maudage a curtain spring.
When as his yielding had appeased the billows
Of their loud passions, and their meat digested,
Nights middle age invited to their pillowes,
But tell I d are not, how the lovers refted,
Whether co-sheeting was allowd as fit,
Monastic vows dispensing well with it.
But this I say, there was but one guest-roome,
Hanged with a pentice cloth spoke age enough,
The spiders here had one continued loome,
Here rats and mice did play at blind man's blough.
Their bed had many tasters, but no teaster,
Their bedding usherd in thin-sided Easter.
Repentant Mattresse for chastising Lent,
Stout as a face of steel, which never will yield,
Their sheets were tenants, weekly paid rent,
The pillow was with juice of noddles steeld,
And therefore fit to bolster any sin:
Their coverlet was of a bullocks skin.
Their urine-vessell was of Ticknell make,
Whose inside was with unshorne vellet clad,
Their bed-sted flored in a springing lake,
Where Frogs and Newts their randevouzes had.
This was their guest-bed, and there was no other,
Think you Bellama then lodged with her brother?
No such pure virtues saint Bellama's breast,
And such clear sparks of honor heat his soul.
That such a thought would stain her virgin crest:
And blur the sacreds of Albino's roll.
Then dye black thoughts, Bellama's chaste denyals
Repeld all charms of love, and Venice-trials.
Nay, he ne re tempted, nor attempted once.
To scale the fortress of her virgine-tower:
For her chaste Noes, and vows did guard the sconce
That it was impregnable, not forced by power.
And though he did enspheare her naked waste,
Yet durst my faith and oath conclude her chaste.
This longing on Albino workt so strong,
That when the god of slumbers did entreat
Him to his court, into his thoughts did throng
His house of penance, hunger, cold, and swear.
So powerful was his dream, entruth'd with fear,
That his strong faith concluded he was there.
And in some sort he was: for when the East
Was purpled with the blushes of the morn,
When his benumbed senses were releast
By the shrill sound of Gallus bugle horn.
He heard a sound of words, and looking out,
He saw a legion of the Monkish rout.
For you must know that when Albino's wit
Had won him freedom, and Conrado thrall,
The jealous matrone somewhat feared it,
And the next morning did Conrado call;
Who (brooking ill his lodging) struck with fear,
Made answer to the matrones question here.
So when her eyes suspicion truth had made,
She asked Conrado how that came to pass?
Quoth he, credulity my fear ore-swayd,
I was deluded with the dukedom less.
She p^omis'd me a dukedom for my pains;
And I, poor I, thought it sufficient gains.
Hah, quoth the Matrone, could thy falsehood serve
Thus to dishonor me, and all my train?
His penalty is thine, till every nerve
Shrink up with famine, thou shall here remain,
Time will not measure years, e^re thou will say,
A Dukedom for thy penance is no pay.
Madam, quoth he, my senses were bewitched
With that pure white which dwelt upon her brow,
I scratcht and pincht, but still my humors itched,
I stood upright, but still my heart did bow.
Who would not twice ten minutes in a brook,
Chin high and thirsty st^nd, to be a Duke?
Quoth she, I see that folly over-swayes,
And Venus sovereign is of every sect,
To beauty every arder homage pays,
Whilst only age and blackness gain neglect.
I 'xcuse thy frailty, haste unto thy dell.
The sentence of Phaliches flight repel.
Conrado thankt her, and away did pack,
(As one reprieved from the gallow tree,
Still fearing that stern justice plucked him back)
Lest Ianns-like her face should changed be:
For well he knew, the monthly horned queen
No oftener fills her orb, than she her spleen.
He nature blamed, he could no faster run,
But coming to the gate, the porter op't,
Who much appald to see a youthful Nun,
Says, Mistress, do you travel to be coap't?
Give me my see, for sure a plumpe-cheekt less
Shall not the Porters lodge unkissed pass.
He could not quiet his impatient lust,
Till he had shown the ensigns of his habit,
His paired crown with Venus rays adust:
Then lest the mongrell his supposed rabbit,
And slinkt away from his monastic veil,
Just like a dog that newly burnt his tail.
When he had cast his woman, and put on
The habit of his order, he made haste
Unto his Lord, told him Phoeliche's gone,
And that his conscience did conclude her chaste.
She Folco's large endowments must inherit,
And promised me to recompense my merit.
The Prior smiling at his folly, checked
Him for Apella's faith, and said his less
Was young Albino in Nun-vestments decked,
(If that our Porter had his doble glass)
And since thy coming clears every doubt,
Harness your selves to seek the yonker out.
As the attendants of an hunting Prince,
Intending to disfrank an ore-growne Boar,
View the impressions of his feet, which since
Last eve were printed on the sandy shore,
Beating each bush, and in each cabben searching
To find his frank, and not the pheasants pearching.
And as when Reynald with his wily plot,
Into the squadron of the geese is crept,
And grand-sire Gander on his back has got,
The Affrighted geese like them which watch-towres kept,
With shrill-ton'd gabblings wake the slumbring towns,
By Phaebe's candle to go seek the downs.
Some arm themselves with spits, one with a ladle,
Some snatch up pick-forkes, one a bill or knife.
The ambling nurse runs out, and leaves the cradle,
And the awd midwife flies the teeming wife,
Old grand-sire gray-beard his tusse bilbow gets,
And grandame Grissel with her distaffe jets.
Just so our hair-lack Monks pursued their quest,
Searched for his view, and threaded every grove,
With bells, beads, books, and holy water blessed,
And armd with envies whips, about did rove.
Their runnigado Reynald to surprise,
And came to Stean ere the Sun could rise.
Which sight unspirited Albino quite,
That his invention could not teeme a plot,
For in his looks his fear was writ in white,
And to his heart his frighted blood did trot.
Yet calling courage to appear o^h'stage,
He sheathed his body in his woven cage.
Then h^sting to the Host, bad him awake,
Desired his counsel, and assisting hand,
Says now his life and safety lay a^ stake,
For at his door a troop of shavelings stand,
I am their errand, I must bid adieu
To lovely Maudge, mine hostess, and to you.
Hoh, quoth mine host, and rubd his gummy eyes,
Whot says my son? Must thou be whurld away?
I warrant, boy, my club shall still their cries,
When 'bout their costards I shall make it play.
I Will die their stark nak't crowns with their own blood,
Then let 'em come, if that they think it good.
Good Sickerlin, says M^udge, ere they shall have
My hony-sweeten Dick, I Will scratch and bite,
With scalding water I Will their noddles shave:
Then busse me Dick, thy Maudge will for thee fight,
Thanks, quoth he, Duck, but yet it cannot be,
That thy endeavors should advantage me.
But yet methinkes I see some comfort dawne,
You tinkers budget strengthens every joint,
Lend me some cloths, by times harsh grinders gnawn
And I will be a Tinker in each point,
My sister must have rags, and be my trull:
Thus ^aild and clothed we will the shavelins gull.
Accoutred in these robes of state, he made
His face and hands in sootie vestures mourn,
Then wak't Bellana, who was sore afraid
To see a Tinker, and away does turn.
But grasping only air, she shrilly cryde,
Art ^ed Albino, from thy sweet-hearts side?
Which words so shrilly spoke, made echo babble,
Who winged with envy, out oth' window flies,
Carries Albino to the Monkish rabble:
They hearing that, Perduers made their eyes,
And sweld with rage, against the door did knock,
Whose aged breast could not endure the shock.
This stroke Alhino's heart did almost break,
Yet bids Bellama sheath her body in
These homely rags, which only safety speak,
Care not for coursenesse, so they hide the skin,
And at this Tinkers habit do not wonder,
It Is but the curtain thy Albino's under.
What tispyde fellows at my door do beat
Thus early quoth mine host, is this your manners?
What must mine hostess wayt upon th'entreat
Of Tailors, Cobblers, Carpenters and tanners?
If drinking be your errand, where yey got
Your last nights fudling-cap, this morning trot.
Impatient they, did make the door unhinge,
Which gave an entrance to enraged Bardino,
He to the reverend host did lowly cringe,
Told him his errand was to seek Albino.
And as they did his homely cottage hem,
Albino's name came leaping unto them.
Hoh, quoth mine host, unto mine house there came
Last night for lodging, a stout Tinker knave,
Who now is ticking with his ragged dame,
Go, if with him yey any business have:
But who Albino is, I cannot tell,
Here Is no fike mon does penance in my cell.
Into the Arras sieled parlour then
The coapsters went, in every corner snookt,
The Tihkers visage none of them did ken,
But for Albino, on Albino looked;
Well might he cozen them, when as his saint
Knew not his face under that mask of paint.
Then as they searched every place, by chance
Conrado did his Monkish vestments own
He lent Phoeliche at their affiance.
The host perceiving that the clothes were known,
Said, yesterday about the after three
A fellow came, and pawned those clothes to me,
They asked Bellama then, why she did call
Upon Albino? Why forsooth said she,
I was a servant once in Darwey hall,
Where that young Monk I oftentimes did see,
Who often in private would disport with me,
And promised that I should his sweeting be.
But by misfortune being turned away,
This Ioviall Tinker took me unto wife,
So as this morn by his warm side I lay,
I of Albino dreamed, my joy, my life.
He Is not thy mon, quoth Maudge, thou lie base drab.
Peace huswife, says mine host, you tatling blab.
Thus had the Scean been changed, had not the Sire,
Suppressed her babblings with a check and grin.
The Monks well satisfide, gang to the fire
To taste the juice of Kates old Kilderkin.
The Tinker and mine host would always cry,
Fill hostess, fill, the Monks are still a-dry.
Canzone.
Drink full ones Tinker, me thinks the Monks are dry,
Drink healths mine host, the Monks do fear a thirst:
Are the Monks thirsty? the Monks will quickly try
If they or the Tinker want a pillow first.
Else will we jig and hay unto the black pots sound,
Til to that music the house shall dance the round^
Then fill a dozen hostess, we will have a merry cup,
And make the Tinker forfet his budget and his brass.
Faith, says the tinker, I Will make your monkships sup
Till yey sing Requiems, in reading of the mass.
Then fill a gallon hostess, we will health it all about,
Till all complain oth'head-ach, the falling or the gout.
Come on dropping shavelins, let us see you count your beads,
I am half afraid youl'l stutter in the mass.
Gramercy lovely pots, and nimble Ganimedes,
That brought more water than what holy was.
Well saucy tinker, well, pray finger you your brass.
And let the monks alonelone, they will finger well the mass.
Pray Gaffer Cowlists why are yey so bald:
To cool your Pia matters in a sweat?
Or did the water your wise noddles scald,
Which your devotions and hot zeal did heat?
Or are yey given unto Venus play?
I am afraid there went the hair away.
But base Bardino did this mirth eclipse,
(In his monastic life Albino's friend)
Viewing the travail of his hand, his lips.
He by a secret mark Albino kend:
For by some strange mishap, was set a brand,
An azure spot upon his abler hand.
Says he, me thinks you are too frolic Tinker,
Your mirth I sear presageth your disgrace,
You must no longer be mine hostess Skinker,
For you will say, unless you have braz'd your face,
That you both see, and do Albino know,
If you deny't, I have your hand to show.
During the time that you were cowld and coap't,
On your right hand there dwelt a coerule mark,
Which nere would off, although it was often soapt.
Well, quoth mine Host, but pray your worship hark,
May not two men be like, may there not be
Theselfe-same spot of him, and you, and me.
This could not yet appease Bardino's hate,
Still teeming mischief, and with envy big,
So starting up, he fumed, and loud did prate,
And snatched off Albino's periwigge.
Now against two witnesses he could not stand,
When as his head bore witness with his hand.
Albine excused, it was by nature so,
Saying no razor ere did touch his scull:
No, says Bardino? it again does grow,
Thou can not with this fop my wisdom gull.
Keep him my brethren, and mean while I will
Retch the watch-beggar, and his rusty bill.
Bellama did mean while what language can,
With oyled words, and pitty-pleading tears,
Beseeching these to free her wedded man;
But to her voice they cottond had their ears,
Until an Angel did appear unto them,
And with his goldy looks and music woo them.
Then did they yield to let them go away,
And they mean time would fame a deadding sleep,
They for a second license would not stay,
But hasting out, along the ditches creep.
And as they went a Raddle-man they meet,
Whom with kind aires, and highway phrase they greet.
And greeting past, Albino did require
To change apparel with him, and his trade,
Giving him cash to hasten his desire.
With all my heart the Raddle-yonker said.
(Nere questioning the cause) yet by the mass,
My Dames will say, I am a podging Ass.
Thus changed they clothes and budgets; then with lead
On the new Tinkers hand Albino made
A mark like his, to gull his envious bead:
With Raddle-crimson then fit for his trade,
He cloathd his face, and gave Bellama some,
So trudgd away, for fear the Monk should come.
Have you beheld a hound in sudden fright,
Whom powder feared, or else the staff did beat,
How often he turns and looks, yet keeps on flight,
So they with glancing eyes would often retreat,
Yet moved sorward still, as in a ship,
The Pilots backward look, yet forward skip.
But our new Tinker swelled with content,
Fearing no colors, to the town did pass,
Crying, as he along the hamblet went,
Ha y'any need, hooh, of a Tinkers brass?
Bardino now returned in a chafe,
And asked the Tinkers name, who answered, Raze.
Where dwelst thou? any where? how long
Have tinkring used? I cannot tell.
Then bout the Tinker all the Monks did throng,
Whilst he, poor fellow thought he had been in hell:
For till that day, he never saw such creatures,
And what they were, he knew not by their features.
Bardino feared this was but a gull,
And says, good fellow, let me see thy hand.
I Am not ashamed to show't, by cock and bull,
Bardino viewing't well, espyd the brand,
And says, Sir youth, before you couzend me:
But now in sooth, I will be meet with thee.
Devil or Friar, whatsoere thou art,
What taunting language do thou give to me?
Hah! quoth the Tinker. Quoth Bardino, Smart
Shall give a comment of my words to thee.
Smart, quoth the Tinker, swigge for Smart and you.
I bid defiance unto all thy crew.
Talk not to me of Smart: for if you prate,
This knotty staff shall bastenado you,
I Will set a scarlet cap upon thy pate,
And lace thy shoulders with a purple blew.
Peace, honest Tinker, say the other Monks.
I, I will peace it, if I catch the hunkes,
But let the Monks and Tinker take their chances,
We Will view the travails of our Raddle-man,
With faint Bellam' whom every fear entrances,
And every trance does make her roses wan.
Thus far their loves have Tragi-comick been,
Thwarted by Fate, and the unconstant Queen.
But every planet with kind aspect now
Viewes their long traveld loves, and Venus boy,
Smiles on their wishes with auspitious brow:
Now a full harvest must they have of joy,
Though sowd with black disasters, dangers, fears,
Despair, hope, doubtings, sad complaints and tears.
For aged Starley's towers (that fatal stage,
Where Danes did act their juries once in blood,
When bellowing cannons belched out their rage)
Within the kenning of our lovers stood:
And the well-tuned bells did loud proclaim
Joy to the lovers in great Hymen's name.
A near allye, Albino in this town
(By order a devout Carthusian) had,
Whose voice, he hoped, with joy their loves should crown.
But he a slave in Raddle vestures clad,
And a raged Marget seeing, started back,
Bidding his knaveship to some other pack.
He would have no commerce with such as he,
He had no Ewes, whose backs did want his raddle,
And if he over-sawcie needs would be,
With a good bat he would his gaskins swaddle.
The Provorst Marshall else, if this does fail,
Shall show you lodging in the whip-stock jayle.
This language sounded in Bellama's ears,
Like the sad voice of death, yet fear no flaughter,
To joy straight changed shall be this scean of tears,
And stead of grief, the child of pleasure, laughter,
My promise stands unshak't, for this short anger
Brings not their loves nor safeties unto danger.
Sir, quoth Albino, there was once a time,
When you esteemed those winged minutes sainted
You spent with me (when Fortune was in prime)
For you and I have better been acquainted,
Though some disasters, and stern Fate have made
Me take this homely garb, and homelier trade.
Some blood which in your azure channels glide,
Dwells in my veins, I am Albino hight,
And lest you think this smells too much of pride,
View this triangle on my able right.
That sight unto rejoycings be at alarmes,
His kinsman then ensphear'd him in his arms.
So led them both under his arched roof,
Breathing kind welcomes from his courteous lips,
Excused his ignorance, and sharp reproof,
Asked what misfortune did his worth eclipse?
Demanding how coy Fortune dealt with him?
And who she was, that was so passing trim?
Unless high heavens do forbid the bane,
This maid shall be my bride, though homely dressed,
Clothes oftentimes the purest beauty stain,
And Venus most unclothed, is clothed best.
Under this roof of rags Bellama dwells,
Franght with diviner worth than nature spells.
Hymen enrich your wishes with content,
As benign heaven has enricht your face
With natures glory, beauties orient,
Says the Carthusian with a comely grace,
Thrice welcome, welcome, for your lovely grace
Will add a luster to my homely place,
Sir, my endeavors shall be wholly spent
Henceforth, quoth she, to recompense your air;
This is no time (forsooth) to complement,
Prithee adjourne thy words of courtship (fair)
For till our hands be joynd as well as hearts,
I fear (quoth he) supplanting envies darts.
Good Cozen, ere the next days sun be rold
The Apogaeum, our Meridian point,
Favor our wishes with the have and hold,
Tie us so fast, fate may not us dis-joynt.
For envy like a snake does crawle about,
And winds her tail in where she holes her snout
Omit no nuptial rites, with holy oil
Let her anoint the posts with virgin hand,
To Ianas consecrate the weathers spoil,
And to those gods which for our house-holds stand,
Procure horn torches to be borne along,
And cry Th^lassus with a bridal song.
Provide me store of nuts to throw about,
With a full hand unto the gaping boys,
That from the tumults of the struggling rout,
All voices may be dampt, that speak not joys,
Over us two, let the same Flamine fall,
And let the wheaten cake consummate all.
Nor will we manumisse these robes of state,
Within whose walls blessed safety only dwelles,
Lest our known faces and apparel prate
In louder eccho's than the marriage belles.
Then say (fair Lady) truth I do not jeere,
Will you be wedded to a scarlete ere?
Quoth she (with blushes carpetting her cheek)
And is that question (prithee) yet to ask?
Your worth does merit the unequald Greek,
Without Nun-penance, or Alcides task.
Then pray you (in truth it is no gull)
Will you be married to a Tinkers trull?
Thus sleep and mirth did cut the night, and e're
The sovereignty was taken from Cynthia's horn,
When at Easts casement newly did appear
The orient brightness of the rising morn,
Albino rose, and to the Church did haste,
T'un-Nun Bellama, and un-gird her waste.
When the Carthusians voice had crowned their amors
With an assurance of Thalassian joys,
The air was thinned with the joyful clamors
(Not of state-sattens) but of Grammar boys,
And our fresh sponsants in that height of mirth.
To every pleasure gave an easy birth.
Now are they landed on the I Will of bliss,
Where every joy courts their desires with pleasure,
Envy did then her snakie train dismiss:
For their espousals did all sweet entreasure.
Dead grief bequeathed her stings to thorn and thistle
Nor durst a sigh within those borders whistle.
Then, as Sea-merchants, when their reeling Gally,
Drunk with salt Neptune, hazardeth their bteathes,
To calm bold tempest, and the Tritons valley,
Hack on the quiet shore their bracked sheathes.
So did our Amorists, (half wrackt with eye-men)
Devote their raddle vestes to Love and Hymen.
Some marrow-lancing eye perchance may quarrel,
'Cause with the bridal torch my muse expires,
And in loud jeeres his towering voice apparel,
Taxing the saintnesse of my Metricke fires,
Because my lines tread not the common path
Of Fortune, issue, and appeasing wrath.
Perhaps I dare not lengthen out my story
With those events succeeding time begot,
Lest some disaster should eclypse their glory,
And the pure Ermins of their pleasures spot:
For having scru'd them into firm embraces,
I will not waken hate, or rouse disgraces.
Yet beauty (know) when virtue shines upon her,
And virtues (know) skin-perfections gloss 'em,
Awe Fortunes nath, and challenge heavens honor,
Hell cannor cancel them, nor envy dross 'em.
Love, if to me the same content thou wilt yield,
I Will limme thy mother on Minerva's Shield.
TO THOSE WORTHY HERO'S OF OUR Age, whose noble Breasts are wet and watered with
the deaw of Helicon, N. W. wishes ever- flourishing Laurels.
YOu noble Laureats, whose able Quills
In framing Odes, do drean the sacredrills
Of Aganippe dry, within whose breasts
The Sire of Aesculapius safely rests;
And all the Muses Temple, daigne your rays
To cheer the measures of an infant Bays,
Spread forth the Banners of your worths to shield
His younger Muse, unable yet to weild
Arms, against the Monsters of this Critic age,
Envy, detraction, and Saturnine rage.
I to my self assume not double worth,
Or that my teeming fancy can bring forth
Words to make wonder stand amazed, do try
To vindicate the breath of Poesy.
In such a thought I Am silent, but because
I Have heard invectives belched from the jaws
Of Nil-scientes, whose audacious bragges
Have raised a thunder like a shoale of dagges
T'affright endeavors:
In writing which, if my weak studies hit
Of any fancy speaking worth or wit,
If I have snatched any fainting Muse
From the black jaws of envy and abuse,
Shooting a soul into her, and new breath,
Maugre those tongues that doomed her to death.
Echo forth thanks unto coy Daphnes lover
(About whose Fane the sacred Nine do hover)
Whose kindness smild on my uncrusht designs,
And locked a Muse in my unworthy lines
Able to blunt the darts of envy, pare
The sharpest hoofed Satyr, and with air
Shrill as the voice of thunder, chide those gauls,
That belch forth scandals and invective bawles:
Nay, he, befriending me above my merit,
Unseen of any, heaved my winged spirit
T'a higher court than the Star Chamber is,
Where souls may surfeit with immortal bliss.
And taught my fancy in those quiet slumbers,
What, waking, I have folded up in numbers,
To tell the brood of Critickes, that there are
Some few, or if not some, yet one, that dare
(Backed by your thrice-sacred worths) expose
These lines and letters to the ken of prose.
The humble admirer of your Nuses N. W.

Il in sonio insonnadado.
WHhen (in the silent age of sable night)
The silver way with Phaebes glimring light,
And her attendants was adornd, and when
Fast slumbers scald the eyes of drowsy men,
I entered Morpheus Court, that Ivory port,
Whereat benighted phansies pass that sort
With real good, sleep was the Ianitor,
Who let me in without one crum of Ore,
Into the spacious hall, whose darksome flore,
With downie beds and quilts was paved ore,
Instead of Marble stones: here nuzzled both
The hated spawne of idleness and Iloth,
Icilone and Phantaso, the one
Wrapped in a mantle set with stars and stones,
Checkerd with flowers, and trimd with antic shaper.
Playing with children, feathets, flies and Apes,
Blowing up spittle bladders: and the other
Stretched on the bosom of his quiet mother,
Folded in furs and feathers, would not stir
To earne a penny, or to please you Sir
With cap and curtsie: wondering much, to me
The winged post came with an Embassee,
I, frighted with his strange apparel, shrunk
Away, and closely into feathers sunk.
He smiling said, let not my strange arraying,
Kind youth, beget amazement, or dismaying:
I Will show thee where in marshald order stray
Whole troops of Laureats ensphear'd with Bay,
Then spread his winged sails, and caught my hair,
Without a sense of motion through the air,
Conducting me, through where the Salamander
(If faith b'historlcall) does breath and wander,
Then through those glorious orbs, enricht with gems,
The palaces of seven Diadems.
Then through the firmament, where glittring spangs,
Like blazing Topazes, in Crystal hangs,
Three stories higher was the Galupin
Where Jove was frolic with his goddy kin;
Hither was I uplifted, then mine eye
Besprinkled was by nimble Mercury,
With liquor, which with strength did me endue
To Abide the presence of the immortal crew,
The whispring vaults I opened of my brain,
The counsels of the gods to entertain,
And fearing memory, with short-lived chalk,
(Wanting the tongue of paper) writ their talk;
The Patron of Parnassus and the nine,
To JOVE presented and the rest divine,
Their suites with comely grace and majesty.
But Phoebus was the Orator; Lo I,
Thy daughters undertook to patronize,
Great Emperor of the Crystal spangled skies,
And shield their measures from the sullen rage
Of envious ignorance this Critic age;
(For none inveigh against Poetic measures,
But those that never had Pandora's treasures)
Yet such a shoale of ignorants I find,
It Is thought the greater part oth' world is blind,
That maugre all my scourges, in the dark
Against the Muses they will snarle and bark.
Let winged-sandald Hermes post to call
And summon them unto thy judgment Hall,
That you may know their rage is want of brains.
Hermes took post, and brought the silly trains,
Jove waved his scepter, and commanded hush,
Then calls a gawdie piece of empty plush,
And asked what he could say against Poetry?
Hah, hah, quoth he, and fleer'd with blinking eye,
I have a mistress (then begins a tale,
Which made Jove call for some Nectarean Ale,
To arm his ears against nonsense, and his side
Against laughters fury) has too much of pride,
She Is fair, as is a wall new parg'd with lime,
She Is wise enough; for age, she is in her prime,
I vow her service, but she slights me, why?
Marry, I dave no vein in Poesy,
But what I take on trust, oth' second hand,
She jeeres and says, this cannot well be scand,
This has a foot too little, that too much,
This is a borrowd line, she knowes't byth' touch,
Tells me the double Indies shall not gain
Her love, without the smirke, Poetic vain,
Despairing I against the Muses rail,
And wished my hands had crusted been with flaile,
Then should not I have needed Proxee-verse,
To Have won a milk-mayd, neither coy nor terse,
Tush, say I, Madam, this same ragged crew
Of rithming dizzards, are not worthy you.
Plato exiled them from his commonweal,
Their tongues will flatter, and their fingers steal,
Mere sycophants, that for a trencher-bit,
Will swear you have beauty mixed with purest wit.
And if you anger them, will in a rage
Vnsay't, and rail against you, your sex, and age.
Hundred invectives more, I often use
Against the Poet and his strumpet Muse;
But I protest, it is to dissuade my Lady:
For had I wit, Phoebus should be my Dady.
Then sacred sisters I emplore your Bays,
Make me a Bard, and I Will descant your praise.
No quoth the Muses Helicon nere brooks
To Have servants which do wear such simple looks,
So sent him packing with a flea in's ear.
Apollo called another to appear,
A feeble brain, that at a general dye
Had got the sable hue of infamy:
He buzzles like a bustard in a wind,
And with his aio's strikes the vulgar blind,
In whom, if we believe Pythagoras,
I think the soul of Battus housed was:
He is demanded why he thus does bawle
Against soaring wits, not worms that earthly crawle?
Clothing his face with impudence, his looks
With pride; and with high self-conceit (his books,
So are his words, he speaks in print) why, why,
Have I not cause t'exclaime on Poesy?
I Am a Divine, not a fond prattling Poet,
I am a Preacher I would have you know it.
Peace arrogant, says Hermes, else I Will drive
Thee quick into the black infernal hive.
There was a time when thou admir'dst with praise
Each sprig of Laurel, slip of youthful Bays.
But Envie's master now, or th'cause of it
Is, thou nere hop'st t'attaine that height of wit.
But say the truth, (yet truth will scarce abide thee)
Are there not some that jeere and do deride thee
In lofty measures, and thou wanting skill
To vindicate thy credit by thy quill?
Do scold? Quoth he, I do acknowledge it,
I blamed the Muses, 'cause I wanted wit,
And darted scandals at Apollo's Lyre,
Yet pardon, mighty Aesculapius Sire,
And ye blessed goddesses, my grand offense,
And on your Altars I Will burn frankincense.
Nay, build rich Trophies unto Poetry.
It Is good to see a convert mind, stand by
Apollo said; says Vulcan by the Mass,
I have espyd a plumpe-cheekt bonnie less,
She is a wrig I warrant, where is my wife?
Oh! it is a hell to live a coupled life.
Thus did the Blacksmith mutter, till Apollo
Cited the damsel with a gentle hollo.
Up comes the Margit with a mincing pace,
A Citie-stride, Court-garbe, and smirking face,
So curtsy'd to the gods, yet it was but short.
Then says Apollo, (meaning to make sport)
What occupation use you, Art or Trade?
Are you a Virgin? Yes, a chamber-mayd
Forsooth I am, I have my virgin seal,
To honest Vulcan I dare make m'appeale,
Heel pawn his head, had I kept Venus room,
Mars had not dubbed him with Actaeons doom.
A merry wench in faith says Jove: yet stay,
To serious parle let us fall from wanton play,
You are accused, as one that does condemn
And boldly scoff the Laurel Diadem.
I once, quoth she, admired them all, until
I found my praise returned but traffic ill
For when I praised, they praised me again,
So I had only praises for my pain.
Then wittily I oftentimes would flout,
And say the Poets was a needy rout:
Of all professions sure it was the worst,
Just like the Cockatrice, in the shell accursed,
With many more, yet though our tongues did jarre,
Our quarrel ended in a lippy war.
We kissed, to friendship like the nurse and child,
And there she stopped: whereat the heavens smild.
Then came a Serving-man, a blunt old knave,
That dared Parnassus with a saucy brave,
In youth says he, I rim'd, and framed notes
To Pans choice music, and the sheepheards throats,
And many a lusty bowl of cream have got
For Kates three brace of rimes, which was God wot,
But once removed from prose, and for a song
The iron-hoofed Hobs' bout me did throng,
But now old age my wit and fancy nips,
I gaul the Muses with satyricke quips,
Yet might I with the Eagle cast my Bill,
And gain my youth, I would regaine my skill.
This done, the Pursevant Apollo posts
TO Elysium, to call the Poets ghosts,
That paid the infernal Ferry man his fee:
There saw I Homer, but he saw not me,
Lascivious Ovid, and Virgilius grave,
Satyricke Iuvenal, and Martial brave,
Splay-footed Plautus, limping Ennius,
Propertius, Horace, and Boethius.
Amongst the Modernes came the Fairy Queen,
Old Geffrey, Sidney, Drayton, Randolph, Green,
The double Beaumonde, Drummond, Brown,
Each had his chaplet, and his Ivy crown.
How rested ye amidst those gloomie shades?
Says Jupiter? see ye not other trades
Learnings and Sciences have constant springs,
Summers and Autumnes without winterings?
They Will have no hail-stormes, fleezie rain, nor frost,
They Are kin to rimes: winter must not be lost:
A pregnant witted Bard did silence break,
Homer 'twas not, he could not see to speak.
Virgil it was not, he had got a wrench,
Nor B. nor M. for they had got a wench.
Ennius was lame, and much did fear his shine,
Horace was busy with the kilder kins.
Ovid employed with his beloved Flea,
Old Geffrey's language was not fit for plea:
Draiton on's brains a new Moon Calfe was getting,
And testie Drummond could not speak for fretting.
I knew the Roscians feature, not his name,
Yet it is engraven on the Shaulme of Fame;
With settled grace he boldly did advance
Father of gods, king of the large expanse.
We often have heard proud Envy belching forth
Fogs, mists and fumes, t'cclipse the metrick worth,
And know the teeming world did never nurse
So great a mischief as the Griticke curse:
Our souls one minute have not rested quiet,
Since carpes we know was Ignoramus diet.
If Wisdoms Faecial call to the sand,
We have revenge, our standish is at hand.
That rights our wrongs, but against Don Sillies railes
The fist is heaved, for paper naught availes:
We sat in counsel, did intend to sue
With a petition to this noble crew,
The substance this, that ye would either give
Wit and discretion unto all that live,
Or make them Idiots, deprived of reason,
Else but to speak, let it be counted treason.
But we appeal, great gods, it is now my theme,
To clear from mud pure Aganippi's stream:
Assist Pierides, maintain your fires
With greater care than can the Vestals theirs.
It Is merely loss of time and papet both,
By refutation to chastise their sloth.
Then I the juice of Helicon will sup,
Not in nut-shell, but Colocassian cup,
Shall make my fancy catch at naught but gems,
And wreath the Muses brows with diadems.
Me thinks this draught such virtue does infuse,
As if in every sense there dwelt a Muse,
A spirit of valor, to un-god great war,
Should he but send a ram; but to the bar,
Who knows not Vaticinium does imply
In equal measures verse and prophecy.
An inspiration, a celestial touch,
Such is the Poets raptures, Prophets such:
Vates a Bard, and him that does presage
Vaticinor possessed with either rage.
Poema is a book in numbers framed,
Fast cemented with sense, by working named,
To which the choycest Orator stands bare,
Poesies does in a sublimer air,
Things humane and divine expose to view.
The first Philosophy that Fame ere knew,
Was honored with the name of Poetry,
Enricht with rules of pure morality.
Reading instructions unto heathen men,
With more contentment than the Stoics pen.
The ancients unto Poets only gave
The Epithites of wise, divine and grave,
Because their meeters taught the world to know
To whom they did their holy worship owe.
The Greek is free and kinder in her praise
Which she bestows upon Poetic Lays,
She calls all that which takes not essence by
A matter pre-existent, Poesy.
So makes the world a Poem, and by this
The great creator a great Poet is.
Nay more, that language on the Nine bestows,
(As every callent of that Idiom knows)
In her etimologues an higher grace,
Calls them (...), and whose measures trace:
The steps of Nature, humane and divine,
The abstruse mysteries of both untwine,
Unlock the exta of each Science, Art,
By cunning search: again, not as a part
Nor a grand column only, but entreasures
The soul of learning in the Poets measures,
All other Arts (which use and learning gave)
Precepts and rules, as sure foundations, have,
When as the Poets pen alone's enspir'd
With high Enthusiasmes, by heaven fired,
Ennius them holy calls, and Plato says,
Furies divine are in the Poets lays;
Nor wanted he himself the Poets wit,
He Dithyrambos and love passions writ.
The Regal Prophet was a true borne Poet,
As to the life his well-tuned meeters show it,
Composed to music by that holy man,
Ere Hopkins and Sternhold knew how to scan.
Hence Chicken-Augures with your crooked staver,
Whose rash conjectures crown and dig us graves.
A lofty fancy steeped in the fount
Of Pegasus, an higher pitch can mount.
Sibylline Oracles did speak in verse,
Their scatterd leaves in measures did rehearse
The mysteries of man's redemption, by
The incarnation of a deity.
Grave Maro, I remember, in an Ode,
An Eclogue, treades the same Prophetic rode,
Those famous Druides renownd of late,
Treated at large oth' souls immortal state.
Man's spirit does not to the gloomie shade
Of Erebus, ore black Cocytus wade.
Death sets no period, is the lesser part
Of humane life, for the same breath does dart
Vigor to every sinew in the bulk.
Man lives as freely in another hulke.
Who reads Ovids Metamorphosin,
And thinks not Moses soul was sheathed in
His body, by a transmigration?
He from the chaos tells the worlds plantation.
Maro accords, and gives the world a soul,
Which does this well compacted lump control;
And by illumination he discoverd
How then the spirit ore the water hoverd.
Th'inspired pen of old Pythagoras
By Nasos guide, relates, how in this mass
All things do alter shape, yet soon Dame Nature
Of one form lost, informs another feature,
No substance's nothinged in this large globe,
But against some feast puts on a newer robe.
The earth resolved to water, rarefies,
Into pure air the thinner water flies,
The purer air assumes a scorching heat:
They back returning, orderly retreat,
Those subtle sparks converted are to breath,
The spissye air, being doomed unto death,
Turns into sea, earth's made a thickened water,
Thus wily Nature is a strange translater.
My Lady Readers, I refer to sands,
But the grave learned unto Ovids hands.
Nor Seneca divine wants prophesies,
Near to the death of time an age shall rise,
In which, says he, the Ocean shall untye
The watery bands of things, and to the eye
Of Typhis, a new world appear
Unheard before, by the most itching ear,
In glory matching this. Then Thule no more
Shall be the earths ne plus ultra, bound or door,
Our eightsith'hundred would large heaps of treasures
Set in their wills to buy Zorastus measures.
Mass. priests for Dirges then would loose their fee,
These would the surest de profundis be.
Shopsters and gallants to his house would hop,
More than t'Exchanges, or Canary-shop.
And Poets brisk would have a larger dealth
Than holy Confessors, of dead men's wealth.
I might be infinite, should I but show
For what grave Arts the world to Poets owe.
Apelles had not been without Parnasse,
The pensils worth had only dwelt on glass,
Or dusty tablets, guided by those Apes,
In imitation of some antic shapes.
Venus a portraict had, Pigmalion mist
That speechless female which he hugd and kissed,
Had not th'enlivening breath of Poetry
T'a higher pitch reard up dull fantasy.
How quickly worthy acts of famous men,
Died in the waine of our poetic pen?
How rudely by the Monks (which only had
The key of learning) were their actions clad,
King Ethelbert's closed in his Poliander,
To Christ for Church buildings, he is gone without Maeander
Such stuff the tombs of Bid and Petrarch have,
The razor from all Monkey pates did shave
Wit with their hair, except in Mantuan
Re-teind by Vida and Politian,
And many others was this glorious Sun
Which glitter shall till earths last thread be spun,
We raise shall Obeliskes by Apollos breath,
Which owe no homage to the rage of death.
By pen Honterus creatures limbed to life,
Better than could the Cynicke with his knife.
Pliny compared unto him, did err,
He was a Chymick and Cosmographer.
How bravely does the Scottish Bard depinge
The planets order, and the Sphericke hinge.
Brave Petrarch, Latin'd by our learned clarke,
Lights us a lamp to guide us in this dark
And critic age, says, that stout Alexander,
(Whose warlicke steps ore all this globe did wander)
Fixing on brave Pelides tomb his eye,
Wrapped with a noble envy, loud did cry,
Happy, O happy thou, whose actions still
Live, being enbreath'd by the immortal quill,
Of worthy Homer! nay, when his sword had gaind
Those wealthy realms, ore which Darius raignd,
He among his treasures found a casket fair,
So set with gold and gems, it rayd the air,
And called in day despite of clouds or nights,
Yet the best use (as grave Patri^ius writes)
This cabinet could serve to, was t'entom be
Homers choice Iliads in his glorious womb.
Of Zoarastus now some wonders hear,
And barrel his disciples in thine ear,
Whose rithmes could charm foul Cerbers bawling tongue,
And pick hels lock with his enchanting song.
From Stygian shade conducting whom they listed,
And whom they pleased with hellish fogs bemisted.
Oh golden meeters, rimes out-worthing gold,
At what high prices would they now be sold
If they were extant! Friend for friend would sell
Lordships, books, banners, to redeem from hell
How many ages has those Greeks survived,
(Than all their predecessors longer lived)
Which showd their noble worths at Iliums grave?
Yet thrice Nestorean age them Homer gave:
How bravely Lucan tells succeeding ages
The seven-hilled cities bloody rages.
Moist clouds long since, have washed the purpled grass,
Yet red as ever'tis in Lucans glass.
To Carthage Queen the wandering Trojan Prince
Pretended love, but dead it is long since,
And dust are they, yet Virgils lofty verse
Makes him speak wars, she love, from under th'herse.
Long since did Hellespont gulpe in Leander,
When he presumed on naked breast to wander.
Hero's watch-candle's out, they vanished quite,
Yet Ovid says, all was but yester-night.
A great while since the cheating Miller stole
The Scholars meal by a quadruple tole,
They gave him th'horn-booke, taught his daughter Greek
Yet look in Chaucer, done the other week.
I'rne-sinewd Talus with his steely flaile,
Long since ith'right of justice did prevail
Under the Scepter of the Fairy Queen,
Yet Spencers lofty measures makes it green.
Dun was a Poet, and a grave Divine,
Highly esteemed for the sacred Nine,
That after times shall say whilst there is a Sun,
This Verse, this Sermon was composed by Dun.
What by heroic acts to man accrues,
When grisely Charon for his wastage sues,
If his great grandchild, and his grand-childes son,
May not the honors, which his sword has won.
Read, engraved on paper by a Poets pen,
When matble monuments are dust, and when
Time has eat off his paint, and letterd gold,
For verse alone keeps honor out oth'mold.
The press successively gives birth to verse:
Shall steely Tombs outlive the Buckram hearse?
To other things the same proportion hold,
Pure rimes, which lofty volumes do enfold.
Autumnall frosts would nip the double Rose,
If cherisht only by the breath of Prose.
Beauty of beautie's not the smallest part,
Which is bestowed by our liberal Art.
Orpheus, Arion, and the scraping crew,
To wyre and parched guts may bid adieu,
Or audience beg, were not for sprightfull Bays,
Which to the strings composeth merry Lays,
But with the Muses I Am so fallen in love,
That I forget thy presence, mighty Jove,
And through the spacious universe do walk,
But this shall set a period to my talk.
Jove stretched his Scepter then with frolic grace,
And joy trinmphed on the heavens face,
The Orbs made Music, and the Planets danced,
The Muses glory was by all enhanced.
Jove then intended for to ratify
Decrees in the behoof of Poesy,
Giving the Bards his hand to kiss, and made
Chaplets of Laurel, which should never fade.
But Vulcan to Gradive placed in oppose,
Was nodding fast, and bellowing through the nose,
His armed brow fell down, and lighting right,
His antlers did the marching god unsight.
Mars fumed, the gods laughed out, the spears did shake
At which shrill noise I starting did awake,
And looking up, (East having op't his doors)
Amazed I beheld a troop of scores,
And wondering, thought they would been Ale-debts, but found
I them had chalked in my dreaming swound.
I trow not the decree, 'twas Vulcans fault,
Yet dreams are seldom sound, like him they halt.
Take this, and if I can so happy be,
I Will write in my next slumbers, the Decree.
FINIS.
GEntle Reader, bear with some faults, which through the obscurity of the
copy, and the absence of the Author have escaped; as page 3. line 24. for
vein read reyne. p. 3. l. 6. for enjoyd read enjayld, p. 6. l. 10. for tener
read knee. p. 12. l. 24. for Satamit read Catamite. Two staves there are
misplaced, to the reforming whereof the sense will direct thee: what other
errors thou find, let thy pen amend, excusing the press, and un-staining
the Author.


