A GODLY Sermon preached the xxj. day of June, 1586. at Pensehurst in Kent, at
the burial of the late Right honorable Sir HENRY SIDNEY Knight of the noble
order of the Garter, Lord President of Wales, and of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Council,

By Thomas White professor in Divinity.

AT LONDON Printed by Henry Midleton. M.D.LXXXVI.

To the Reader.
Having gotten the copy of this godly Sermon into my hands, which contains
so excellent matter for all estates, especially to beat down the pride of flesh
with the consideration of their mortality, and to raise up the poor and
distressed servant of God, in regard of their glory after this life: I
thought it my duty in conscience to make it common to the church. Wherefore so
read and remember the things that are written therein, that thou may fear
the Lord al thy days, and reap thy life with joy, in the resurrection of the
righteous.

A SERMON PREACHED the xxi. day of June 1586. at Pensehurst in Kent, at the
burial of the late right Honorable S. Henry Sidney knight, of the noble order
of the Garter, Lord President of Wales, and of her Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel,
By T. W. Professor in Divinity.
1. John. 3. 2. Dearly beloved: Now are we the sons of God, but yet it does
not appear what we shall be. And we know that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is:

3. And every man that has this hope purges himself, even as he is pure.


THis scripture (right Honorable) does naturally divide it self into three
principal parts. The first is an Evangelical Dearly beloved: Now are we
the sons of God. The second is an Anticipation or preventing But yet it does
not appear what we shall be.] The third is an exhortation upon the premises.
He that has this hope in him purges himself, even as he is pure.

The proposition, or assertion, is worthy to be considered and thought upon:
nay, to be wondered and maruayled at, which at this day is admirable to the
Aungells, and Spiritual powers them selves, 1. Pet. 1. 12. except we shall be
found ungrateful unto God, and that that should be respected of Angels, and
not of men, which pertayneth to men, and not to Angels, Namely to be the
sons of God. By nature there is but one only son of God, Jesus Christ, by
creation many, even all the Myllions of Angels, good and bad, Job. 1. And by
redemption not a few, but an infinite number of men, even the sons of Adam,
as many as are elected, Gal. 3. And for a certain piece or spice of the glory
and majesty of God, shyning in the government of the world, the kings and
magistrates of the earth are called gods, as sons of God: Psalm. 82. So that
albeit in creation Adam be inferior unto Angels, yet in the unspeakable work
of our redemption, he is superior: for the son of God did take our nature,
and not theirs, Heb. 2. 16. and made men the sons of God, and not Angels: he
often appeared in their form, but never took their substance, so that they
all lie under the judgment as many as fell, and are reserved in chains, unto
the darkness of death, 2. Pet. 2. 42. And of many rebellious spirits not one
shall be saved: but of all the race of Adam not one was despised of him that died
for all, though not all, but many do become the sons of God: as more at
large it might be cleared by the scriptures.

The proposition is indefinite, equivalent to an universal, you are the sons
of God, for you are all the sons of God, as it is expressed else where, Gal.
3. 26. For there is neither Jewe nor Gretian, bond nor free, male nor female,
there is no respect of persons in Christ: and all the children of Adam are the
sons of Abraham if they believe, young or old, rich or poor, wise or
simple. The which although the Lord him self do say and that very often in
scriptures, nay albeit for our faith sake he sometimes do swear that by two
immutable things wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might receive
strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18. Yet notwithstanding it is, and has been
always a Paradox unto us, until the spirit do bring his testimony to it, in
our hearts crying Abba father, as it is Romans 8. It is no marvel therefore if
one, a most learned Rabby of the Jews, a ruler, Nichodemus, so long as he
remained natural in him self, did not only wonder and doubt of this
principle of religion, but plainly doat, when he said, How can a man be
borne again which is old? can he enter into his mothers womb again, and be
borne? John. 3. 4. Object.
For thus the brain of man might reason. Whatsoever is borne of flesh is
flesh: and to repeat the birth is impossible in nature, and further then the
natural course of things the heart of man can neither reach, nor conceive,
and therefore as overcome in this care, he stands still: how can it be?
nay, he is armed on the contrary side with many reasons and respects. Sprange
we not all of Adam? came not he out of the earth? went he not into the earth
again? and is not this the way of all flesh? how say you then, we are the
sons of God? Solutio^.
I answer that this Generation is not after flesh and blood, nor of the will
of man, but of God, John. 1. That there came an Adam after Adam, which was
before Adam, who came from God, and God was with him, and he was God, even our
Emanuell, God with us, who himself was made man, and the son of man, that we
might be made the sons of God. For as many as received him, that is, that
believed on his name, he gave them power to be the sons of God, John. 12.
Wherefore call no man father upon the earth, says Christ, for one is your
father in heaven, Mat. 23. A father, not for sun, and rain and no further,
but we are heirs and joint heirs with Christ of his kingdom, Romans 8. In
deed with the wicked God deals as Abraham did with ye sons Genesis 25. 6.
of his Contubins, he gives them certain gifts, and sends them away. But
he that shall inherit is Isaak, the Child of promise, with whom we are
heirs annexed of the same blessing: and the excellency of this thing passes
ye poor measure of man's capacity, whether you respect the cause, (Gods
merries:) or the effect thereof, (man's salvation) especially if you fall into
the consideration of the greatness of ye price, which can no more be valued
than God him self, for he gave himself which is God: and albeit Judas played
the traitor kindly to sell him for 30. siluerlinges, yet Peter makes him
inestimable and therefore does reject both silver and gold as base and corrupt
Metal. You are redeemed (says he) not with silver or gold but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and without spotte, 1. pet.
1. All the world is not worthy to serve for one counter in this reckoning: for
all the treasures thereof are but mere corruption. And men and Angels must
give place to the son of God, and let him alone with this matter for ever who
has opened all the Treasures of his goodness, even the fountains of his love,
and has powered out the bowels of his mercy. Wherefore, if either the great
price a man pays do cause great love of the things so bought, or the
grievous pain a woman suffers in the^ Throes and pangues of her Travail do
procure a perpetual mind and memory of her Issue and will not possibly admit
forgetfulness of the same for ever, Isay. 49. Then there is no cause at all of
any doubt in Christ whose love cannot go back, him self being risen from the
dead and ascended into heaven who stuck fast unto us in all the agonies and
anguish of his death, and though he turned his head, yet he changed not his
heart: but drancke the draught of death and damnation for the time. Justly
therefore might John ye apostle term the christians here (dearly beloved) at
which love him self seems to stand astonished in the first verse of this
chapter, and therefore by way of admiration he labors to express it.
(Behold what love the father has showed on us, that we should be called
the sons of God.) Wherefore seeing God him self has said it, and showed us
all his secret counsel in it, (for otherwise Christ so borne and buried, so
rising and reigning should have been but happy for him self, and not at all
for us) except God had so ordained him to be a mediator for us and set him out
to be a propitiation for our sins, Romans 3. Nay, seeing the Lord has sworn
it as you have heard, let us give glory unto God and believe and live, let us
believe not hystorically, which is profane, but after the spirit. For as an
heavenly knowledge of earthly things by the means of faith does help a man to
heaven, so an earthly knowledge of heavenly things be it never so excellent,
yet through ye flesh it does but send a man to hell: And because the Apostle
does so urge the instance of the present time, directly pressing this word:
(Now) now are we the sons of God, Let us not dream that we were his sons
before we did believe, as if it were of nature: or that we shall become his
sons after we have believed, as if it were not of grace: but let us firmly
hold with the apostle that we are now the sons of God, even when we do
believe. You were darkness, but you are now light in the Lord, Ephe. 5. 8.
Prove your selves therefore whether you be in the faith, says the apostle,
2. Cor. 13. 5. You shall easily find whether you have faith or not, except you
will deceive your selves. And it fares not with faith as with the eyes of ye
body, which the further off it sees, the brighter and better it is; but true
faith, except it be the naked name, or shrine of faith, the greater it is, the
nearer it finds and beholds the Lord, not above in the clouds, but beneath
in our hearts, whose Temple we are, that is, God dwells in us by faith, 1.
Cor. 3.

The second part.
Here follows the answering of an objection, in these words, But yet it does
not appear what we shall be, etc.

It is most sure that God does know who be his, albeit men may easily deceive
them selves with an opinion of faith. For superstition seems to be true
Religion, and Hypocrisy is very like to christian profession, and there is a
faith which is marvelous forward and fervent for the time, but proves but
temporary in the end. Wherefore it stands us upon to cast off all Hypocrisy
and double dealing with God, and to look soundly to our selves, for Cocle
cannot be discerned from Corn in the blade, and Chafe arises of the same
seed, grows in the same field, and by the same means is nourished with the
Wheat: many are glorious now, but yet it appears not what they shall be. This
doctrine is true, and were exceeding good for our cunning counterfaites in
Religion which roabe themselves with the out side thereof for the time, but
rob God of his honor, which profess the gospel, but in peace do plague
and persecute the saints, which are afraid of nothing more than of an
extraordinary measure of the light, they are now Gods sons: for so they
will be called: but yet it does not appear what they shall be when he comes
which has his phanne in his hand: who can sever the sheep from the goats:
who called as deep dessemblers as them selves, Hypocrites and painted
Sepulchers, let the policies of men yield them what alowance they list they
get none of God nor of his Christ with whom whosoever is not wholly with, he
is directly against, and such indifferent midlesised men ye scripture knows
none.

But these words go another way and carry another sense, it does not yet
appear, it is a concession or a granting to the adversary so much: that
whatsoever appears in this life, or can appear, it is but poor and
miserable, and too vile and base for ye sons of God in their estate, whether
you respect our breath or life or death, for unto all and every one there is
but one and the same coming in, and going out. Between the rich and poor you
can find no difference, nay wise and foolish are all one in this thing, and
that which is most of all. There is no odds between a man and a beast, if you
respect the body, Eccle. 3. For man being in honor may well be compared to the
beast that perishes, Psalm. 49. 1^.
wherefore you may not judge by sight, but by faith, not after the external
things which are present, but after those things which are prepared and to
come. For as sense only apprehends the things present, and memory the
things that are past, so faith beholds things that are to come, and
spiritual wisdom considers all things: and knows that albeit the kings
daughter be never so richly clad, as in a vesture of gold, yet al her beauty
is within. 4. 5. Psalm.

Isay does properly play the Harold when he makes corruption the coat of all
men: All flesh is grass,] Esaias 40. And least he should seem to do injury
unto great men, he does give it with a difference, And all the glory of it is
as the flower of the field, To whom Solomon the king consents who terms
the total sum of all things vanity of vanities. All things under the Moon
(say the Philosophers) are mutable, but the prophet tells us that every thing
under the Sun is corruptible and vain. I will not now speak of the infinite
necessities of the poor, with the which he being daily pinched and pressed,
cannot choose but he weary of his life: (for it is most evident) neither can I
conveniently discourse of the godly, whose condition is not better, but rather
worse than the rest. For how so ever it goes they are certain of bitterness
in this life, if they he evil, God will be upon them, if they be good the
evil will both hate, and hunt, and persecute them: they are sure to be
exposed to the tyrants of the time, the proud persons of the world, and to
all the sons of the Devil. If any speed well in this life, by all
likelyhoode it is the Rich, for they are the men of this world, the day and
time is theirs, they rule and strike the stroke, they live and take their
pleasure as they list, and therefore is the world set in their hearts, for
where the treasure is there the heart will be. Mat. 6. 21.
But yet notwithstanding, if a man shall duly weigh the continual vexations
of spirit, the sudden reciprocations and chaungings as often as of the Moon,
the ircksomnes of pleasures themselves, together with the uncertainty and
shortness of their breath, which is as it were a hook of God set in the
nostrells of all the sons of men to restrain them with all, he will soon
gene his consent, that the states and stars of this world are miserable for
all their riches, if not the more miserable, which is most certain. For the
greatest part of rich men, they are miserable, because whatsoever they enjoy,
it is but as a dream, and but as a shadow whatsoever they follow after, it
is all uncertain and unconstant: yea, as the Ship does swiftly trace the Seas,
ye Bird with quick winge does fly in the Skies, or as an Arrowe shot strongly
at a mark, so hastes and passes pleasure fast away, and riches with Eagles
wings do often take the morning flight. We see that great rentes, and
revenues do not always keep us company in our life, and in death they are
sure to depart: they are but as the Aples of Sodom, which if you touch them
they turn to dust, or as the Goord of Jonas which withered in a moment:
neither do they redeem the life from ye grave. Psalm. 49.
They cannot, wisdom is not able to do it, because time as a tiraunt casts
all down and lays all a long, yea being the appointed line and measure of
every thing, it wears out the very heavens as a garment, and being swift in
all other things it is both swift and short in the life of man. Wherefore the
prophet says our life is but a span long, 49. Psalm.

You have heard the difference that Isay gave between the grass and the
flower. The flower is more orient, but not more permanent: yea, sooner fades
the flower than the grass, and though in corruption there be no difference,
yet to corruption there is greater speed in the one than in the other: as ye
Sun, the eye of the world can testify. And as soon, as soddayne, as often,
and as miserably dies the Rich and honorable person as the poor and naked
soul, which thing this present spectacle can demonstrate. The reason is,
because all the grace and glory of the flesh, it is but as the grass or
flower of the field, I have said you are Gods but you shall die like men,
Psalm. 82. 6. Wherefore if a man could possibly be as glorious as ye sun:
yea, though he were ye crowned king, or second to the king his son, or as one
of the Princes fellows, so that for his excellency and beauty he might well
be compared to that glittering Image in the Prophet Dan. 2, 31. whose head was
of gold, his breast and arms of silver, his belly and thyghes of brass, and
legs of Iron: yet his feet are always parted with brickle clay. This is the
foot of all flesh: claye, and this is their only way into the earth, in the
which way we are all carried with continual motion. And as all the Rivers do
run into the Sea from whence they sprange, so by a decree hastes Adam into
the earth from whence he came, and stays no where, from the birth unto the
grave. For as we all increase we do decrease, and in vain does a man expect
his death to come, a great part whereof is past to him that has lived many or
any years. Singular therefore is the Metaphor of the flower to flourish out the
nature of the great ones of the earth, who in scripture are under these terms
otherwise commended to them selves, as by vapoures, shadows blastes of wind,
bladders of water, and not only vanitye, but vanity of vanities, so quickly
in the turninge of a hand, nay in the twinkling of an eye comes man to
naught. And as the great world in the closing up and conclusion of nature,
shall at once even in a moment receive a change, so in an instant Adam ye
little world falls and comes to his end, for too day a man, and too morrow
none: nay, now a king, and now a piece of clay. Wherefore, if the days of man
upon earth were as the days of an Duke, if his height were as one of the
Cedars of Lybanus, so ye his excellency might mount up to the heavens, and his
head reach unto the clouds, if he were always as green and fresh as the
Laurel, or fat as ye Olyue: if all ye days of his years were every one as
long as the day of Iosuah when the sun stood still in the midst of
Heaven, Joshua 10. 13
yet it must be night at last. Our fathers lived long, yet saw the grave at
length: many of them continued nine hundred and odd years, but none, no not
Methusaleth reached out the thousand year. Genesis 5.

The poor man labors for his living, and the rich man for his life, and
whose condition is better judge you: for both are resolved quickly into ashes,
and do loose their bones, even the pillars of their bodies in the dust. Now,
if the greatest part of our life past may justly seem unto man to be but
yesterday (so soon it is spent and gone) why shall not the least part
remaining appear but as too morrow, especially seeing it may be consumed this
very day or hour. For besides the shortness of our spirits, the uncertainty
is wonderful, when there are a thousand ways and means to give a man his
end, and to cut the cord or thread, the very line of life. But men are for
the most part careless and secure in life, and too too timorous and fearful
in their death, and so Adam is always in extremes, and therefore after the
proverb many had rather choose to be living dogs than to be dead Lions.
Eccle. 9.
I do not speak this as if it were not lawful to fear that which Christ
himself has feared. And if a beast made for the slaughter does yet abhor
to dye, how much more shall man do it upon whom this evil condition came
after he was made to live: Romans 8.
but spiritual fortitude does always become a christian man both in his life
and death.

As I trust I may both freely and faithfully speak unto you of this late right
Honorable person, to the laying up of whose body in the treasury of the earth,
you are this day assembled, who do yet live and flourish in the world in great
wisdom, honor, and dignity. That he was a stem of a noble house, which
himself has honored with many and principal virtues, but especially with
faithful service always to his king, unto whom both young, and old, he was
ever in great trust, either in war a valiant Captain, or in Peace a worthy
Counselor, besides many honorable Embassages. As in the time of king Edward
that sweet and fragrant flower (who was cut down in his spring, and died in
his arms) he was sent into France and since her Majesty's most excellent
reign, both into France and Scotland diverse times, being of the most noble
order of the Garter, and of her Highness right honorable privy Counsel, four
times Lord Justice, and three times Lord Deputy in the Irish parts, and also
Lord chief President of the Country of Wales, in which place he governed with
great honor 26. years, and being visited of God in a good age of 57. years he
deceased in Worcester. What should I stand to play the Orator or the painter in
this place, I know it is not looked for at my hands, but yet to tell the truth
it shall give glory unto God. And seeing he has sowed the fruit of his
wisdom in peace, it shall yield unto himself a worthy Fame, and to his Seed
a certain print or mark of their fathers steps, who was a treasure of the
common wealth and a common good of his country. And surely the land has lost
a mighty man, and as it were a star is fallen which sometimes shined in his
place, but now behold he lies in the dust: and so does the righteous
person, and no man regards the evils that are to come, Isay 57.

If the wisdom of a man do make his face to shine, and if without light the
son be nothing worth, surely his name deserves with us a pillar of gold which
had and held so many offices and so great: nay which bare them so long, and
weilded them so well, who truly as a candle consumed himself in yelding light
to other men: Besides his special gift of affability to poor and simple men
the very grace of all his greatness. It is no hard matter for a man to be humble
in low estate, but to be lowly in greatness is not a common gift: and if pride
her self be often forced to dissemble humility, because lowliness makes a
simple man to be highly commended, how much more does it excel, when it shall
in deed appear in persons of value and renoune? Wherefore if any man will
build his house high, let him lay his foundation very low, forenuie shootes
at high marks and pride goes before a fall. But the greatest praise that I ca^
give, or he receive, either in this world, or in the world to come, is of his
constant perseverance in that faith which he had long professed, and of his
patience and joy in his last end. Of al which being credibly certified, I doubt
not in Gods behalf to pronounce him most happy. And here I intended to have
spoken in few words to his noble issue, but it shall now suffice that I pray
for him, that he which must succeed him in his family, may if it be possible
exceed him in his virtues, or at the least imitate them, that God may gyrd him
with his fathers gyrdle, and fasten the nail of his tent in a sure place, that
he may be the glory of his fathers house, and a father to many inhabitants of
Judah, which ye Lord promised to Eliachim his servant whom he made steward unto
king Ezekias, because he loved well the faithful, Isay 22.

And because there can not be a readier way to cut the throat of the common
wealth, than by exalting of the wicked and unworthy, the Lord bless our
Magistrates, and rulers with true religion, wisdom, fortitude and humility,
and all ways free our country from tyrants and proud persons, who as Nymrods
do but wound by oppression the poor people, and never heal them by counsel.
And as this day especially requires let us beseech the Lord to maintain our
peace at home and his wars abroad, together with the excellent and honorable
persons employed that ways, that all the enemy Papists may know that there is
a God of Israel which is able to give the victory to his own name, when they
are broken and confounded. But I have dwelt too long on these things, I will
return and make marvelous haste in the rest.

In the mean time the Question remains strong all the honor in the world,
Object.
notwithstanding, how mortal men environed with a thousand evils, closed up
and concluded with so many kinds of miseries, may be said to be the sons of
God: especially considering how they are suddenly taken away by death, as if
they had not been, or as if they should never be again.

The Apostle answers effectually, Solutio^.
It appears not what we shall be. For we might as well except against Christ
with the Jews, waying his birth in a maunger, his life laden with miseries of
all sorts, his death most accursed, that he was not ye son of God: but in
his resurrection he begun to appear, and more clearly he showed himself in
his ascension but in his second coming, it shall be most manifest unto all the
world. Phil. 3. Colos. 5. 3
And when he which is our glory shall appear, the^ we shall also appear with
him in glory. A thing that is hid cannot be seen, our life is hid with Christ
in God, and therefore he says it does not appear, etc. Four things I must
needs observe unto you by the occasion of the words following, the first is,
how that all the excellency of the sons of God lies in these words ( We
shall be like unto him,) which in truth exceeds all declaration, and therefore
after certain similitudes of a crown and kingdom, whereby the Scriptures do
speak unto our capacity, they conclude the glory to be such, as no eye has
seen, no ear has heard, and no heart can conceive, 1. Cor. 2. 9. For we must
not think that only vulgar and common persons, but the kings and princes of
the earth shall feel in themselves an admirable brightness when they shall
taste of this glory in such sort that they shall confess that they were
nothing before. For if Solomon the most glorious king that ever was, yet in all
his Royalty was not like a lilly of the field, what shall we judge of them
that shall be like unto the Son of God.

And when he says ( like:) he makes us not equal and fellowelike, for in all
things Christ the head of Angels must have the pre-eminence, because he is
the Son: and if the Saints shall differ from themselves in glory, which
seems by the similitude of the stars used in the same cause, 1. Cor. 15.
how much more shall the natural son of God excel in glory, because he is
the head? And if the beauty of the militant Church restored, is said to be
such, as if the Moon should shine as the Sun, and the Sun should exceed
himself seven times, Isay 30. 26. how much more shall it be in the Church
Triumphant in the heavenly Jerusalem, where Christ himself is the light and
glory of all the saints? The form of which city, and the riches exceeding
all gold or precious stone is yet by such things described as it could, Reave.
21.

And here the resurrection is most evidently affirmed and assured, albeit that
order ask the head before the other parts, and we know that Christ's is first
and past: So surely shall they that are Christ's be next at his coming, and
then comes the judgment: it shall be sudden in a moment but in a wonderful
order. If any doubt hereof, because it is to come, as a fool he is reproved by
the natural evidence of a seed dying and quickening again, whereby the
resurrection is more than shadowed out unto our faith, 1. Cor. 15. It shall be
with the same body, and the same skin, and with the same eyes and no other
shall I see my Redeemer faith the most patient Job. 19. 27. that is, the
substance of the body remaining the same, the quality shall be clean altered,
which is no monstrous paradox, as that of Popery: The Papists gross error of
transubstantiation.
(the accidents remaining the substance being taken away) which in reason is
absurd, and most monstrous against nature her self. The glorious change is
noted, 1. Cor. 15. for mortality immortality, for corruption incorruptio^ and
glory etc. There is nothing that can more comfort us in or against death, than
the resurrection from the dead by the hope whereof our bones do live in the
grave, and our flesh does rest because he shall not leave our souls in hell nor
suffer his holy ones to see corruption, Psalm. 16. In the old time this matter
was plainly signified by the translation of Henoch and Elias, but now it is
more fully sealed and assured by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, whose
resurrection and ascension is ours in as much as he is ours appointed to be our
head, and we his body.

The second is that though the time when all this shall be, be not here nor else
where particularly assigned in the Scriptures, yet it is most certain When he
shall appear. The day is dated and most certainly determined with God, but
otherwise unknown to men and Angels, nay hidden from the eyes of the Son
of man him self in as much as he is man. They are therefore the more bold or
blind coniecturers, who do thrust them selves most fearfully into the
secrets of God, and dare appoint a day which he has kept alone unto himself.
Demer. Act. 1.
Faith thorough hope does expect the very instant, but yet knows not the day,
and therefore thorough patience does quiet her self, and rests within us no
less until the time, than the Coarse does tarry in the grave. Christ did
rise the third day, perhaps to day or to morrow the dead shall arise, but when
soever it shall be, it shall be as to morrow to all that are a sleep in the earth,
albeit they have lain in the dust five thousand years before, because there
is no time to them, and both the bodies of the good and bad fare all alike in
the grave, but yet there is a difference of their souls now, and shall be of
their bodies then, when the voice of God shall raise them out of the pit,
neither shall it be necessary for the souls that are separated from the
bodies to spend time in returning from heaven, or hell again, when as the
Scriptures do teach us, that in the twinkling of an eye and in the least and
last moment, not without wonderful and fearful miracle, both the
resurrection and the judgment by the power of God shall be begun and finished.

The third thing is, Heb. 6.
the certainty of our salvation, and as it were the anchor hold in this that
he says, We know we shall be like unto him, which makes mightily against the
Papists, who do hold that for a chief point of their faith, which we know
to be a great infirmity of our flesh, that is, to doubt or to distrust, and
they call it presumption to say we know, which yet is the doctrine of God that
cannot presume.

The certainty of faith is greater than of any sense, because of the promise,
from the which faith may no more be parted than the house may be separated from
his foundation and stand. And the reason that causes all the faithful to be so
bold? is because that that which might alter the case, cannot fall in the
nature of God, with whom is no change, James. ^.
nor shadow of change, neither in will, nor power, both which are as firm and
constant as himself: and therefore he that will distrust the Lord, let him
believe nothing. In this pickle they stand, or rather in this puddle they
sink, who wickedly trust unto their works, and foolishly believe that there
are three sorts of places for resort of souls after death: namely, Heaven,
Hell, and Purgatory, and to which of these the soul does pass, Popery
cannot tell, which is a warm comfort to a soul departing. As if a man were
cast into the Sea and coming to the land were returned back again, perhaps
he might sink and perhaps he might swim. But we thank the Lord and his
Christ we are better dealt with all than so. We know we shall live if we
believe, because he has said it, and we know that they that do not believe are
so sure of death as that they are judged already, John. 3. 18. Wherefore in the
mean season, hope serves to nourishe our faith and patience to possess our
souls which were but seely and simple means to relieve the heart, if that
faith were not out of al doubt in the promise of the word. Last of all is the
reason to confirm us in the expectation of our glory, For we shall see him as
he is, which words do send us unto Christ as he now sits at the right hand
of God his father, and as he shall most gloriously appear in the clouds, with
all his Angels, armed with fire and power for revenge. He is now ascended
from the Center of the earth, unto the very height of heaven. We must not
therefore basely think of Christ, as apish Papists dream, because he is full
glorified in himself. He was born in a manger, he did live poorly upon earth,
he died miserably on the cross, he was crowned, but with thorns, mocked,
and scorned in all the anxietie of his soul, and in the anguish of his death
he was forced to yield forth strong cries in the days of his flesh, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me. Mat. 27. 46.
It was so because it became Christ so to suffer, but now it is nothing so but
otherwise, and, we shall see him as he is, and not as he was. We shall see him,
but not as Peter and the rest, when he appeared glorified on the mount Tabor
but partly, and after a sort, Matt. 19. whose brightness yet the Apostles
could not bear, though it were not long, nor fully revealed unto them: but we
shall behold him, as the only Emperor sitting in the throne of heaven, with
all his host of Saints, and spiritual powers, not by faith as now, but
truly by sight: not in the mirror of his word, but in the presence of
himself.

So the wicked shall see him when he comes, Obiec.
for all flesh shall behold him, Mat. 29. 30. It is true. But this thing shall be
their death a thousand times, Solut.
that they shall see him, in whom they have not believed, nay him whom they
have pierced Ioh. 19. Zach. 12. They shall see him as Adam heard the voice of
God in Paradize, and ran away Genesis 3. If no mortal wight can bear or abide
the glory of an Angel, but he must tremble and fear, melt and fall in sunder
for the brightness: how much greater horror and confusion shall be to the
sinful creature, when the Creator is in presence, and ready to enter his
indgement? But mercy shall work in that day toward all believers, according
to the covenant, and we shall be changed into his glory after an image, when
we shall behold him as he is, 2. Cor. 3. 18. These things ought to keep our
faith and hope alive in the promise, and against all temptations to make us
most patient: for if we be afflicted, we are more suitable unto Christ. We
must keep the possession of our selves, and of our souls by patience, not by
insensibilitie, but by suffering after Christ, and by Hope we must correct and
cut off all preposterous humors and affections of the flesh, which do but
wound our faith, and cast a man into many perplexities remediless, if he
promis to him self any other thing, or do look for it otherwise, or sooner,
or later than God has ordained in his word. It is lawful for a man to burn
in desire, and for this cause speaks the Apostle to stir us up: and
celeritie in desire seems always to be delaie, but the quality of faith
through hope, is to be contented with the opportunity of God, called the
Lords leisure, knowing for a surety that she shall once see him as he is.

The third part.
And he which has this hope in him, purges him self even as he is pure.

These words concern ye exhortation, that we should labor to be holy as he is
holy Leu. 19. 2. for albeit the promises of God do pass most freely from
himself, yet there are alwais certain couenantes and conditions required, as
faithfulness and obedience to the word. So Abraham our Father with whom the
contract was first made, and as it were left in his hand for us, is commanded
to walk uprightly before the Lord, Genesis 17. 1.

And so albeit we are saved freely, yet it is by faith, and not by every
starting faith, but if we do continue to the end, Matt. 10. And because there
is no other way to make our calling sure, than by adding virtue to our faith,
therefore true faith is always fruitful, never idle nor weary of good
works: for albeit they be no cause, yet they are the way to heaven, for by
these means an entering into the everlasting kingdom shall be ministered
abundantly unto us, 2. Pet. 1. 11. Saint James reasons thus, No works and
no faith, and Saint John in this place thus, No purging of our selves, and no
hope, all one in conclusion. He that minds not sanctification shall never see
the Lord, Hebr. 12. 14. but the pure in heart are blessed, for they shall see
God, says Christ, Matt. 5. 8. Neither let the devil insinuate himself to
make us think Gods grace the less, or our state the worse, for these
conditions, (as he dealt with Adam our father about the tree forbidden:) for our
salvation stands most sure in Christ, and the he^uens have no sounder
foundation, the whole matter being firmly past by word, and oath from God:
nay, being fully done and finished by the life and death of Christ. Wherefore
if Adam in Paradize, and the Angels in heaven, even in their creation did stand
upon their obedience, which when they forsook they fell: how much more should
man in his redemption content himself with the covenants of God, especially
seeing they are such as do not hinder, but further him in the faith and life
of Christ?

And albeit such perfection is required, Object.
as seems and is impossible unto man, To be pure as he is pure, in whose
sight the Angels are not without spot: Solutio^.
yet we must consider, that he deals not with us as by the rigor of the law,
(though he might justly judge us for all our transgressions and wants therein)
but he sets up himself as a mark of perfection to aim and contend unto,
as Philip. 3. 14. And because we can never come near unto perfection in this
life, and yet we ought to press hard, and to follow after it, what else does
the Apostle mean by these words, but that there should be in us a continual
endeavor to proceed from virtue to virtue, and never to desist, until we come
into the brightness of his presence?

And as this place gives no allowance to men's works after the Romish rate,
who may as well think to cleanse dirt with dung, as to purge sin with their
desert: (for if we trust to merit then we must despair) so it answers the^
as Calumnious enemies, which so shamefully beelye the doctrine of faith, to be
against good works, where as nothing is more often, or usual in scriptures, tha^
after faith works. It is the course that all the Apostles take, as it were the
line they al draw in. The fountains do not more naturally break forth and issue
into streams, than the holy Scriptures do plentifully power out themselves
into this kind of exhortation. Wherefore, if they could hit upon it, they
should see themselves liars. For it is meritte of works and not good works
(...) disclaim. And herein as we are wise ^^^aue the law which is impossible
to save us, because of sin, so are we found faithful unto God when we stick
unto his ordinance, and will not seem to save our souls otherwise than he
has appointed in his word, (which is by faith only.) But I have been over
long and tedious, and seeing this part is an exhortation, with an exhortation I
will conclude it: That seeing to sin, and do wickedly has been the way, both
of men and Angels, but to arise and repent pertains only to Christians, the
saved of God: and seeing we may not as stocks and stones suffer the spirit of
Christ which is in us, to pass thorough us insensibly without all effect of
holiness, as water runs through his pype, but our continual diligence and
endeavor is required: let us crave the continuance and increase of Gods grace,
and spirit, in our hearts, yt thereby seeing the infirmity of our lives, we may
be able to purge our selves, our bodies, and souls, eue^ as he is pure: and
that we use not the spring to purge the body, and think the fall good enough
for the soul, after the old manner, making Winter-worke of our salvation, lest
we be prevented in an hour: that we consume not the strength of our days upon
our selves, the world, and the devil, and bring to God our bleared eyes, and
palsy hands, which was forbidden to be offered in the Law, Mala. 1. (except we
shall think it a sacrifice good enough for the Gospel,) but that taking, nay
redeeming the time, because the days are evil, we may shake off presumption,
and prevent desperation our deadly enemies, and so disapoint the Devil. And
albeit we cannot win heaven by our merits, who are the sons of him that
lost paradize by his works, the entrance whereof an Angel of anger did always
keep against him with a brandeshing sword: Genesis 3. 14.
yet seeing we are all the sons of God by faith, and heirs annexed with
Christ of eternal life through the spirit, let us contend thither by continual
righteousness, and holiness of life, as by ye way, and let us never faint, or
give over, until we come to that place, where only we shall be perfect, and
without spot, and where we shall see him as he is, that is most glorious: To
whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one eternal, and
euecliuing God, be all honor, glory, praise, and power, both now, and
evermore, Amen.

Errata.
In the third page of A in the third verse of the text, add in him. In the 14
page of A the last line, breath for birth. In the 15. 22. line add saying.
Ibid. line 23. And for Yet. In B. page 7. line 18. person for perish. In B. 13.
line 26, When for That.


