Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross the 17. of November An. 1589. In joyful
remembrance and thanksgiving unto God, for the peaceable years of her Majesty's
most gracious Reign over us, now 32.

By Thomas White professor in Divinity.



Printed by Robert Robinson and Thomas Newman. 1589.

To the reader.
I Could not ( Christian Reader,) deny, so many requests, and reasons, of my
friends; for the printing of this poor Coppie, (though they were only moved
by affection thereunto) yet because the matter is so needful for our age, and
world, whereunto this little treatise tends; as to unity and love, both in
Church and common weal, and to hearty thanksgiving, and prayer, unto God for
the blessed reign of our most Noble and Christian Queen ELIZABETH I was, and
am the more willing, to yield unto their desires herein, to make it common for
the benefit of our country, not regarding my self so much, as to use any
addition, or alteration, but simply to send it forth, as it was delivered to
the people: Praying God to give it that success in the hearts of the Readers (
printed:) as it seemed to have in the minds of the hearers ( preached:) and so
it shall be double printed: which the Lord grant, to whom I do ever commend thee
in Christ.

Luke 3. 10 Then the people asked him saying, what shall we do then?

11 And he answered and said unto them, He that has two Coats, let him part
with him that has none: And he that has meat, let him do likewise.

12 Then came there Publicanes also to be baptized, and said unto him,
Master, what shall we do?

13 And he said unto them, Require no more then that which is appointed unto
you.

14 The Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And
he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falselie, and
be content with your wages.


THis text (Right Honorable, (...)iuision.
and beloved in the Lord) may be divided into two parts. A Question, and an
Answer, for I do not take it to be any Dialogue, or discourse, but a plain
Question moved by the Jews, to John the Baptist in the wilderness of Judea, by
the waters of Jordan.

From the building of the second Temple until now, they lacked Prophets, and
well worthy they were to be without them; for they had killed all that were
sent unto them, as Steven challenges them, Acts 7. 52. Which of the Prophets
have not your Fathers slain? Now John coming and preaching according to the
Prophecies that went before of him, not after the old and ordinary manner of
the Prophets: but crying: Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand, and
Baptizing, in the wilderness: the common people, as their manner is, to follow
new things, and to see a Prophet: having seen none a long time before, they run
out of all places and come unto him; and not the people only, but the Pharisees,
and the Saduces, also, Mat. 3. 7. Now when John saw, the Pharisees, the
Hypocrites of the world, come to his Baptism, he mends his style, and welcomes
them, as Hypocrites should be welcomed, with O Generation of Vipers, etc. And
so performed one part of his office, which was to cast down mountains: But
because the way was not yet plain for the Lord, except he filled the valleys
also, and the valleys trembled now as it were with an earthquake from the
hills; for the common people being smitten through with fear, for the words
which he spoke to the Pharisees, they come and say ( what shall we do then?)
And he answers them mildely, as it follows in the Text, coming to a lower
kaie. And this was their Question. The reprehention of the Pharisees.

Now if this place seem to any man, Ob.
unmeet for our cause and occasion this day, which is to rejoice and not to
hear reproof; who altogether are or ought to be in thanksgiving, for
benefits before the Lord (as we all, and every one have infinite cause.) So.
Surely he thinks no other thing, then I my self sometimes did think: but
when I do remember the world wherein we live, and the proverb ( It is good to
be merry and wise) and call to mind that the Prophet where he wills Kings
to serve the Lord in fear, he would have them to Rejoice with trembling
also, Psalm. 2. I durst not sunder that, which he had joined so together.
Therefore that we might have a better sight of our selves, and a more full
sense of him, with whom this day we have to do, I thought I could not better
give you exhortation to thanksgiving, then joined with some precepts of those
duties, which do most of all express the same, that neither I might run
nor you rejoice in vain: and that the wise man might not rejoice in his
wisdom, nor the rich man in his riches, nor the strong man in his strength,
but that he that reioiceth might rejoice in the Lord, as it is in Iere. 9. 23.
And then I say not only with the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Rejoice always. But as
he speaks in the 4. Phil. 4. Rejoice always, and again, I say Rejoice: and
if there were such need, I would sing with the Prophet in the 118. Psalm,
This is the day which the Lord has made, Come let us rejoice and be glad in
it; or I would dance with him before the Arc, or do any thing that might
provoke you to joy: But our God requires not such outward things now, let us
therefore offer him our souls; and to give the Prince this day both, Grace and
Glory, (as she well deserves at our hands) in the name of God let every good
man strive, and strain himself, (so that he be found thankful unto God.)

In the Question, Points noted in both parts of the Division.
briefly you may note these things, First, who moved it? Secondly, what is
the matter moved? Thirdly, the manner, how they do propose it? Where the force
of the word appears at large. Likewise if you please, you may observe in the
Answer, 1. Who made it? 2. How he gives it? 3. What it is in substance?
Where the scope and purpose of this place does show it self unto you: within
the compass whereof, are rainged many duties of the Minister, and the
Multitude, of the Prince, and of his Officers, of the Captain, and his
Soldiers; that is of both states, of the church and Commonwealth, and in both
conditions, of Peace, and War.

Multitude, of the Publicanes, and of the Soldiers, that is, some of no
Vocation, as the (Multitude.) Some of public calling, as the (Publicanes.) And
some as it were between both, as the (Soldiers* Matthew records, that there
were some of the Rulers there also? but belike they were too wise to be lured
so soon, Luke reports nothing of them here.

Secondly, what would they have? What shall we do?

Thirdly, For the manner how they do Athenians handled Paul in mocking him:
Acts. 17. Neither speak they so gloriously, as the foolish young man does
Mat. 19. Master what shall I do for eternal life? They have no great hope of
heaven yet: their case is rather how to avoid hell, whereof they are afraid.
Much less speak they maliciously for to entangle John: as the Pharisees and
others often dealt with Christ, they are safe enough from intangling John:
themselves tumbling in John's net. Being at a full point, and driven to the
stand: and albeit at the first remove they come not so far, as those which
heard Peter preach in the 2* of the Acts, where three thousand had their hearts
wounded, and cry ( Men and brethren, what shallw do?) who being instructed,
believed; and baptized, were added to the Church: yet they are in the way, a
light is risen unto them, and they begin to grope and feel after it.

As yet they seem somewhat to savor of themselves: for the Multitude given
always to extremes, either to madness, or fear, say ( What shall we do
then?) The Publicans accustomed to flatter (an usual thing in Officers which
gain more by licking than by biting,) they speak fair ( Master) What shall
we do? The Soldiers hot and rough fellows, speak after their fashion
bluntly, ( And what shall we do?)

The Multitude, Multitude
is called a Beast with many heads; if ever it might be said of any Multitude,
surly it might be said by right, of the generation of the Jews, of that same
seed, which is said to be innumerable for Multitude, Genesis 16. 10. You may
have a pattern of this Multitude in the desert, here by them, which were
before in the wilderness with Moses, where forty years long, they did nothing
else but grieve the Lord and his servant Moses, or if they shall be thought
better afterward; when they were in Canaan, not one of the Prophets will say
so: Isay says they are a people whose neck is Iron, and their browe brass,
Isay, 48. 4. And that is more then, Moses calls the^, out of Gods own mouth ( a
people of a stiff neck) Exo. 32. But peradventure being taught the law so
long, and by so many Prophets, it is otherwise with them now. Read the holy
story, and by them measure these (I confess that of the two, they were better
then their Rulers) and yet they run ahead following the stream, despising
both John and Christ: as Christ himself vpbraideth them, underneath a parable
of Children sitting in the market place, and playing to their fellows, who
would neither mourn nor be merry, for ought that they could do, Mat. 11. They
mocked, and more then mocked Christ, when they assisted Judas the Traitor to
take him, and brought him before Pilate, following the cause with wonderful
importunity, crying, Crucify him, Crucify him, never ceasing until the the
only son of God were slaughtred. And with what success Christ labored among
them, with all his miracles and mercies, and whole three years preaching (the
Church gathered of 120. souls or there abouts) does witness Act. 1. 15. And
does note the Multitude to be both pestilent and perverse. And surely the
religion and life of these here, could not be better then theirs there; where
all things were so corrupted as they were, and yet of this Multitude, some were
woonne unto the Gospel.

Then came the Publicanes, (...)blicans
men worse then the Multitude, for you may judge of their honesty, when you
shall always see them fellowed with Harlots in the scriptures, so that a man of
good name and fame would not willingly be seen with them: and it was objected
unto Christ, as a falt when at the conversion of Matthew the Publicane, he did
sit in his house, and eat with them; it was said, that he was a friend to
Publicanes and harlots. Matthew. 9. and 11.

They were not Jews these, but officers for Caesar among the Jews. (They
took the tribute.) If it please you to see a proud Painter that cannot see
himself, and yet can draw other men's faces true enough, read ye the 18. of
Luke, where a Pharise stands praying in the Temple, and praising God for that
he was not like to other men, as an Extortioner, unjust, or an adulterer, and
pointing to the poor Publicane, painteth him out thus: ( nor as this
Publicane?) where he makes him worse then the former, which needed not,
neither did the Pharise so much brande the Publicane there, as Christ himself,
which proposed that parable, to the Pharisees, rather to show the^ their shame,
then to note the others sin, But in the 18. of Matthew, where he sets an order
to reconcile men being out, and would have a man to deal privately with his
brother, and to tell him of his fault alone, and if he will not hear thee,
then to take with thee one or two witnesses: and if he will not hear thee yet:
then to complain to the Church, but if he will not hear the Church: let him
be unto thee as an Heathen and a Publican, that is worse than a Pagan. So that
it appears there, cannot be a worse man then a Publicane, which will do
wrong, will hear no man, nor the Church, that is neither God nor men: and yet
such are caught here by the word.

Thirdly come the Soldiers, and if it be possible, thrice worse then the
former too, (...)ldiors.
(not for their calling) but for their condition. And if you will try these by
their fellows also, which lived after the^, and were better taught, and yet
were the worst me^ alive, you may safely conclude, that these could not be much
better, for me^ exercised in blood, without the great grace of God, do grow
barbarous and beastly.

Who platted the crown of thorns, and set it on the head of Christ? Who
stripped him out of his clothes and roabed him in derision, but after robbed him
in earnest of all his clothes: so speaks. John 19. 24. The soldiers did
these things* indeed. Who so vilde as to mock him in all the anguishes of
his soul, when he hanged the most miserable one that ever was, striving
between life and death, heaven and hell, for the Redemption of the world, and
then to give him Vinegar, and Gall, for his last draught? Who so bold to take
a spear, and to thrust it into his side, till blood and water followed after?
Who so impudent, for money to lie, and say, that his body was stolen by his
Disciples out of the grave, to blind the world from seeing the Son rising,
which was as apparent, to them that saw him, as the Sun shining? Read ye,
consider ye, and wonder: for soldiers are overcome here, not with weapons or
wounds, but with words only.

Where the unspeakable force of the word appears, that albeit the multitude
hated the Publicanes, and the Publicanes the multitude, and the Soudiers them
both, and all of them God and his Christ, yet notwithstanding at once preaching
of the word, so many in number, and such manner of men in Nature, are suddenly
here changed, and (as Isay prophesied it should be in the kingdom of Christ)
a Wolf is turned into a Lamb, (for so is this multitude) and a Leopard into
a Calfe. (for so are the Publicans) and a Lion or a Bear (such as these
Soldiers were) into a very Cow, and do cry as Cowherds ( What shall we
do?) Esa. 11. 6.

How excellent the word is, the title that it bears, The praise of Gods word.
teaches, when it is called ( the word of God) and the ministers thereof in
both the Testamentes are termed ( the men of God) of the which the former
prefers the word before all other things, and the latter does almost fellow
men with Angels, but our point now, is to consider the force and virtue of the
word, which you may see here to be, as it is affirmed in the fourth of the
Hebrews. Quick and mighty in operation.

I speak not of the word the ( Son) and substance of his father, but of
that word, which brings the truth, which is from everlasting. As the Sun
by his beams brings down the light unto the world, which light was made
before the Sun. Genesis 1. 5. John calls himself a voice, but not the word, much
less the Truth. As the voice is before the word, so truth is before them
both, of the which truth, mortal men should never be capable without the
word, for by the word the son of righteousness does arise unto us, and by
the word things passed and to come, are made present to our faith.

After many ways and diversely, this word was given in former age, as by
Dreams, Visions, Revelations and Angels, etc. But in these latter days after
one uniform manner and order, namely by the Son, the Lord and heir of all
Heb. 1. 2 A comparison here of the Law and gospel, (as two stones smitten
together cast forth fire) would give a light; but I had rather apply my self
unto the Gospel, whereof I am a minister.

And in the gospel how many Metaphors has the spirit, to express this one
thing unto us, for after many proper Epithetes. As the word of faith and
truth, The immortal seed, 2. Pet. 1. The power of God to save, Romans 1. and
the like, it is compared to leaven for seasoning, to honey for swetening; to
the hammer, for breaking the hard flinte. Ier. 23. To fire, for burning the
dross. Ier. 5. To a Sword for cutting, and to a two edged sword, Naie it is
said to be sharper the^ any two edged sword Heb. 9. 12. The one can but enter
the body, and pearce the bones, or if it can divide between the body and the
soul it is all. But this sword called the sword of the spirit. Ephesians. 6. can
divide between the Soul and the spirit, Gaging the hare and renting the
raines: where no other sword, no not that brandishing fiery sword of the Angel
that kept the garden of Paradise, can come. Genesis 3.

Neither are these things spoken of the word, as it goes out of the mouth of
God; for so it exceeds, as it proceeds out of the mouth of Christ, which
John saw as a Sharp two edged sword: Reu. 1. 16. but as it comes out the
mouth of me^, and therefore Peter when he called it the immortal seed: 1.
Pet. 1. 23. he adds straight, and this is the word which we preach unto you:
and Paul does not say the ( word,) but, ( we) are the savor of life or death:
2. Cor. 2. 16. I grant that a heart well affected, as an instrument well tuned,
does sooner answer the sweetness of it, when it sounds) but where is that
heart before the word has made him such a one? likewise I confess that men
by despising thereof, do make it weak and wearish to themselves, but if the
word be weak to save, take heed, for it is strong to destroy: Water
searches and Wind shakes mighty things, and the voice of thunder smites
with terror the hearts of Lions. Psalm. 29. But al these things can nothing move
Man's heart, as the word does, which woorketh powerfullie as well in good, as
bad, learned as unlearned, Kings, as Private persons: In all men that hear it,
one way or other, it wounds as well Caine, as David, and Saul, and Achab, as
Josias and Hezekias; as well Judas, as Peter, but after a diverse manner.
Baltasar the King when he saw it written, his loins loosed Dan. 5. 6. Josias
hearing it read, his heart failed: 2. Reg. 22. 11. (but after an other sort.)
Why, the Prophets themselves, when they were made but messengers thereof to
other men they cry out, one, O my loins, my loins: Isay 29. 16. An other, O
my belly, Abac. 3. 16? For it searches all the bowels, Prou. 20. 27. and
cutteth as it goes with a double edge, either to plant or to supplaint the
soul.

It sleyeth the wicked man alive, although he would feign have it die in a
tempest, when he hears it: yet it leads him into a Labirinth and leaves him
not until it send him to death, or desperation. Antichrist if ever he shall
receive his deaths wound, it is not with Iron or steel but with the breath
of Gods mouth, that is the word. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. The Devil himself is put to
flight in the desert with no other instrument then with the word. Matthew. 9.

And it is a wonderful advantage that Satan has against Christ in that he
holds the first possession in all men, and except he were more strong in
deed, that comes afterward, there were no hope of ever recovering any one.

But these converted are good witnesses here, who is greater, Christ, or
Satan: and not only these, but their Corrupters and Captains also; even the
Pharisees and Saduces do witness the same thing, who are said to be converted,
Matthew. 8. and John 12. Men do very hardly change their minds; especially, if
they be Learned, or Rich: and hence grows all the mischief among us, that
men prove Pharisees in the Church, and Cammels in the commonwealth: Knowledge
makes not the Pharise, but the proud conceit, nor Riches make a Cammel, but
wretchedness; by which means, if it were possible, Satan would stop all
the course of the word, but he cannot, for what Ground the gospel, the Word,
has won in the world (in spite of the God thereof) and all his followers, the
Pope, the Turk, and other Tyrants, the Church every where does Witness; and
with us, Rejoicing and Triumphing this day, does confess, to the glory and
praise of God, saying, that The truth is great, and has prevailed, and praying
that it may prevail for evermore. Amen.

All these here, as it were with one voice, do acknowledge their sin past,
and their present ignorance: O when will our People, and Publicans, and
Soldiers, do the like? when will they say, What shall we do? I would they
would but say, What have we done? we could answer them to both, in two
words, and counsel them also, saying but this? ( do the contrary.) Some
there are that can speak smoothly enough, as it were with Jacobs voice, but
feel them, and you shall find the^ shrowde and rough, for they have the hands
of Esau.

The Law did not admit the Multitude to approach the mountain of Syna, more
the^ the very brut beast, Exo. 19. And under the law they came not but to the
Door of the Tabernacle, where the beast went further, Leuit. 4. The Pharisees
counted the common people vilde, and cursed; Men that knew not the Law, John 7.
49. And Papipists made the same reckoning of you when they called themselves
Spiritual, and you but Lay and Temporal men, and bard you from the Reading of
scriptures which Christ bad you to Search, John 5. 39. But now you are come,
not unto that terrible Hill Sina, but unto the mountain of the Lord, ( Sion,)
not to the Door of the Tabernacle, but to the Altar: not with Beasts for
sacrifices (for now they are all unclean to be offered) but with your Selves
and Souls, which the Apostle calls, The reasonable, living, and acceptable
sacrifice, and service of God, Romans 12. 1.

You have heard and heard again, this word which is so effectual here, but
we have neither hard, nor seen of any great success thereof in you, the fault
is somewhere, either in the word, or in us, or else in you; let us al clear
the word, because it is the Immortal seed. And do not you accuse us, seeing
we never sowed the seed which brings forth that fruit whereof we have
cause to complain, we make your selves the Judges, as God does make his own
people, Esa. 5. It is the Envious man has done it, to whom you have yielded
rather then unto us, for you will hear when and who^ you please, what and how
you list, there is no rule with the multitude: teach them and they will teach
you: for every man makes a cross of his duty: And albeit they are not full
so bad as those which answered the Prophet plainly, We will not do what thou
command us, Ier. 6. Yet they are nothing near so good, as those which said
to Moses, what soever thou command us, we will do, Exo. 19. I would they
were but so forward as these, to say ( What shall we do?) (except they fear
the statute of troubling us in preaching) which in such a case I think they
needed not to fear.

But this virtue and force, which we have showed to be in the word, comes
never out of the word, but as fire comes out of flint, when it is stricken:
the word read profits, but to prepare men for their teachers. Most true was
the answer of the Eunuch, Acts 8. When Philip asked him whether he understood
that he read, he says, How can I, without an interpretor: Faith comes by
hearing of the word, all sides do consent, but the question is whether it be
wrought in us by the word preached or read? they that doubt, let them consider
the place, Romans 10. 14. and tell me whether they find not, that that hearing,
which does engender believing, be not inseparably tied to Preaching, or no. I
would not that men should learn from hence to despise the reading of
Scriptures: (as some have done) seeing it has his singular use in the Church,
But that men so esteem of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, that is as The
disposers of the secrets of God: 1. Cor. 4.

Therefore the Position and Proposition is necessary, and not to be denied,
that there must be me^ teaching in the Church, not only Apt to teach, but they
must teach, except it shall fare with them as it does with ( Genus) in Logic,
to preach Potentially; The labor of an Husbandman returns into a ring, that
is, it knows no end, and You are the Lords husbandry, 1. Cor. 3. Wherefore
there are two other Requisites, which he may not be without. 1. Faithfulness
to give meat and not poison: The second, Wisdom, to give to every man his
own portion, and that in season too, Luke 12. 42.

And all this is nothing yet, without the Grace of God: it stands much in
these, but not all, for men can go no furthe^ than men can go, as in
Baptizing: If Ihon go before with water, and Christ come not after with fire,
or in Preaching: If Paul go before planting, and Apollo follow him watring,
but if that God come not after them both, giving increase; I do not say, our
labor is lost, because we have it, but you have lost the fruit thereof, because
you have it not: and if it be true, that Heaven, and Earth, the common Parents
of all worldly things, be barren; and the Sun, and Moon, do but lose their
labor except God do give to every seed his several body, as it is 1. Cor.
15. how much more shall it be true in this precious and heavenly seed, when
Christ him self has pronounced to the world, that No man can come to him,
except the father draw him, John 6. That is before his spirit descend, no
spirit of ours, (not so much as one soul) can ascend; and this was the reason,
why John caught so many here, and Peter more, in the 2. of the Acts. and Paul
more then they both: whereas Christ himself (whom I hope you do not think
inferior unto these) who is the Lord; yet does convert fewer then they do, I
speak of the external dispensation of his Ministry in the world, for
otherwise I know that never any yet was converted, or shall hereafter be
converted for ever, but Christ must convert him; And the reason of success in
all our labor, is only of the spirit, who in John 3. is compared to the Wind,
which blows, when and where it lists.

Faith and religion do come with a spirit, but take you always heed of those
spirits which come unto you without the word, there be too many of them in the
world, which are both fanaticall, freneticall, and satanicall: therefore after
the difference and distinction made between God, and Men, then observe you but
the order of the spirit, when he gives grace, or increase, not without
planting, and watering, neither before, but after; as you may sufficiently
perceive in these conuerts: and it is the second part. 1. Who answered them? 2.
How he makes his answer? and 3. What it is?

1 Who answers them? (...)and (...)rt.
it is John the Baptist, of whom it is written that he was the voice of a crier
in the wilderness, etc. and not only so, but it is further affirmed, that he
was a Prophet, and more then a Prophet, being of all the Prophets, the very
last, and next forerunner unto Christ, whose way he made right, and his paths
strait, with a wonderful resolution, opposing himself to the chief, and is
not holden back with the respect of any fear, or danger, but provoke even
them, that knew as well how to revenge him, as they knew how to strike a dog.
His faithfulness made him bold, and a bold Prophet is good, but a bold man,
and a cold Prophet, are both naught.

Christ called him Elias, for his spirit surely he might have called him
Bonarges, the son of thunder, as the other John was called, Mat. 3. 17. for
what a clap of thunder, is this upon the hills, first to call the Pharisees
Vipers, and after to threaten them the fire? The Axe (says he) is laid to the
root of the tree, and every tree, that brings not forth good fruit, is
hewn down, and cast into the fire: This Axe, is death, a violent death: the
Tree, man, any man, a Pharisee: the Fruits, are works, and the Fire, is hell:
Hell fire. So that he threatens them with no less than with death and
damnation (as I take it) and that presently except they do repent, for he
gives the^ neither day nor time, so that this seems to sound more terrible,
than that cry of Jonas, Yet forty days, and Niniuie shall be destroyed,
Jonas. 3. 4.

Therefore the Multitude, Publicanes, and Soldiers, hearing these things, by
and by begin to look about them, and remembering the flame to be next the
smoke, and fearing the fire, the wrath to come, whereof John spoke, they all
cry out ( What shall we do?) Unto whom, he is said now to answer, for he
opposed before, and that hardly: and he uses so great moderation and mildenes,
as he had done severity and sharpenes; and how good says Solomon is a word
spoken in season? Pro. 15. It is like a sweet shoure, that comes after a
drought, or like a light that shines in a dark place. He does not now
flatter, fawning, or fanning the^ with wind: he leaves that unto the
Politiques of the world, which thoroughly serve their God, with reuiling the
good, and praising of the bad, but John speaks, though sometimes sharply,
and sometimes smoothly; yet always truly, charitably, and to the purpose: let
us examine his answer. He that has two Coats, (...)ext.
let him part with him that has none.

The first Answer is to the Multitude, and it is very fit, and apt, to
persuade the^ to be merciful, which seek mercy them selves; Ob.
But for all that, it seems scarce sound, and perfect counsel, whereof the
people can receive no profit; for God is not pleased with good deeds for our
ill? as if there were a law to bind him either to Accept, or to Except, the
one, for the other, as the Jews did think him bound by the law, for Sin, to
take a Sacrifice, and for a Soul, So.
a Sheep? I answer, it is true, that there is nothing in all the Law, which
may comfort the Offender, because he is under the Curse: and therefore if he
had shapte his answer out of the law? He might have answered thus? Perish
and Despair: but he answers them out of the Gospel: and for many reasons
chooses the works of Charity, which he urges not after the Law, but after
the Gospel. And therefore this exhortation depends upon another Principle,
and on a new Law, where, to the Repentant, his sins are assured to be
remitted: and in lieu of thankefulnes, a better life is inioined.

Wherefore he does not further reprove them now, but spares them, that as
John the Evangelist, after the voice of Thunder, heard the voice of Harpers
from Heaven, Revel. 14. 2. So these might hear of John the Baptist, after
Anger, Favor: and might see after Fire, Water: and receive after Commination,
Exhortation: wherein he handles them so tenderly, as the Samaritan did the
wounded man: pouring in old wine, and not new, for fear of breaking their old
Bottels, for he knows that the bruised Reed must not be be broken, nor the
smoking flax be quenched, Isay. 42. 3. And therefore wills them rather to
break their sins by Almes-deedes, as David did persuade Nabuchadnezar, Dan.
4. 24. Not with any Goats offered unto God: but with some Coats given to
poor men, Sacrifices, were Ceremonies which had their time, but Love is a
service of all times both to God and Man; and it is most necessarily required
here for many reasons and respects. First, for the Multitude, as the best
thing in their case: For perfect love casts out fear, 1. John 4. 18. and (I
think they were afraid.) Secondly, for the Church, whose necessity could
not choose but be infinite then in the beginning when Hypocrisy, and Tyranny,
had possessed all. Thirdly, for John himself, who auoideth by it, that same
suspicion so often objected of the Pharisees unto Christ, (that he spoke against
the law) as our Pharisees handle us, because we constantly affirm, ( That
Faith only justifies) according to the ( Word) we have many evil words for
it, and though otherwise we preach and teach good works a hundred times, yet it
will not serve our turn. For they conceive of us, as of the enemies of all
goodness, where as it is not the good work, but the merit of our good works
that we do so disclaim and abhor. Lastly, it serves more for the honor of
Christ, when such a Multitude shall be turned and changed by his word not in
Opinion only, which often falls out in the common sort, through
inconstancy, and temeritie, but by good works, and such as kindly cross the
soul of an earthly minded man, and for the which many did depart from Christ
both sorrowful and sad? They should now witness to the world, that they
esteemed nothing in comparison of the peace and quiet of their troubled Souls.

And there are but two effects of true Repentance; To cease from evil, and to
learn to do good. He pursues the latter, which implies the former: He
might have said, Love you one another: but lest a People too much given to
dissimulation should only answer in word and tongue; He calls them as John
does his hearers, 1. John 3. 18. Unto the Deed and Truth of Love.

By ( Cloth, and Meat,) here he understands all our Substance: for Food,
and Raiment, is the effect of all that a man can have in this world, 1. Tim. 6.
8.

But who should relieve the Poor? Ob.
the Multitude only?

It is said to the Multitude, So.
He that has two Coats, let him part with him that has none. There are
certain special Duties, which do concern one, and not another, but to give
to the Poor, belongs unto all Christians, (with this prouiso) If they have
it. For John counts it a disgrace in the Church, which is the House of God, to
see one man with two Coats, and another naked, and yet both one man's servants:
wherefore that equality, where the Plenty of some, supplieth the Penury of
other some, is Christian, and not Anabaptistical, 2. Cor. 8. 14. And that
inequality where some do Surfeit, and others are hungry, is not Christian,
but Devilish, 1. Cor. 11. 21.

I know the Multitude would post over this lesson to the Minister: but if (as
they call us men of a Coat) they could prove us to be men of two Coats, (men
that had it, they should reprove us the better, (as we do them.) If we did it
not, Rich men would have all the water still fall into the Sea. Though Aarons
oil, rested not on his Head, but ran down to his Skirts, and smelt better
from his Clothing then from his Head.

1 They do but dream that think we are commanded here to give half our
goods unto the Poor, because it is said ( Let him part with him that has
none) In deed Zacheus gave half his goods unto the Poor, Luke 8. And so did
Ananias too: but he perished with his wife Zaphira, for dissimulation, Acts
5. Christ in the 19. and 21. of Matthew, bids the Proud young man To sell al his
goods, and to give it to the Poor; (for hard and Knottie wood must have Iron
Wedges.) But John does not here define, what, or how much we should give,
only he moves us to keep our Conscience in pitying of the Poor; with such
things as we have, And if there be a ready mind, says the Apostle, God
measures a man, according to that he has, and not according to that which he
has not. 2. Cor. 8. 12. And if any man should neglect himself by giving of
too much: (which seldom falls out) surely he should offend against himself,
as well as the hard and covetous heart sins against others, in giving
nothing, or too little: And if You gave all your goods unto the Poor, not your
Coat only, But your body? to be burned for them; Yet without Charity it
were nothing. 1. Cor. 13. 3. For as Faith without Works is dead, so Works
without Faith, and Love, are in the same Case, dead, and Damned.

2 Likewise he does not Counsel us to give of our superfluous things, for who
counts two Coats to be superfluous? Nay, who holds it not very necessary
to have two Coats, although for speed in an extraordinary Journey, it was
denied the Disciples for the time, to have two Coats, Luke 9. 3. It is a sorry
Sacrifice, or Service unto God, to Give of our superfluous things? it may well
serve the Poor, but better gave the Widow a little of her poverty, then the
Pharisees* did of their abundance, great for the heart, which God respects
rather then the hand; may be rich, in Poverty: I cannot tell what you call
Superfluity? No man knows what is Too much, except he knows first what to
call ( Enough) but if to give where there is no need, or of those things, which
we care not for, be superfluous: And if there were ever any work of
Supererogation in the world: this is like to that, but there is no such work,
nor can be: for a man may as well give more then he has, or do more than he
can do, as do more than he ought in any good (all being a like impossible
unto him.)

3 To whom must we give? ( To him that has need) that is, to him that
wants, then must we give to Covetous men; for they have not that they have,
and want as well that they have, as that they have not? But John simply
commends unto us the Poor, whom Christ would have in his own steed to be
comforted until his coming, saying, Me you shall not always have with you,
but the Poor you shall have always, John 12. 8. Surely there are many Poor;
and made many ways, as well by their own default, as otherwise: and as they
are almost without number, so they are altogether without order, for on Saboth
days, when you are in your best array (they say) they are in their worst;
belike bringing their Poverty, or Hypocrisy abroad, to meet with your Pride,
hoping thereby to provoke your Prodigality or Mercy: Better care would be had
both of them, and for them, but in the mean season thou may never despise
him to whom thou may be like, even when thou do despise him: for the
Affliction of an hour will make the prowdest stoop and sit upon the ground,
and forget all former felicity. Sirac. 11. 27.

4 But what Reasons does John use to move the Mind? Ob.
for men are very skillful to allege reasons not to give; Nabal that never did
good until he died, can say, Shall I take of my bread and my water, and of my
flesh from my Shearers, and give it to men whom I know not? Every word the
Churles word, My bread and My water, and My flesh, 1. Sam. 25. 11.

I see no reason here expressed (except Nakedness, So.
and Emptiness be a Reason) Give to him that wants. If he had said give
to him that deserves it: he had persuaded Many, better: But Christ that does
command, he has or may deserve it: and this reason or a less, would always
prevail with us, if either in body or mind, or both we were but troubled a
little, as these were a great deal (in their mind:) for we are All, even the
best of us; but like to Patients in Physic, of whom the Phisicions have a
Proverb and a Practice, take while they be in Pain, for after they will Pay
nothing: so Fear and Affliction do open the heart, and soften the Bowels which
Prosperity does close up, and harden: and this does declare our Nature to be
most Corrupt. Did I say our Nature? yea the best among us; for who sees not
that they which were wont to keep many Servants, and to give many Coats, do
now keep many Sheep, for a sheep is found better to their Mastership than a
Servant, the one gives, the other takes Liueries. And though it be A more
blessed thing to give than to receive: Act. 20. 35. Yet we had rather have the
Giver than the Taker. I should hardly persuade such men to give many Liueries
with Christ's badge, unto the Poor that have with drawn their own Coats and
Cognisances (...) be Rich: but if their sheep could seru^ the King and Commonwealth in War(...)hat half so well as they serve their tu^^^ in Peace, it were
the more tolerable.

But peradventure this provision of Sheep is for Hospitality. Hospitality?
that is for you of the Ministry? It is true, that a Bishop should be given to
Hospitality, 1. Tim. 3. and 1. Tit. And I think he must have wherewithal too.
But whether this be plain Hypocrisy or no? Judge you, that they would have
it Good and Necessary in a Minister, and yet would have it Free and Arbitrarie
in themselves, who can spend ten to one: either let them say it is Naught in
us, or let them Count it Necessary in themselves for very shame. Socrates
Cursed him that first did sunder Profit from Honesty. And the Commonwealth
has no cause to bless him, or them, who first have taught our Gentles, to
degenerate from their noble Ancestors, to leave their Houses in the Country
for the most part of the year, and to keep Ordinaries here in the City,
without need: a trick of more then Ordinary Gentlemen. And if this were a
day for Reproof, I could challenge you and others for the causes of this and
other evils, ( Covetousness) and ( Usury,) whereby you do not only sleece
your sheep, but flay men, and directly Cut the throat of the Commonwealth;
One thing is fallen already ( Clothing,) If another follow? which does
begin ( Husbandry) I mean, the Mattocke and the Sithe, (for otherwise we
have too many good husbands) but if that once fail; we must look to Reap
with our swords abroad, or to have no harvest at home: and all by Cruel
usury. Let the great Masters of our Commonwealth, look to it.

But Usury, Ob.
is the Merchants fault, Gentlemen cannot be charged therewith. You know whose
fault Simonie is, Sol.
but you will not know whose sin Usury is, some say it is the fault of
Merchants, and others say of Aldermen, some of Gentlemen, and some of Plow-men,
and some of all men. (all sorts of men.) To clear this City, if every man
were bound to exercise the trade whereof he is free, Poor Companies would
not then decare so fast, and Usurers should be driven to sue for a Corporation
for themselves, for while they are no Corporation, they are Free of al
Companies, and this casting of your money into the Bank, will cast a bank
about this City in the end, and then you may go purchase Aceldama.

I know this City does cloth many Backs, and feed many Bellies of the
Poor, but yet notwithstanding the Dead do give more then those that are
alive, and therefore if God will have the poor more provided for: I think he
must provide, to take away more of the rich men, and he shall do them a good
turn too (who fearing they shall be poor before they die) if he take them
away while they be rich, and so discharge them of that fear. But why should
the mind thus hunt, and labor after Vanity, the day will come, and is
coming, when all our substance, and our Money shall be but as Manna was unto
the Jews: He that gathered more, had nothing over, and he that gathered
less, wanted not, and that which was left, did stink the next day, Exo. 16.
18. Therefore Heaven not your selves in this world, but lay up your treasure in
heaven, whither you can have no direct, and ready way, till you have gotten
the Moon, under your feet, I mean this World, Revel. 12. 1.

If he had simply commanded us; it had been Sin, and Death, to have denied
him, but he says, Give, and it shall be given unto you, Luke 6. 38. For thy
Coat a Roabe, for thy Bread that perishes, the Food of Angels, for thy
Money and Coin, a Crown. Neither shall we want our reward in this life: for so
runs the Covenant to both worlds. And godliness is profitable unto all
things, says the Apostle, having both the promises, of this life, and of that
that is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8. And we see, that there are some that spend and
have the more, and others that spare and have the less, as Syrac. 11. 11. And
therefore not only the Widow of Sarepta, found increase by giving: for if there
be a Sowing of Bread, as there is of Corn, as speaks Isai, 32. and 20. And
if he that sows liberally, or sparingly, shall reap accordingly, as saint
Paul says, 2. Cor. 9. both the Prophet and Apostle, do show us a good reason
of this profit, and increase that may arise by giving; and therefore Solomon in
the 11. of Ecclesiastes, bids us to Cast out bread upon the waters, and
assures us that After many days we shall find it again. Yet you must not
use God for the World, for all that. A man were better use the Devil; for if
God and Mammon cannot well be served together, surely much less Mammon and God,
or God for Ma^mon: For God will be served for nothing but for God, neither shall
any man serve him so for naught. Therefore he that gave the first Coat to Adam,
and all the Coats that Adams sons have had, or can have, and bids us not to
Care for raiment, Mat. 6. 28. Who gave, I do not say of two one: but his Coat
unto the Soldiers, and his Body and Soul, unto the sorrows of Death, and
Hell for thee. Who says, Ask and you shall receive, Mat. 7. 7. Let not him
ask of us, and go without: or if the Promises of god cannot persuade us, yet
let the Judgments of God prevail, to provoke us. For he shall surely reckon
with all them, that have woonne this World, and lost their Souls: that have
given him, either no Drink, or Vinegar and Gall to drink, and as he will
recompense any thing in Mercy, that will recompense to a Cup of cold water, so
he will deny any thing in Justice that denied Dives one drop of water: and in
that day only Mercy shall rejoice against Judgment, Jacob. 2. 13.

But do I hope that this doctrine shall take place in these days, in which
Christ has said that Charity shall wax cold? I do not expect it, for if
Love should Rule, then God should Reign, for he is Love: but the god of this
world cannot abide that, and therefore he has sown all things full of Hatred,
yea even the Church her self with the seeds of Discord: Contention in the
Church.
which albeit she be but One, yet she is not in one Union, but labors with
the pain of her womb, as Rebecca did, for the strife of Jacob, and Esau, Genesis
25. 22. I know now that I have a Woolfe by the ears, and cannot tell whether I
should hold him, or let him go, (for both is dangerous) I choose this Text to
miss him, and yet he meets me, and so meets me, that I cannot well avoid
him. If the days were no better for Lawiers to plead in, then they are for Us
to preach in, I think they would hold their peace: but we must not hold our
peace, for our tongues are Trumpets, not ( Firebrands) nor ( Fig-leaues) but
Trumpets to give warning of any evil approaching, Esaias. 58. 1.

And how evil a thing Contention is in the Church, we have no need of
foreign Stories, or discourse to learn: our home maladies, and miseries can
teach us, but too well: For Discord, has separated us one from another, for
all good purposes, as Death; but sets us one against another, for all evil as
the Devil. Wherefore as the Apostle advises us in the 16. to the Romans 17.
verse, They are to be noted which cause this division, and distractio^ among us.

The old faction, which was, and yet remains still, is two fold, of the
Anabaptists, and of the Papists: and these troubled our Church mightily, as
Aram before, and the Philistin^s behind troubled Israel: but yet Ephraim
against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and both against Judah, have
deuowred more. Esa. 9. 21.

What is the cause? the Cause? of all this division and ado? for albeit it
becomes Christians, to embrace Peace offering her self, and to follow after
her, flying away; because we can no less lack Love and Unity in the Church,
than we may lack the Sun and Moon in the world: yet notwithstanding
Christians may not so agree, as to betray the truth? Why that is the cause say
some? I ask then what truth? I do not say as Pilate did to Christ, John 18.
38. What is truth? But what truth? for I hope they be not so foolish, to
understand the wise man, Sirac. 4. 28. For the truth contend unto death: Of
every truth? If they could Answer me, and Answer truly, that it is for
that truth which is said, John 8. 32. To make us free, that is, for the
Gospel, and for Christ: surely as well as I love Peace, I would say, Contend
and strive still, and except there may be Verity, let there be no Unity; for
we have a just cause and quarrel against all the Enemies of that truth, as
are the two Sects above named, and he that has had Zeal and stomach against
them, and now has none, is either Demas, or Judas, choose him whiter.

But on the other side, to pretend such a cause, and not to prove it, or if
there be any other good cause, as The redress of some abuses (which no man in
his wits will deny to be a good cause) yet to follow it out of time, and Place,
by importunity, and unlawfully, by false, or foolish Libels, which in deed
leave the Cause, and fly to the person; and tend to nothing but to provoke; I
suppose that no wise man can allow the course; sure I am, the evil success
thereof does disalowe it; and if his name should answer his doing herein, as
it seems he would have it by the Title, and Purpose of his books, sure he
should be called for Mar Prelate, Mar Preacher: for there are fewer of
these, and no less of those, if not more* since he practiced so to mar
them; I Judge not things only by the issue and event, but I wish that he had
been more sober, or more silent.

Wherefore I exhort both the one, and the other, (for what have I to do with
sides) that they play not in the Church, as men do that are fallen out in the
Commonwealth; where both will be talking of right, but neither will cease, from
doing of Wrong: So let none pretend Conscience when it is Covetousness, nor
Zeal, when it is Malice, and so by bitter strife and stomach, seek one to
denowre another, making the Babilonian noise, for the spoil of that Temple,
which at his first setting up, and long after, had no such noise in it. There
was not heard the noise of a Hammer at the setting up of the Temple, 1. Reg.
6. 7. but the Babilonians made the Noise in the pulling of it down, 2. Chron.
36. 19. Wherefore let us not speak, as the Priests do, in the 11. of John 48.
If we let Christ thus alone, all men will believe in him, and the Romans will
come and take away our Place, and the Nation, but rather let us say, and assure
our selves; that if we let him not alone, and believe not better in him, but
stand dividing both his Coat, and Body, by irreconcilable hatred among our
selves; He will send them, that will come, and take all: and the Romans be
very ready to be sent.

Likewise they are to be admonished that sill the Pulpit too full with these
controversies, I do not mean our Lunatike libellers, which cast phrases on
both sides, as mad men do hurl stones, but I mean Men of my own
Profession and mind, that they consider; that the Pope has had too long a
Pause, and has gotten ground apace, since we have spent our breath about
these things, for how so ever Martin flies, he lies in the wind to make
Martyrs of us, and lives as the Salamander does, the better for the fire;
Wherefore the Prophets are to be reclaimed by a more certain sound of the
Trompe, to oppose themselves to Anhchrist, and not to pursue so whotly, a dead
Dog, or a Fly, as David says to Saul, 1. Sam. 24. 1,. They are to be
counted our enemies that are Gods enemies, and hate our faith, which stand not
upon small difference, but upon plain defiance with us: and all the other odds
is nothing unto that. If Isaac may be known from Ismael, Jacob from Esau, a
Protestant from a Papist, and the Contrary; all lesser controversies should be
left off, or followed in Love; for the Churches sake: and The fruit of
Righteousness, is sown in Peace of them that make Peace, says James, 3. cap.
18. And when Paul, Apollos and Cephas shall agree, yet shall you find the
devotion of the people to be division still, as it was among the Corinthians,
1. Epist* 3. and the Prophets shall have Work enough to unite, and knitte,
their minds together, the Word is able to do it, and you see by this
Multitude, it has done it; and when that is done, then though one should say,
I am the Lords, another call himself Jacob, and the third subscribe with his
hand unto the Lord, and name himself Israel, that is, (use many and diverse
names,) as it is Isa. 44. 5. It shall be no matter, for all is one thing, when
the Heart is one.

I have ouershot my self, and therefore must of necessity, pretermit the
duties of the Publicanes, and Soldiers, lest I be prevented by the time; I
will refer them to some other occasion where, or whenever; and apply my
self now to conclude, with exhortation to Thanksgiving, our especial Duty
this Day, praying your patience for the time.

An Exhortation unto Thanksgiving, for the happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
AS God only is to be blessed for ever, for the people of God are only to
bless him, as for the Lips of the Leaper, let them be covered according to the
Law, Leuit. 13. 45. For It becomes the Righteous to be thankful, Psalm. 33.
Ask not for what thou should praise him: but rather ask for what thou
should not praise him, seeing thou ought to praise him for all things,
yea even for Evil things, because he turns Evil into good, to them that
love him, To. 8. 28.

Not only our Redemption and Salvation in Christ, should hold the Heart in
continual grace and thanksgiving unto God, but also the External benefits of
this life. Except we shall deal with our Blessings, as Solomon dealt with his
Brass of the Temple, because it was so much he waied it not, 1. Reg. 7. 4. 7.
For to leave the rest to your remembrance, and to speak of the Common good,
which first, and last, we all have reaped, by the happy Reign, of his
handmaiden and servant, our Gracious Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth. Who, by a
continual providence and preservation of God, from so many, and manifest
dangers, both before and after the wearing of the Crown, (as this day does
witness) appears to be made, and borne, nourished, and preserved, Crowned, and
Kept, not for Her self, but for us; not for us only, but for God himself;
whose Son lived in this wretched world, 32. years, but reigned not an
hour. But Elizabeth by the Grace of God, Reigning now as we account 32.
years, I do not say has Crowned, but has Kissed his Son Crowned, and
submitted both her Self, and Scepter unto him, saying with David in the 5.
Psalm. ^. Thou art my King, and my God, And it is they only that would not
have his reign over them, who cry with the wicked in the 19. of Luke, We
will not have this man to Rule over us, For they cannot well endure that date of
the year, (not of Christ's birth, but of Antichrists death in our Church; now
32.) She has come through many Dangers to the Crown, as David; yet God
has given her Plenty with Solomon: She has Restored Religion with Josias,
but she has Paul for it with Enochias: Read the books of the Kings, I do
not say she exceeds these, to flatter her, but I say she resembles them,
to comfort us. The Romans did greatly glory in their Emperor Angustus
Caesar, saying, that he found Rome built with brick, but left it as a Marble
Monument. Did not Her Highness find our Coin, Copper, and our Religion,
Superstition, and through the goodness of God, has she not freed our Country
from them both. He reigns unprofitably* that is born, and deserves not to
reign, says Chrysostom. But she that comes unto us in a double Right both
of Nature and Desert, let the blessings of both the Testaments Rest, on her
Amen:

1 For Dangers, whether she resemble David or no? Consider ye: He afraid of
Saul, and she of her Sister. And who was worse beset, he, with Saul before,
and Absolon behind; or she, set between two ( Marahs) the one Crowned before
her, the other shrewdly hastening to her Crown. Reckon you the rest, that
Know them, and reckon right, and you shall find her dangers very many, and
more then either you know, or can know.

2 For Salomons Plenty who gave Silver as stones in the streets of
Jerusalem, 2. Cron. 1. 15. I will not now compare England with Egypt, or with
Canaan; but with England: Elizabeth with Marie for Corn, with Edward for Coin,
and with Henry for quietness. Papists draw all goodness to their Popery,
although they cannot prove any good thing in it, or of it, except tumbling and
tossing of Kingdoms and Commonweals be good?

3 Josias restored Religion, and not only so, but reformed the Temple also:
wherefore it is written of him, 2. Reg. 23. That like unto him, there was not a
King before, neither rose there any such in Israel after him. The first we
do both say, and think, of our most gracious Queen; but the second (if ever
it should please God to give her a Successor) we would be loath to say.

4 Lastly, how like her case was to E^echias, witness that Proud and Peereles
Invasion, made by the Popish Senacherib, the king of Ashur; who openly
Pretended, the cause of his quarrel to be our Religion. (So speaks Rabsaketh
to the Nobles of Israel.) If you say to me, that you trust in your God, Why?
says he, is not that he whose Altars Ezechias, has destroyed? And so
glories in his superstition; saying, which of all the Gods has been able to
deliver his land out of the hand of the King of Ashur? where is the God of
Hamath, of Arphad, of Sepharvalm; and of many other Places which his Master
had won? and comes at length to the God of Israel, and takes his pleasure of
him also, and so flourishes and flow^eth; offering upon Hostages, 2000. horse,
if they could get but Riders for them, Riding, and deriding poor Israel,
because their Army seemed invincible, as the Wooden bridge, or Spanish Navy
did.

The cause was sufficient and the quarrel good, for the pulling down of
Alters, Images, and Idols to leauie an Army against Jerusalem, and for the
breaking of one Brazen Serpent, to send in many Brazen faced Serpents, more
fearce then over Railing Rabsake was: who did not only upon the walls, and in
the peoples hearing, openly speak odious things against the King, but by
Shameless and Seditious printed books, spread the same over the whole land,
flying as the very Fiery Serpents, which stong the people, and could not be
avoided; for how many Balaams did Balaack send? and how often came they in,
who because they might not be suffered to destroy Souls, most desperately,
they threw away their own Bodies, (and the Souls of the rest if it be
possible, always saved) I wish such honor to all his Saints.

Then Ezechia prayed, laid the cause before the Lord; and sent to the Prophet
Esaias. Now whether Elizabeth did behave her self so or no? If Men would deny
it, Angels will witness it: And Esaias does comfort him, with no other reason
than with this? That he should not fear them Because they had blasphemed
against the Lord: And sure I am that the People never felt the Prophets more
comfortable, nor the Prophets ever found the People more courageous,
Especially when our Ezechias, seeing that Ashur was come, and purposed to
fight against Jerusalem, took present counsel of her Princes, stopped the
passages, Built fortresses, made many Darts and Shields: Set Captains of war
over the people, assembled them into abroad place, and went her self and spoke
comfortablie unto them: saying, Fear ye not, With him is an Arm of flesh,
but with us is the Lord our GOD to help us: Read ye the 2. Reg. 18. and 2.
Chron. 32. and you shall find the very same words in the discourse, and you
shall not have two Histories more like in the Process, let us see the Success.

The Assirian Army could not shoot an Arrowe in the City, and was not
Spaniards shot like to Ionothans Arrows, either over, or short? And the same
night the Angel of the Lord slew 185000. of the^. (as in the days of Midian,)
and who can number the Souls that perished in the deep, (as in the days of
Moses and Miriam) when he that came riding on the wings of the wind, dealt with
Phillip as he did with Pharao.

Then returned Zenacherib, and as if there were no other place for him to die
in, nor any other person to kill him in all the world, even in his Idol
Temple, and before his God, his own Sons must slay him. Let him take heed
of Friars, that has lost his Son at their suite, for I see no reason, why a
Friar may not deal with Spain, as he has done with France, seeing France
did love a Friar as well as Spain.

But in the mean time, let us take heed, for the Devil is not dead. Nor
Zenacherib daunted, for all his ill success, his Malice will not let him rest,
for he prepares again, and means to make his second coming worse then the
first, (and I wish he might do so.) They say their Ships were too big:
They will try what less can do, (their ha^ts are to big:) for cannot he
destroy the lesser that did destroy the greater?) Or what think they? As the
Aramites. 1. Reg. 20. 23. That he is God of the Mountains, and not of the
Valleies? Let not him that puts on his Armor, brag and boast as he that
puts it off? Our God is able to cross, and Curse, all their plattes, and
practices of war, and other wretched means, especially of using wicked
Instruments to bring their purposes to pass; I mean not of our Papists only:
which ebb, and flow, at home with tidings, as the Tide, but Jesuits more
serviceable the^ their Generals: which hunger after Kings hearts, Counselors
heads, Captains hands, and Prophets tongues, as after meat, and thirst
after Christian blood as after drink, whom it is no charity, but extreme
cruelty to releaue; And if this place were Golgatha, where Christ was
crucified, and not Gilgall, where Christians are Circumcised, I would wish the^
nailed a live on this Cross with Anathema Amaranatha, that be so bloody
minded.

Great wars there was before the first coming of Christ, and greater there
will be before his second coming, for Antechrist must war against the
Saints, And unto Tyrants, war is a felicity, but unto good and Christian
Princes a very necessity: whose wars are nothing else, but the seeking of
safety and peace.

Our Gracious Sovereign, did suffer long, and too long, almost before she
took the Sword in hand, and stood to her defense in the cause of the Gospel,
against the Enemies thereof: and the People whose hearts she had Iustilled,
into her self, did offer themselves most willingly. Though there might be some
Inhabitants of Mero^, who marching in their bodies, did not march in their
minds so Valiantly To help the Lord against the mighty; (as speaks
Deborah) Judges 5. 23.

But as She did then prepare her Arm, and yet made God her Strength and
Steel, So let her now set up her rest in Heaven, and give no rest to them in
earth, that within the compass of Her Dominions shall seek the setting up of
Dagon again, either whole, or broken: for why should Moses suffer the Calfe?
or Ezechias the Serpent? or Gedeon Ball? or Elias Bals Priests? or Elizabeth
Balaams Prophets? seeing both the Idol, and the Idol maker, and the Worshipper
are all accursed of God. And for this cause, the Pope is more odious unto us
than Turk, or Jew, and Popish Princes, are as Sheon, and Ogg, and therefore is
it, that we say of Philip of Spain, as the Lacedaemonians said of Philip of
Macedonie, we would not have him to come into our Country neither a Friend nor
a Foe: for we have tried his coming both ways to be naught, though worse to
us in ( Marriage) than in ( Mart,) but our God, has delivered us from them both
and will deliver us still, if we be found faithful, and thankful unto him.

The Cherubins ever stretched forth their wings, but never pulled them in, to
fly from the mercy seat, Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord, for
his mercy indureth for ever: His Anger is but to the third or fourth
Generation, and of them that hate him; but his mercy, is to Thousands of them
that love him, and Keep his Commandments, for Five years displeasure, we
have received already One and thirty years favor: Wherefore as I wish that
Elizabeth did take up the Prophet David's words in the 30. Psa. ver. 1. and say,
I will magnify thee O Lord, because thou have exalted me, and have not made my
foes to triumph over me: So would I that the people every where did sing, even
the same song, for our Day is as the Day of Iosuah, when the Sun and Moon
stood still, until Gods people were avenged, Joshua 10. 13. Our year as the
year of Iubile, when every man was freed in Israel, and I hope and pray that it
may prove unto us the Great Iubile, which was the fiftith year.

We are not yet in the December of our Days, but in November, neither in the
end of that Month, but in the midst, and Her Highness day: this year is the
first, after the Lords day, and if it be Ominous? Behold the sign is in Leo,
next unto Virgo: and look your Calendar, who stands in the last Day of the
last month of December, and in the sign ( Pisces) under foot, and you shall
find it to be Pope Siluester (as I do think the second of that Name,) who as
Platina writes, got his Dignity by the Devil, and seeking of him by Oracle,
how long he should live? is answered doubtfully, long; if he came not near
Jerusalem, but there he died the fourth year; and he cannot thrive or live
long, that now is Pope, nor they that hereafter shall be Popes after him,
because they all follow Siluester and Silver to the Devil, and do still strive
to come near unto Jerusalem.

There is no Affection in the heart, but it will express it self in the
body; when Nature has occasion offered, and as it is an evil Spirit which
can be quiet, when God is dishonored, so that, cannot be a good spirit, which
is sad, or silent, when God is to be praised: Wherefore let us not speak as
David did, (our case being nothing like;) Tell it not in Gath* nor publish it
in the streets of Ashkelon* that Saul is slain, least the uncircumcised
Philistines do Rejoice, 2. Sam. 1. 20. but rather let us say, as the four
Leapers said in the 2. Reg. 7. 9. when the Aramites* had sledde, and forsaken
the Camp, and left all their provision for have behind them; and when these
Leapers entered their Tents, and did eat, drink, and carry away; they said
one to another, we do not well; Because this is a day of good tidings and we
hold our peace. Wherefore hold you not your peace, but tell it in Spain, and in
the Islands there about, where (perhaps) you may come, that as ELIZABETH of
England lived by the Grace of God, the first hour, so by a much more Grace of
God. QVEENE ELIZABETH Reigns this present year: For, HE that is mighty
has magnified her, and Holy is his Name.

And in hope of continual Grate, and favor of God this day, let David dance
before the Arc, let the Priests sing before the Altar, let the People showte
in the Presence of the Lord, let all our Silver Trumpets sound, let our Sweet
perfume ever go up, and let our Fire never go out: and a White L^^prosie smite
his Soul, that reioiseth not indeed, because of this day.

The Jews Kept the Month ( Nisan) for Egypt, and ( Adar) for Haman: Let us
every Moon solemnly, by Sacrament, remember him to whom we owe every
Moment of our life, but every Twelue-Moneth; let us in Thanksgiving remember
Her, to whom ( Under God) we owe al our service upon Earth. And let Her Posie
be from henceforth for ever: ( Eloi-Sabaoth; Elizabeth, Alleluia.) And he
shall be her God of Saboth; of Rest, and Peace, who has been Her God of
Sabbath, of Force, and Arms; and if the First Psalm, be but a Preface to the
rest (as many do account) then according to the Number of the Crown, I can
commend unto you the 32. Psalm (which otherwise is the 33.) as most precious
for our purpose, and most proper for Her Person. And when the Prophet says,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel. Let all the people of Israel say, So be it.
And as he concludes his Psalm, 106. So I conclude my Sermon, Praise ye the
Lord, The I(...)d ( God) the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, with the
Holy Ghost, three persons, one Eternal, Almighty, and everlasting God, be
all Honor, Glory, Power, and Dominion for ever, and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

