A GODLY Sermon preched before the Queens Majesty at Grenevviche the.26. of
March last past, by Doctor Whitgift Deane of Lincoln.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Studiose sectemini veritatem in ebaritate. Imprinted at London by Henry
Bynneman, for Humfrey Toy. Anno. 1574.

A godly Sermon preached at Grenwiche.
Textus. 10. 6. Master, when came thou hither? Jesus ansvvered them and
said: verily, verily I say unto you, ye seek me, not because ye saw the
miracles, but because ye eat of the loanes and were filled. Labor not for
the meat which perishes, but for the meat which endures unto everlasting
life.
IN the former part of this chapter, the Evangelist declares that the people
followed Christ into the wilderness, where they being fed with five loves and
two fishes, John
did not only acknowledge him to be that Prophet that should come into the
world, but also would have taken him and made him a King. He shows likewise
that the next day the people by ship passed over to Capernaum, where they
fynding Jesus, and maruelling at his strange kind of coming thither (for they
knew that he came not in the same ship with his Disciples, and that there was
no other ship there for him to pass in) demanded of him when he came
thither, saying: Master, when came thou hither? to whom Jesus answering
said, verelye verily I say unto you, ye seek me, not because you saw the
miracles, but because ye eat of the loaves and were filled. etc. In which
words two things are generally to be considered: the one is, the question of
the people: the other, the answer of Christ. In the question of the people,
there are three things especially to be noted: their inconstancy: their
flattery: and their curiosity. In the answer of Christ, there is a
reprehension, and an exhortation: the reprehension is this: Verelye verelye I
say unto you, ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles. etc. the
exhortation is this: Labor not for the meat which perishes. etc. of these
points I will speak (by the grace of GOD) as breefly as I can.

The first thing therefore that I note in this question of the people, is their
inconstancy, the which that aunciente and learned Father Chrysostom
gathers of this, Chryso 6. Joan
that when as the day before, after they had been filled with bread and meat,
they esteemed Christ as a Prophet, and would have taken him and made him a
King: now having him in their presence, they neither so greatly magnifye him,
neither offer unto him any kingdom at all, but rather begin to doubt of
his omnipotency and power, as though they had utterly forgotten his former
miracles.

Ancient and learned interpreters do ascribe this inconstancy of the people
to two chief and principal causes: The one is, because the people (for the
most part) respect only those things that are present, and are most
commonly allured with present commodity or pleasure. An other is, because the
people are oftener moved with affection than reason, and led with fancy
rather, and opinion, than with sound proofs and certain knowledge: and such
motions as spring of present commodity, and are grounded only upon opinion, be
but momentane and sone pass away. Therefore says the wise man in the.27. c.
27.
of Eccle. Homo sapiens in sapientia sua permanet sicut Sol, stultus autem v^
luna mutatur. A wise man continues in his wisdom constant as the Sun: but
a fool is altered and changed even as the Moon. By a wise man he means
such as are guyded with reason and knowledge: by a fool he understands, not
those that lack the use of reason, and be void of wit, but those that follow
affection rather than reason, and are carried away with opinion and fancy, not
with sure proofs and certain knowledge: the which thing because the people
(for the most part) do, therefore are they called the unlearned and unstable
multitude. And these be the causes why they are so greatly delighted with
novelty, so ready to embrace every strange and new kind of doctrine: these (I
say) be the causes why one and the self same thing and person, can not long
please them: but whom to day by praising they extol up into heaven, to morrow
by dispraysing they cast down into hell.

Of this so great inconstancy, we have a notable example, and a manifest
pattern in this people that we have now in hand: For the selfsame people that
followed Christ into the wilderness, and from thence over the sea into
Capernaum, John.
as it is evident in this Chapter, shortly after (as it appears in the same
Chapter) utterly forsook him, saying. Durus est bic sermo: quis potest eum
audire? This is a hard saying: who can abide to hear it? only because he
taught the^ not such things as pleased their fancy, and served their fond
affection. And the same people which immediately after their eating with him did
acknowledge him to be a Prophet, and had a reverent opinion of him: shortly
after (as it is also to be seen in this Chapter) spoke contemptuously of him,
saying: Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we
know? as though they should say, is not this Jesus the Carpenters son? what
do we make so great account of him? Again the people that spoke here so
lovingly unto him, and salute him by an honorable title, calling him Rabbi: in
the.8. ^. 8.
Chap. of his gospel speak most slanderously and opprobriously of him,
calling him Samaritane, and saying that he had a Devil. And who^ they in this
sixth Chapter, would have taken and made a King if he had not conveyed himself
from them: in that eight Chapter they would have stoned to death, if he had not
withdrawn himself out of their company. To be short, the same people that in
his journey from the Mount toward Jerusalem so joyfully received him, with
spreading their garments and boughs of trees in the ways, and saluting him
with a most honorable salutation, crying Hosanna to the Son of David. etc.
not long after, ^h. 21.
preferred a murderer and a seditious person before him, and with might and
mayn cried out, that he might be crucified. And this is the inconstancy even
of that same people, among whom Christ himself was conversant: whom he so
diligently taught, and in whose presence he had wrought so many and notable
miracles.

Of the like inconstancy the Apostle S. Paul had experience: for ye
Galathia^s who were so greatly affected toward him when he first preached the
Gospel amongst them, Gal. 4
that if it had bin possible (as he himself does testify) they would have
plucked out their eyes and given them unto him, within a while after (being
seduced by false prophets and contentious teachers) contemned and despised him.
Hereby also it came to pass, that the Corinthians were divided into so many
factions, whiles some said, 1. Cor.
they held of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas, and some of Christ. The
like inconstancy appears to have bin in the people at all times, and in all
ages. Let the ecclesiastical histories be perused, and it will easily be
proved, that there was never Heretic so horrible, nor Schismatike so
pernicious, but that they had numbers of the people to follow the^: even of the
selfsame people that before embraced the true and sincere doctrine o^ the
Gospel. Therefore the Apostle Saint Paul does forewarne his scholar Timothy
hereof, and as it were, arm him against this temptation, saying: Erit tempus
cum sanam doctrinam non sustinebunt. ^. 4.
etc. The time shall come when they will not abide wholesome doctrine, but they
whose ears does itche (that is, which are delighted with novelties and new
invented opinions) shall heap up to themselves teachers according to their
own desires, even such as will satisfy their fancies, and apply themselves
to their humor.

My meaning is not to condemn all the people of this crime, I know there be
many both constant and godly: but I speak of the most part, and I declare
that, which most commonly comes to pass. It is reported of one Polycletus a
cunning Image maker, that he framed two Images, the one according to art, the
other according to the opinion of the people: and when he had finished them, he
brought them forth to be seen of the passers by, that he might hear their
judgments of them: it came to pass (contrary to his expectation) that the
Image made according to art, was praised even of the people, and the other
dispraysed. Whereat Polycletus marueling, said unto the people, Atque bane
quam tantopere laudatis ego feci, eam quam vtuperatis vos fecistis: this which
you so greatly commend I my self made, that which you so discommende, you
your selves have made: meaning that he made that which was made according to
art, and that the people made that, which was framed according to their
fancy. So that sometime it may happen that the people judge aright, and
mislike their former fancies, though it be most rarely. I speak this for two
principal causes, the one is, that no man depend upon the judgment and
opinion of the people which is so inconstant and variable: for (as Basil
Basil. ^ ad ado centes.
says) he that will study to please the people, had need to be like unto that
Sophister of Egypt which could transform himself when he listed, into any
kind of form or shape. The other is, to admonish the people of GOD to take
heed of this crime whereunto they are so naturally inclined: not to be carried
away with every wind of doctrine: not to be delighted with such teachers as
study to satisfy their foolish affections, least it prove true that is
commonly said, Incertam scinditur studia in contraria vulgus: the unstable
people is easelie drawn into contrary opinions: least also that saying of
Chrysostom be verefyed. Populus est quiddam ad instar fluctuum maris, (...)
varia and pugnante sententia saepenumeroiactatum: The people is like to the
waves of the sea, oftentimes tossed with diverse and contrary opinions: But
rather to be constante in the truth that they have embraced, to hold fast
the Gospel that is and has bin truly preached unto them, always remembering
that which the spirit of GOD speaks to the Church of Philadelphia: Tene
quodbabes, ne alius accipiat coronam tuam: (...) 3.
hold fast that which thou have, be content with that doctrine that God of
his infinite mercy has opened unto thee, least if thou be not therewith
contented, but seek for farther novelties, that which thou haste be taken
from thee, and given too some other that shall more thankfully accept it, and
be better content with it.

The second thing that I note in this people, is their adulation and
flattery, the which the most and best interpreters do hereof gather, that the
people by asking Christ this question, do insinuate, that they maruayle at
this strange manner of coming thither: the which they do to this end, that
they might seem to be commenders and praysers of his virtues and miracles, and
maruelters at his doings, and yet their end was nothing less. In this manner
did the Disciples of the Pharisees assault him, when they came unto him with
the Herodians to demand whether it were lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or
no: they called him Master, they said that he was true, Math
and taught the way of God truly, and had no respect of persons: in words they
pretended that which they thought not in heart, and that is the nature and
property of all flatterers. For it is truly said that Adulator omnis est
virtutis inimicus, and quasielauum figit in oculo eius cum quo sermones
confert. etc. A flatterer is an enemy to virtue, and does as it were fasten a
nail in his eyes with whom he talks, and stops his ears with wax,
least he should either see, or hear the truth. It is most certain that
flattery has always these companions waiting on it: Subtlety and deceit:
the blinding of him that is flattered: a note of servitude: and the banishment
of all honesty. S. Augustine says that Adulator est crudelis and fallax: a
flatterer is cruel and deceitful: a flatterer is a present friend, and an
abse^t enemy: which undoubtedly is found to be most true in diverse of the
people: for howsoever in presence they seem to commend or reverence,
especially those that be in authority, yet in their absence they are delighted
to hear and to speak all evil of them. It is most certain that Andronicus
the Emperor was wont to say. Vulgiaures insectatione aliorum quam
collaudatione magis delectari, epb. (...).
and iniurias quam recte facta liben^ius legere, quamuis illas prolixamendacia
ven^itent, haec vero lux veritatis antecedat: The ears of the common people
are more delighted with the dispraise and discommendation of other, than with
their praise and commendation, and had rather hear of their evil, than of
their good deeds, although the one be uttered never so falsely, the other never
so truly verefied. Hereof we have too great experience in these our days: for
if a man in some congregations commend the magistrates and such as be in
authority, if he exhort to obedience, if he move unto peace, if he confirm
the rites and orders by public authority established (though he do it never
so truly, never so learnedly) he shall scarcely be heard with patience: nay, he
shall be sent away with all kind of opprobries and reproaches: but if he nip at
superiors, and reprove those that be in authority (though they be absent and
not in place to hear) if he shall inueigh against laws and orders
established, and talk of matters that teud to contention rather than
edificatio^ (though it be done never so untruly, never so unlearnedly, as
commonly it is) they flock unto him like bees, they esteem him as a God, they
extol him up into heaven, even as the Corinthia^s and Galathians sometime did
their false prophets and contentious teachers: and yet notwithstanding do they
color and cloak this peuish and sinister affection with dissembled gesture,
countenance, and words, when they be in the presence of those that may hurt
them, or do them good: and I would to God they did not deceive some, whose
office and duty it were, rather to suppress this fond affection, than to
nourish it, especially seeing that it tends to two principal evils:
disobedience toward the magistrate, and flat Anarchie. But I may not stand
upon this point, only I note it being thereunto moved by the writings of such
learned interpreters as expound this place.

The third vice that I note in this people, is their curiosity, which
appears in that they propounde so vain and frivolous a question unto
Christ. The vanity of the which question Cyrill sets forth in these
words: Although this question (says he) signifies some affection of love,
yet is it but unprofitable and childishe: neither ought they to have demanded
so vain and unprofitable a question of him, Clrill in Joan.
whose divine power and virtue they had experience of: and what profit could
come unto them by asking this question? Therefore wise men are to be asked wise
questions, and silence is better than unskillful talk. Wherefore the wise man
says, Eccles.
if thou be asked any wise question, answer, if not, lay thine hand to thy
mouth, that is, keep silence: thus far Cyrill. Whereby he utterly condemns
the vain curiosity of this people in demanding so frivolous a question. The
Apostle Saint Paul, speaking of the like curiosity, commands his scholar
Timothy that he warn those that be preachers, ne aliter doceant, that they
teach no otherwise, than the Apostle before had taught: that is, that they
broach no new or vain opinions: and to the people he wills him to give
warning, ne attendant fabulis. etc. 1. Tim. ^
that they give no ear to fables and genealogies that never have end, but
engender questions rather than the edifying of God; which is in faith: that is:
that they give no ear to vain and contentious teachers and doctrines, which
tend not to edification but to contention. And in his.2. ^m. 2.
Epist. 2. chap. he says, f^ultas and ineruditas quaestiones respue. etc.
avoid foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they engender strife,
porro feruum Dei non oportet esse pugnacem, the servant of God must not be
contentious: In which place the Apostle speaks against such teachers as
sought to win credit unto themselves by broaching new opinions. And in the.1.
epist. to Timo. and.6. ^im. 6.
chap. he shows the fruits that come of such questions. ex quibus (says he)
nascitur inuidia, contentio. etc. of the which there comes envy, contention,
cursed speaking, vain conflicts, evil suspicions. etc. And therefore well
says Tertullian in his book De praescript. ^tullian.
aduersus haeret. Nobis curiositate opus non est post Christum Iesum, nec
inquisitione post euangelium: cum credimus, nibil desyder amus vltracredere,
hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod vltra credere debeamus. We need not to
be curious after we have received Christ Jesus, nor inquisitiue, after that we
have received the Gospel: when we believe, we desire not to believe any more,
for this we first believe, that there is nothing more that we ought to
believe. And in the same book, showing what discretion is to be used in moving
of questions, speaking of these words, Quaerite and inuenietis, Idem.
seek and ye shall find, he says: ratio dicti huius in tribus articulis
consistit, in re, in tempore, in modo: in re, vt quid sit quaerendum
consideres: in tempore, vt quando: in modo, vt quousque igitur quaerendum est
quod Christus instituit, vtique quandiu non inuenis, and us tique donec
inuenias: The reason of this saying does consist in three points: in the
matter: in the time: and in the manner: in the matter, that thou consider what
it is that must be inquired of: in the time, that thou consider when it is to
be inquired of: in the manner, as how far it is to be inquired of: we must
inquire of those things that Christ has appointed: so long as thou have not
found them: and until thou have found them. Therefore says Chrysostom, Vbi
sides, Chrysos^
nulla quaestionum vtilitas est, quaestio namque fidem tollit: where faith is,
there is no need of questions, for questions destroy faith. And all this do
the ancient fathers speak of such questions as are moved to stir up strife
and contention in the Church of Christ where the Gospel is truly preached, and
the sacraments rightly administered. Here therefore is first condemned the vain
curiosity of the scholemen, who have pestered their volumes, and troubled the
Church, partly with vain and frivolous, partly with wicked and impious
questions: with vain and frivolous questions, as these and such like: Whether
the Pope be God or man, or a mean betwixt both? whether the Pope may be said
to be more merciful than Christ, because we read not that Christ ever
delivered any souls out of Purgatory, as it is said the Pope to have done?
whether God can make of an Harlote, a virgin? whether such a number of Angels
may be contained within the compass of a man's nail? with infinite other of
the same sort, with wicked and impious questions, as these: whether God in the
beginning could have made the world better tha^ he did or no? whether he could
have created man so, that he should not have sinned, and why he did not?
whether God could beget a son, and after what sort? with such like. Of the
which, and of al other like unto them, Chrysostom gives this censure and
determination. Quid si periculosum est de his quae ille ma^dauit curiosius
indagare, Chrisost 1. Romans
extremumque supplicium curiosis est propositum, quamnam tandem defensio^^m
^abituri sunt, qui ea curiose perscruta^tur: quae sunt ^is multo and
secretiora, and honorabiliora, verbi gratia, quomodo Deus filium generault?
etc. If it be dangerous to inquire curiously of those things which God has
commanded, and extreme punishment is prepared for those that be curious: what
defense can they have, which curiously search those things, that are much more
secret and honorable than these be, as, how God could beget a son? etc. And I
would to God this vain curiosity had only occupied the scholeme^, and
contained it self within the Popish church, I would to God it had not invaded
this Church also: nay, I would to God it did not much more troubled the church
of Christ now, than it did in that time, for as much as the^ it was only among
those that were learned: now it has invaded the common people, most unapt
persons to deal in such causes. For now it is a question among them,
whether, if a man be certeinely persuaded ye he is moved with ye spirit, it be
lawful for him to do any thing that is contrary to the express commandment
and word of God, as to kill? which once to imagine, is extreme wickedness, and
it is a mere Anabaptisticall fancy, neither is it the spirit of God, but the
spirit of the devil that moves such cogitations: for the spirit of God moves
a man to nothing that is contrary to the word and commandment of God.
Likewise, it is now disputed at every table, whether the magistrate be of
necessity bound to the Iudicialles of Moses, so that he may not punish
otherwise, tha^ it is there prescribed, nor pardon any offense that is there
punished: which is most absurd, and contrary to al those places of scripture
that teach us the abrogatio^ of the law: besides, it is contrary to the opinion
of all learned men: and some of them (as namely M. Calvin) do call it a
seditious opinion, as indeed it is: for it tends to the overthrow of all, or
at the least of the best common wealths that are now in Christendom. Moreover
it is doubted whether the magistrate is to be obeyed for conscience sake, or
no: though the Apostle S. Paul has flatly determined the matter in the.13. to
the Romans where he says Oportet esse subditos, non solum propter iram, Romans
1.
sed etiam propter conscientiam: we must be subject, not only for fear of
punishment, but also for conscience. And the co^tratrary doctrine must needs
root out of the heart of the subject, true obedience. It is also doubted,
Whether the magistrate may prescribe any kind of apparel to the Minister,
without doing unto him some injury: which is too too much to strengthen the
authority of the magistrate. To conclude, it is now called into controversy,
Whether the children of Papists and excommunicated persons (notwithstanding
their parents be Christians, and cannot amittere baptismum, lose their
baptism, as it is determined by S. Augustine against ye Donatists) ought to be
baptized. And whether the minister be of the essence and being of baptism, and
none to be counted ministers but such as be preachers, so that whosoever has
not bin baptized of a minister, of a precher, is not baptized? the which
questions and other such like, spring out of ye schools of the Anabaptises, and
tend to the rebaptization of all, or the most part of those that at this day
are living. With these and such like questions, partly impious, partly vain
and frivolous, is the Church of Christ at this day maruellously troubled: and
men so occupy themselves about them, that they neglect those things that
perteine to their salvation, and forget due obedience. Yea, it is come to such
extremity, that if any do withstand them in these questions (as they must be
withstanded, for the wise man says, answer a fool according to his
foolishness, (...). 26.
least he seem to himself wise: and Basil says, that we must answer
cauilles, least we by silence seem to confess them to be true) he shall be
compted a worldling, a flatterer, a Papist: neither shall any thing be omitted,
that may sound to his reproach. But on the other side, if any man consent unto
the^ in such opinions, though he be an usurer, an whoremo^ger, an extorcioner,
a royster, a swearer. etc. yet shall he be co^pted zealous, and godly. I have
therefore to exhort all that be godly in deed, to take heed of this
curiosity, knowing that it has always been counted of all learned men a
manifest note and token of a contentious nature, to make such stirs, and to
move such controversy about external things, in that Church where the gospel
is truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered. And thus much of ye
first part of this text, that is, of ye question of ye people.

The second part is the answer of Christ, wherein (as I said) is contained a
reprehension, and an exhortation. In the reprehension there are two things to
be considered, the manner, and the matter. The manner of reprehending is noted
of Chrysostom in these words: Chrysos^
Modestius coarguit. etc. He does modestly reprehend them, for he does not call
them belly Gods, or epicures, he does not vpbrayde them with so many miracles
which they neither followed nor marvelled at: but only he says, Amen Amen dico
vobis, verily verily I say unto you. etc. This modest kind of reprehending the
Apostle teaches his scholar Timothy, when he says, Argue, increpa, exhortare
cum omni lenita^e amp; doctrina: 2. Tim*
improve, rebuke, exhort with all lenity and doctrine. And in ye first to
Timothy the.5. Tim. 5.
chap. teaching him how to use himself in reproving all sorts of men, he
says, Seniore^ ne aspered obiurges, do not bitterly rebuke an elder. etc. and
yet there is a time and place, where and when the preacher of the word of God
may use sharp and severe reprehe^sions: but this is no place to speak of this
thing: we have rather now to consider y^ matter, than the manner, the matter
that is reproved, than the manner of reproving.

First therefore he does covertly reprove their flattery (whereof I spoke
before) as it is noted by ye best learned interpreters, for he answers not
directly to their question: they asked him when he came thither, and he
answered them, that they rather sought his meat than himself: so that he
reprehendeth their adulation and flattering kind of questioning with him,
whereby he declared that he nothing at all esteemed of the commendation of the
people, or regarded their opinion of him: A worthy and necessary lesson for all
men to learn, especially such as be in authority (to wit) y^ they open not
their ears to flatterers, nor hunt after popular fame and commendation. Well
says Ambrose: Prospiciendum est ne adulantibus aperiamus aurem, Amb. De.
offic. lib. 1
emolliri enim adulatione, non solum fortitudinis non est, sed etiam ignauiae
esse videtur: We must take heed that we give no ear to flatterers, for to be
moved with flattery is not only no point of valiantness, but an evident
sign of a cowardly and dastardly mind. Chrysostom speaking of this sinister
affection, says that it is an intolerable drunkenness, and that whomsoever it
has subdued, it makes him almost incurable. In the same place he compares
it to certain Images, which are gorgeous and beautiful without, but empty
and vain within, and therefore he says that such flattering commendation may
aptly be called vain glory, quia nihil in se habet aut clarum aut gloriosum:
because it has in it no substance nor pith. In the same place he earnestly
dehorteth both ecclesiastical and secular persons from this vice: ecclesiatical
persons, because it drives the^ from the truth, and casts the^ into error,
it ingendreth in them pride and arrogancy, the root and mother of all sects,
schisms, contentions, and heresies. For while the people commend their life
and doctrine: whilst they call hypocrisy, holiness: arrogancy, simplicity:
wrath, zeal: disobedience, conscience: schism, unity: words, matter:
ignorance, learning: darkness, light: it so puffs up the minds of their
teachers with an opinion of themselves, that they dare be bold to propound any
thing, so that it taste of novelty, and please the people, though it tend to
the disturbance of the Church, the contempt of Magistrates, and the breach of
good laws and orders. Therefore by the old Canons it was decreed that those
Clearks, which either flattered themselves, or gave ear unto flatterers,
should be deposed without hope of restitution.

And as it works this effect in men of the clergy in matters
Ecclesiastical, so does it work the like effect in civil persons in matters
civil. For it breeds in them Ambition, the root of rebellion and treason.
It moves them, not to be content with their state and calling, but to aspire
to greter dignity, and to take those things in hand which commonly turn to
their ruin and destruction. And in whom has not popularitie wrought these
effects? or who ever fell into these inconveniences, but such as first were
provoked there unto by the flattering of the people? But my meaning was not to
speak much of this matter: this only I thought good to note, and to admonish
all (but especially those that be in authority) by the example of Christ, not
to give ear to flatterers, nor to be delighted with the commendation of the
multitude.

An other thing that he reroueth in the people (which is in deed the chief and
prinpal) is, that they sought him not with that mind, nor to that end, that
they ought to have done: and therefore he says, verily verily I say unto you,
ye seek me, not because you have seen the miracles, but because you have
eaten of the bread and are filled: as though he should say, ye seek me not
aright, ye seek me not to learn of me those things that pertain to eternal
life: but you seek me to have your bellies filled* an evident argument hereof
is this, that you are more moved with yesterdayes saturitie, with yesterdayes
bread and meat, than with all the miracles that I have wrought among you, and
all the exhortations that I have made unto you: and therefore you seek not me
but your selves. In the person of this people, Christ reproves all those that
seek him not aright, yt seek him not with a sincere affection, but for some
worldly respect and commodity. Such was Simon Magus, who joined himself to
the Apostles, was baptized and pretended great zeal, only that he might gain
something thereby, as it is evident in the.8 ct. 8.
of the Acts. Such was Demas also, of whom the Apostle speaks.2, Tim. 4.
Tim. 4.
Demas has forsaken me, embracing this present world. Such are they whose
religion consists in words, not in works: in contention, not in peace: in
contempt, not in obedience: who under the pretense of zeal, seek their own
liberty: under the color of religion, seek confusion: and with the shadow
of reformation, cloak and cover their usury, their ambition, their minds
desirous to spoil the Church. All which Christ in the.xiij. of Matthew, Math.
1.
compares to the stony ground, wherein the seed being sown prospers for
a time, so long as there is any moisture, but when the Sun waxes hot, and the
moisture is dried up, then does the seed wither away, and becomes
unprofitable: eue^ so they (while there is any moisture left, that is, as long
as they can hope for any commodity to come unto them by the professing of the
Gospel) seem to pass all other in zeal, but when the sun waxes hot, and
ye moisture is dried up, so that they ca^ suck out no more gain, but must now
suffer and endure persecution for the Gospel sake, and leese that they have,
they wax marvelous cold, and suffer the seed utterly to decay. It is most
truly said of Saynct Augustine, Boni ad ^ocvtuntur mundo, Aug. lib e^ ciui^. ^
cap. 7.
vt fruantur Deo: Good men use this world, that they may enjoy God: that is,
Good men may enjoy and use the commodities of this world so, that thereby they
may be more able to do their duty toward God. Mali autem contra (says he)
vt fruantur mu^do vti volunt Deo: contrariwise evil men will use God, that
they may enjoy the world: that is, they will pretend religion and godliness,
that they may gain thereby some worldly commodity. Such there have been in
this Church of England even within our memory, who whilst there was some
commodity to be looked for by the dissolution of Monasteries and such like
places, were bitter enemies to the Pope, and pretended to be earnest professors
of the Gospel: but the same men afterward (when this hope was past, and the
time now come when they must suffer for the Gospel, and leave that which
before they had gotten) did not only not profess it,, but persecuted those
that were professors. And may there not be such (think you) at this time, who
would not seem only to favor the Gospel, but very earnestly to seek
reformation, only because they see the new platform tend to the spoil of
Colleges, Churches, Byshoprickes. etc. whereby they suppose that they might
procure unto themselves no small advantage? Surely it is to be thought that if
they were once frustrate of this hope, the waywarde and contentious zeal of
many would soon decrease. And how should we otherwise judge of diverse, who being
scarsly as yet delivered from ye suspicion of Papistrie in matters of
substance, would now seem to condemn this church of imperfection, because it
retains some accidents used in Papisme? or of those, who when as they could
never abide such as have hitherto faithfully planted and preached the Gospel in
this kingdom, would now seem fautors and patrones of those that are wholly
occupied in disturbing and disquieting the peace of ye Church? or of those, who
having in them no sparkle of godliness, being dru^kards, swearers. etc. being
(I say) of so large a conscience toward themselves, yet are so precise in
other men's doings, that they can not abide to have the^ wear, no not a square
cap? we may say unto them as Christ said unto the Pharisees: Ye hypocrites, Math
ye stumble at a straw and leap over a block: ye strain at a Gnat, and
swallow up a Camel. I fear it may be truly verefied of this time that
Augustine Augu^^
spoke of his time: Quam-multi hodie non quaerunt Iesum, nisi vt illis
benefaciat secundum te^pus: vix quaeritur Jesus propter Iesum: propter carnem
quaeritur, non propter spiritum. Many in these days seek not Jesus, but only
that they may gain some thing by him for a time: Jesus is not fought for Jesus
sake, he is sought for the flesh, not for the spirit: That which Chrysostom
spoke of this people, which then only confessed Christ to be a Prophet, when
he had filled their bellies with bread and meat, O gulae incredibilem
auiditatem, (...)
maiora his miracula, and quidem innumera operatus est Jesus, neque vnquam
confessi sunt, nisi nunc exaturati: O incredible greediness and gluttony,
Jesus did greater miracles than this, and that a great number, and yet did they
never confess thus much of him, but even now when their bellies are filled.
Even so may we say to such like kind of men: O ye covetous persons, and
desirous of the spoil, we have taught you more necessary points of doctrine,
than these that are now preached unto you: we have exhorted you to repentance,
and to amendment of life: we have taught you the true doctrine of justification,
the true and right use of the sacraments: we have confuted the erroneous and
damnable points of Papisticall doctrine, as transubstantiation, the sacrifice
of the Mass, Purgatory, worshipping of Images, praying to Saints, the Popes
supremacy, and such like: and you have not believed us, nor harkned unto us.
But now that we begin to teach you these things that tend to your own
commodity, and to conte^tion, you magnify us, you commend us, you make us
Gods, nay, you make us Devils, for you so puff us up with vain glory, that we
know not our selves. O gulae incredibilem auiditate^, O insatiable desire to
spoil, O covetousness: non quaeritis Iesum propter Iesum. etc. you seek not
Jesus for Jesus sake, ye seek him for the flesh and not for the spirit: non
quaeritis iustitiam propter iustitiam, sed propter crapula^: ye seek not
righteousness for righteousness sake, but for the bellies sake. Therefore seek
Christ, not for any temporal commodity, but for himself: least it be as truly
said of us as it was of the Jews, ye seek me, not because ye have seen the
miracles, but because ye have eaten of the bread and are filled And thus much
concerning the reprehension that Christ here uses.

Now follows his exhortation: Labor not for the meat that perishes, but that
remains to eternal life. By the meat that perishes, our savior Christ
understands al those things which pertain to this life temporal: by the
meat that endures to eternal life, he comprehends all those things that be
spiritual, and wherewith the soul is nourished to eternal life. He does not
here forbid men to labor for these things that pertain to this life temporal,
but he admonishes them to prefer those things that belong to the life
eternal. It is a negative by comparison, which does not simply deny, but in
the way of comparison. So when he said to Martha, Martha thou troublest and
busiest thy self about many things, (...).
but there is but one thing necessary. etc. he does not condemn in Martha her
diligence in receiving of him, or the office of civility which is to be
exhibited toward strangers (for it was commended in Abraham Genesis.xviij.
(...) 8.
and is prescribed unto us Heb. 13.) but he teaches her that she ought not so
to be occupied about these external offices of civility, (...) 3.
that in the mean time she neglect those wholesome exhortations that her
sister Marie attended unto. In like manner, when Christ says, If any man come
unto me and hate not his father and mother. etc. (...) 14.
he cannot be my disciple: (...) 20.
His meaning is not that we should hate our Parents, whom we are commanded to
reverence and to love, but he only speaks in the way of comparison: that is,
that we be so affected toward our Parents, that we prefer the love of God
before them: and that (if the case so stand) we rather forsake them for
Christ's sake, than Christ for their sake. Wherefore Chrysostom justly
reprehendeth those y^ abuse these words of Christ in this place to the defense
of their idleness and slothfulness, Chriso^ Joan.
and says that in so doing they do but pervert the scripture where also he
proves by sundry places of the scripture (as 1. These. 4. 2. The. 3. Ephesians. 4.
Act. 20. all which for breuities sake I pass over) y^ it is lawful to labor
for external things: and in the end he concludes that the true meaning of
Christ in this place is nothing else but this, that we prefer heavenly things
before earthly things, according to that which is written Math. 6. First seek
the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, Mat^
and then al these things shall be ministered unto you.

Many reasons may be alleged, why we should prefer heavenly things before
worldly things. First worldy things are but momentanie, they have no
continuance, Magna momento ruunt, though they be never so precious, yet are
they soon decayed: to day, as a beawtiful flower, to morrow, as the withered
grass: now, as the burning fire, and by and by, as the dead and quenched
ashes. Voluptas and bonor finem habebunt: ^ost.
pleasure and honor have their end: but heavenly things remain and continue
for ever. Therefore says Saint Paul, Gal. 6. Qui seminat in carnem, de carne
metet corruptionem. etc. he that sows in the flesh, shall reap corruption of
the flesh: but he that sows in the spirit, shall reap eternal life of the
spirit. That is, those that labor for such things as perteine to the flesh,
shall reap only that which is mortal and tarieth not: but those that labor
for things perteining to the spirit, reap that, that continues for ever.

Secondly, worldly things how pleasant soever they are and delectable, yet in
the end they ware loathsome: Omnia mundana quantumuis dulcia, amarescant: All
worldly things how pleasant soever they be, in the end wax bitter. Yea the
perfectest pleasure that can be in worldly things, is mixed with sorrow. Riches
are gotten with labor, kept with carfulness, and lost with grief. Therefore
says S. Augustine. Si vana seculi huius inexperta co^cupisti, epist.
experta contem^e: fallaxest enim in eis suauitas, and infructuosus labor, and
perpetuus timor, and periculosa sublimitas: initium sine prudentia, and
finiscu^ paenitentia. Ita se habent omnia quae in ista mortalitatis aerumna
cupidius quam prudentius appetuntur: If thou have desired the vain things of
this world before thou had experience of the^ now having experience,
contemn them: for there is in them deceitful pleasure, unprofitable labor,
perpetual fear, dangerous dignity, or promotio^: the beginning is without
wisdom, and the end with repentance. This is the condition of all these
things that in this miserable mortality are more greedily, tha^ wisely
desired. But heavenly things are void of all such grief and sorrow.

Thirdly, what will it profit a man to win the whole world, Mat^
and to lose his own soul? or what shall he gain, if he feeede and pamper
his body with delicates, and suffer his soul to perish for hunger?

To conclude, we are but strangers in this world, and therefore we must so
behave our selves as those that are in a strange country, who though they
provide for things necessary for a time, yet their desire and intent is to
return home to their own natural country again: even so we, though we
enjoy those things that are needful for this present life, yet must we not
so fix our minds upon them, that we be withdrawn from that earnest desire
that we have to return to our own country. These and a great number reasons
more may be given, why we should prefer heavenly things before earthly things.
But how few are there that consider them? It is reported of Pambo, that when he
saw a woman decking her self with costly array, he wept bitterly: and being
demanded the cause of his weeping, he said that one cause was, for that he
himself was not so desirous to please Christ his savior, as this woman was to
please mortal men: nor he so careful for eternal things, as she was for
earthly and corruptible things. But what would he say if he lived in these
days, when not one or two women, but almost all mankind do only labor for
this, that they may please men, and provide for those things that perteine to
the belly? Necessary therefore is this exhortation of Christ labor not for
the meat that perishes, but that remains to eternal life, the which the
son of man will give unto you: to whom with the father and the holy Ghost,
three persons and one God, be all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

