SOME HELPS TO STIR UP TO CHRISTIAN DVTIES.

Wherein is explained the Nature of the Dnty of stirring up our selves.

Instances are given in the most necessary Christian Duties.

Some Questions about this Subject are profitab^y resolved.

By Henry Whitfeld, B D. ^reacher of Gods Word, at Ockley in Surrey

The second Edition, Corrected and enlarged.

LONDON: Printed for J^hn Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Gilt-Cup in Cheape-side. 1^34.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT GREVIL, Lord BROOK, of Beauchamp-Court,
increase of Grace.
Right Honorable,
COnsidering how hard a thing it is, by reason of that frail and corrupted
nature we carry about with us, to profit by praise; and finding moreover, Vt
quisquis est laud dignissimus ita minime lib ente^ suas audite solet lauds.
Buchol.
that the more deserving and worthy any are of it, the less desirous they are
to hear it; Judging your Lordship to be of the same mind, I resolved not to
detain you with matter of that nature; neither indeed dare J give Job 32.22
flattering Titles, fearing the secret reproof and stroke of God in my own
Conscience. I have adventured to address this Dedication to your Lordship,
partly for the shrowding and sheltring this little Book under your Honors
name and protection, which I humbly crave; and partly because J deemed your
Lordship a fit patron of it, the Lord having added this to al his other favors,
as to give you a heart stirred up in duties of his Service and Honor, which is
the subject of this Treatise; I conceived also some hopes that you might see
something in it, whereby you might be farther provoked and stirred up in the
earnest Love, and open profession of the Truth whereof you have given abundant
Testimony before many witnesses, which this Treatise calls for, and gives some
light unto. Blessed be the Divine Majesty, who (notwithstanding the great
severity of that Sentence in Holy Writ, 1 Cor. 1.20.
That not many wise men after the Flesh; not many mighty, not many Noble are
called) has, in your fresh and flourishing times, amidst the confluences of
many worldly blessings and contentments, looked upon you, and made choice of
you for himself to do him service, and has taught you to esteem the world as
it is; when he has passed by so many of high birth, and of great rank and
quality, who are mightily enthralled, and lie prostrate, adoring the seeming
felicities of this present world. What remains then but that you advance
forward, and do still more Nobly and worthily, improving those singular
endowments bestowed on you to the best advantage of the giver of them. Thus
shall the Lord still go on to perform his promise, 1. Sam. 2.30.
That such as honor him he will honor. The truth and comfort of which I doubt
not but your Lordship has already found and felt, the greater and more
excellent part of which remains to be fulfilled to you when your earthly
honor is laid in the dust, and your soul advanced to that hoped for
perfection. For the full accomplishment whereof he shall ever pray, who rests

Your Lordships to be commanded in all Christian Service, Henry Whitfeld.

The Epistle to the READER.
Christian Reader,
Our spiritual life being the most choice and precious treasure that we carry
about us in these our earthen vessels, in the lively sense and operations of
which consists the very life of our lives, and the the height of our comfort
and solace here below: How needful is it that we consider of all means, and
ways, by which this life may be preserved, and enlarged, that we may have it
in more abundance. And this we should the rather do, both in regard of those
inward annoyances, which flowing from our corrupt nature, do cause many
faintings, and decayings even in the best, as also in regard of those evils,
which coming from without, and breaking in upon this life, do wondrously
waste, weaken, and hinder the operations of it. Now as it fares with our
natural life, that stirring and exercise proves specially helpefull for the
preservation of it; so that which makes our spiritual life more lively, and
fills it with stronger spirits, and activenesse, is the exercising of the
several powers and faculties of it, the several gifts and graces of it, in
all those acts and ways in which it is to put forth it self. The serious
thought of which has caused me (Christian Reader) to make this Eslay, and to
come to thy help in what I might in this short discourse following: The matter
I know is necessary, and of general use for all Gods people, though the manner
of handling of it will not be found so notionall, accurate, or judicious; yet
finding none, as I could call to mind, that had traveled in this Subject, I
thought my weaknesses in this kind might be sheltered under my desire of a
more general good.

I considered also I had many of my Christian friends, and nearest kindred
far removed from me, who being part of my care, I was willing to put
somewhat into their hands, which might, not only be as a pledge of my love to
them, and some direction for them, but might also (by Gods blessing) have
somewhat in it to quicken them up in their Christian course. I saw my glass
running out apace, and I knew it would be a grief of heart unto me, if either
they or I had been called for hence, before I had left with them some proof
of my care and love, which I conceived might best be effected this way.

I viewed also the way, and course of many professors of Religion, even of
such as are counted of the forwarder sort; where I found much sloth,
lukewarmenesse, and backsliding. I thought if I could throw but a spark into
the heart of any such, who did know what a fire it might kindle: In many also
(though well minded) there is plainly to be seen a lowness, and flatnesse of
spirit, together with a contentedness to go an easy and ordinary pace in
their Duties and performances: Now if I could but a little heighten the
affections, desires and endeavors of such, and cause them somewhat to advance
and put forward, it would be abundant recompense for whatever pains I could
bestow in this kind.

I found also I had a dull and sluggish heart of my own, which by this means
might happily be quickened up, and that thus setting rules, and laws to my self,
what I had written might be of further use for me for the time to come.

Some fruit also, and acceptance I found amongst such, where I preached over
these Notes, in a shorter manner. All which laid together have now prevailed
with me to do that which I never intended to do, viz. to give way to the
publishing of them, and bringing them into a more open light. Whatever I have
done, I offer it unto thy view, and submit it to thy loving censure; hoping,
that if thou gain ought by what is written, thou will remember him at the
Throne of grace, whose aim and end was merely thy profiting. And thus,
beseeching the Lord in mercy to guide us with the Spirit of wisdom and
meekness in writing and reading, that we may be able to give up a comfortable
account of both in the great day of our reckonings; I rest

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, H. WHITFELD.

The Contents of the several Chapters of this Treatise.
CHAP. 1. THe Coherence and resolution of the Text. page. 1 CHAP. 2. That Gods
people do charge themselves with more secret sins than any else do. p. 13
CHAP. 3. How Gods children should seek unto God in evil times, when he gives
tokens of his displeasure. p. 29 CHAP. 4. That the work of a Christian in
respect of a spiritual estate, lies most with himself. p. 39 CHAP. 5. About
this Christian duty of stirring up our selves, and what it is to stir up ones
self in Christian duties. p. 66 CHAP. 6. What the maine duties are about which
we are to stir up our selves. p. 73 Section 1. Of stirring up our selves in
the most weighty business of our own and others salvation. p. 74 Sect. 2. Of
stirring up our selves against our own sins. p. 89 Sect. 3. Of stirring up our
selves against the sins of others. p. 94 Sect. 4. Of stirring up our selves
when we come to God in prayer for our selves. p. 99 Sect. 5. Of stirring up our
selves when we come to pray for others. p. 102 Sect. 6. Of stirring up our
selves in praising God. p. 106 Sect. 7. Of stirring up our selves in standing
for God and his honor. p. 109 Sect. 8. About stirring up our selves in the
reading and hearing of Gods holy Word. p. 116 Sect. 9. About stirring up our
selves in Meditation. p. 122 Sect. 10. Of stirring up our selves in sanctifying
the Lords day. p. 129 Sect. 11. Of stirring up our selves in our partaking of
the Sacraments. p. 131 Sect. 12. How to stir up our selves in laying hold on
the Promises. p. 138 Sect. 13. Of stirring up our selves in the duties of love
and mercy. p. 151 Sect. 14. Of stirring up our selves in regard of our
Christian race. p. 154 Sect. 15. How we are to stir up our selves when our
last end approaches. p. 157
CHAP. 7. Showing the grounds of this Duty of stirring up our selves. p. 164
CHAP. 8. Where the doctrine of stirring up our selves is applied in the several
uses of it. p. 170 CHAP. 9. Showing some Motives unto this duty of stirring up
our selves. p. 204 CHAP. 10. Showing some Rules and Means by which we might
attain to this stirringnesse of heart. p. 217
SOME HELPS TO STIR UP TO CHRISTIAN DVTIES.
ISA. 64.7. And there is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up
himself to take hold on thee.


CHAP. I. The Coherence and Resolution of the Text.
THese words are part of a Confession, and Confession part of a prayer, which
the Prophet poures out unto God, upon occasion of the sad, and desolate estate
of the Church of God, to be caused by the Caldeans, which the Prophet
foreseeing in spirit, speaks of it as present. For it may appear by the sad
expostulation which the Prophet makes with God in the latter end of the former
Chapter, that God had given up his people to the error of their wales, and to
the hardness of their hearts: and, which much aggravated their misery and
calamity, God had taken away the means of their Reformation (which were the
holy Ordinances of his Worship) by giving up his Sanctuary to be trodden down
of the Adversaries; so that now they were overwhelmed both with Spiritual, and
outward Judgments together; inward desertions, and outward desolations both of
Church and Commonwealth, Chap. 63. verse. 17, 18.

Now look as when the Cisternes are dry, and the Conduit-pipes are broken, men
are wont to have recourse to the Fountain for supply of living water: so in
this dry and dead estate of the Church, when the ways of Gods people were
foul, and their hearts worse, and themselves left destitute of all means of
redress and succor, the Prophet looks up to God in heaven: and because the
succor they stood in need of, was a work of great power and glory, he
bursteth forth into a vehement and earnest prayer, calling unto God to come out
of heaven, to work their Salvation and Redemption for them with his mighty and
glorious power: Oh (says he) that thou would rent the heavens and come
down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence: meaning, that God
would suddenly and strongly show forth the might of his glorious power in their
behalf; that so those mountains of difficulties, which hindered their
deliverance and restitution, might be removed, or at leastwise melt, and give
way to them, v. 1.

Now this prayer of the Prophet (which takes up this whole Chapter) consists
of three principal parts:

1. Of a Petition, verse. 1. to the 5.

2. Of a Confession, verse. 5, 6, 7.

3. Of a Deprecation, verse. 8. to the 12. which ends the Chapter.

In the Petition (which is the first part of the prayer) the Prophet earnestly
provokes God to manifest his glorious power, and fierce wrath against their
adversaries: his glorious power is expressed, verse. 1. That he renting the
heavens, and coming down, the mountains might flow at his presence. His
fierce wrath, verse. 2. That as when melting fire burns, the fire causes the
water to boil; So the fire of Gods wrath, burning against their adversaries,
as dross (though mountains of dross) yet they might boil, and melt, and
wast away.

This petition the Prophet works upon God with an holy and spiritual
wrestling by a threefold argument:

1. From the glory of Gods great Name; that so he might make his Name known
to his Adversaries, and the Nations might tremble at his presence, Verse. 2.

2. From the ancient, terrible, and glorious power, which God showed forth in
their deliverance out of Egypt, and in the promulgation of the Law, verse. 3.
When thou didd^st (says he) terrible things which we looked not for, thou
cammest down, the Mountains flowed at thy presence.

3. From the unspeakeable and unconceiveable riches of the grace of the
Gospel, which from the beginning God has prepared for his people that wait
for him, verse 4. and so the Apostle expounds the place, 1 Cor. 2.9.

The second part of this Chapter, and of the Prophets prayer, is the Confession
that he makes, and that of two things:

1. Of Gods readiness to show mercy, verse. 5.

2. Of their unpreparednesse to receive mercy, in respect of any desert of
their own, verse. 5, 6, 7.

Gods readiness to show mercy, is expressed in the beginning of the fifth
verse, Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness, those that
remember thee in thy ways.

Their unpreparednesse to receive mercy, is expressed, first, generally; and
then particularly.

Generally, in regard of their sins, and of Gods just displeasure against
them for their sins, in the next words; which yet he qualifieth with hope of
salvation, by the continuance and constancy of Gods ways of grace and mercy to
his people, verse. 5. Behold, says he, thou art wroth, for we have sinned, (and
so are unworthy and unfit for mercy) yet in those, to wit, in those ways of
thine (ways of grace and mercy, prepared in the Gospel from the beginning of
the world) in those is continuance, and constancy, (notwithstanding our
undeservingnesse) and we shall be saved.

More particularly, their unpreparednesse for mercy is expressed, verse. 7. in a
double respect:

1. In respect of the uncleanness and filthiness, not only of their corrupt
nature, but even of their best actions and duties, verse. 6. But we are all
(says he) as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness, are as filthy
rags, etc.

In respect of their spiritual dullness and sloth to exercise such graces and
duties as might turn away Gods wrath, and remove their sins and misery: Verse.
7. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take
hold on thee.

In the third part of this prayer and Chapter (which is the Deprecation) the
Prophet earnestly prays against the soreness or greatness of Gods wrath,
and the everlasting remembrance of their iniquities, verse. 9. and this request
he presses upon God by two Arguments:

1. By the mutual interest they have in God, and God in them; Thou art our
Father, our Potter; we thy children, and as clay in thy hand, verse. 8. We thy
people, verse. 9. thou therefore our King.

2. By the desolate and forlorn condition of Gods own Cities; yea, of his,
and their holy, and beautiful house, verse. 10.11. Which injuries and
indignities the Prophet demands with a patheticall question, how he can endure
to look at, and refrain and hold his hands from redressing, verse. 11.

To return to the words of the Text, they be (as you see) a Confession or
Complaint of the latter of those evils, which made them unworthy, and
unprepared to receive mercy; to wit, in respect of their Spiritual dullness
and untowardnesse to the exercise of such Graces and Duties, as might turn
away Gods wrath, and their sins together. Wherein observe,

1. The generality of this Spiritual dullness; it is Epidemical, common to
them all, none free from it; there is none (says he) that calls, etc.

2. The Duties neglected, which were two:

1. Calling upon Gods Name (though in a most needful time.)

2. Taking hold of God; by which is meant, either by faith laying hold of his
Covenant; or else figuratively, as it were, holding God, and staying him that
he depart not from them, keeping him with them, as Saul would have kept
Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.27. And this latter he amplifieth by their neglect of the
very endeavor after it: None stirs up himself to take hold of thee.

CHAP. II. That Gods people do charge themselves with more secret sins than
any else do.
ANd there is none that calls upon thy Name.] Before we come to lay forth
the maine thing intended, it will not be amiss to take a short view of some
passages in the Text as they lie in our way.

And first in general, from the nature of their complaint; if we look to the
matter of it, we shall find it to be not so much in regard of their present
pressures, and evils which lay upon them; neither for grosser sins, which
were more open and obvious to the eyes of others, but for more inward and
secret corruptions, and failings, such as the world takes no notice of, or will
hardly be brought to acknowledge they are sins at all; or if so, yet not
worthy the troubling themselves for them; as not to have striven with the Lord
in their prayers, to stay the judgment threatened; and not to stir up
themselves to hold the Lord, that he depart not from them. Hence we may
observe, Gods Children, in the times of confession of their sins before God,
are wont to charge themselves with more close and secret evils and corruptions.

Their complaints are mingled with bitter bewailings of more inconspicuous and
indiscernable evils, of wickedness more spiritual, not to be perceived by a
carnal eye, and therefore not lamented by a carnal heart.

To give some instances: As,

For their Psalm. 51.5 Isay 64.6
birth-sinne, that corrupted mass they brought into the world, which steames
like a dunghill, and sends up stench and unsavorinesse into the whole man;
hindering in all duty, and putting forward unto all evil.

They complain of those remainders of Atheism, of their wicked and
blasphemous thoughts, of strong objections rising up in their minds against
clear and evident truths; as against the very Being of God, the work of our
Redemption by our Savior Christ, the truth of Gods Word, and many such like.
So also they lament their Psa. 31.22. Psa. 116.11
Unbeleefe, 2 Cor. 12.7 He that tells the people of God of the medicine God
applied to heal and prevent the exalting of himself above measure, secretly
confesses the privy pronenesse of his own heart to selfe-exalting.
privy Pride, Psa. 51.10. Praying for a right Spirit, he confcsseth his own
spirit not right nor straight, but crooked and deceitful.
secret hypocrisy, Isay 6.5. Nehem. 13.22. His great zeal for reformation,
yet needs great mercy to spare it from exact examination.
and the evil which cleaves to their best works, their self-love,
selfe-seeking, and Psalm. 30.6.
self-confidence, their great Psalm. 106.6, 7. Nehem. 9.35.
unprofitablenesse under all those means, and mercies offered, their Isay
63.17.
hardness of heart, and that great Prove. 30, 2, 3. I feel such ignorance of
God and a^l his ways, so many years toward me, such folly which keeps me
from taking any thing to heart which respects God, or concerns my self;
such uncircumcision of heart, which makes me that I cannot be holy, poor,
and abject, though conscious of innumerable Motives, past, present, imminent,
whieh might move me thereunto. Lastly, I feel such a selfe-sufficiency as
will not let me perceive what need I have of my God to be with me for
quickening, strengthening, comforting, directing, prospering of me in my
course. Baines, Letter 19.
blindness and ignorance which they find in themselves; it much grieves them
many times for their unruly Psa. 73.3.22
passions, and their Isa. 45.9.
strivings with God, and impatiencies under his hand; their security,
lukewarmenesse, and not Cant. 1.6.
keeping their Watch; their Deuteronomy. 32.15 Nehe. 9.28
abusing lawful things; their Hos. 8.12.
unthankfulness for Spiritual mercies; their Ezech. 9.4 Isa. 42.19, 20
not mourning for the sins of the land, and of the places where they live;
nor taking to heart spiritual judgments; their Ier. 9.3.
fearfulness and aptness to be discouraged, and give out in good businesses,
and Gods causes; their too much 1 Samuel 2.9
indulgency and favoring themselves, and those that are near unto them in
their faults and failings; so Psalm. 78.37 38, 40,
their often breach of promise, and Covenant with God; Isa. 64.7.
their sleightnesse and perfunctorinesse in the service of God; much
irreverence, etc. Mat. 26.40 43.
their dullness, heaviness, weariness, indevotion, together with their
distractions, and dissipations of heart in holy duties; their Mat. 8.18
forgetfulness, Hos. 6.4.
inconstancy, and Psalm. 43.5.
uncomfortable walking in their Christian course. These and such like do make
them sigh in secret, shake their heads, and wring their hands, and cry out with
many a bitter cry when none eye sees them, or ear hears them.



they have received into their minds (being hence denominated 1 Thessalonians. 55,
children of light, and called Ephesians. 5.8
light in the Lord by which they discern these close and hidden corruptions,
being now by this light made, as it were, transparent unto themselves. For
look as it is with luminous and lightsome Bodies, as a Diamond, Crystal,
Glass, or the like; when the light of Sunne-beames shine upon them, it causes
a transparency in them, so that the foulness within is as visible as the
foulness without; so it is here. The word used by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12.
will serve somewhat to explain this: He tells the Corinthians, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity he had had his Conversation in the world,
(...), Vid. Bez ad loc,
i. e. in all candor, and perspicui y of spirit and heart; as in the sight of
God, which might plainly be seen even through and through. Now as the good,
so is the evil in Gods Children transparent; as the spots which appear in the
face of the Moon, so that by the help of this light they are able to pass a
judgment upon themselves, and their more secret evils.

bleeds for known, though close sins, and so affects the heart with sorrow
for them.

Paul is alive when without the Law, Romans 7.9.
and he is without the Law whilst carnal; but Paul being become spiritual,
the Law also is become spiritual unto him, verse. 14. So that spiritual and
secret sins so apprehended he could then judge of, which before he could not.

Yet we are to know, Caution.
that this work of bewayling secret evils, is not found in all Gods children
alike, since their Consciences are not equally enlightened, and made tender;
neither are they all alike mortified, or watchful; nor have they the Spirit of
judging and discerning alike; neither are all so easily convinced alike; but
this is found in all, so far as their light goes, there will be smiting for
guiltiness in these things.

confessions which are found in the truly penitent and humbled soul, and those
ordinary large forms taken up by carnal men, either by custom, or extorted
from them by their natural conscience in some painful and hellish pangs of
it: As Pharaoh in extremity cried out, I have sinned this time, Exodus 9.27
the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. So Saul being convinced
of his unjust and unnatural dealing toward David, 2 Samuel 26.21 1 Samuel 24.17
said, Return my son David, I will no more do thee harm. I have played the
fool, and have erred exceedingly. Thus was it with Judas in the gross and
open case of betraying his Master; Matthew, 27.4
I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. When the Conscience has but
Natures light, it must be a great print that a man can read in this kind,
taking knowledge only of more gross and staring evils, and that most an end
against the second Table: but the regenerate go farther, as I have said,
confessing and lamenting their inward and secret corruptions, which the
hypocrite swallows up, as not worth the naming.

Dissemblers, etc. whereas they appear in their own eyes doubly vile, and
twice as sinful: For in others their open and outward sins only are apparent,
but in themselves they behold both their open and inward sins, which must
needs break down all high thoughts of themselves, and cause them to prefer
others above themselves.

Neither can they be so charged with Hypocrisy, since the foulness of the
inside of the platter is seen, and bemoaned, and washed with tears by them,
as well as the outside: They are more troubled for praying, than thou for not
praying; for hearing, than thou for not hearing, etc. This being seldom found
in the practice of any hypocrite to lay such things as these to heart,
abounding so much in self-love, and selfe-deceit, and being secretly willing
to rest in his present condition, and to make his bed as easy, and to lie as
soft as he can, and so to rest with as little disturbance as may be; he will
not search for matter to trouble himself, but keeps up himself in as good an
esteem with himself and others, as possibly he may; nothing troubling him
more than to know, or be known what secret guile and rottenness there is in
his spirit; and therefore loath, not only to hear others speak, and complain
of it to him, but to hear himself speak and complain of it to God, is an
heavy, irksome, and unpleasing work; only Gods child, as he is willing to
know the worst of himself, so will he confess the worst of himself in the
ears of the Lord; Iustus favere sibi nescit rigorem iudicis circa se non novit
infl^ctore. Amb. Apol. cap. 9.
none thinking or speaking so bad of them, as they do of themselves; and none
laying so much to their charge, as they do to their own.

their secret failings in their faces, yet then when the conscience can bear
witness, and the distressed soul can truly say in Gods presence, The Lord
knows these evils have not wanted complaining against, In quantum non pep^^^
ceris tibi in tantum tibi Deus par^et Tertul. de poenit.
secret though they be, I have often spread them before the Lord, as my sores
and sorrows.

CHAP. III. How Gods Children should seek unto God in evil times, when he
gives tokens of his displeasure.
THere is none that calls upon thy Name.] This is the first thing they charge
themselves withal; not that they were altogether praierlesse, as the Heathen,
or profane; but it grieved them that this their service had not been
according to the Law of prayer; they had not intended their inward affections
to apprehend the Lord, to keep him with them in their affliction, they were
sluggish, and did not seek to stay Gods wrath before the judgment came. Hence
we may observe, In evil times, when the Lord gives tokens of his displeasure,
then not to call upon him with intention of spirit, increases sin and wrath.

This appears, whether it be an evil time with a man's self, or with a Land
and Nation: The Hypocrites in heart (says Elihu in Job) put to wrath, or heap
it up, Job 36.13
because they cry not when God binds them; having wilful and rooted
stubbornness in them, habitual contempt of God, without all reverence of his
word, or Rod; that even in adversity they will not submit themselves to God,
but obfirme and harden themselves under the evils. Of this also the Prophet
Jeremy complains, Ier. 5.3
Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved. The people striving and
stomacking against God, they entreat not his mercy and favor, therefore their
curse is augmented more and more, Verse. 6.
verse. 6. This the Prophet Esaias affirmed of the people of his time; The people
turns not to him that smites them, Isay 9.13
neither do they seek the Lord of hoasts; therefore the Lord will cut off
from Israel, head and tail, branch and rush in one day. So in Zephany, the
Lord threatens the neglecters of his worship, not only Idolaters, and those
that mingled their Religion with superstitions: but those that have not sought
the Lord, Zeph. 1.6
nor enquired for him: i^ e. not sought him by prayers, and entreated his help
in such a declining and corrupt time.

course and practice, if it were searched with a candle, it would be found
that they had never opened their mouths, nor lifted up one petition this way,
seeing what desolations have been wrought in foreign parts, what tokens of
his displeasure amongst our selves in the land we live in; nay, when the Lord
has knocked at their own doors, brought it home to them, and the very marks
and signs of his anger have been upon themselves, their wives, or children,
yet then to have the heart so sink and fall, and to be so over-growne with
senselessness, as not to be able to commend the case of themselves, or theirs,
to the Lord; this shows the Atheism of the heart; for in what degree a man is
praierlesse, in that degree he is godless.

Daniel, Dan. ^.13, 14
All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer before the Lord
our God. Therefore has the Lord watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us.

How may they call and cry to us out of the Palatinate, Bohemia, and other
places, and say, Some of you have seen, and most have heard of the grievous
evils that have befallen us; Lam. 1.12
Behold and see if there were ever sorrow like unto our sorrow, to have the
glorious Gospel of Christ taken from us, the Arc displaced, and Dagon set in
his room; our Ministers banished, and our people betrayed unto
Antichristianisme; our Country laid wast and desolate, many a Family driven
from house and home, not knowing where to lay their heads; many of us seldom
going to bed with dry eyes, confidering the many pressures, straights, and
necessities of our selves and ours. O then why were your prayers and tears
wanting to help to extinguish the flame of Gods wrath broken out against us?
May not many amongst our selves of this land cry against us, when Gods hand
has been upon them by the Pestilence, Psalm. 91.6.
which walked in the streets at noonday; by Famine, and other miseries, yet
our prayers have not bin with the Lord with intention. O we put not forth our
selves as we ought to have done, by strong cries in the behalf of the
distresses of our bretheen: What may we think is justly owing us to this day
for our great neglects herein? the Lord grant it be not laid to our charge.

did not help by thy prayers as thou ought to have done; see now how
heartlesse and shiftlesse thou art, and it is just with God it should be so; O
this will add to the bitterness of the cross, and strike the stings of it
deeper into thy Spirit. On the other side, if thou have dis^harged thy
conscience this way, if the worst fall, Zeph. 2.2
yet either thou shall be hid in the day of Gods wrath, or with Noah, Ezech.
14.14
Daniel, and Job, thou shall deliver thine own soul; or thou shall be
mightily assisted, and furnished with faith and patience to undergo the
present affliction, and thy prayer shall return into thy own bosom like Noah
his Dove into the Arc, with an Olive branch of peace in its mouth; and God,
who has been a witness of thy heart and ways, will look to it, that thou
shall not lose thy reward.

CHAP. IIII. That the work of a Christian, in respect of his spiritual
estate, lies most with himself.
OR that stirs up himself.] This is the second part of their complaint they
had been sluggish and drowsy, they had not been dealing with themselves, nor
laboring with their own hearts for quicknance and stirringnesse; they did not
stir up [themselves.] Hence observe, The business of a Christian, in regard
of his spiritual estate, should lie much with himself.

A Christian has of all others the greatest business, and this lies in many
places; in heaven, in the Church, in the Family, in the Closet, etc. and though
God set him his work, and give abilities to do it, yet in regard of the
transacting and perfecting this work, it has special, and primary relation
to a man's self, and specially to that part of a man's self which we call the
Inner man, as his mind, and thoughts, will, and affections, and Conscience; God
being a Spirit, with whom our principal business lies; and the service being
Spiritual, in which we are to address our selves unto him; its the ordering
and managing of our spirits that lies upon us, as the chiefest of our
employment. See it in some Instances:

First, in the great business of Repentance, and turning to God: we shall
find this in Scripture to be called Luke 24.1^
A coming to a man's self: To make this farther to appear let us take the
whole order and course of this work.

It pleases the Lord, at some time of a man's life, such an one whom he
purposes to save, by the Ministry of the Word, together with the help of the
Spirit, to meet in his way to Hell, where there is discovered unto him the
vileness and horriblenesse of his sins, and the fearful estate the sinner
is cast into by reason of these: The conscience is now a wakened, the books are
opened, he sees sin clearly, and is convinced of them, so that he cannot
shift, he cannot deny them; his thoughts also begin to be troubled, and to
beat one against another with unsavory perturbations; finding all is not well,
he goes alone by himself, begins to search, reads his sins as in a story;
his conscience tells him, I am sent unto thee with heavy tidings; and one
messenger follows another to tell him of his lost and condemned estate: Dan.
5.27
To thee be it spoken, thou art weighed in the balance, and found too light;
these be thy sins, and these will be thy sorrows. Being thus perplexed, he
begins to cast about, and to consider what way he were best to take to
extricate, and unwind himself out of these Mazes and Labyrinths of sin and
misery: He looks upward, and sees heaven shut against him; he looks downward,
and finds hell opened for him; he looks round about him, and sees no help in
any creature, men, or Angels; he looks into himself, and finds innumerable
sins co^passing him about, which stare upon him, and having every one, as it
were, a chain in their hands, they are binding him hand and foot, to cast him
into utter darkness. Being cast into these great streights, such thoughts
begin to rise in his mind, (God being merciful to him;) Is there not mercy
with the most High? Will he cast off any poor sinner that comes unto him? And
therefore resolves and says, Sure Luk, 15.18
I will arise and go, and I will say to the Lord, I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee; who can tell but the Lord may show mercy to as great a
sinner as I am? He comes therefore, and casts himself down before the Throne
of grace, and says, Job 7.20.
What shall I say unto thee, O thou preserver of men? I have no arguments to
plead, no excuses to make, no reasons to defend my self withal; my sighs are
my best Apologies, and my tears are my best arguments: O that thou would
pity! O that thou would spare! O that thou would have mercy upon a poor
worm, a wretched and forlorn sinner! Thus all alone he humbles himself, he
Psalm. 32.5
confesses his sins, and spreads them before the Lord, Eze. 20.43
loathing himself in his own sight; Luke 15.21
accuses himself; 1 Cor. 11.31.
judges himself worthy to be destroyed: He now beholds John 3.14
Christ lifted up to him (as the brazen Serpent in the wilderness) which he
sees with his own eyes, embraces with the arms of his own faith, applies him
to himself for his own everlasting comfort. And thus his sins pursue him to
the Sacrifice of Christ, to this City of refuge, giving him no rest, till
Christ speak peace to his soul: and all this is done by a man with himself.

Psalm. 4.4
self. Thus we 1 Kin. 8.47
read in 1 King. 8.47. When Gods people are carried captive into their Enemies
Land, the promise is, that yet if they shall bethink themselves, and repent,
and make supplications, etc. then God would hear them: He speaks it of
renewed Repentance, of them who are already Gods people; and this he calls a
bethinking themselves, or a bringing back a man's heart, a going down into a
man's self; and answerable to this is the other expression in the same Chapter,
ver. 36. When they shall know every man (that is, particularly) the soar and
plague of his own heart. Thus also, Levit. 16.29. the children of Israel were
to afflict their souls and to make bitter to themselves the remembrance of
former sins, they were Eze. 16.62 63, and 36.31
voluntarily to cast themselves into heaviness: so Peter Luke 22.32
went out by himself and wept bitterly. As it is with a man in times of taking
Physic to recover health, he betakes himself to his chamber, takes the
potion prescribed, and is contented to be pained, and made sick: So in this
Repentance, which is Spiritual Physic, the work lies by ones self: as it
is in Zach. 12.11. They went apart, the Land shall mourn every Family apart,
and their wives apart. Thus we see it in the business of Repentance.

It is the same also in the work of Mortification. How does it lie with a man's
self, as the several phrases in Scripture, pointing to this, import; when a
man is to Grandis virtutis est tecum pugnare quotidie etinclusum hostem centum
oculis observare. Hieron. ad Fur.
fall out with himself, and to have great 2 Cor. 7.11
indignation against himself; to Gal. 5.24
crucify his lusts, and corruptions; to Mat. 18.8
cut off, as it were, the parts and members of ones own body, as to pull out
our eyes, to cut off foot or hand; to 1 Cor. 9.27
keep under the body; to Mat. 8.34
deny a man's self; all which seem terrible and bloody words to corrupt
nature, and carnal reason; yet about this must a Christian be exercised, and
that by himself.

Again, when fears and doubts rise in that great and weighty matter whether
we have any part or right in Christ or no? this question must be resolved by 2
Cor. 13.5
proving and trying a man's own self, by a private search and scrutiny, which
must be made in our own bosoms.



1 Hearing and Reading the holy Word of God: Hear it Job 5.27
(says Eliphaz to Job) and know it for thy good, or for thy self, as it is in
the Margent. When we apply things to our selves, as the Disciples upon that
speech of Christ unto them, One of you shall betray me: they Mat. 27.22
asked every one, Master is it I? To do as the Be, which brings home the
honey gathered to her own Hive, there lays it up to nourish her, and to feed
upon it as need requires. A man must so look into the Word that he Iam. 1.23
may see his own face in it as in a glass; and so helping himself to reform
what is amiss.

2. In singing of Psalms the Ephesians. 5.19
Apostles counsel is, that we should speak to our selves, singing and making
melody in our hearts to the Lord.

3. In preparing to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we are exhorted
1 Cor. 11 28
to examine our selves before we come.

4. When crosses and afflictions break in upon us, and God lays his hand on
us, we are to Lam. 3.28
sit alone by our selves, pondering and considering the grounds and causes of
them; so quieting our selves, that we may bear them with patience. Jer. 15.17
I sat alone because of thy hand (s^i^h the Prophet Jeremy.

For here indeed lies the straight and pinch of our Christian work:

To be wrestling with God in prayer; To be dealing hand to hand against our
beloved corruptions, and to keep a constant and close fight against them; To
be much in selfe-examination; To be gaging our own hearts, and digging into our
selves to find the roots of our sinful distempers, to rake in the puddle and
sincke that is in our own bosoms, and to smell the stench and unsavorinesse
of it, to be humbled by it: These, these are those private and painful works
which must be done, if ever thou mean to make sure work for thy soul, and
without which all thy Religion is but a selfe-deceiving.

In our more public and open performances also this has place: So to tend to
our hearts, and spirits, that they be preserved in their strength and
intention in the duty, beyond what will satisfy men, as in Hearing, Receiving,
Praying with others, etc. all which may be done with ease by the outward man;
but do thou say to thy self, this charge must I always lay upon my self in
all duties that are of public Observation, to do them from my self, not from
others; that is, to set upon them from such a vigor of spirit as would carry
me to such performances, even from my self, if there were none to behold me.

deep Ier. 17.9
deceitfulness of our hearts, and desperate wickedness. A man can lay no sure
foundation of his house, that diggeth not deep beneath all quicke-sands, and
rotten soil, so here.

to heaven or hell; of such the Prophet complains, Ier. 8.6
None says what have I done? They live abroad out of themselves, looking and
prying into others, but leave their own hearts neglected and untilled. Nay,
they shun, and decline this work as a grievous task. Oh, me thinks it is
a folly and a madness, that wants a name to express it, that Man, a
reasonable creature, endued with such abilities, and so fitted every way for
this work, and it being a business of that great consequence, yet that he
should make such an escape from himself, and live at such a distance from
himself, so far out of his own call and reach! Oh what studying is there in
the world of sundry sorts of salutations, garbs, and complements? What asking
of each others health and welfare? Nullum tibi anima tua propinquiorem nullum
^u^t ces chariorem Si te amiseris omnia in ^e p^rdis. Salv. lib 3. cont.
Avarit. Of all prisoners, use often nest to visit thine own soul. Greenham.
(...) etc Intend ^^^imae oculum in tuum i^siu^ examine ut nosca^ ^ect^ne
anpecus ^^eat anima ^u^^. Basil.
yet never to ask his soul how it fares; not so much as to bid it good
morrow, or good even; I mean, he passes it by as a worthless, and a
neglected thing. What great desire have many to visit far Countries, and to
know the manners and customs of other Nations far or near? What long
Pilgrimages do many make with many a weary step? yet they will not take a
short journey down into their own hearts, nor know the behavior and language
of their own souls and consciences. The grounds of this extreme folly may be
such as these:

1. In many it proceeds from Ignorance, they know not what this duty means, or
that there is any such work reqvired of them, they know not how to behave
themselves in such a business.

2. In many it proceeds from slothfulness, they will not be at the pains, Est
et he^ perversitas hominum mori^itius, quam curati desiderare.
they choose rather to put things to the venture, speed as it may: They say
they keep their Church, say their prayers, come to the Sacrament, pay every
one his own, etc. if this will not serve the turn, but that there must be such
ado, then God help. They think such as call for more, or do more, are more
busy then needs, and that far less would serve the turn.

3. In many it proceeds from a strange levity, incomposednesse, flotingnesse,
and unsetlednesse of Spirit; they cannot keep their mind steady, nor serious in
this work, but are quickly turned aside to other things, even a feather flying
in the air will divert and take them off, and cause them to wander in vanity
and impertinencies.

4. In some it proceeds from a guilty fearfulness; they will not be too
busy this way, to pry into themselves, fearing lest they might see that which
would make their hearts ache to see, by causing the remembrance of their former
evil ways to return upon them: They think it would bring a damp on their
worldly comforts, and mar their carnal mirth making them grow mellancholicke
and mopish, and so expose them to the scorn of the world, or their companions,
and carnal friends.

5. In some it is from worldliness, and earthly-mindednesse; they will not
afford so much time, being carried along with such great intention and
vehemence of Spirit, they cannot be at As if a sick man should say, I have no
leisure to be cured.
leisure for this business. But can thou be at leisure to eat, drink, and
sleep? Can thou find a time to look upon thy Cattle, corn, and bags?
To laugh and be merry? nay, to lie, swear, drink, etc. Be thou assured, that
so continuing, God will not be at leisure to forgive thee thy sins, or save thy
soul.

spent by thy self about these things; be ashamed for thy failings, and bless
God heartily for any time spent, or thoughts had, or progress made about these
things.

(...), Iam. 1.22.
false reasonings of thy heart which drew thee into it. Say to thy self, how
came this to pass? As Absolon said to Thamar, when she came weeping with dust
upon her head, 2 Samuel 13.20
Has Ammon bin with thee? So, Has Satan been with thee? Has passion
overborn thee? Has Pride swelled thee? Have worldly cares choked thee, etc.
How came this about?

To move us further to this duty, take these few helps: Motives,


and Commonwealths man, etc. but this, as a Christian. This, being the most
noble work, and business of the mind, puts a luster and beauty upon the
soul. This is the special part of wisdom, and makes a man the wisest man.
All other thoughts and actions, without this returning into a man's self, Ier.
17.11 Pro. 5.13, 14
leave a man at last in the midst of folly and misery.



peaceable state, sweet, clean and comfortable, as often sweeping keeps the
house clean; and often reckoning keeps long friends: This will make thee
rejoice in thy own bosom, and the Pro. 14.10
shranger from this work shall not meddle with thy joy: Otherwise the soul
must needs be a loathsome place, and a cage for every unclean lust and sinful
vanity.

CHAP. V. About this Christian Duty of stirring up our selves, and what it is
to stir up ones self in Christian duties.
NOne that stir up themselves.] This is the second Duty neglected, they did
not stir up themselves to take hold on God, there was a neglect of the very
endeavor after it, which is here charged upon them: whence we have the
Observation lying plain before us, It is our duty seriously to excite and
stir up our selves in all exercises of piety and Godliness, with all
intention of spirit, to our uttermost.

For the further opening of the point, two things are to be explained:

1. What it is to stir up ones self.

2. The things, about which, this duty is to be conversant and exercised.

For the first, to stir up a man's self, has these two things in it:

1. The awaking of our selves, the shaking off that dullness and drowsinesse
which cleaves to us. To this the Apostle has reference, Romans 13.11. (...).
Excitari. Expergisci.
It is high time to awake out of sleep; he speaks to such as were already
converted: Now this awakening is a freeing of our grace from the oppression it
was under, by worldly cares, carnal fears, or some sinful lusts, which cause
a neglect of universal piety, and the works of the light, and day of
regeneration, unto which we had our new Creation.

The Believers, in their Ferventior esse solet, qui rem primum aggreditur.
first setting out, are commonly more earnest and fervent in following God
calling them; the first apprehensions, and sense of their blessed change affect
more, which may be gathered from the reproof of the Church of Ephesus, in the
loss of their first love, and calling her to remember from whence she was
fallen, to do her first works, Rev 2.4, 5. That seems to be like it, Ier. 2.2.
I remember for thy sake the kindness of thy youth, though that does more
principally declare the kindness of God in taking that people to himself
before all other, as an argument of conviction, that for no cause, against all
obligations of duty, they, contrary to their first beginnings forsook the
Lord: As in process of time men grow colder, in their affections to him at
least, though they utterly forsake him not; the Prophet therefore calls upon
them, and uses diverse arguments in the verses following, to put them upon the
duties enjoined them.

Though Gods children are called out of the world, yet they have much of the
world in them still, and therewith are miserably enthralled many times, so that
we need awaking, and stirring up. In which respect it is that the Lord has
provided, as well goads to prick forward the dull, as nails to fasten them
that are inconstant, Eccles. 12.11. See also for this, these following
Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.34. Revel. 3.2. Heb. 10.24.

The second thing in the stirring up a man's self, is not only the awaking up
of our selves, but the setting aworke that grace bestowed, together with the
employing of our faculties in their sanctification, to their uttermost
abilities. This may appear by Saint Paul his exhortation to Timothy, I put
thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God that is in thee: as if
he should have said, Considering thou have an unfeigned faith, and because of my
great affection to thee, whereby I am careful of thee, I, with great
confidence, put thee in remembrance that thou (...). 2 Timothy 1.6 Sicut ignis
indiget lignis, ita and gratia alacritate, ut fervere perpetuo possit.
Chrysostom. ad loc.
quicken up the holy fire that is in thee, and blow it up, use the grace thou
have with courage, and strength of Spirit. So again the same 2 Timothy 2.1
Apostle, Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.

Now as there is required great wisdom and circumspection in ordering the
graces given, and setting them in their right place and station, and so giving
them their due work and exercise; When, one says, knowledge be you ready to
discern what Gods will is; Faith, be you ready to believe what God promises;
Hope, be you ready to expect what is promised; Patience, be ready to bear what
the Lord inflicteth; Obedience be you ready to go about what God commands: I
say, as there is required this wisdom in ordering grace, so there is required
great intention of Spirit in intending al instruments of motion, all faculties
and powers of body and soul, for the keeping these in their due height, that
they slack not, nor abate not of their former strength and vigor. Thus you
see what it is to stir up ones self, and wherein it stands.

CHAP. VI. What the maine things are about which we are to stir up our selves.
SEcondly, we are to show whereabout we are to stir up our selves, and what the
duties are; to speak, as the truth is, these are of large extent, and bear an
equal latitude with all duties of Religion and godliness; there being no
duty, unto which this is not required, it being as the fire to kindle the
Sacrifice, and Mark. 9.^9
as Salt to season it. I shall give instance in some particulars, such as are
of great concernment, which do call for our utmost care and intention of
spirit.

Section 1. Of stirring up our selves in the weighty business of our own and
others salvation.
FIrst, concerning the most weighty business of our Salvation, and our
everlasting estate, it is our duty that we mightily stir up our selves, and
tend to the good of our precious souls above al things in the world beside:
about this, three things are specially to be heeded by us:

1. To take hold of all seasons and opportunities for the furthering and
advancing this work: For this end we are to take a serious view of the times
and places where we live, to consider what they afford and bring with them,
what confluence and concurrence of means, more than at other times, or in
other places. The Apostle calls upon, and stirs up the Corinthians with this
Argument, 2 Cor. 6.2 Can. 2.10.13 Ester 5 2
Behold (says he) now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation: that
is, whilst the light of the Gospel shines, whilst the Ministers call, whilst
the Lord (like Ahasueros) holds forth his golden Scepter, his promises of mercy
and pardon to all such as come to him, especially when he begins to stir the
heart with touches and remorses for sin, and desires of mercy and pardon. The
people that were stirred by the Ministry of John the Baptist, how wonderfully
eager were they in the pursuit of their Salvation? Mat. 11.12
From the days of John Baptist until now (says our Savior) the kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force; that is, Quidam ad
omnia viae and vita hu^us exer^it^a non Solum ^mbulant sed et c^rrunt, i^^o
po^ius v^l^nt. Bern Sermon. 3. de ^. s. Dom
they would have no nay, they were set upon it; as if they should have said,
What a time is this? What days be these of light and grace? Who ever perish,
we will not: Who ever go to Hell, we will not: As long as there was grace
and mercy to be had, as long as such gracious offers were tendered unto them,
they resolved to refuse no labor nor pains: rest they cannot, have it they
must, whatever it cost them: Oh the strong and restless desires! Oh the
unwearied endeavors of such, whose hearts God has truly touched with a care of
their own Salvation!

Phil. 2.12
Apostle exhorts, that we should work out our salvation with fear and
trembling. As Salvation is a great work, which should take up our whole man,
so it is still to be wrought out, that if at any time we were questioned what
we were a doing, we might answer, we were working out our Salvation with all
our strength; as the fountain works out the mudde, and as Physic works out
the disease, so to be throwing out all that hinders, to be still Sapiens
qua^diu vivit, tama^u addit.
adding to this work, one grace to another, one duty to another; according to
that of the 2 Pet 1.5 (...). Linking them hand in hand
Apostle, Giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue; to virtue,
knowledge, etc. Be still going onward to perfection, as the Heb. 6.1
Apostle Saint Paul teaches us; Therefore leaving the principles of Christ,
let us go on to perfection. and again, 2 Cor. 7.1
Having these promises, let us perfect holiness in the fear of God: so never
slaking our pace, or giving over our care, till we had brought it to its full
maturity: and this is to be done with fear and trembling, noting that great
seriousness of going about this work, what a Acts 7.32
fear should fall upon our hearts, considering the great Majesty of God, with
whom we have to deal; and our own unworthiness and great insufficiency, as
of our selves, to go forth in so great and weighty a work: Neither is this
fear, a blind, or a servile fear, but such as is accompanied, 1. with
Humility and lowliness of mind, opposed to high mindedness, and
self-confidence; as Romans 11.12. Be not high minded, but Timor virtutum omnium
^usios est. Hierony.
fear. 2. With an awful and child-like reverence of God, opposed to
wantonness and carnal security; as Hebr. 12.28. Wherefore we receiving a
kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God
with reverence and godly fear. When we do things in faith and obedience, and
in great love to God and his holy Commandments, for his truth and goodness
sake, Hos. 3.5. Instance might be given in preaching the Word, by which Gods
people are gathered to him; I was with you (says the 1 Cor. 2.3
Apostle to the Corinthians) in weakness, in fear, and in much trembling. So
in hearing, thus the 2 Cor. 7.15
Corinthians received Titus with fear and trembling. And the Lord Isay 66.5
Ezra 5.4
says, he looks to such; that is, with the eye of pity and favor, that
tremble at his Word. So for prayer and other duties, which help forward this
work; and this we must take for an everlasting truth, that they always speed
best, and have most assistance, and enlargement of heart in duties, that set to
them in most Humility and tremblingnesse of Spirit.

3. To grow up to more and more full Assurance of our salvation, unto which we
are exhorted, Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure.
Diligence here implies, 1. Care of the heart, so rendered, 2 Cor. 7.11 2.
Earnest endeavor, which has in it speed, instantnesse, painfulness, putting
forth our best strength thereunto, taking pains for God and our souls [to
make our calling and election sure] that is, that we be not disappointed, or
doubt or distrust of it; the former is the assurance of the things in
themselves, Certitudo obiecti.
the other is in regard Certitudo subiecti.
of us. This duty is to be done, 1. by building our hope of both, not upon the
Sand; that is, either upon Ephesians. 2.3
good nature, or Matthew. 3.9
Gods outward Covenant, or Man. 7.21, 22, 23.
common graces, and duties, for these will deceive us, but upon the Rock,
which is Christ, Mat. 7.24. and in him, upon his promise of Word and Oath, Heb.
6.18 2. By gathering certain signs of our safe estate in him, as from our
choosing him for our God, Psalm. 73.25. a sure sign he Ioh. 1^ 19
first chose us, 1 John 4.19. so of our effectual calling, and the like. 3.
Eschewing such evils as might darken, or dampe our Assurance, and break the
bones and strength of it. 4. By adding grace to grace, and linking one to
another, as you heard before. Thus you see what things are required of us about
this great work and business of our Salvation; and unto this we should the
rather hasten with all our might, as in many other respects, so, in that
priority in enjoying the benefits of God in Christ, is a great prerogative; and
every one should stir up themselves about it. To be first in Christ, has
special privileges; Romans 16.7. Salute Andronicus and Iunia (says Saint Paul)
who were in Christ before me: So is Epinetus recorded to be the first fruits of
Achaia: The sooner we get out of the world, which lies in wickedness, unto
Christ, the safer we are, what ever befalls us; and the more sins and pollutions
of the world shall we be freed from, and so the sooner shall we provide for
the peace of our consciences, and the comfort of our lives.

Thus also are we to stir up our selves, according to our places and
callings, Pecora fratris tuo errantia iubel ut reducas fratri tuo nedum ipsum
sibi. Tertul.
about the salvation of others, and to further the same with all earnestness
of intention, by all the ways and means we can, as they stand in relation
unto us. Thus Cornelius, taking the opportunity when Peter was to come to his
house to Preach the Word unto him, Acts 10.24
he gathered together his kinsmen and mere friends. So Andrew calls his brother
Simon, and Ioh. 1.40, 41
tells him We have found the Messiah, and so brought him to Jesus. This being an
infallible note of a good man, that he cannot tell how to go to heaven alone.
This care, and dear affection should specially be found in Ministers of Gods
Word; how should they stir up themselves when they come to perform this
work? Before them sit the blind, and ignorant; the proud, profane, and
rebellious sinner, 2 Timothy 2.20.
held under the power of the Devil, and led captive by him, according to his
will, who are making have, and fetch large strides to the fiery Lake, which is
but a little before them. What tender compassions should they put on to bring
home wandering sinners, and Heb. 5.2
such as are out of the way; that, if it were possible, Acts 20.28
not one soul should perish, committed to their charge.

When the Lord is pleased to call home a lost sinner, and begins to lay a
foundation of his blessed change in his soul, we should stir up our selves
by all signs of joy and rejoicing. As it was when God put to his hand to lay
the foundations of this glorious frame of the world, the Lord himself tells us,
Job 38.7
that the morning stars sang together, and the Sons of God, that is, Vid.
Ion. ad loc.
the Angels, shouted for joy; much more when he begins Amos 9.6
to build his stories of grace and mercy in the soul of any, it being a
greater, and a harder work to save one sinner, than to make the world; because
in that work there was no resistance, for he did but Psalm. 33.9 Genesis 1.3
speak and it was done; he said, Let there be light, and it was so; but in the
soul of man there is great resistance, who stands out as long as ever he can,
and God has much ado with us before he can bring us home: therefore are we
to make it matter of great joy, even as it is to the holy Angels themselves,
Who rejoice over one sinner that repents, Luke 15.10. Thus does the Father of
the prodigal child in the same Chapter, Luke 15. ult
It is meet (says he) that we should make merry, and be glad; for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; Luke 10.21 Jesus rejoiced in Spirit
he was lost, and is found: and good cause have we to rejoice, one soul more
being pulled out of the Devils claws, and kingdom; one more is added to the
Church; one more, of a child of wrath, death, and hell, is made an heir of
grace and salvation.

Section 2. Of stirring up our selves against our own sins.
THe second thing, about which this duty of stirring up our selves is to be
exercised, is in regard of sin, and Gods offense, whether in regard of our
selves, or others. 1. In regard of our selves, and our own sins.

we are to stir up our selves, Incentiva vitiorum statim in mente iugulabis,
et parvulos Babilonis allides ad Petram. Hieron.
in opposing and resisting the inward motions, stirrings, and provocations of
it, it is our duty to set our selves against them with all our might, to
sharpen our eyes against them, we should labor to see Death, Hell, Wrath, and
Gods curse in the least risings and motions unto them; we should look upon
Lust, Pride, Malice, Revenge, thoughts of blasphemy, etc. as upon the Devil
himself; we should be no otherwise affected with the stirrings of these, then
as if thou did feel a Toad or Serpent stirring and crawling in thy bosom: O
in what a case would thou then think thou were? How would thou shake thy
self, and never be at quiet till thou had got forth that loathsome and
venomous creature: So, and much more should thou Dum in cogitatione voluptas
non reprimitur, etiam in action dominaetur,
strive and struggle against all motions and provocations to sin. Say to thy
self in such a case, Oh these filthy lusts, whither will they carry me? How
shall I be able to look God in the face, if I should give way to it? And I
must go to him before I sleep, Cavendum vulnus quod cum dolor Sanatur.
Hieron. Ep. ad Sal.
in what a case will my conscience be within this half hour? Beg hard of
the Lord to keep thee, and to give thee strength against these sinful
stirrings of thy corrupt nature. Thus have Gods Children with success helped
themselves, when they have set themselves against the brood of the Devil,
crying, as the repenting Israelites against their Idols, Isay 30.22
Get thee hence, and so have preserved their peace.

Jonah 3.8
cry mightily against them, and to be in great bitterness for them, Zac. 12.10.
as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn; even to cry out as a
traveling woman, amidst the pangs and throws of guiltiness. Hence 2 Chr.
33.12
Manasseth is said to humble himself greatly. O when the fountains of the
Genesis 7.11.
great deep are broken up, and the heart of the penitent sinner begins to
break and melt, there be strong groans and sighs uttered, which pierce the
very heavens, and the voice and cry of them is heard on high.

Licet lapsi sint, non commorentur in lapsu, nec in ipsis se sepuliant ruinis
suis sed ilico, ubi concidere resurgant, Salv. lib. 1. cont. Avarit.
to get out of the mire, never to give thy self rest in it, think thou lie
all the while amongst ginnes, and snares, and Scorpions, amidst quicksands, in
which thou sinkest deeper and deeper every moment thou so abidest. We should
call to mind what Peter did in such a case, Luke 22.62
He went out presently, and wept bitterly.

Section 3. Of stirring up our selves against others sins.
IN regard of others sins it is our duty to stir up our selves, and that in
regard of the evil of doctrine, or judgment, or of life and conversation:

1. For the evil of doctrine, false and erroneous tenants, and positions, we
should stir up our selves Jude 3.
to contend earnestly for the faith, once delivered to the Saints; not to lose
the least dram of that precious doctrine: we are not to look for any more
Gospels, or any more truths to be penned for us, therefore to look well to
these we have. As they are penned and written for all Gods people, so all have
interest in them; it being the Common Salvation, Jude 3.
al should stand for it to their uttermost; Mos iste semper in Ecclesiae viguit
ut quo quisque foret religion fior eo promptius novellis ad inventionibus
contra ir^t. Vincent. Lerinens.
so to stand against that which is contrary to sound Doctrine. Ah (dear
Christian) we should prize most dearly every truth of God, the least of which
is more precious Mat. 5.18
than heaven and earth, and a most sweet and beautiful thing; whereas every
error is loathsome and deformed, Nova dogmata vetus Testamentum deos alienos
appellare consuevit. Id. Vinc.
casts a blemish on the most holy and pure nature of God, and tends to the
ruin and confusion of all things. He that goes about to corrupt and debosh
another in life and manners, by wicked counsel, or example, is to be shunned
as a dangerous enemy; but he that goes about to corrupt and debosh another in
his judgment and understanding, which is the most precious and excellent part
of man, and to spoil him in his intellectuals, is to be accounted as a cursed
enemy, and to be driven out from the society of mankind. Revel. 2.2
The Church of Ephesus was commended, Vid. Pareum ad loc.
that she could not bear with them that were evil: that is, such as were
false Apostles, who carried about false doctrins, and corrupted others. How did
Saint Paul stand out against Elymas, Acts 13.9
who sought to turn away the Deputy from the faith: How did he sharpen his
Spirit against him, saying, O full of all subtilty, and all mischief, thou
child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of the Lord.

2. In regard of the evil of life, and corruption of manners in others, Ne
sitis negligentes in co^r gendis v^st^^ ad curam vestiam quoqu^ mo^o
perimentibus monendo, do cendo, hortan do terrendo, Aug. ver Dom. ^.^8.
we are to stir up our selves against it, as far as our calling and
condition of life will permit. They that forsake the Law ( Pro. 28.4
says Solomon) praise the wicked; but such as keep the Law, contend with
them. The innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite* says Job,
Job 17.8. They will not let them carry it away so, but will reprove them for
their wickedness. The example of that worthy Governor Nehemiah, is
remarkable in this kind; who contended with the Nobles who profaned the
Sabbath day, and by their example drew on others to that grievous sin: Hear
what he says, Neh. 13.17
Then contended I with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them; What evil
thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day? Did not your fathers
thus? and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon the City? yet
ye bring more wrath upon Israel, by profaning the Sabbath. Verse. 28
See also how he cleased from him one of the sons of the high Priest, because
he was son in law to Sanballat, who was a professed enemy to Gods people,
and a great scoffer at all their proceedings. But incomparable is the example
of our Savior in reforming the abuses of the Temple; John 2.15
Zealous of his fathers house, he whipped out the buyers and sellers, powered out
the mony-changers, and overthrew the Tables: At which fact, the Disciples
remembered that it was written, The Zeal of thy house has eaten me up.

Section 4. Of stirring up our selves when we come to God in prayer.
WE are also to exercise this stirringnesse of heart in all duties of
Obedience, whether they be duties of immediate worship, or otherwise.

To give some instances:

When we draw near to the Lord to pray to him, it is our duty to stir up
our selves, and to declare by all signs Vitus Theodorus writing to Melancthon,
speaks thus of Luther, No day passe^ him, faith ^e, but he spent three hours
at least in prayer. Once I happened to overheare him being at ^rayer: O what
spirit, and life, and faith, was there in his prayers! what he ask, he does
it with such ^evere ce, as having to deal with God; with such faith and ^ pe,
as speaking with hi^ Father, or his friend, In vit. Luth. pag^ 142
our great desire to be heard of him: God is of such Majesty, as he looks for
all earnestness in our petitions; and the excellency, together with the great
need of the things desired, should move intention of all our powers in seeking
them from God. S. James Jam. 5.16.
says, that effectual prayer, ((...), deprecation incitated, driven with
motion, and force, vehement, fervent, with great affection of devotion)
Diligent prayer and the committing of sin will not stand together for if
prayer cannot make a man cea^e from sin, yet his sinn^ng will make him leave
off praying, Mert. lib. t. page 61.
has great force with God to obtain that which we desire. Acts 26.7
Paul speaks of the twelve Tribes, that they instantly served God day and
night: the word is, (...), with intention of Spirit. This is sometime called 2
Kin. 19.4
lifting up of a prayer: It is recorded to the great praise of Jacob, that Genesis
32.26 28 Hos. 12.3, 4
by his strength he had great power with God; yea, he had power over the
Angel, and prevailed; he wept, and made supplication unto him, he found him
in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. In which is set down, both the favor
of God to Jacob, vouchsafing the manifestation of himself, and speech with
him; and the faith and piety of Jacob propounded to be imitated by us, as
belonging to our confirmation, who holding fast the promise made him at Bethel,
wrestled strongly by the faith of it, and found that he had not believed in
vain; at Bethel again was the Promise renewed unto him.

Section 5. Of stirring up our selves in prayer for others.
SO when we seek to him by prayer for his goodness to others, it is our duty
to quicken and enkindle in our selves, strong affections. Genesis 18.13
Abraham was earnest and importunate with God for wicked Sodom: especially for
such as are near and dear unto us; as the Mat. 15.22, 23.
woman of Syrophenissa obtained her request in the behalf of her child. But
most especially we should put forth all the strength of our spirits in the
behalf of the Church and people of God: Ye chat be Lords Remembrancers (
Isa. 62.6, 7
says the Prophet Isaiah) keep not silence, and give him no rest, nor hold
thy peace day nor night, til he establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth. When Gods people were driven into great streights, by reason of Pharaoh
his pursuing them behind, and having the Red Sea before them, the Lord asked
Moses, Exo. 14.15 Number. 14. 12 20
Why cryest thou unto me? Ah! Moses could not hold his peace, but must burst
out into strong prayers and cries. Aaron also bestirred himself, when the
plague brake forth amongst the people; Number 16. 46 47
He ran quickly, stood between the dead and the living and made atonement
for the people: So interposing, and, as it were, exposing himself to the wrath
of God for the people: It was not so much the Incense, as the strong prayers of
Aaron that prevailed with God to stay the plague. So when Peter was in prison,
it is Acts 12.5
said, that Prayer was made of the Church without ceasing for him; (the word is
(...), earnest and stretched-out prayer;) the Church was so earnest with the
Lord, that he was feign to take him out of prison, unloose his chains, and
bring him to them, and set him before them; as if the Lord had said, there he
is, your importunity has Deus ipse quinullu cont^^ se virilus superaripotest
pr^cibus v^ncitur. Hiero
overcome me. O the power of fervent-conjoyned prayers! These be the Prece^
sunt Bombard^ and instrument^ ^ell^ a Chritian rum. uther. Arius the heretic
was b^ou^ht to ^onf^^ o^ by th p^^^ers of Alexander the good Bishop of
Constantinople, and (...) ^eath w^, precationis opus non morbi. Socra, lib. 1
cap 15.
scaling-ladders that are set up to heaven; and these do lay siege to the
Throne of God, and encompasse him round, and will not depart till they have
that they came for.

Section 6. Of stirring up our selves in praising God.
When we draw near to praise him for blessings, received, having therein a
comfortable taste of Gods love to us, that he is our God, and we his people, it
is our duty to stir up our selves in all the heights and elevations of our
hearts, that possibly we may: Hence have proceeded those high strains of
speech, and Ebullit Cor. Psalm. 45.1
ebullitions of the hearts of Gods servants. Judge. 5.12
Deborah, to her due praising of God, calls upon her self to awake, to sing a
song; and the redoubling of the word, Awake, awake, Deborah, awake, awake to
utter a Song, implies her care to do it with all, her might. So David, Psa.
57, 7, 8
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: which notes the addicting of
himself, with constant purpose of mind, to the duty of praising God, and also
his alacrity wherewith he comes to it, not only opposed to hypocrisy, but to
torpor and spirit-lesnesse; kindled with zeal, he shoo^ off all impediments,
to be attentive to this voluntary Sacrifice; which the verse following
declares; Aw^ke up my glory, awake up Lute and Harp; expressing the vehemence
of his heart, and burning desire, he stirs up his tongue, and joins the
help of Instruments to fire himself the more. In another Psalm he stirs up
Psalm. 101, 1 Habet e^sonum Cor, Aug. ad loc.
all that is within him; he calls, as it were, a Council, assembles all his
powers, and Zeph. 3.14 Zach. 9.9
faculties of soul, understanding, will, affections, in their full strength,
to this duty of praising God It falls out sometimes, that when the soul is in
serious contemplation of Gods mercies past, present, and to come, that the fire
secretly kindles, and a man bursts out into high praises of God, finding his
tongue to come far short of his heart, and his heart infinitely too narrow to
comprehend, either the multitude of so many mercies, or the great love of him
that is the bestower of them and so he is swallowed up in that Sea which has
neither bank nor bottom, but is feign to cry out, O the depth, the depth, the
depth! and can go no farther: and this is the highest manner of praising God,
though one can speak never a word more.

Section 7. Of stirring up our selves in standing for God and his honor.
IN our standing for God, promoting his honor, and exalting his name, it is
our duty to stir up our selves, and that not only by spreading the knowledge
of him in our own hearts, and setting, him up as glorious there, making al
things within us to stoop and do lowly obeisance to him, by Jam. 4.12
acknowledging his authority in what he commands, and Ps, 119.128
by keeping the heart in a continual readiness to set about what shall be
commanded us from him, and Ier. 42.5, 6 1 Samuel 3.9
by resting in his will when it is revealed, Gal. 1.15, 16. Heb. 11.8
without resisting or gaine-saying, and not only by a faithful dependence upon
him, and hanging upon him from day to day, as a child upon the mothers breast,
by all which we advance, and lift up the Lord in our hearts; but also when we
are ready to make an open profession of him, not fearing the face of man, when
Gods cause comes in question. Then a man is right in his way, when he gives up
himself to be wholly for God, when al his ends, projects, and purposes are
subservient and subordinate unto him and his glory. We read of Caleb, that when
the false Spies Number. 13, 28.30
discouraged the Israelites from entering into Canaan, by telling them of Cities
walled up to heaven, and of the Giants the children of Anak, his spirit was
mightily stirred, and he said, Number. 14, 8
Let us go up at once, if the Lord delight in us, he will bring us into this
Land. For which standing in Gods cause, the Lord gives this testimony of him,
That Number. 14.24 Ad verbum implevit post me.
he had another spirit with him; and, that he has followed me fully. The
Hebrew word is a metaphor taken from a Ship under sail, which is carried
strongly with the wind, as if it feared neither rocks nor sands. Iehoshaphat
also 1 Chr. 17.6
had his heart lifted up in the ways of God: he was more courageous and bold
in promoting the true worship of God, than Asa his father was: With a high
Spirit he took away Idolatry; contemning peril, he took away the high
places and groves, which either his father left, or the people in the latter
end of his reign brought in again. David, but a youth, was mightily stirred
up in Gods cause when Goliath railed on the host of the living God, thy 1 Samuel
17.32.48
servant (says he) will go and fight with this Philistim: drawing near him to
fight, he hasted and ran, moved with fervent zeal, to be avenged on the
blasphemy of Gods name. It is said of Baruch, in the repayring of the wall of
Jerusalem, he Neh. 3.20 Se occendit
repaired earnestly, or as some read it, he fired himself, burst out into
heat, angry with himself, and others, that were so slothful in working, so
finished his portion in a shorter time. This stirringnesse of Spirit did
appear in Levi, who preferred Gods glory to all natural affection, Deuteronomy. 33.9
Who said to his Father and his Mother, I have not seen him, neither knew he
his own brethren, or his own children; for they observed thy word, and kept
thy Commandment. Thus also have the holy Confessors and blessed Martyrs done,
whose Spirits we should desire to be doubled upon us, in these evil and
backe-sliding days; who living incurst and cruel times, in Gods cause and for
his sake Rev. 12.11
loved not their lives unto the death, but thought the prison Who will ever
believe that I shall say? or what man will ever think? in the deep dark
dungeon to find a paradise of pleasure in the place of sorrow; and to dwell in
tranquillity, and hope of life in a cave infernal to be found joy of soul:
where other men do shake and tremble, there strength and boldness to be
plenty? Algerid his letter, Fox, Act. and Mon. ^ol, 2. p. 181.
a paradise, and great iron chains great Marsac going to the stake to be
burned, with two others with ropes about their necks, seeing himself to be
spared by reason of his order and degree, desired to have one of those precious
chains about his neck, in honor of his Lord, Fox, ib. p. 141. Luther
resolved to appear at Worms, though all the tyles on the houses should be
Devils.
ornaments, and embraced the flames as cheerfully as Eliah did the fiery
Chariot, that came to fetch him to heaven. O when the love of their dearest
Redeemer had once warmed their hearts, they were mightily inflamed, and like
David's three Worthies, who for David's sake, brake through the host of the
Philistims; so these were ready, for his sake to undergo all hard adventures,
to look all dangers in the face, and to break through an host of Deaths and
Devils.

Section 8. About stirring up ourselves in the reading and hearing Gods holy
Word.
IN regard of Gods holy word, when we are to be exercised in the reading of
it, or hearing it preached, or read, it is our duty to stir up our selves: as,

1. In reading the holy Scriptures: when thou take up the Bible into thy hand
to read, look upon it, as upon the most blessed book that ever eye saw, and
that no book in the world has that in it, Quid est Scriptura sacra nifi
quaedam Epistola omnipotentis Dei ad creaturam suam, Greg.
which concerns thee so much, containing in it the whole counsel of God for
thy good. And as children are stirring and wakefull when they hear their
fathers Will read, to know and understand what is left them there; so ought
we to stir up our selves, considering those many rich and precious Legacies
which our Savior has bequeathed unto us, in that last Will and Testament of
his, sealed with his own blood.

So in hearing the Word read, we have a notable example in Ezra his time, that
Nch. 8.3
when he read in the book of the Law, from morning to midday, the ears of
all the people were attentive to the book of the Law.

stir up ourselves with all the life of attention we may; as hearing the Lord
speaking in his Servants: Hither tend those pressing exhortations in Scripture,
To Isay 55.3
incline the ear; To be Jam. 1.19
swist to hear; Flying, to the places of assemblies, as Isa. 60.8
Doves to their windows.

The Bereans are commended for this, that they heard the Word, Acts 16.11
(...) with all readiness and alacrity. In hearing the Word, we are to Psalm.
24.7
lift up these everlasting doors, to set wide open the doors of our hearts,
that the King of glory may come in. We are to choose the Word as our Psalm.
119.111.173
portion, for the goodness, beauty, and truth of it. To bring hearts and
affections answerable to the matter in hand; when the Lord threatens, to bring
fear; when he promises, to bring Neh. 8.12
joy; to 2 Chro. 34 27. Luke 3.10
yield willingly to the stamp of every truth, as the Wax to the Seal. To set
the heart strongly to every word of God, (...). 1 Timothy 4.15
cleaving inseparably to every truth, binding them close to the soul. Deu.
32.46
Set your hearts, (says Moses) to all the words which I testify amongst you
this day, which you shall command your children to observe to do all the words
of this Law, for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life, and
through this you shall prolong your days.

3. For Ministers, and such as are to preach the Word, it is their duty to In
Bucholsero vivida omnia fuerunt, vt vida vox, vivida oculi, vividae manus
gestus omnes vividi. Mel. ad in vit. ipse p. 556.
stir up themselves in the careful discharge of this their weighty calling.

1. The Names given in Scripture, do all imply laboriousnesse, and great
intention: They are called Ezec. 3.17
Watchmen, Ier, 23.4
Shepherds, 1 Cor. 3.10
Builders, Mal. 3.1
Messengers, Tit. 1.7
Stewards, etc.

2. Their work set them, as dealing with the precious souls of men, and to
call home wandering lost sinners, calls for so much. They are to Preach with all
Acts 18.2-28.
diligence, 2 Timothy 4.2
earnestness, and instancy; in season, out of season; with courage and
freedom of spirit, Isa. 58.1 Ier. 28.17
fearelesse of the face of man: With great Phil. ^.8
earnest desire of the salvation of Men, and the people committed to them. This
made the Apostle Saint Paul to enter into great Col. 2.1
conflicts and combatings for the Colossians, and to be pained and afflicted
as a woman in Gal. 4.19
travel.

O me thinks what should not one do to keep one soul from perishing
everlastingly! if any Hic est ille Farellus qui nullis difficultatibus fractus
nullis minus convitiis, verberibus denique inflictus teritus, Mempel-garoenses
Aquil^enses. Lausanenses, Gene^ e^ses, Noacomenses, Christo Lucrifecit. M l.
Adam Decad. in vita Farel. p. 115.
pains and study would do it; if denying a man's credit, profit, pleasure, and
ease would do it; if stooping, and yielding, and laying our hands under their
feet would do it. if prayers and tears would do it; or if, like Clouds, we
should sweat our selves to death, so souls might be brought home to God, it
were a blessed way of dying.

Section 9. Of stirring up our selves in Meditation.
THe mind being quieted, and composed, and deep silence and attention being
caused in the whole man, thy spirit being awed with the presence of God, draw
forth the subject matter thou would meditate of, and to stir thee up in the
duty, take these two helps:

labor to see them at their best, present them to thy self in their prime and
beauty. To give some Instances:

1. If thou would meditate of God, labor to see him in the glory of his
Attributes, as Moses saw him, Exodus 34.5, 6.

2. If thou would meditate of Christ, ay me at the highest and most raised
apprehensions of his excellency; see him in his Nature, and Offices, or hanging
on the Cross, or sitting at the right hand of God, as Steven saw him, Acts
7.55. and Isa. chap. 9. view him in those places wherein Paul represents him,
Heb. 1. and Col. 1.13. to 21.

3. If thou would meditate of heaven, and the glory of it, labor by the eye
of faith to penetrate into it, and to see it at the best, as Paul saw it, being
caught up into the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.12. and as Peter represents it, 1
Pet. 1.4.

4. If thou would meditate of Gods Love to thee in Christ; See it at the
best, in the dimensions of it, in the breadth, length, height, and depth of it,
Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Think from whence thou art brought, to what things advanced;
thy self dug out of the rubbish, and ruins of forlorn mankind, and
placed as a living stone in Gods building; 1 Pet. 2.5
as a brand plucked out of the fire, Zach. 3.2
and like Jonah, from the belly of hell, cast up upon the dry land, and made a
child of God, and heir of life.

5. If thou would meditate on the Promises, look on them at their best, as
most fresh, and green, as they grow out of the heart of God, and breast of
Christ, their native and proper seat; out of whom they are but as fading and
dying things. They being in their full strength and vigor as ever, the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever; what Gods people have heretofore found
them to be, they are still the same unto us; like silver tried and purified
seven times, Psnl. 12.6
and have as much life and comfort in them as formerly in Abraham's, Heb. 11.13
or in David's time; what ever they could speak of them, Gods people in this
age of the world are able to report the same.

labor to see them at their worst. Take for instances:

1. If thou would meditate of sin, and the nature of it, see it at its
worst, even worse than the Devil himself; for what made him a Devil but
sin? it was sin spoiled him; he was a glorious Angel till he was
acquainted with sin. Think it is that which is most contrary to the most
holy Nature of God, and is the sole Object of all his hatred; whereas his love
is dispersed to several things, his Self, his Son, his Children, etc.
Think it is that which makes the greatest separation between God and us, and
to be without God in this world, which only makes a man accursed, which all
miseries of themselves can never do. This blots out the Image of God, stamped
on us at our first Creation, which being lost, all Paradise could not make Adam
happy. This conformes us to the Image of the Devil, and causes us to have
communion with him, who is Gods greatest enemy: This is it that grieves Gods
most Holy Spirit, and sends him sad to heaven, when we resist his motions, and
rush into evil.

2. If thou would meditate of Gods wrath, look upon it as at the worst; as
it keeps burning and glowing those everlasting flames, and can blow the coals
of a thousand hels more; the least spark of which let fall into the Conscience
sets all on a flame, which without the sprinkling of Christ's blood, and the
tears of true Repentance, can never be quenched.

3. If thou would meditate of the state of a soul that is lost, think of it
as at worst; even as of a forlorn, helpelesse, hopeless creature, covered
with shame and horror, and lying amidst the pangs, throbs, and throws of
guiltiness, which is the Worm that never dies; Mark. 9.44
of whom all mercy, pity, and comfort have taken their leaves for ever, being
there to remain in that dungeon of fire so long as Hell is Hell, and God is God.

Section 10. How we should stir up our selves in sanctifying the Lords day.
IN sanctifying the Lords day it is our duty to stir up our selves, both in
longing for it before it comes, and highly prizing it when it is come; Isa.
58.23
making it the joy and rejoicing of our hearts. It is recorded of the godly
Jews, before our Saviors time, that they called the Sabbath, Wemes. Christ.
Syn. p. 76.
Desiderium dierum the desire of days, the most desired day. Every moment of
this day should be precious, as having Gods blessing more immediately annexed
unto it, and unto all those duties performed in it; having, as it were, his
Image and Superscription more lively portrayed, and engraven upon it; and
therefore to be improued by us to our uttermost, in all the parts and duties of
that day.

Section 11. How we are to stir up our selves in our partaking of the
Sacraments.
IN the use of the Sacraments, it is our duty to stir up our selves:

How to stir up our serve to make use of our baptism to our selves and our
children
both to our selves, and our children, and that in these respects: children of
wrath; both we and they, all of us (like still-borne children) borne Ephesians. 2.3
dead in trespasses and sins, Ezec. 16.6
weltring in the blood of the sins of our first parents, empty of all grace,
prone to all wickedness, though as then not able to put it forth in outward
Act, no more then young Vipers, or then the Cubs of wild beasts; which yet,
when we grow up to ripeness and strength, are ready to break forth to do
any mischief, if we be not restrained. Genesis 17.7,
offers himself to be a God to us, and ours; and withal praying for our
selves, and them, that we, and they might Genesis 17.18
live in his sight. How should it provoke us to wrestle with God, to convey a
Covenant and Sacrament of life unto our children, since we have conveyed to
them nothing but sin, and wrath, and the fruit of both, which is death. Genesis
8.19
bring the blessing of the Covenant upon us and ours. Gedeons children, Judge. 8
27. and against Eli and his, 1 Samuel 3.13. For want of the latter, against
Amaziah, 2 Chronicles 2 5.2. which David sought to prevent, by giving his son
Solomon better counsel, 1 Chr. 28.9

How to stir up ourselves in the right use of the Lords Supper.
it is our duty to stir up our selves, Bread to strengthen us, and Wine to
quicken us, if we were not of our selves weak, and dull, and even starved
creatures without him? 1 Cor. 11.28
By examining and searching out the feebleness of our best graces, and the
strength of our manifold corruptions; that so as by searching into the sores
and wounds of the body, the body is payned and grieved; so by searching into
the sores and wounds of our souls, our hearts may be inwardly pricked and
afflicted. Zacheus was converted, Christ said, This day is Salvation come to
this house, Luke 19.9
for as much as he also is the Son of Abraham. And hence we read in the
Acts, when the master of a Family was turned to the faith, that he was baptized
and his whole household; and therefore also it lies upon us not to leave them at
home; so, nor to bring them with us uncircumcised, so far as it lies in us to
use the means for their good, Exodus 12.48. Christ was careful to 1 Ioh. 13, 8
10.
wash his Disciples feet, to purify their hearts against the Sacrament. Such
new wine, as Christ is, would be put into new bottles. Zac. 12.10.
him as 2 Samuel 9.8 with 19.28
dead dog (as Mephibosheth said to David) yet the Lord is pleased to set us
at his own Table, to feed us with the Body and Blood of his own Son, and
thereby to make us one body and spirit with his Son, giving him to us, and us
to him, that we might partake in all the precious blessings he has purchased
for us, both for this life, and for a better, and therefore we are to feed upon
him with faith, and exceeding joy for all his abundant goodness to us herein.
purify us, and Gal. 2.20
live our whole life in us. 1 Cor. 10.17 2 Cor. 12.13
and called of God to partake in the same Table with us.

Section 12. How to stir up our selves in laying hold on the Promises.
IT is our duty to stir up our selves, to conceive confidence in our hearts
in taking hold of God, as he has offered himself in his Covenant, and
Promises (the special thing mentioned here in the Text) and a point of great
use through the whole course of our lives: on which I shall a little more
insist; opening the phrase what it is to take hold on God, and showing how the
Scripture calls for this duty. The phrase is put for the Act of believing,
which because it is to be performed by the whole man, and all the powers of
it, and is the great Act of all others, and includes all others, therefore it
is set forth to us in Scripture by all the several Acts of each member or
faculty in a man: So, elsewhere it is called Seeing, 1 Pet. 2.3
performing the Office of the eye to the soul; Eating, Isay 30.7
tasting, coming to Christ, sitting still; and here (to name no more) Taking
hold of God, performing the Office of the hand, it being all in all to the
soul. Thus, Isa. 56.2. God promising to bring near his righteousness and
salvation, and to place it in Sion for Israel his glory; he adds, Blessed is
the Son of Man that takes hold of it; that is, any mortal man, be he Jew or
stranger; which was first in fulfilling his Promise to restore the Captivity of
Babylon, but principally the righteousness declared in Christ and his
Salvation: And verse. 4. it is called taking hold of the Covenant; that is,
believing. Faith then is the hand whereby God is to be laid hold upon; God in
himself, as he cannot be seen, so nor be laid hold of by the hand of any
mortal man, but has subjected himself to the capacity and apprehension of
faith, by setting forth his Son and Promises between us and him; whereby, as
by two Handles, we lay hold on that God, whom the world in the dark feels
after, and cannot find, Acts 17.27.

First, his Son; and therefore faith is expressed to us by apprehending
Christ, Philip. 3.12. and thus the Church, being in Temptation of Unbeleefe,
after she had found Christ for atonement, she laid hold on him, Cant. 3.4.
and would not let him go. And so laying hold on Christ, we have (...),
manuduction, are led by the hand to God, Ephesians. 3.12.

And secondly, the Promises; therefore, Heb. 11.13. the Patriarchs are said by
faith to have received the Promises, and to have embraced them: So as first we
take hold of the Promises, and of Christ in them, and then by this means we
come to God, having both hope and faith in him, 1 Pet. 1.21. The life of faith
then lies in apprehension, and application of the Covenant, and of God therein.
The Covenant says, I will be a God to them, and they shall be a people to
me. First, indeed God speaks to the souls of men, Thou art my people; and
then they lay hold on him, saying, And the Lord is my God. As in our first
separation from the world, by Divine Calling, we stand up, and take hold of
him for the obtaining of reconciliation, and all other blessings flowing from
hence in Jesus Christ, so we go on after in our life, seeking by increase of
faith to enjoy him more and more, and apprehend him for the blessing of the
Covenant, whereunto our effectual Calling gave us Title: That as all blessings
that we enjoy with his favor proceed from him, as declaring himself to be
our God; as blessings Exodus 6.7
earthly, Heb. 8.10.
spiritual and Heb. 11.16
heavenly; so in our necessities, we renew our faith of that Covenant, I will
be thy God; and plead our interest in him for obtaining all blessings, holding
him fast; as, Psalm. 119.4. I am thine, save me: and the Peophet here, verse. 8,
9. Thus David, Psalm. 43.2. Thou art the God of my strength, why do thou cast
me off? and, verse. 5. My soul hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is
the health of my countenance, and my God: And thus are we especially to take
hold of God in evil times (to which this Text especially referres this duty)
when Gods hand is stretched out against our selves, and the Church. So, Isa.
27.4, 5. when God goes through his Church, burning up the briars and thorns, to
prevent which, he bids a man take hold of his strength; that is, by faith hold
his hands. As when a man is lifting up his hand to strike, another steps in,
and lays hold on it, and stays him, as Moses did when Gods wrath was gone out
against the Israelites: Let me alone, Deuteronomy. 9.14
says God; which if a man does, God promises in the following words, that he
shall make peace with him, for fury is not in me. When the Lord seems to be
furious, yet faith laying hold, has power with him to stay his hand; though it
be his strength, and the hand of faith weak in it self, yet it shall have
power with him, Hos. 12.3. And then when he begins to withdraw himselfy, as
it were, we are to excite our faith, draw near, and take hold of him. Oh be
not far from me, for trouble is near, says David, Psalm. 22.11. As a child
if he be to go in the dark, or in a crowd, he will be sure to take fast
hold of his father, and not leave him. And because we are naturally dull unto
this, therefore we must stir up our selves to it. Other things, as Riches,
etc. are, ad manum, nigh us here below; and therefore like dying men, that
catch hold on any thing that is next them, so do we on these to help us, and
do trust in them. But God, and Christ, they are high, and far above our sight
and natural reach, and therefore we are loath to stretch to them, to lay hold
on them, and must stir up our selves to it.

Thus having explicated the phrase, and showed the duty, I shall briefly show
how we are to stir up our faith to make use of the Promises to our selves,
and lay hold on them, and God by them, which is done diverse ways.

First, by knowing that we are the children of the Promise, Romans 9.8. so
called because the Promises pertain to us, verse. 4. So as knowing our selves
children, we may call the Promises ours; They are the childrens bread; and we
may lay hold on them as our own mercies, Ion: 2.8. All the Children of God
being in this case, as Isaac was, the Seed of the Promise; all of us borne of a
word of faith: and as we are borne of a Promise, Romans 10.17
so to all the Promises are we borne; yea, being in this right accounted one
with Christ. Therefore Gal 3 16. to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises
made; to Seed as of one, which is Christ; that is, Christ mystical, the whole
Church.

^ Cor. 1.20
in whom all the Promises are wrapped up and fulfilled; and Romans 8.32
for whose sake God will deny us nothing: We having married the heir, have a
joint Title to his Inheritance, and the Deeds of it.

Way, and the threatenings as his Bridle, he may safely take all the Promises
for his Inheritance and comfort. Psa. 119.111 112.


Isa. 43.25
but for his Name sake: Genesis 32.10
acknowledging our own unworthiness of the least of all the promises and
mercies of God, which make our empty vessels more fit to receive them.

2 Cor. 3.18
to transform us into the likeness of Christ by it.

Section 13. Of stirring up our selves in duties of Love and Mercy.
THus of some Duties which have a more immediate Relation unto God, about which
we ought to stir up our selves, now to go forward, and to instance in some
duties which have reference to our selves or others.

In all works of Love and Mercy toward others, it is our duty to stir up
our selves, that we 2 These. 1.3
abound in them; and we should have 2 Cor. 8.16
an earnest care about them; whether it be in regard of the bodies, or souls
of others, or any other way. Our love should be 1 Thessalonians. 1.3
laborious full of the Romans 12.10
bowels of tenderness, and compassion; to be kindly affectioned, to be 1 Timothy
6.18
ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Where we see grace in any
eminency to have our hearts knit to such, 1 Sa^. 18.1, 2
as Ionathans was to David. Heb. 10.24
To consider one another, and to provoke to love, and good works. Some we may
find in soul troubles, with Nehe. 2.2 Genesis 40.6, 7
countenances sad and dejected, faces pale and wan, heavy-eyed, and sighing as
they go, now to stir up our selves to come to their Job 4.4
help and succor, by all the ways we can: if it be thy friend, or any thou
can any way reach, never give thy self rest, but let it pity thy very
heart, cry to God for their ease and deliverance, and if God have given thee
the skill of a Spiritual Physician, with a tender hand bind up the bruised
Spirit. Some also are Romans 14.1
weak in faith, these we should support: Some are feeble-minded, apt to be
discouraged, these. 1 The. 5.14
to stre^gthen. Some are overtaken with frilings and temptations, these to Gal
6.1 (...)
set aright, as a bone that was out of his place, as the word there signifies:
some grow disorderly, and scandalous, these to 1 The. 5 14
reprove: some grow cold, lukewarm, and are like to Heb. 12.15
fall away, these to quicken and rowse up from their drowsinesse.

Section 14. Of stirring up our selves in regard of our Christian race.
IN regard of our Christian race we are set to run, it is our duty to stir up
our selves, 1 Pet. 1.13
to gird up the loins of our mind, to run like the two Disciples to our
Saviors Sepulcher, who ran with all their might, who should come thither
first: We should not stay for company in this weighty business, Quoties
cogitas de perfestione virtutum noli considerare quid alii minu^ habeant quam
tu habe^, sed quid ^s minus habis, quam habere iam de^bes. Filg.
neither are we to content our selves with the pace of carnal professors,
temporary believers, or lazy Christians; nor with that pace which we our
selves do, or have gone; nor should we look back to see who comes after, but
think thou art upon life and death; therefore Heb. 12.1
to cast away every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us; nothing
in the world should cause us to step aside, but to run Pro 4.25
forth right: We should now Phil. 3.13
forget all things that are behind reaching out to the things which are
before. To this end we should set before us, that Heb. 12.1
cloud of witnesses, those blessed servants of God, who have gone before us,
who have finished their course, and kept the faith to their latest breath;
especially Heb. 12 2
looking to Jesus, the Author and finisher of our faith; who, for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down
at the right hand of the Throne of God. Our Savior Christ is not as a dead
mark, Note.
who helps not the runners at al, but looking to him by faith, he guides us
in our way with his eye, Psalm. 32.8
enlarges our steps, and gives us strength that we faint not, but still
helps us to Phil. 3.14
press toward the mark, till we obtain the price of our high calling of God
through him. And this we ought to do with the more care and earnestness,
there being so many that look upon us, whom we may encourage by our example,
either in doing or suffering. We little think how many do eye us in our
Christian walk, and what good we may do by Phil. 2.15
holding forth the light of a good example, how it may 2 Cor. 9.2 1 The. 1.6, 7
provoke others to mend their pace, and to run with the more cheerfulness,
having some to lead the way before them.

Section 15. How we are to stir up our selves when our last end approaches.
When our last end approaches, and we lie upon our last bed, (if God be so
merciful to us as to afford any strength, ease, or respit from pain, freedom
from Temptation, or to continue the use of our reason and memory) it is our
duty to stir up our selves, that we quit our selves well in the last act of
our life: and this is done,

our Phil. 1.12
desire of being dissolved, and to be with Christ. Now to stir up our hope,
and earnest expectation of the accomplishment of all those blessed promises of
the life to come, (...), The same word used, Romans 8.19
according as the Apostle speaks of himself, Phi. 1.20. the word used by him
there, signifies to reach out ones neck in looking after somewhat we greatly
desire, and earnestly expect to come unto us. Ask is said of Judge. 5.28
Sisera his Mother, she looked out at a window, and expecting the return of
her son, she cried, Why are his Chariots so long a coming? So now the soul
should be looking out, and reaching forth it self, expecting that good hour
when God will send for it. O when the immortal soul which has long
so-journed in this sinful flesh, shall begin to Intrepide purgamus ad
Redemptorem nostrum Iesum, intrepide ad Patriar -- charum concilium, trepide ad
patrem nostrum A -- braham enm dies adveneris pr^fie; s^amur Ambr, lib, de bono
mortis,
draw near to the confines of eternity, there being, it may be, but a few
hours, and, as it were, but a step between it and everlasting blessedness,
and those beatificall visions, which infinitely transcend all that ever mortal
eye saw, as far as the glory of the greatest Princes Court does the meanest
Cottage, how should we begin to lift up our heads with joy, the Luke 21.28
day of our final redemption from sin and misery, being so near? Here
indeed sometimes, and it is but sometimes, we have a glimpse of heaven showed
us, and a ray and beam of celestial joy has been let down into our hearts,
which has infinitely passed all the pleasures of nature, but it stays not
long; but now thou art going to take full possession of that glorious
inheritance which has more comforts in it than the heaven has Stars; or
there be Sands on the Seashore, how should thy heart When Doctor Tailor that
worthy Martyr was going to suffer, he saw afar off many people standing
together, he asked what it meant; it being told him it was the place where he
must suffer, he said, thanked be God, I am even at home Fox, Act. and Mon. vol.
2. p. 178.
leap within thee, and spring forth to meet those approaching blessings?

2. By S^^ comparatum est cunctis fere mortalibus ut morituri sub ultimum vita
exitum hortationem apud suos relinquere serveant. in vit. Cranmeri, p. 15
applying our selves in all the ways of advice, counsel, and comfort, in
regard of such as are about us; it may be a sorrowful wife, who stands besides
thee with a heart ready to burst, to think of her leaving of thee; it may be
children, or servants stand before thee weeping, or near friends or kindred
are with thee, who are loath to leave thee; now to stir up thy self to leave
somewhat with them, which they may remember when thou art in the dust: That the
child may say, I have lost a careful father, these were my fathers words, and
last charge unto me, those that stand by may say, Thus did he exhort us, thus
did he comfort us, Mr. Calvin did the like being near his end, vid, Bez, in
vit. Calv.
these were his last words, thus went he to his rest. We shall find it
recorded of the Patriarch Jacob, that drawing near his end, when his children
came to see him, he stirred up himself, Genesis 48.2.9.20
and strengthened himself on his bed, and he blessed them. A worthy pattern
for all parents to follow, he lay not like a logge in his bed, as many do, but
now, though of great age, and weak, yet he raised up that little strength
which was left, and spent it in Genesis 49.23
leaving a blessing on his children; his last words were blessings. Ioh. chap.
13, 14, 15, 16 17, per tot.
Our Savior, when he was to leave this world, showed his great care and love
to his Disciples, in preparing them for his departure, and leaving with them
many precious counsels, comforts, and exhortations, by which they might be
helped and strengthened for the time to come. Thus did the Apostle Peter
imitate his Master, 2 Pet. 1.12 to 15
Who knowing shortly he was to put off his Tabernacle, he did stir them up;
that after his departure they might have those things always in remembrance
which he had taught them. The Apostle Paul being how aged, and Acts 30.18 to 35
knowing the time of his departure was at hand, he called for the Elders of
the Church of Ephesus, and leaves with them many excellent and weighty
exhortations, they being now to see his face no more.

CHAP. VII. Showing the grounds of this duty of stirring up our selves.
THus you have the explanation of those two things proposed; to wit; what it is
to stir up ones self; and secondly, about what it is mainly to be
exercised. Now follow some grounds and reasons of the Point.

up our selves in what we do, that it be done with all our might, (...), as the
word is.
with an harmonicall consent of all parts of man, understanding, will, and all
the faculties existing in the person of man, with the whole strength; so it is
most pleasing unto God, as most agreeable to his nature, who is a Spirit
infinitely active and stirring, and impatient of all dullness and
sluggishnesse. The Psalm. 68.17
Angels are his Chariots, Psalm. 18.10
he rides upon a Cherube, and does fly; he comes also on the wings of the
wind: Isa. 19.1
he rides on a swift cloud, which the rack wind drives, all which shadow out
unto us the wonderful activity of his nature: Who John 4.24
seeks therefore such to worship him. Hence is David commended for his
readiness to fulfill all the Acts 13.22 (...).
2. Sam. 6.14
wills of God, for so it is in the Original. Thus he danced before the Lord
with all his might; that is, with the might of his spirit.

2 Cor. 5.14
even of his love that passes knowledge,) and Tit. 2.14
purchased us to be a peculiar people to himself, did it to this end, that we
should be zealous of good works. Zeal is an affection proper to Men, who
having will, to which belongs the choice of good, as the object of it, have
two attendants thereon, the Concupiscible, and the Irascible part; the former
moving toward the object, the latter encountering whatever difficulties hinder
the attaining and enjoying of it; Cant. 8.6, 7
The coals thereof are coals of fire, which have a vehement flame, which many
waters cannot quench, nor floods drown. Hence, such as are Christ's, are Luke
3.16
baptized with fire; that is, with the holy Ghost, who is like fire; not only
in purging away their dross and corruptions, but mightily heating them, and
stirring up strong and ardent affections in them for God and his glory.

years come on us and we feel it not, and as the dust falls upon our clothes,
and we perceive it not; so that, if one let himself alone but a short time,
the mind will sink, and get downward: we must therefore ever and anon be
winding it up, as we do our Clocks and Watches, and still be tending unto it
by renewing our purposes, and Psa. 132.4, 5 Psalm. 137.5, 6
tasking our selves to all duties, that the heart may be kept in its due
height, and this must be done often, the heart being not in that frame in the
evening as it was in the morning: As an Instrument of Music, though put never
so well in tune over night, though it rest untoucht by an external hand, yet
the strings will fall and grow out of tune of themselves; and thou shall find
a few weeks will breed a great alteration in thee, which many months may not
recover again: such wretched natures do we carry about us, which are such
great enemies to the work of grace, that if we look not very narrowly unto
it, a great dampe and chillishnesse will fall upon our hearts, our prayers will
grow weaker and weaker, shorter and shorter, good purposes and resolutions will
quickly dye, go out, and be lost in us. Happy is he that can say in a
spiritual sense (as it was said of Moses) that after long profession of
Religion, Deuteronomy 34 7
his sight is not waxed dim, nor his Spiritual force and heat abated.

CHAP. VIII. Where the Doctrine is applied in the several uses of it.
Non est ad magna facilis asc^nsu^; quem sudorem perpetimur cum co^amur
asco^dere c lles, and vertices montium? quid ut as^endan us ad coelum? Cyp. de
dis. and hab. Virg.
highest pitch of our affections, our most elevated thoughts, and the utmost of
our endeavors.

Again, it shows how much they do deceive themselves, that content themselves
with doing duties of Religion out of form, and custom, without theinward
Principles of Faith, Quodlibet agens propter amorem agit, quodcunque agit, Aq.
1.2 q. 28. art. 6
Love, and Obedience, to set them a going, and to move and stir them forward.
Amongst these we may rank,

1. The Papists, whose Religion cannot be but joylesse and uncomfortable,
resting in the work done; who if they can give in such a number and tale of
Prayers, undergo such penance, and screw up their outward Devotions to such a
height, think all is well, though the heart all this while has not stirred a
foot about the business, nor so much as looked toward the body what it was a
doing.

2. Amongst our selves we may take in our simple ignorant people, who are full
Papists in this; who therefore think they have prayed, because they have bin
upon their knees; heard the Sermon well, because they have been at Church,
etc. and so plod on from day to day, without any sense of the evil, or comfort
of the good.

3. Thus is the Civil man, and carnal Professor deceived; who though he has
more knowledge than the other, and by the benefit of education, good example,
or the light of natural conscience, has more dealings with God, yet has he
his heart as cold, stark, and unstirring as the other; and though he applaud
himself in the Mediocrity of his temper, as having found out a Nihil Salvator
^id^lium ama^^ ^epido^ e^^n^. Hieron.
middle way to serve his turn, between strictness and profaneness; yet is
it of al others the most dangerous and most loathed by the Lord, who, being of
the Rev. 3.16
Laodecean temper, shall certainly be spued out of Gods mouth.

4. Thus is it with the subtle and close hypocrites of these times, who, like
the cold Glow-wormes of the night, seem to carry more light about them, and
make a greater bustling than the other; yet because it is without all heat and
sweat of the mind and heart, what they do shall be reckoned but as Heb. 9.14
dead works, which have a loathsome savor in the Nostrils of the Almighty.
Thus the Rev. 31
Angel, or Minister of the Church of Sardis is said to have a name to live,
though he was dead.

Psalm. 73.26
satisfied with him alone? How are we for Christ? since the saithfull called
and chosen are with Christ, Revel. 12.7 and 17.14
fighting on his side against the Dragon and his Angels, against Antichrist and
all his Adherents; and since Mat. 12.30
he that is not with Christ, is against him; and he that gathers not with
him, scatters with the Devil Our new Creation giving a new disposition,
whereby we rise up on the Lords side, against whom, before, Romans 8 7
our wisdom was enmity. Do thou seriously weigh what answer thou can give,
as in Gods presence, without deceiving thy self, or others, unto that pressing
question of our Savior, Mat. 5 47 (...), What singular thing do you?
What do ye more than others? What do you more than the carnal and profane?
than the civil, or the hypocritical professor? What do you more for God than
these?

Who may not take up this heavy complaint, There is none that stirs up
himself? and may say, and I am one of them: and so may I say, that speak
this; and thou that hear this. Ah we fools, and slow of heart, we have not
put forth our selves in any proportion answerable to the grace given, or
mercies received. Ah! (dear Christian) he that shall look back, and take a
serious view of the time of his life since his calling, and shall consider what
special opportunities of doing, and receiving good h e has fore-slowed, how
cold and careless he has bin to oppose, or prevent sin in himself or
others; what a dead heart he has had for the most part, in all the duties of
Gods worship, both in his prayers to him, his praises of him, and his standing
for him; how the bowels of his compassions have bin locked up from his brethren,
whose good he should more have tendered: his slacknesse and slownes in his
christian race, going most an end a snailes pace, as though heaven were
notworth the coming thither: if any shall (I say) consider his many failings,
and gross omissions in althe aggravating circumstances of them, if the tears
stand not in his eyes, he has just cause to complain of he hardness of his
heart. Ah if our hearts were searched with lights and tapers, what a deal of
luggage and lumber would there be found? what heaps of dross, of cold and
sluggish matter would appear to lie deading and damping those few sparks of
heat, and little light yet remaining in us? Good Lord! how full are we of our
selves, and of the world? what strange lusts and passions lie yet unmortified
in us? which keep down our minds that we cannot lift them up to divine and
spiritual things: May it not be said in a spiritual sense of most of our
hearts and houses, as the Isa. 47.14
Prophet speaks, there is not a cole to warm it.

and ashame us? how should we bewail this wretched luskishnesse and
sluggishnes of our spirits, this indisposition, this unactivenesse and
unzealousnesse, if it were possible, with tears of blood? The godly are wont
to esteem of life, not according to that they find in their body, but their
soul; when that wants a heavenly disposition to spiritual things, they lament
over it as a dead soul, since herein stands the life of it, to be stirring and
active in our duties of love and obedience. Isa. 38.15^.16.
O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my
spirit, says that good King Hezekiah. Let us view our selves in the several
relations we stand toward others, whether Magistrate, Minister, Parent,
Master of a Family, Friend or Neighbor, etc. and then let us but stand a while
and think what good might have been done, which now has been fore-slowed in
our own hearts, in our families, and abroad: if in our first setting out in
our Christian race we had thus bestirred our selves; now that time is past and
gone, and spilt like water on the ground, which can no more be gathered up
again! What prayers and Sermons have been lost, etc. what sin and evil
might have been avoided, what sin might have been restrained by us, the
guilt of which now sticks upon us. But more especially should it abase us, and
throw us down in our selves, and make us blush within our selves, that we
have bin so vilely wanting to the Lord and his grace, that we have not stirred
up our selves according to the grace given, and abilities bestowed upon us; in
that we have not done that which we might have done, and was in our power to
do, both in regard of resisting sins and temptations, and performing duties of
piety and mercy. Whether a man may do more then he does with that ability which
he has?






Mat. 12.33
the tree must be good before the fruit can be good: As John 15.4.
the branch bears not fruit but in the Vine, John 15.4.



grace, new qualities into every faculty: so after regeneration he cannot do
Romans 7.15. Gal. 5.17.
all the good he would, nor when he would, nor as he would.

It is Gods free grace, his voluntary influence which habituateth and fitteth
al our faculties, which animate thus unto a heavenly being, which gives us
both the strength and first act, whereby we are qualified to work, and which
con. curreth with us in astu secundo, to all those works which we set ourselves
about. As an instrument, even when it has an edge cutteth nothing till it be
assisted and moved by the hand of the artificer: so a Christian, when he has a
will and an habitual fitness to work, yet is able to do nothing without a
constant supply and assistance and eoncomitancy of the grace of Christ,
exciting, moving, and applying that habitual power unto particular Actions. E.
R.
but of supply of new grace, to put forth every spiritual act of grace; partly
for the working out of his own salvation, and partly for the more spiritual
and lively performance and accomplishment of the work it self. He stands
in need of,

1. Preparing grace, that whereby God prepared the heart of Titus to receive
Paul's exhortation, 2 Cor. 8.17. By this grace the hearts of Gods people are
prepared to pray, Psalm. 10.17.

2. Exciting, or awakening, or quickening grace: Isa. 30.4. in the latter end of
the verse, He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth my ear to hear as
the learned. So, Psalm. 143.11.

3. Assisting and strengthening grace, 1 Pet. 5.10.

4. Enlarging grace, Psalm. 119.32.

5. Directing grace, 2 These. 3.5.

6. Protecting, or preserving grace, keeping off prevailing interruptions, Esaias
27.3.

7. Perfecting grace, 1 Pet. 5.10.



1. He may walk in a conscionable care not to live in any known sin, or
after the flesh; for to live after the flesh, deadeth and dulleth the Spirit,
Romans 8.13.

2. He may abstain from the constant, abundant use of sensual comforts; for
such (though lawful) will secretly choke the heart of a Christian, as they
did Salomons.

3. He may diligently use the holy Ordinances of God, especially the hearing
of the Word where it is Preached with power; in the use whereof, a regenerate
Christian, by grace received, exceeds a natural man, in that a natural man
can only hear, but not upon a right ground, nor for a right end; but a
regenerate Christian, by grace received, may hear in obedience to Gods
ordinances, and for his edification, seeking and waiting upon God for a
blessing, Cant. 3.1.

4. He may discern the dullness and deadness of his own heart to all
spiritual duties, and may Isa. 63.17
complain thereof unto God in prayer, Isa. 63.17.

not to prepare his own heart, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. not to stir up himself to take
hold of God, as in the Text: and so thereby to Ephe. 4.30
grieve the holy spirit of God, 2 Cor. 6.1
and to receive the grace of God in vain, and therefore may justly be reproved
hereof, and complained of, as in the Text. Besides this, the constant
experience of all the children of God will bear them witness, that there be no
sins that lie more heavy upon them, or under which they do more deeply
groan and mourn, than their walking unworthy of those precious mercies and
graces they have received, Verum, heu mihi, studium ellud meum et zelus (si hoc
nomine dignus est) adeo remissus and languidus fuit ut innu mera mihi ad munus
meum preclare fungendum defuisse fatear In Test. Calvini in vita ipsis, p. 102
Quest.
neither growing up in them to that strength, nor employing them to that
fruitfulness they might have attained unto.

But why is it a sin not to stir up our selves to holy duties, since exciting
grace is Gods work alone, and he must renew it every morning, else the work
will not be done, Isa. 50.4.

Answ. Because it is by reason of our sin that God does not stir us up: as,

1. Our narrowness of heart and mouth in prayer, Psalm. 81.10. Ask liberally
and have liberally: prayers are 2 King. 13.17, 18, 19.
like arrows of Deliverance, which would be multiplied and enlarged.

2. Our heedlesnesse in the use of the Ordinances, Luke 8.18.

3. Unfruitfulnesse in the use of grace received, Mat. 25.29.

4. Unbeleefe, Mat. 14.31. else renewing our waiting on the Lord for his help
and grace, would renew our strength, Isa. 40.31.

Thus you see how still the fault Recte homo corripitur que precepta non implet
quia exetus negligentia est quod gratiam non habet per quam possit servare
mandata. Th. Aq. quest. disp. 24. art. 14
returns upon our selves, how we cannot stand before this truth, but must lie
down as condemned of our selves, and guilty of this evil, that we have not
stirred up our selves to do that which was in our power to have done, that
good (I say) which we ought and might have done.

but saplesse, livelesse, and loathsome things without this?

And first I would bend my speech to such as formerly have bin more forward and
stirring-hearted, but now are grown more remiss and spirit-lesse: I would
speak to such, in the Name of God, as the Lord speaks by the Prophet to his
people, Ier. 2.5
What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone from me?
What evil have you found in Gods ways, that you are grown weary of them?
Speak, in the presence of God, what evil have you found in prayer, that you
grow so slack in it? You were wont you could have gone to the Lord with much
enlargement, and, it may be, with many tears; Psa. 45.1
your tongue was as the pen of a ready Writer; why are you now so
narrow-hearted? Why do you so fore-slow the duty? Siccine putamus orasse
Ionam? Sic Danielem inter Leones? Sic latr nem in cruces? Hier. speaking
thereof cold prayers.
and make so many excuses? and are so loath to come into Gods presence? neither
is there that struggling against this woeful disposition as formerly. What evil
have you found in Gods word? the time was when you went with much joy to Gods
house, and you loved the Bible above al books, and now it can lie a day, and
sometimes a week, and you never look into it? Job 15.11
Are ^he consolations of God small with you? are the counsels and exhortations
of the Scriptures grown weak? Are the Promises of God more dry and withered?
Is not God still a hearer of prayers? or is his arm shortened that it cannot
save? God forbid! But does not the fault lie in yourselfe, unto whom the world,
and other sinful distempers have marred the relish and taste of these Divine
counsels and comforts? What evil have you found in the society of Gods
people? of whose grace and goodness you cannot be but well persuaded; why are
you so strange unto them? the time has bin when you have preferred them before
all others, and chose them for the only companions of your life, you could
have opened your mouth to the edification of others, but now you are like a
cursed Cow that will not give down her milk; you can now like well enough of
carnal speech, and worldly company, and can sort your self with such of
whose happiness you have no persuasion. Speak, is not this your case? are you
not blameworthy? why then be grieved, and sigh within your self: and Rev.
2.4, 5
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first works. Let
our Saviors counsel come seasonably to thee, Rev. 3.2
Be watchful to strengthen the things which remain which are ready to dye
rest not in this unprofitable and uncomfortable condition, till thou find thy
spirit to revive, and thy care of better things to flourish, and spring again
in thee: Heb. 12.12 13.
Lift up thy hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, lest that which be
lame be turned out of the way. Labor to recover thy former strength and
station; and therefore to cherish and blow up that fire which yet remains hid
under the ashes 2 John 8
that thou lose not that which thou hest wrought, but may receive a full
reward.

But lest any be discouraged, Cauti^n.
we are to know, that this dullness and unstirringnesse of heart, may proceed
sometime from

1. Weakness, faintness, and feeblenes of body, whether it beinregard of
present sickness, indisposition to health, age, or other bodily infirmities,
in which case a good Christian may be feeble in performance of duties the mind
most an end following the present temper of the body.

2. It may proceed from melancholy distempers with which the mind may be
over-growne.

3. Or the party may lie under some violent temptation of Satan, or distress
of conscience, which may strangely, for the time, make one dull, mopish, and
forgetful.

4. Or it may proceed from spiritual desertion, when the sense of Gods favor,
love and wonted presence may be departed from him for a time.

5. Or the outward means of the Word may be taken from them, either wholly, or
it may be much ecclipsed, which formerly they enjoyed in more plenty and power.

These, and many such like, may bring a dullness upon the heart in Duties; but
if thy wearisomnesse in duties, and thy decayings in good arise from none of
these, but that it has rooting and foundation in thy own corrupt nature, and
is cherished and fomented by the lusts of other things, thoumust take it home
to thy self, and know thy case is so much the worse, and that thou art laden
with the more guilt, by how much thou art left without excuse, God having done
so well for thee, and thou having so Deuteronomy. 32.6
ill requited him.

Lastly, this exhortation is to be set home upon every one that fears the name
of God, be they poor or rich, noble or mean, learned or unlearned, young or
old, all need it, and therefore all may harken to it; for all to kindle and
quicken up our selves, to sharpen and set an edge upon our selves, to rouse up
our selves, to press forward and go an end with all our might, in all our
duties. O what is worthy our care, pains and travel if this be not, to have
our spirits quickened and enlivened with stronger incitations to what is
required of us, to tugge and toil, to labor and Non ad ruborem tantum sed ad
sudore^,
sweat in this work, breaking through all difficulties, and bearing up against
all oppositions. As the Cock claps his wings to stir up himself to crow,
and as a firebrand borne in the wind is the Sea David's answer when Michall his
wife mocked him, 2 S^m. ^ 20 21, 22, 23
more enkindled; and as Sampson stirred up his strength, when it was told him
the Philistims were upon him. As there was more in Sampson than in another man,
so is there in every true Christian, who being in covenant with God, and having
his vows upon him, he goes forth in the strength of these and so long as he
Judge. 6 14
goes forth in this might, and cleaves to him that is the strength of Israel,
so long no sin shall master him, nor duty be too hard for him; otherwise he
shall be weak, and as another man. Hence it is that Solomon says, Pro. 15 24
The way of life is above to the wise. The godly man goes an higher way than
his neighbor, even in the common businesses of this life, even of his ordinary
calling, because they are done in Gal. 2.20 Romans 14.23
faith and Deuteronomy. 5.29
obedience: much more when he draws near to God in more immediate duties of
his worship, as when we are to praise him, or stand for him This is that which
p^ s the difference, even the hea t stirred and moved with these principles,
which being wanting in every natural man, the heart must needs sink, and
flagge in his performances. O then that there were such an heart in us as to
go this higher way, to get above the ordinary sort, even like the Aegles of
heaven, who delight themselves in their high flying, and when they are farthest
from the earth: so to get above earthly men, and earthly things, to be as the
flame, which, the higher it rises, the purer it is; so still to be aspiring
in our thoughts, desires and indevours, and to get them up to such a pitch,
Prove. 4.18
by which they might be freed from their dregs and dross.

And seeing the strength of our minds is the most precious thing we have, we
should reserve this for the most excellent duties and businesses, and bestow it
upon them. Thus shall we make Fides auget aetatem. Amb
a short life a long one, and thus shall thou live more in a day, than another
does in seven years, or in all his time: for it is not to be reckoned a life
which is measured with days and years; but that which is In brevi vitae
spatio tempo^a virtutum multa complevit. Hieron. Ep. ad Fu.
filled with good Actions, with fervent prayers, with walking in an awful
fear of God, with denying thy self, and mortifying, thy lusts, with bearing
afflictions patiently, with giving good example unto others, to help the
distressed and afflicted, to stand on Gods side, opposing the sins and evils
of the times, etc this is truly to live; these are the most noble actions of
life, and these are the most excellent issues and productions of the mind and
soul

CHAP. IX. Showing some motives unto this duty of stirring up our selves.
NOw that we might be farther moved and stirred up hereunto (for God knows
that great is our dullness; and sloware our apprehensions of these things) let
us consider in the general how we are commanded Cor. 11.3, ^. Cor 14.12
earnestly to covet the best gifts and * to study that we may excel; and that
it is honorable to be 2 Cor. 9.2
leaders in goodness, to be presidents of piety, provoking others; and that if
this stirringnesse of heart be wanting, all goes but heavily forward. As the
Exo. 14.25
Egyptians, who, when their wheels were taken off, drove their Chariots but
heavily. But more specially there be three things which I would offer to your
consideration to move to the duty in hand.

Consider what a stirring world it is.
how mightily men are put forward, and set a going in their several ways,
according to the several projects they drive, and those inward principles by
which they work, and by which they walk. The world is as a great Ant, or
Emit-hill, where there are multitudes of those busy creatures, carrying and
recarrying strawes, stubble, or other such luggage, and every one busy in
doing something, and intent to add, and bring to the heap: So in this world
there is a mighty and general business, an earnest trudging about, a continued
sollicitousnesse, plotting, and working upon the face of the earth. See it in a
few instances:

1. The Time-server is busy to fit his sails to every wind, marks what is in
grace and fashion with the Times, observes the Motions of great ones, and
studies how he may please the most.

2. The deep and clung-headed Politician, who dwells many times the next door
to Atheism, is busy in wheeling about his own ends, is dark in his ways,
and usually, like a Boat-man, looks one way, and rows another.

3. The Ambitious man puts on Absolons behavior, is busy in seeking applause
and respect and how he may be carried aloft, as a feather, upon the breath of
men.

4. The Voluptuous man is busy to draw out the quintessence of all sins and
vanities; to suck the sweet out of them, to array himself like a child of
Paradise, and to have his part in all the pleasures of nature.

5. The worldling is busy in telling his money, casting up his accounts,
looking in his Almanacke, enquiring for a purchase, enlarging his barnes, Luke
12.18.
always plotting how he may get or save. The Papists are busy to advance the
Catholic cause, as they call it, to make Proselytes; busy they are in their
Devotions, as the Ier. 7.18
Prophet speaks, The Children gather wood and the Fathers kindle the fire and
the women knead their dough to make cakes to the Queen of heaven. The Devil
is busy, Job 1.7
going to and fro in the earth, doing mischief, murdering souls, and filling
Hell. All these, and many others, are driven with great force upon their
several ways, and are unwearied in them. Thus it is with the men of this
world, Psalm. 17.14
who have their prrtion in this life. And how should this fire us, and put life
and spirit into us, who serve a better master, and have better work to do?
Turp^ est impios diabol^ tam strenue servire nos Christo pro sanguinis pretio
nihil rependere. Cyp. lib. de opere et elemosy.
Why should not we do more for God and his honor, than any in the world should
do for themselves, or to promote Satan's kingdom. Let us resolve therefore
with the Prophet Mich. 4.5
Micah, All people (says he) will walk every one in the Name of his Grd,
Zach. 10.12
and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.

Look upon our Savior, how he stirred up himself in the great business of
our Salvation.
in the great business of our Salvation, stirred up himself, and put forth
himself to his Heb. 7.25. (...).
uttermost for us; he stirred up all his strength, left nothing undone, bare as
much as he could bear, Phil 2.7. Scipsum exmanivis.
went as low as he could go, down to the grave, even to hell it self in
pains and anguish of Spirit, did what possibly he could do, which should fill
us with strong desires, and endeavors, to enforce our selves to our uttermost,
for so Quid nos pro Domino tam b^no facere conveniet cum ille pro malis Servis
tan^a seceret? Salv.
kind a Redeemer as we have found him to be, to love his person, to prize his
merits, to obey his will, to delight in his Ordinances, to love his children,
to do what we may to advance his honor and service, to Genesis 3.15
tread hard upon the Devils head, and to be professed enemies to his kingdom
all our days.

The certainty and fullness of the reward.
as it is accompanied with much sweet peace, and inward comfort, and rest of
heart; and as it brings a good report, and esteem in the Churches of Christ;
causing one Christian (of what degree, calling, and condition soever he be) to
excel another, and appear higher, even as Saul did amongst the people: so it
is attended with certainty and fullness of reward, and that according to the
quality of our work; as there has bin more grace in it, more reverence,
zeal, fervency, more faith and resting upon God; so shall the 2 Timothy 4.7, 8
reward be more plenteous and abundant. The more faithful service we have
done, the more welcome shall we be to him when he calls for us; As a
faithful Ambassador is welcomed home by his Prince; and as a Factor, that
has done his master good service in a far Country, is gladly received by
him. O when the faithful soul, being carried on Angels wings, shall first set
footing on the glorious pavement of heaven, and the Lord shall say, Welcome my
dear and faithful servant, thou have been a good servant unto me, Mat. 25.23
Enter into the joy of thy Lord; this speech shall be of more infinite
refreshing, then if ten thousand worlds, and the glory of them, had been given
unto it; for what could be spoken more by the Creator? what could be desired
more by the Creature? This their faithfulness also, with how much the more
stirringnesse and advantage to the Lords honor it has been managed and
discharged, by so much the Rev. 3.21
nearer in place it brings us to the Lord; As David's Worthies were admitted to
have the nearest place about his person. How many thousands are there of Saints
at this day, Rev. 7.9.14 15.
standing before the Throne of God, with Palms in their hands, and Crowns on
their heads, who in this world have been the Lords Worthies, who have fought
his battles, and lifted up his Name to their uttermost. Speak, O ye blessed
souls departed, whether this be not your glory and your joy that you have had
your hearts stirred for the Lord; and if you were upon the earth again, whether
you would not do, if it were possible, a thousand times more for him, that for
such weak services, such poor and imperfect performances, has rewarded you
with the favors and joys of eternity. Rev. 15* 3
O who would not fear and serve thee, O Lord, thou King of Saints, and
glorify thy name? who make all thy servants Rev. 1.6
Kings, and affordest them everlasting Communion with thy self! It matters not
(dear brethren) what we are in this world, how shunned, despised, and 1 Cor.
5.13
made the offscouring of all things; nay, though every one that meets us
should spit in our faces, revile, and trample upon us, if by this means any
honor might redound to the Name of the Lord; it is enough for us to be happy
when we dye, and to be set safe over that Luke 16.26
gulf that parts Hell and Heaven, and to Job 33, 26
see the face of God with joy to all eternity. O Eternity! Eternity! blessed
Eternity! this makes abundant amends for all, though we should live here
thousands of years, and in them all do and suffer Frederick Danvile, and
Francis Rebezies after they had returned from the Torture to their fellows in
prison, rejoiced together, and comforted themselves with the meditation of the
life to come, and contempt of this world, singing Psalms together till it was
day. Eox. Act. and Mon vol. 2. p. 160.
hard things! How should this fill our hearts with great thoughts, our hands
with all advantages? how should we with great courage go forth to meet al
opportunities? What a spur should this put upon all our endeavors? How should
we think our selves happy that ever we were borne, that the Lord has done us
this honor, as to put us into his service? and that he has conferred upon
sinners and poor worms, such as thou and I are, 1 Cor. 2.9
Such things as neither eye has seen, ear has heard, nor have at any time
entredento the heart of man to conceive.

CHAP. X. Showing some Means to attain a stirring heart in duties.
NOw for our further help and light in so needful a point, I would lay down
some few helps and means by which we might the better attain unto this
stirringnesse of heart:

The removing of all those impediments which damp and dead the heart.
which do any way dampe and dead the heart, keep it under, and lay bolts and
fetters upon it. Such are,

1. Idleness, slothfulness, and careless mis-spending our time, incogitancy,
letting the mind drive, as a Boat or Ship that has none to guide it, but it
floats up and down uncertainely; so living without a calling, and the like.

2. Barrenness, and unfruitfulnesse in our Christian course.

3. Lusts, and passions, and such like sinful distempers, which are the
sicknesses of the soul, and keep it in a low and weak estate.

4. Unnecessary sadness, and unchecrefulnesse.

5. Vain fears of what may befall us in regard of our Christian profession.

6. The disswasion of worldlymen, carnal friends, and kindred, which say, Why
cannot you content your self to do as others do, Vulgar speeches against the
earness^. profession of Religion.
but you must make all the Town and Country to talk of you, in being so
strict and precise, in running after Sermons, and in saying as many prayers as
would serve two or three besides, there is a reason in all things, and enough
is enough. Thus our Saviors kindred dealt with him, who seeing him wonderful
earnest, and painful in Preaching to the people, came to lay hold of him,
thinking he had bin Mark. 3^ 20 21.
besides himself.

7. Worldly cares, and multitude of worldly business, which Mat. 13.22
choakes the heart.

8. Sinful pleasures, too much carnal mirth, or abusing of lawful things,
which mightily Anima dispersa fit minor.
weaken, intenerate, and emasculate the Spirit, and draw out the vigor and
vivacity of it.

9. Consorting much with Civil and Carnal company, these are as a continual
dropping, which insensibly cooles the lively operations of the Soul: A good
man amongst such, is like a sheep amongst the briars, he will come away a
loser, do what he can.

10. Resting in thy present condition, contenting thy self with the beginnings
of Grace, and with that measure thou have.

11. Discouragements in thy self at thy own weaknesses and inabilities for
want of parts and gifts. For this God was angry with Moses, who pleaded his
inability to go on Gods errand: consider what the Lord said to him, Exo. 44.10
Who has made man's mouth? or who makes the dumb or deaf? or seeing or
blind? have not I the Lord? Who has given thee that which thou have? Who can
increase it? Who also will expect no more then he gives.

Earnest prayer to God. Iam. 1.19
from whom comes every good and perfect gift. Let thy heart follow the Lord
with uncessant requests, leave him not till he answer thee in this great suit
of giving thee a stirring heart. Iabez, in the 1 Chr. 4.10
first of the Chronicles, makes this prayer to God, saying, O that thou would
bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast! and God granted him that which he
requested: So do thou say, O that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge
my heart. This is a blessing indeed, if God would be so gracious to thee as to
grant thy request. Thus Psalm. 143.11 and ^0.11
David often prays, that God would quicken him, and unite his heart to fear
the Name of God. Cant. 1.4
Draw me (says the Church in the Canticles) and we will run after thee.
These are the breathings of a faithful soul, and thus should thou do: if
thou had but one request to make, next to the salvation of thy soul, this, O
this should be it, That God would give thee a stirring heart: for without
this, heaven it self would not be heaven; and with this, a very dungeon would
seem a corner of heaven. In all thy prayers therefore, put up one petition for
this, that God would keep this Holy fire upon the hearth of thy heart all thy
days.

Ps 119.116
purposes and promises often, Often to renew our former promises and purposes.
we must lay more bonds and engagements upon our selves, more Vows and
Resolutions, Ps. 132.2.8 Psa. 137, 5, 6
and charge our selves with them, and to do it solemnly with Prayer and
Fasting if need require, to bind our selves, the more strongly to our duties:
even that we will stand on the Lords side, and give up our selves more for the
public good; and for this end we should often commune and reason with our
own hearts, chiding and reproaching our selves for our dullness, and dejection
of Spirit. Why art thou cast down, O my soul (says Psa. 42.5, 6
David;) As if he should have said, O my God, I do lie down overthrown in
the strength of my mind, and I am ashamed of my self for it: My soul hope
thou in God, I will yet praise him more, I will remember him, and all his
promises and mercies, and cleave unto them with more faith, and greater
confidence than ever yet I have done.

To set before us the examples of Gods servants, who have exceeded this way
who have exceeded the common measure in their zeal and earnestness. As the
Apostle says of the 1 These. ^.7 2 These. 1.3, 4
Thessalonians, That they were patterns to all them which believed in
Macedonia and Achaia, and propounds them in their rare faith and patience with
glorying. Luke 7.44
See thou this Woman (says our Savior to Simon) compare her love to me
with thine, and be ashamed. So also let us look upon such who are now living,
who excel in this grace; prize them highly, rejoice in their society, resort
unto them as to the Psalm. 16.2
most excellent upon the earth. When we want fire, we use to go to our
neighbors, and to light our Candle at another flame. Seek them out, though
it cost thee much travel and pains, they will abundantly recompense all thy
labor. Luke 24.32
Did not our hearts burn within us, say the two Disciples when they traveled
together, and talked with our Savior. O the communion of Saints! what a
blessing is folded up in it, and goes along with it! How do the sparks fly
abroad? and how are our cold and dull hearts quickened and enflamed thereby? How
do Gods servants many times part from each other, blessing God in their
hearts, that ever they saw the faces, or heard the voices each of other, having
got such courage and strength one by another.

The frequent exercise of that grace we have.
helps much to stir up the heart. Every act intends the habit, and the more
the acts of grace are iterated and repeated, the more the grace is intended and
enlarged, the more spreading, strong, and active it grows. The more we lay
forth our selves, dress, and tend to every grace and gift bestowed, the
greater is the increase and fruit of them. Simile.
As it is in a tree planted, and plashed against a wall, the more it is spread,
and laid forth in the branches, even to the least twigge, the more warmth and
vigor it gets from the Sunbeams, and the more fruit it bears. Thus when
every grace is exercised, and put to the best use and advantage, it must needs
make a stirring and a fruitful Christian. And as men get warmth into their
hands by rubbing them, and as the wax is made fit for the seal by chafing it;
so Quomodo sine exercitio doctrinae, aut sine usu profectus? Res omnis proprius
ac domesticis exercitiis augetur. Amb. offic. 1. cap. 5.
exercise of grace helps to warm and kindle the heart, and makes it fit for
many Divine and heavenly impressions to be put upon it. Thus fervent prayer
kindles the heart, increases that grace by the often exercise of it, stirs
up other graces in us, and shakes off all heaviness and drowsinesse of soul.
Exo. 24.39
When Moses had been long with God in the holy Mount, there was a brightness
and shining put upon his face. So our conversing much with God by prayer puts a
greater light, and brightness upon the soul.

Thus he that edifies another, edifies himself, and whilst he is imparting
what grace he has to others, it grows in his own heart, as the Mat.
14.19.20.
bread did in the Disciples hands, whilst they were distributing it to the
poor hungry people. The more also we put forth the fruits of Christian love
toward others? the more loving it makes us; by giving we become more liberal,
and by showing mercy on the distressed, more pitiful; besides that great
comfort and refreshing of heart which follows upon well-doing.

FINIS.

