A SERmon Preached at Pawles Cross on Sunday the ninth of December. 1576. by
T.W.

Imprinted at London by Francis Coldock. 1578.

To the Reader.
IT IS commonly seen (Christian Reader) that cunning men are dangerous, and
that the boldest are the blindest oftentimes: and it is to be lamented that
this curiosity should so be found in Christianity, and that any professors
of the Gospel should be deintie to do good. Alas it is but little we can do,
when we have done all, and our life it self is not very long: Job. 14.
while we have time therefore let us be doing, 1. Pet. 5. verse. 8.
for Satan never sleeps nor cease destroying. We are all in debt to
Christ's Church, and are bound to build according to our Talent. Let every
man set too his helping hand then, and let Christ's cause never be hindered
for man's credit. Let us rather consider the Commandment, and express our
love by feeding. Tongues that are silent in speaking, should argue hands
diligent in writing, especially in a Minister: but when both are idle, surely
all is evil, and that Minister but an Idol before the Lord. The wise debtor
unable to pay all, uses policy in trifling presents, and finds good ease
thereby. Owe we all unto the Lord? and shall we bring nothing to his Church? I
must needs confess that I have bin tardy, and lingered in this fault too long
my self, but fearing the rashness of them that come to soon, I see the
dangerous lapse, or lashe of them that come too late, and happy is that
servant, whom when his Master comes he shall find doing. Surely I had
denied many petitions, being privy to many infirmities of mine own, but
look what the forwardness of my friend could not do, and that has the
frowardness of certain brought to pass, and I trust all for the best: only I
mark this for my learning, that what I denied to do voluntarily, I am made
now by an exigent in a manner to do violently: for nothing can hinder Gods
purpose. Wherefore I crave pardon of them, whose instant requests I did
incessantly deny, but chiefly of God, whose church is wronged if any thing
that may profit hi^ be at any time concealed. To avoid which fault, at the
last I am resolved, and be^ing persuaded that the playner is the better, for
the most part, I have used no curiousness in the matter, for it can not be so
simple, but if it be sound withal, it shall profit the faithful reader. The
worst fault I find, is of the most part, who can be content to let all Sermons
slip, and scarcely buy one: or if some buy them, to let them sleep in their
houses, who were as good let the^ alone, for so they lose both their money, and
that precious pearl which no money can buy again. The benefit of writing
deserves more diligence in reading, especially of good things: but the
thousands of Pamphlets and toys are caught up quickly, and devoured in have,
though they shall never be disgested into any good substance, I fear, they are
so full fraught with poison. It were happy that they were all buried in
darkness, or burned in the light, which minister matter to Fancies schole, or
Pleasures palace, but nothing unto the church of god. Redeem the time, for
the days are evil. Ephesians. 5. ver. 16.
Let this be a warning to you that fear God, to let go such Books, and to
have nothing to do with them, the world is full of them. Empty you your
houses in the name of God, and let not your youth once finger them, for they
are the bane of youth. and learn to play the Be, not only to fly and see
the flower, but to suck also: the word of God is sweeter than honey, or the
honey comb. Psalm. 19. verse. 10.

Being diversely called at this time, I am feign to prefixe no other preface
than the very same which I used at the Cross, and that word for word, as
both my Sermons are, excepting in my latter I have kept back certain things,
which I thought not so convenient or necessary to divulgate, because they
concerned the persons then and there more particularly. God increase thy
knowledge, and with knowledge faith, and with faith zeal, that thou may
grow aright, and righteous to salvation, in Jesus Christ. Amen.

I Crave pardon (Christian Reader) for that the Writer being full of other
business him self, whereby he could not follow this, and his hand being
very hard and small, has bin the cause of some escapes in the print: Yet let
it not discourage thee, but take thy pen and bestow the pains to correct them,
and I hope the profit shall make thee recompense. I have not altogether
satisfied the Author neither in disposing many things, yet I have done my best,
but the matter being not much amiss, our labor is not lost. Farewell.

The faults escaped.
Page. 1. line. 4. for 77. read. 76. Page. 3. line. 12. for the, read, a.
Page. 7. line. 17. for. aunswerable, read, a miserable. Page. 10. line. 19.
for was, read, were. Page. 15. line. 6. for say, read, scan. Page. 14. line.
11. for do, read, does. Page. 45. line. 14. for end, read, eye. Page. 45.
line. 16. for end, read, eye. Page. 47. line. 5. for arrived, read, aimed.
Page. 51. line. 9. for king, read, tongue. Page ead. line. 7. put out (and)
Page. 51. line. 3. for sure, read, sore. Pa. ead. lin. 17. read, that that I
cannot. etc. Page 60. lin. 11. for was, read, co^mes. Pa. 64. lin. 4. read,
overcome in our selves.
A Godly Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross on Sundaye, the.9. day of December.
1577.
IT were highly to be wished, and heartily prayed for (honorable beloved in
Jesus Christ) that in this and all like assemblies, the eyes and ears of men's
minds were but as well occupied, as the eyes and the ears of the body: and
that we would prepare our selves by prayer, to come with a circumcised and
catechized soul, in the humility of spirit, not presuming of wit, or
wisdom, or wealth, or authority, or any thing what so ever: I mean, not to
be puffed up, or sowred with that forbidden leaven of the Pharisees, and so
vngratiouslie to prevent the sweet and sauorie doctrine of Gods eternal
counsel. You have heard I am sure of the Spyders poison, and of the honey of
Bees, yet both suck out of one, and the same flower: you have heard that the
self same Gospel is to one a savor of life, and to another a savor of death.
2. Corin. 2. That our blessed Savior came to bring peace, Luke. 22. Math. 10.
and yet no peace, but war and a sword: That he was a stumbling stone to all
refusers, Esai. 8.
and a corner stone to many buylders in Sion: that he is a rock against whom
many do make shipwreck, that is, of ruin and destruction to Infidelles, but
to the faithful a rampire of rescue and defense. And what is it? touching the
dignity, aucthority, and power of Gods word, that you have not heard and
plentifully received out of this place: You know as well as we, that all
Scriptures are inspired of God, and are profitable for men, to instruct, to
rebuke, and to correct, that the man of God might be made perfect in all good
works: 2. Timo. 4. that they are written for our learning: To. 15. that many
do err not knowing them: Math. 22. Only now there remaynes that doctrine
which the enemy untruly says, we condemn: that is sincerity, integrity,
and honesty of conversation and life, which commonly they call good works.
Never a iusticiarie of them all, is so earnest as we are, to desire and
beseech you, nay, The grace of God does so teach us. Titus. 2. verse. 12.
to charge and command you, and that in the name of Christ Jesus, that you
provoke not the holy one to anger, and to the just judgment against you, by
breach of his laws and statutes: and yet we preach not as they, for all this,
for our end is mercy, Luke. 17. verse. 10.
because we are unprofitable. Luke 17. but their end is merit, because they
are seruiseable (you must think so at the least, God is true and men are liars.

Romans 3. verse. 4. 1. John. 1. verse. 10. Iam. 2. verse. 14.


though I cannot coat the place in all the Scriptures) but they write so of
them selves. This is the nail in the ships side, which we all drive at, to
strike up to the head, least water leaking, should sink her into the Seas:
After faith, works: after light, walking: after a foundation, buylding: after
planting, prospering, So run that you may obtain 1. Cor. 9.
and growing: after a good profession, some good practice: after so long and so
loud a calling, some coming and running toward the mark which is set before
us, Jesus Christ, which is the price of our calling.

Philip. 3. Math. 3.
Now is the time for fruit, take heed of the axe: now is the time for the
husbandman to drink of the Uine, beware of no grapes, Esa. 5.
and beware of sour and wild grapes: for down goes the walls then, in comes
the Boar, and roots it up. Reave. 22. verse. 12.
Now is the time for harvest, when the sickle of Gods judgment shall cut
down both corn and cockle, the corn shall he gather into his Garner, but the
chafe he shall burn with unquenchable fire: If you know his will and do it
not, be sure and look for those many strypes: and if the Lord handle his iron
rod once, and give but one blow of correction, Luke. 12
are we not all as the Potters vessel? is our matter any better? But if he
stryke the struck of condempnation, what powder and dust shall the ungodly be
made, and scattered before the face of the wind? Psalm. 1.
it is God that is true, and all men are liars. Mark. 13.
It is heaven and earth that shall perish, and not the smallest portion of his
word shall pass unperformed: when the Lord speaks therefore, let the
congregation be silent: let flesh and blood, nay, let earth, and ashes, worms
and worms meat, never dare once resist as the obstinate, or refuse as the
ignorant, or receive in vain the yoke of his obedience, as all carnal and
careless professors do, which do nothing according as they are commanded, which
have a face or a show of service, but have denied the power of godliness, and
therefore do receive the word of God in vain: 2, Tim. 3. verse. 5
He speaks unto you by the Prophet Jeremy this day.

The days of Jerusalem were perilous times, for both Prince and Priest and
people, did not only neglect (as we do) but manifestly contempne the word of
the Lord, and fell to smyting of his Prophets. Hence grew monstrous
enormities, as it was meet when the Lamp and light of our steps was once
out, Psalm. 109.
that they should run over shoes into all extremities: when they sinned in
the great thing, I mean Idolatry once committed, it can not be but adultrie
should follow, and incest, perjury, Romans 1. verse. 24.
murder, extorcion, robbery, and all abomination to be ryfe amongst them, as
you may read, 6.8. and many other places of this Prophecy.

Least therefore as a horse headlong should run into destruction, they
should make a league with hell, and as it were vow their own dampnation, (as
a man of himself does still run the race of iniquity, to make up the number
of his sins) least thus working wickedness with greedynesse, they should
past all cry fall into the dangerous mouth of hell fire, and kyndle whole
heaps of coals upon their own heads: the Lord in his mercies of old, Ephe.
1. verse. 4. John. 6.
having an everlasting providence for preservation of his Church, and may not
lose one, opens the mouth of this Prophet by his holy spirit, and utters
matter enough both for the comfort of his chosen, and utter confusion of the
reprobate, and says: Albeit there is not one true Prophet left almost that
speak a good word, but every man cries peace peace, and yet al from
highest to lowest are given to brybes, and horrible things are committed in
the Land. Iere. 8. et. 5.
Albeit there is neither judgment nor justice, but like stone horses every man
haunts harlots houses, and his neyghbors wife. To be short, though there be
aunswerable confusion, and such a deformity, as for the like sins or less,
I once drowned in justice the whole world, Genesis 7.
in Noah's time, except a few, eight persons, and burned in my judgment, whole
Sodom and Gomorra, Genesis 19.
with diverse other Cities: Yet now remembering my promise of old made to David
my servant mercifully, behold the time comes says the Lord. etc.

But how perfect man's eyes are, the shyning sun does show, which quicklye
blyndes the clearest sight: and how brutish man's reason is without Gods
spyrite, in Religion, that it is the special grace of God, we are not turned
clean out of both reason and Religion. Let us therefore crave assistaunce of
Gods most blessed spyrite, that with meek heart and due reverence I may
speak, and you may hear, and we all receive his holy word, to the glory
of his name, the confirmation of his truth, the confutation of error, and the
everlasting comfort of all true Christians in Jesus Christ. In this prayer, let
us remember his universal Church, the Churches of England and Irelande, the
Queens most excellent Majesty, her Graces most honorable Counsel, all
inferior Magistrates, all Ministers, and all private men: that the Lord would
bless us all, to keep our faith unto the end. Amen.

1. Behold the time comes says the Lord, that I will raise up the
righteous branch of David, 2. which King shall bear rule, 3. and he shall
prosper with wisdom, and he shall set up equity and righteousness again in
the earth. 4. In his time shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell without
fear, and this is the name they shall call him, 5. The Lord our
righteousness. The Text. Jeremy. 23. verse. 5.
FOr the the better understanding of the simple, this shall be my order to
proceed as the words lie: First of the Prophecy of Christ's coming:
Secondly, what he shall do: he shall bear rule. Thyrdly, the manner of his
regiment: he shall prosper with wisdom, and set up equity. Fourthly, the end
of his coming or kingdom: Judah shall be saved, and Israel dwell without fear.
Fyfthlie, the glorious title or name, which is the Lord our righteousness.

For the Prophecy.
TO stand upon the praises of Prophets, and their excellent office, being one
of the chiefest instruments, (though extraordinary) that Christ ordained in
his Churches, Ephesi. 4. he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, and some Shepherdes and Teachers, to gather together the Saints,
etc. Or to show you their diligence in sparing no labor, fearing no loss,
and ve^turing their very life for the prophesying and preaching of the truth,
or on the other side, to reckon and rippe up David's sundry virtues, that man
according to Gods own heart: it was not so directlye to this purpose.
Therefore I will turn straight to the prophecy, which is concluded by the
best learned interpreters, (without all controversy) to be understood of ye
Messiah and his kingdom. Albeit the hungry Jews do blyndlie snatche and
wrest it to the scepter of David, and dream it of his temporal seat. The
Lord made a covenant with David in deed as in the.89. Psalm. I will set thy
dominion in the sea, and thy right hand in the floods, and thy seed shall
abide for ever, thy throne as the days of heaven: I have sworn once by my
holiness I will not fail David my servant, and his seed shall endure, and
his seat shall be as the Sun. Likewise.2. Sam. 7. by the mouth of Nathan the
Prophet, 2. Sam. ^. verse. 12
Thy house, thy kingdom, thy throne, shall be established for ever. What time
therefore that they were led away captives to Babylon, as in the.4. King. 25.
Iere. 34. 2. Cron. 36. Esai. 1. appears, when Iheronias was taken prisoner by
Nabuchodonezer, and Zedechias led away captive into bondage, when the kingdom
was spoiled, the Temple burned, the people subdued in miserable servitude, and
besides, never any man after of David's loins left to sit on his royal seat,
for though Zorobabel Neuew to Iheconias was captain, yet he was not King of
Judah: and there were other valiant men, and principal leaders of Israel, but
no Prince nor scepter, they were so under the Meades and Persians and
Macedonians. etc. Now the Jews doting, and groslie buylding of an earthly
scepter, and a temporal seat of David's seed, were justly scattered in their
own imaginations, and did blindlie think ye promises of God to be of none
effect. Here is the barraine fruit of man's own brain: So play the Papists in
the sacrament.
see how perilous a thing it is to receive the spiritual promises of God
carnally, that is, according to our own understanding, what discord it
breeds, and what confusion it brings: even this that our expectation and
accoumpt shall be clean frustrate, void, and of none effect in the end: the
letter kylleth, it is the spirit that gives life. John. 6. to the
Capernaites. 2. Cor. 3.
Yet the Lord mercifullye saved a great sort of that people, and delivered
them by Cyrus, who fought against the Assirians, and took Babylon, and
delivered the Jews: as they had many Oracles before, that a man should do it,
and is named too of Esaie in his prophecy, Esai. 44. many years before his
birth.

I am thy God which say, Jerusalem thou shall be inhabited, Esai. 44.
and you Cities of Judah you shall be buylt, Cyrus shall be my heardman, etc. In due
consideration of that I have shortly said, it is manifest that the promise
must be otherwise than of David's house, for our earthly kingdom only, or
else (far off be it from blasphemy, and with fear I speak it) the promise
must be of none effect. And has God said, and will he not perform it? or has
he at any time spoken the word, and shall he not do the deed? Yes verily God
is true, and al men are liars: the Jews are deceived, for God is righteous,
that he may be clear when he is judged. Psalm. 51. But yet let us proceed to a
more near examination, and playner pondering of the matter, and it shall
easier bring us to ye perfect sense.

Ecce.
Behold, is a noate of demonstration, often used by the Prophets, to prepare
attention, when they speak of any great Mystery, or of any serious matter of
importance and weight, as now of the Messiah to come, than the which there is
none greater: for all ye promises of God to Israel, had their strength and
performance in him, through him, and for him, without whom the faith of the
Fathers had been void and not full. This caryeth a certain awaking or
quickening of the dull senses of the Jews, with whom the promises of God by
little and little did slip out of remembrance, and very rawlie and coldlie
they looked for Christ's first coming as they should do. Which as it was
then, so is it now a most pestilent practice of Satan to make many which
should lively behold, only blindely to dream for his second and most
glorious appearing. The children of God should Roma. 8. verse. 24.
behold Gods promises of things to come, as if they were now present, for that
is the true nature of faith: The eye is the suttlest sense of all the five, and
as it sooner pearceth his object, than any of ye rest, whether Extramittendo,
or Intramittendo, let Philosophers say. So it judges more surer of the same:
this dignity it caryeth above the rest, to be the quickest, and perfectest
sense of all. For example of the first, in the time of thunder, a man shall
sooner see the lyghtning, than he shall hear ye rattling, if he have any sight
at all, though he have never so good an ear, and yet the lyghtning is the
latter of the two, being caused of the fraction or rupture, or thundering noise
of the Cloud so broken: Or more familiarly, you shall see (if you mark) in a
Gu^ne discharged, the pellette flee some space, before you hear the sound,
and yet it is plain, they can not be a sunder.

For the other, the example of Isaac, in the.27. Gene. Will show you every
sense deceived, for lack of this chief sense. And albeit the soonenesse of
Jacobs return in bringing the Kyd, had almost marred al, and his voice made
some suspicion in the matter: yet old father Isaac was beguiled, neither his
smelling, nor tasting, could judge of the venison, which was but Kyds flesh,
nor his hearing, nor feeling, find fault with Esau which was but Jacob: and
not without cause in law, Oculatus testis caryeth credit, they that saw it
with their eyes are best assured. Even so the Prophet speaks here, John. 1.
verse. 15.
Behold, even as perfectly, though not as prese^tlie as Saint John the
Evangelist seeing our Savior, poynted at him, and said: Behold ye Lamb of
God, which takes away the sins of the world: so with the eyes of your
Faith, being far more excellent than ye eyes of the body, if you will awake
and not sleep, watch and not slumber, Behold the time comes, etc.

Daniel does calculate the time.9. of his Prophecy, being a notable and worthy
Prophet, yet he perused and read Ieremies books as it seems, and found out
the Prophecy of the peoples captivity.70. years, which he calls weeks, that
so long Judah should lie by it, and that for their transgression. And the
Angel Gabriel revealed to him afterward, that the Lord in mercy would yet
restore them seven fold again, that is.70, times seven, which amou^teth or
multiplieth in accoumpt to 490 years, and then this Messiah should come. Jeremy
here speaks indefinitelye, and says, the time comes, where the present
time is put for the future (as I take it) not to express the shortness, but
the assurance of the time, when Christ should come. Eccle. 3. verse. 1.
The Wise man says, all things have a time, and it is a high point of wisdom
to know the time of all things, but to know this time of all times, is
wisdom of all wisdoms. The Prophets foreshewed it to the Jews, but yet he
was chiefly received of the Gentiles, John. 1.
for he came to his own, and his own knew him not: I pray God for the second
triumphant and kingly coming it fall not out so, that to who^ he is most
preached, they be least prepared. How long was it I pray you yt Israel longed
to come out of Egipts bondage? and how long looked Judah to be delivered from
Babilons captivity? But for ye great freedom indeed, from ye perpetual and
everlasting thraldom: by this only Messiah, there were very few or none. Right
so play we in these days: we are very careful for the times and seasons,
concerning our worldly affairs. A prisoner duly wayteth his delyueraunce: a
prentise still thinks on his freedom, and both keep just accoumpt of every
day: yea the sick man leteth not one hour escape, nor misseth not a minute,
but still longs for his health: but for our great delyuerance and departure
hence, it is not only the last but the very least care: when friends and
Physicians forsake us, we trust yet in our selves, for no man is so old, but
he thinks he may be older: and no man is so sick, but he hopes he may recover:
Where the Philosopher ends the Physician begyns, and after the Physician,
commes the Divine when senses and all are gone.
and the last messenger shall still be for the Mynister: the danger sure is
very great, and every man is not sure to be at Christ's right hand just
when he dies: and repentance is not in our own hands: thou trustest to thy
end, and thy end brings distrust, for the greatest assault is in thy weakest
estate. As I would not have any man to distrust god, no not specially in the
end: so would I not have any to tempte God, and trust only to the end: and
yet I say all is well that ends well. This example is plain enough of
Christ's coming to the Jews, prophesied and prophesied again, and yet not
understood. So the natural example of our mortality, and daily dropping away,
might move reasonable men to take heed, and if warning would serve, to teach
us to watch and weight for his coming, or to be prepared and provided for our
going.

Says the Lord. Look what the Lord has said, and that is sure to come to
pass in all points as he has said it, for God is not as man is, mutable in
repenting his promises, albeit he is said to repent that ever he made man. Genesis
6. It is but to express the hearty hatred he bears against sin, and
against their sins of the old world: or else why do we so confidentlye
build, and constantly assure our selves of the inexplicable comfort of
everlasting salvation: but because of his word which is immutable? and has
he said it? nay, he has sworn it, Heb. 6. verse. 18. Psalm. 33
he that commanded the heavens and they were made, and but spoke the word
and they stood fast, stands still upon his honor, and will perform what
he promises in number weight and measure, as he has given his word for some
testimony, and examples. Why did not the fire consume those three thrust into
ye burning Oven, was it not hot enough? or did it not burn, Daniel. 3 verse.
25
when the very flames did lycke up those torme^tors that put them in? and what
is the reason but yt it shall be so? and why did the Seas so spy the Lord? why
ran they back and were afraid, and became as a wall to Israel, and ran
together again to drown Pharao and all his host? 114. Psa. but this that it
shall be so: Psalm. 14.
Why did not the Lions in their den, snatch Daniel rather before he came to the
ground, Daniel. 6
and tear him in pieces, than lie still before him as Lambs, and no Lions?
but this, ye water may not wette, though it be a great Sea: fire may not heat,
though it be a flaming fire: many Lions, many hungry Lions, may not touch a
seely man, when the Lord has said it shall be so, for heaven and earth shall
perish, and vanish as a scroule, but his word endures for evermore. Math. 13


That I will raise up the right branch David. This alludes to that raising of
seed to a man's brother, if he dye without issue, as it is in the law. Here we
must note, howsoever God promised to Adam, the Womans seed shall break the
serpents head. Genesis 3. Howsoever to Abraham in blessing I will bless thee, and
in multiplying, I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, or as the
innumerable sands of the shore: and howsoever to David, thy seed shall endure
for ever, and thy seat as ye Sun, etc. That is, how so ever the couenauntes,
or merciful promises of God made to our Forefathers, did differ in
circumstaunce, yet do they all agree in effect and substance. Again, how
soever the Prophets dreamed dreams, or saw visions, whether they prophesied
some plainer, some darker, some as it were farther off and mystical, some more
evident and near, as the spirit gave them vtteraunce: Yet all inspired from
above, spoke in effect one and the same thing. And there can not be found any
contrariety in all ye doctrine of the Prophets of God, tha^ is possible to be
in the spirit wherewith they were inspired. The mark they all shot at, is
Jesus Christ, Luke 16. verse. 16.
the end of the whole law and the Prophets which were until John: and this
partycular Prophecy which I have in hand, as I told you, concerns the
pacte or covenant with David, but not in the Jewish sense. But look how it
was promised of God, so is it prophesied of Jeremy, and right so has it been
performed in Jesus Christ: for the unity of Gods spirit is still one, and
indivisible as the dietie. Why, some Jew may object, is it not plain? that
Solomon, Ezechias, Objection.
and Josias, being lawful Sons and succeders of David, were raised of God as
righteous branches? I answer, that it is God in deed, by whose power all
Princes do reign, Solut.
and through his authority they have their seats: It is he which rayseth them
up, and raseth them out again at his pleasure, which turned out Nabuchodonezer
as a Beast in his justice, 1. Esdr. 9
and in his mercy made the sheephooke of his servant David, to be a Scepter
over Israel. But all that propagation or Princely posterity raised of God, was
not without the means of man: and this is immediately of God him self, a great
difference. And if you will go further, and ask how this branch should be
raised then? I answer, that first you must circumcise your hearts and ears,
least you think it an impossibilytie, John. 3 verse. 4
as Nycodemus thought of a ma^s regeneration: so you having ye veil of
fleshlinesse, and the foreskinne of filthiness, shall vncleanlie and grosely
imagine of this blessed generation or raising: 1 Cor. 1 verse. 14
for carnal man sauoreth not those things that are of God.

This done, I say he was begotten of God, conceived by the holy ghost,
incarnate in the sanctified womb of ye Uirgin Marie, even in the fullness of
time, according to the Scriptures: and it is part of the Articles of our
Christian belief: which none of all David's posterity could say, ^sal. 51
no not he himself, for he was conceived and borne in sin.

But here may a more strong and mighty objection be gathered than before as it
seems, Objection.
and all by my own saying: for is it lykely, or is it possible, that he
should be rightly called, the ryghteous branch of David, which came not of
the seed of any man, of all that stock, before so many Kings good and bad, of
which every one yet naturally descended, and were his sons after ye flesh? I
answer, Solut.
though I say he was not begotten of any man, yet I do not say, that he came
not of yt stock therefore: for Ihesse, David's father, was the root, and David
as the branch: Marie the Uirgin was the flower of Dauides branch, and Christ
our Savior was the fruit of Mary's blossom. Therefore is he called the son
of David in the Genealogy by Math. 1. and often in the new Testament, Math. 1
coming in deed of that Trybe, kyndred, or stock.

He is called therefore the righteous branch for three respects.

Three causes why Christ is called the rightuous branch of David.
First, because he came of the same kyndred by his mother.

Secondly, because of those degenerating bastardes, Roboham, Manasses, and the
like wicked Princes, who notwithstanding, were of his line, yet followed not a
foot of David's ways, but defiled his seat, and profaned the Sanctuary, and
turned his Scepter another way. And as he is not a Jew, which is a Jew
borne: nor he a true Israelite, which is so called: nor all are not Abraham's
sons, that are after the flesh. Roma. 9. No more may they be called right
branches of good Princes, which bear no like fruit, although that otherwise
they be their own sons.

Thyrdlie, he is called the ryghteous branch, in respect of the good Kings
also, Solomon, Josias, Ezechias, and those few more, which not only were of
David's loins, but also did freade in his steps, and walked in the way of
David their Father, in obedience to the commandment of the Lord, in setting
forth the true service of the GOD of Israel, in fyring the supersticious
Idolles, cutting down their groves and wooddes, to the ruin and spoil of
their Idol aultares, which far better deserved the title of David's righteous
branch, than any of the wicked Kings forespoken of: And yet they are not
this branch neither, but only, and truly, and properly, it is Jesus the
Messiah. You will think then that I do to much wrong to them which were
lawfully begotten Sons, and laudablie raygned Kings, which came of his
seed aryght, and reigned righteouslie in the seat to, and yet not the true
branch? I shall satisfy you, if you mark, and that in a word: I do not
deny them to be the right branch according to the flesh, and so is Christ to,
but I deny them to be the right and righteous branch, for so is Christ
alone: for such a sprygge or stem, never sprouted out, neither of Abraham,
whose Isaac was so increased, nor out of David, whose kings so succeeded, nor
out of all generations again, for the fountain is too foul, and our petigrue
must be fetched from Adam which is earth: and this second Adam is the Lord from
heaven. 1. Cor. 15. And the reason is, that those excellent virtues, and
Princely qualities of wisdom, justice, and Religion, in any of those good
kings, the sons of David, or in all, it was in them but as shadows, and
imperfect figures of him in whom dwells the fullness of all goodness, So
that he only and alone, is this ryghteous branch.

Here we may see the infinite love of God toward his Church, never forsaking
her, but in her first fall renewing of her with promises: in her forgetfulness,
reviving of her with prophecies, that she might still hope, and not be
confounded for ever. And if the Patriarchs and men of God, in elder times
received such plentyfulnesse of joy and gladness, in the only promise of the
Messiah, whereby their faith was full: What flowing, and ouerstreaming
unmeasurable comfort should we reap, to whom those prophecies do mynister
more, than to the Prophets them selves. 1. Peter. 1. For kings and Prophets
have desired to see what we have seen, and yet saw it not, but in the promise
only. Luke. 10. They lived in the time of the promise of this branch: and ye
Apostles lived as it were under the shadow of his leaves: but we live as under
the fruit it self. For the time of Grace, the longer, and the later it is,
the more merciful it is to them that shall be saved. And how graciously he
has dealte with us of England besides, may not pass unspoken of in planting
a right branch to raygne over us, not a bastard bramble, as Abimeleche was,
the son of a bond woman, as ye may read, Judges. 9. The Uine, the Olive,
the Palm, the Fig tree, and the rest, chose a Bramble to be their king: Who
began with murder, reigned in cruelty, and dyed in blood. But over us he
has planted a peaceable Prince, Englands happiness.
the right branch of her royal Father, and most worthy King, Henry the
eight: keeping all good steps of her prodecessors, going farther in Religion
than many of the^, (if not than any of them). The Lord lead her farther,
stir up her counsel to comfort her, strengthen her kingdom to keep her,
lengthen her life long to raygne over us: And though I may not say as the
Olyue tree to bear fruit, yet to florishe as the Palm, to be fresh as the
Laurel, to be strong as the Oak, to spread abroad as the Ceader, and to be
an old Tree of continuance, as the Cypre: and though she be fruitless one
way, yet fructify her O Lord many ways, with good and faithful subjects,
that she and we, as well graffed branches may abide still in the stock,
and tarry in the Uine, and fructify by the operation of Gods holy spyrite
unto eternal life in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Which King shall bear rule. Here he is proclaimed King by the Prophet,
head of his Church, and Prince of his people. Traiterous are all other heads
then, monstrous, and rebellious of King or Caesar, or Turk, or Pope, or
Devil, lifting them selves above this King, which must bear all the rule. He
is said to be our Prophet, our Priest, and our King: a Prophet, being a
fulfyller of all that they spoke, and the end of them: a Priest, to fynishe
all the Sacrifices of the old Law, by one suffycient and most blessed
oblation of his own body upon the Cross: a King, by rulyng and governing his
Church, having full authority alone over the same, being anointed not with
the confections of balmes or spices of sweet odors, but with the holy Oil of
gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.


But what rule bare he, some will say: Objection.
could he come simplier than borne in a Manger, despised of the Doctors, had in
derision of the multitude, spytted on, and most spitefully dealt withal? alas,
what crown ware he, but a crown of thorns? or what King was he, being so
poor, and so persecuted, that it was not possible it should be he that is
here prophesied. Thus they looking for a Princely appearing, in power,
authority, and wealth, and to have an earthly kingdom restored (as they
dreamed) received not the King of Kings: and therefore though they ask for the
day of the Lord, the day of the Lord, yet have they nothing to do with it
when it commes, for it is darkness and no light unto them. Amos. 5.
And yet as naked, poor, and simple, as Christ his birth was, the heavens
with their powers, the Sun and the stars: the Wise men did celebrate and
solempnize, their giving of Gold declared him a king: their offering of
Fra^kensense, did signify him God: and the brynging of Myrre did show he
should dye: the testimony of the Angels them selves, and his healing of sick
and sore, his helping of blind and lame, his restoring of deaffe, dumme, and
dead men, nay, his victory over eternal death, does show him self to be
the glorious king of kings: and why do the Heathen then so furiously rage
together, and imagine a vain thing? or why do the Kings of the earth and
Rulers stand up, and take counsel against the Lord the King? It is all in
vain, Psalm. 2.
for yet the Lord has set his King upon his holy hill of Sion: Yet the Lord
is king, be the people never so impatient. Psalm. 99. Nay the Lord is king, and
the earth may be glad thereof, Psalm. 97. For so the Angel song, glory be to
God on high, and on earth peace, Luke. 2, verse. 14.
good will toward men.

He bears rule immediately or mediatly. Immediately by himself, as he is God
from everlasting, whose Scepter shall have no end, whose power is all yt is in
heaven, and al yt is in earth, and yet it is not contained. And as he is God,
so he rules not like an earthly Monarche, who by riches, strength of arms,
policy, and the like, do rule ye roast. But he by his only wisdom, by the
which he sustaineth al things in heaven and in earth, to man's reason very
folishlie, he sometime in an Arc, sometime in a Cave, sometime in prison. etc.
he does for secreet causes lead his Church through many bitter temptacions, as
it were to no other purpose, than by trying them by ye Cross, to make them
true to his Crown. And yt his Church is subject unto such mutations too, it is
our infirmity and weakness, and not his fault, and yet he is so on our side,
yt nothing can be against us. Though ever dying, yet never dead: still
assaulted, and still assisted: now as it were extinguished and clean gone,
and now increased and mightily multiplied. He rules by his spirit, so that
neither thought, word, nor deed, can pass without his providence: and they
that think he rules generally all, but not particularly every one, or that
it is labor for him to know every man's matter, and to dispose them all, and
so say with the foolish. Tush, the Lord sees it not, or is there knowledge in
ye most highest? they are but children yet for knowledge, and but young
scholars for understanding, they have not in part learned the Majesty of
God, nor sufficiently known the greatness of his power: which in all cases
undoubtedly is assistent to his whole Church, and to every part thereof, to
ye whole flock, and to every sheep thereof, I will be with you to the end
of the world. Math. 28,
and seeks even that same one wanderer in the wilderness, and bringes him
home again, and preuentes all dangers, ditches, briars, woolues, and
deuylles, for he may not lose one, except that same lost child of perdition,
Judas John. 7. verse. 12. He rules by the Magistrate. Psalm. 76.
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled.

Secondly, he rules by his Mynisters, and that is the Prince first, and under
him the Pastor: for so you shall read that he lead Israel like sheep through
the wilderness, by the hands of Moses and Aaron: the sword ruled in the
hand of the one, and the word preached in the mouth of the other. So that
every soul must submyt them selves to the superior powers, Romans 13.
for because the powers that are, are ordained of God, and he that resists
them, resists the ordinance of God: for I said, you are Gods, and yet you
shall dye like men. So that a king is subject to none upon the earth, Howsoever
the Pope usurps aucthority as a traitor to God and his prince.
but immediately under God, occupies the highest room in his own dominion,
and sits in the chiefest seat: yet nevertheless, are they all but
subjects unto God and to his word: and to obey this is the safest way to
walk in a kingdom, to say as David, 101. Psa. I will walk with a perfect
heart in my house. A kingdom then is Gods gift, but to one: and a king is his
gift, unto many: and as if his Church offend him in justice, he will punish
her: and children shall be her kings. Esa. 3. so in his mercy he will set up
David in his throne, and Solomon in his seat: whereby we note, that both sorts,
both good and bad, gracious and tyrannous, are al of the Lord: for he that made
Cayus, made Marius also: he that made Augustus, made Nero too: he that made
Domitian the Christian, made Julian the Apostata Emperors. And though the Lord
for just and secret causes, many times do give this earthly kingdom, to wicked
and ungracious Princes, to tyraunts and lymmes of Satan: Yet this is sure,
that not one of them al shall ever enter into the everlasting kingdom without
repentance.

The Lord in whose hands the hearts of kings are, turn them all unto him, and
grant them timely repentance, that they may be kings in heaven, as they are
upon the earth. Religion pertaynes not to the left hand, but to the right hand
of a king, to his scepter and to his Crown. For therefore chiefly has he
placed kings to be our forefathers, and therefore Queens to be our Nurses.
Esai. 49. And secondly, that the Church of God might lack no cherishing, the
example of good Josias teaches, who not only received, but read dilygently the
book of the Law: and provided within three year, that all the Magistrates
should have the same. Again Saules disobedience, how it provoked Gods
judgment, and what miserable and desperate end followed, who knows not?
Wherefore so to speak and so to do, then to punish, and there to pardon: to
exalt some, and other some to exyle, to do all by the swoorde, and yet by the
aucthority of the word: is so full of majesty and honor, among men, and so
full of blessing, and safety before God: as no Crown never so curiously
wrought, or cunningly set with all sort of pearls and precious stones, can
half so bewtifie a Princes grace, as to be the servant of the Lord, and
faithfully to keep his commandments, and to say with David: he is my Lord,
my king. Psa. 5.

The other hand whereby he governs, is the Mynister, He rules by his
ministers.
and in his hand has put a mighty Scepter: which is his word: the
excellency of whose calling, together with the authority, is showed forth in
this: Luke. 10. verse. 16,
that if you hear us, you hear him, if you refuse us, you refuse him. Full
great is our charge to preach offenses, Gala. 1.
even to the face of Princes, and never to seek to flatter and please men, for
then we can not be the servants of God: Is he a Prince then, or a noble man?
is he a Magistrate, or a Mynister? is he a Gentleman, or a rytch man? is it thy
self, or Christ him self, in whom if it been possible for sin to have
met with righteousness, no doubt, rebukes eue^ of the Pharisees had been
faults, when he said, Which of you can rebuke me of sin? Sin wheresoever
it is, John. 8
is still sin, whether it be under sylke or velvet, under scarlet, or under
cloth of Gold, it keeps his old nature and hue, and therefore nothing can
color it: nor cloak it, nor keep it from Gods anger. To avoid which, we
strike at it as an enemy, with the scepter of the word, and hunt it out, to
chase it away. For if nobility, and honor, worship, wisdom, or wealth, or
any thing could excuse you before God, then would we spare such before me^. Or
if you could so compound with God, that notwithstanding your own destruction,
your blood should rest unrequired for at our hands, it were some piece of cause
to hold our peace: But God being no brybe taker, and requyring our tongues as
Trumpets loud, and our mouths to be open wide. So that we have the warrant of
his word, speak and spare not: and as Paul to Tit. 2. says, do it with all
authority, for this matter concerns our souls and yours, our life and
death and yours, nay both our saluations or condempnations, read Eze. 3.
and.33. The authority we have then is over Princes, as well as private men,
and all a like, for there is no respect of person with him. Not that I say the
Minister is above ye Magistrate, no, God forbid. Mystake me not, for that is
the tyrannous usurpation of the Pope, whose swoorde is but Caines knyfe to
Abels throat, whose heart and hand is full of innocent blood.

But this I say, whether for our benefit the Prince be good, or for our
trial he be naught, we are and must be yet subject unto both, because they are
both of God. So likewise the Prince, the Mynister, and the multitude, are all
under the eternal Oracle of Gods word, which is his mighty power, Heb. 4
by faithful receiving of which we be saved, and by refusing we be judged. As
the examples of Saul, Jeroboam, Achab, Ihehoi^kim, Nabuchodonozer, Zedechias,
and the like do tell, who casting off the Prophets, were cast off of the Lord.

Wherefore, said the Lord to Jeremy, I have set thee over Nations and
kingdoms, to root out and to plant, to destroy and to build: what, to
ordain and depose kings, like a Pope at his pleasure? Iere. 1.
no, no, but it is meant of the sovereignty and superiority of Gods word,
which must be the measure to all men, and the only rule to rule Rulers with all, which is not subject to any King, much less to ye Pope, to judge or alter:
but all our wits must be in subjection to his wisdom, and our wyls conformed
by his word: and as obedience to any earthly king, is better than any other
service, 1. Reg. 15 verse. 22.
so is it better to our heavenly king, than any Sacrifice, for he must bear
rule.

His office declared, here follows the order how he will rule (by wisdom:
He shall prosper with wisdom.
) for albeit his Princely power be such, as nothing can resist it, to whom all
power is given: Yet he does nothing without his most excellent and
irreproueable wisdom, and needs no counsayler, of whose fullness all the
wise men in the world, that were wise in deed, have received. To leave the
testimony of scripture, yt he was filled with wisdom, Luke 2. and to come to
his confounding of the Doctors with all their subtyle and serpentine questions,
who made them blanke with his wonderful aunsweres, escaping all the snares
they laid for him to make him a traitor against Caesar, against whom Satan
him self could not prevail, for all his vengeable temptations: But what
shall I take upon me here to describe his wisdom unto you, which has no
measure but is infinite in it self? surely I shall descrie my self to be very
unwise then. Why? is he not the wisdom of God his father? is not the depth
thereof bottomless? and the height toplesse, and his ways unsearchable and
past finding out? To. 11. When therefore our Savior Christ is thus described
as a king, in all those necessary numbers and virtues which pertayne to a
Prince, we must note, he geues us but a glimpse for greater sight, a small taste
for a greater portion of knowledge of him: For Solomon in all his royalty and
wisdom, is not comparable unto him: For shall ye shallowe Ryuers compare with
the deep Seas? or an obscure star with the brightness of the Sun? no, the
Moon her self must be under, if we will be crowned with stars, and receive
light at his brightness. This is rather written for Doctrine to earthly
Princes and Magistrates, to know that honesty is a good defense for private
persons: but Rulers must be wise withal. He that strykes at other men's follyes
and offenses by the edge of the law, must look to defend him self, and with
wisdom play his part. All the weapons, armor, Munitions, blockhouses,
castles, and captains, are no such guard to a christian king, as a breast beset
with wisdom and counsel. Even the subtilty of Serpents qualyfied with the
innocence of Doves, is a perfect Mythridate against all treasons, seditions,
alterations, wars, and whatsoever Popish policy, for the which ye Lord
send a purging pyll. It is wisdom for a man to look before he leap, and in
matters of wayght to wait for the end: it is one end of wisdom to be free
from foreign power abroad, but it is the right end of wisdom to be far
from fear at home.

Two things observed, wisdom can not but be retained. The first is, not to
tempt God, in refusing lawful means, as Anabaptists that will wear no
weapons. Secondly, not to trust to much to our arms. It was wyselie said,
Psalm. 32.
a Horse is but a vain thing to save a man. Judges. 7
Gedeon wyselie mustred.10000. against the Madvanites, though the Lord c^lled
out but.300. for the fight, where many men are, and few hearts, there is but
small strength: all is one to God I grant, to use scores or hundredes, or
thousands, more or less: as the examples of Gedeons goade, Sampsons iawbone,
David's sling, few and weak men, against many and mighty Captains. But
Gedeons case, or Sampsons, or David's, is not every good Princes case, though
their cause may be the same: to trust too much therefore is too much to tempt.
There are examples round about us of the same, and their remembrance is
rufullye refreshed, as it were but yesterdaye, to put wisdom in the mouth of
them that hear it, to be ware: that such late and lamentable confusions can
not choose, but awake wisdoms eyes to see danger, and open her mouth to show
counsel. When men of understanding bear rule, the City flourishes. It went
better with Israel, when Moses held the rod, than when those rebels,
Corah and his companions would rule the roste. Plato arrived at this mark,
when he would have either Philosophers Princes, or Princes to become
Philosophers. The Grecians against Troy, sent not only stout Achylles, but
wise Ulysses also: and Troy to defend, had not only valyaunte Hector, but
prudent Eneas also: of which the one was called Men's, the other Manus Troiae,
the one the heart, and the other the hand of Troy. The Athenians would not
only have the Dragon, but Pallas in their Temple. I speak it not as though
wisdom wanted in England: for I know, and acknowledge gladlye, that we have
a most wise Prince and Counsel, wise Judges and Magistrates, and that they go
before other Kingdoms and countries therein: but for the execution thereof we
speak, for the continual practice, which would prevent all dangerous
conspyracies, which the Lord confound and bring still to light for our better
safety: keep them far from England, farther from London, but most far
from the Crown. Not without cause did Solomon ask wisdom, and not wealth, to
prosper in his kingdom, which was the wysest king that ever was, whose
wisdom drew Saba ye Queen of the South, to come and see him. If I should
here stand upon the excellent graces and gyfts of our most wise and virtuous
Princess, Queen Elyzabeth, I should but bewraye my unableness, and show my
lea^en skyll in a golden cause: and besides, the necessity is none, where Fame
does spread abroad farther and lyuelyer, than this my poor remembrance
shall be ever able to do: Let us rather praise God, and pray unto him for hearts
of heavenly wisdom, to amend our lives, that for his Churches benefit, she
may have her Seat established, her years doubled, her enemies confounded,
and her happy reign long prospered over us. Amen.

It is a great comfort to dwell in a common weal where equity and
righteousness are set up. He shall set up ^^^itie and righteousness.
Christ is no tyrant I tell you in his kingdom. No: Judas and all Traitors to
his cross and crown: Caine and all murderers of his servants and
Mynisters: The Devil and all his lymmes shall be made confess his equity, and
the children of his kingdom shall praise his righteousness for ever.

But some will say, Was he such an upright king, Objection.
which kept company with Publicans, and favored sinners, saved them, healed
them, did al for them, and as he says himself, he came not to call ye
righteous, but sinners. I answer, his saving of sinners declares his
righteousness in mercy, Soluti.
and his condemning them which seemed just, does show his equity in judgment,
and so he sets up equity. What can be more full of equity, than to give Caesar
his own, and God his own. Mat. 22. Justice is no otherwise described unto us,
but to give every man his own, which is so necessary for an Estate, yt as Poets
feign, without Justice Jupiter can not guide the globs. And he yt will do any
Justice to another, must first begin with himself. Lycurgus is said never to
command any thing, but he would do it himself: and what a shame was it for
Judas, to punish her whom he himself had layne with all. Genesis 38. with what
face could Marcus Crassus a stark myser, speak against covetousness: or
Verres a robber, against theft: or Nero a tyrant, against cruelty: or
Gracchus a traitor, against sedicion? It is required of you, not only to be
wise as Serpents, but also to be as innocent as Doves: the one subtilty, that
you may receive no hurt, and the other simplicity, that you do no harm.
Beware of affection, and beware of perturbation: take heed of love, and take
heed of hatred. Let no hope or fear make you ever conclude that which you
know not, nor never give sentence against that you know. Let no widows
causes fall, let no Orphans lose their right, let not equity go to the wall:
for if in your presence she can have no place, alas whether being banished shall
she wander? If the golden king do tell the smothest tale, what stumbling makes
the poor ma^s speaking? Let not good Laws so be made as Spyders webbes, to
entangle small flies, and let ye great escape, to hamper poor men, and to
favor the rich. Favor not the rich man because of his rytches, nor the poor
man because of his poverty, let no such respect be, and cause to make them
fare the better, or the worse: Say not to the one, sit you here, and to the
other stand thou there. But set up righteousness and equity, and deal
indifferently to all in the Land.

All injuries are done, either by affection, or perturbation, or of negligence,
or of purpose. Look to it therefore, and have the victory over your selves
like men: for any offense in the Magistrate is a s^re plague to the innocent.
And one thing I humbly beseech you before the Lord this day: that as (I am
sure) you would not condemn any man innocent, not for any thing, so take good
heed of judging any man absent. I call him abse^t, whose cause is not
thoroughly handled, sufficiently proved, and lawfully deposed. And here I lament
the desperate case of some in our days, yt are possessed with whole legions of
lying deuylles, and pass not a rush for perjury, to overthrow their enemy in
such cases: there is required of you yt I can not teach you (I would I could)
only in ye behalf of your own souls, I admonish you to beware of scarlette
sins, I mean red and bloody cruelty, which Caesar says, is the worst
companion of a man's old age, that can be, a miserable remembrance of tyranny
done in thy youth.

Take example of Christ, to whom when a woman taken in adultry was brought, he
looked on the ground, John. 8. verse. 8.
and wrote with his finger: which may show your wisdoms, that respite,
pausing, and scanning of a matter without long lingering, or reiourning, or
delay, is best and meetest for a Magistrate.

And that may be wished to, that after judgment, all possible speed were not
to execution. Your good policies therein to prevent pardon for unworthy persons
is commendable: but for time and space for instruction and repentance I
speak, that as we all desire ye Lord to give us time, and to keep us from
soddaine death: So as you best shall find good, deal with their souls I
beseech you, whose bodies by justice you commyt to death. Justice is well
called the Lady of civil affairs, or rather the mother of a common weal, and
her two daughters or damsels, Lenity, and Severity, are very necessary
handmaids: Justice is to respect every man's cause, but no man's person, for that
is partiality: Lenity is to mitigate or lessen ye punishment, but not the
fact, for that were iniquity: and Severity, is to punish the fault condignly,
but not without cause, for yt were tyranny. I leave this to your discretions,
even thus, because you are wise enough, to whom the matter is committed: only
I pray you remember, that God is Judge over all, and that he sets up equity
and righteousness in his kingdom.

Here is the end of his coming or kingdom, Isreal's safety (by his time) is
meant for ever, for who can tell his age. Esa. 53. So long then as he is king,
so long shall Judah be safe: but he is king for ever, therefore for ever shall
Judah be glad. We are sealed therefore safe, he has all power, therefore we are
safe. This is ye perfect state of happiness in deed, not only to be in
peace, but to be without fear of farther trouble. This may partly be
understood of Isreal's delyuery, which were in peace a long season, in respect
of their wonted troubles and wars. And it may be applied to the mylitaunt
Church, which notwithstanding it is tossed with many te^pestes, yet is it void
of any fear of dampnation, because of our faith, and faithful foundation,
Jesus Christ. Either it may be, and more effectually, understood of the
tryumphant Church which is safe and past all fear, even as Christ himself
crowned in the heavens, and past all the dangers of hell.

Hence we note the end of Magistrates and of Princes ruling, In his time Judah
shallbe saved and Israel shall be without fear.
to be their subjects safety without fear: a ship sails to come to the
port: a man fights to get victory: he that labors does it, that he may rest.
Christ's Church is mylitant, that it may be triumphant. And look what ye white
is to him that shoots, and the same is peace to him that governs. The mark
that Magistrates should aim and shote at, is the prosperity of the people.

That is no sound peace, where there is danger of war: there is no safety
where there is continual fear, now at meat, and now in the field, now in
the Church, and anon in prison. As Israel was sore chased and vexed of their
enemies at every half while. We have no such cause to complain (God be
thanked therefore) and yet our hope and fear, can not choose but ebb and flow,
because we have had such a peace, as the enemy does envy, and the true
Christian can not but fear what will follow. But seeing Deus nobis haec otia
fecit, that God is ye author of our peace, we will not cease to put our trust
in him, and to pray unto him for increase of grace, and so shall we be sure of
long peace.

Let us decline in deed from evil, and do in deed the things that are
good: let us pray unfeignedly for the bond of peace, which is unity: but I
would have it in verity, for a City divided can not long stand. He that
knows both buildings, and their cause of ruins, has told us so. Parris is
a pattern not of long ago, and Antwerp an example but of yesterday: happy are
they whom other men's harms can make to beware, and doleful is their estate
that dally with destruction. The Lord knit the knot of peace, and make it fast
from flypping and breaking, that being at quiet in our bowelles from sedition
at home, we may be stronger in body to resyst all foreign powers abroad.

A most glorious and gracious title and cause of al our comfort: The Lord our
righteousness.
how near a name to this does the Angel reveal to Joseph, when he called him
Emanuel. Math. 1. Esa. 8. which is, God with us. As the plaster vnapplyed
being never so good, does yet no good at all: So all that we have heard of this
king can comfort us nothing, except it do pertayne unto us: nay the
brightness and glory of his coming and kingdom, does rather breed despair
in us, that well consider what we are: and therefore to meet with this malady,
the mercy of the Lord has discovered him to the full. And to us the day
star shyneth bright, and brings joy in ye morning: so is the son of
righteousness spro^g up to us that were in darkness, and in the shadow of
death. Esai. 9.
And hence is it, ye the ryghteous are said to shine as the son in the
kingdom of God, Math. 13.
because the son himself is our righteousness: at whose appearing the very
su^ne shall lose his beams, and the Moon her brightness, and the stars
their light, for they are darkness unto him, and he is the Lord our
righteousness.

It is necessary, that seeing ye reward of sin is flat by the Law eternal
death, and yt for very shame and conscience sake, no man dare able himself just
before ye bar or tribunal seat of God. Which sore trial David saw, and how
it would go with him, when he cried: Lord, enter not into judgment with thy
servant, ^sal. 142.
for no flesh is ryghteous in thy sight. Notwithstanding, that pestilent rabble
past all shame, does desperately dare to broche such dampnable doctrine of
merit, whereby establishing their own righteousness, they cast down the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, as the Jews did. Romans 10. but their reward is
ready, and their destruction sleeps not, for their merits sake.

Let us deny all worthynesse, or towardness, or spark of goodness to be in
us, which the Papists do falsify and feign to be a grace remaining in the^,
whereby they take away that all which is due to Jesus Christ. Who, as he is all
in all, and alone has wrought our redemption, so alone he will be glorified,
and be altogether our righteousness, without our help or addition: wherefore
it is said, 1. John 4. verse. 10. and. 19.
when we hated him, he loved us: which is taught by that place: He loved us
first, and that he was found of them yt never sought after him: but that he is
made to us wisdom, righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.
sanctification, and redemption: and only has prevented our dampnation, so
that al other practices are but simple shifts: merits are but popish paltry,
and not worth one gally halpeny, nay, whatsoever it be beside Christ, it
helps to hell as round as can be: John. 14.
For he is ye way, the truth and the life. Of with all back byases then,
which makes us run out of course: let us keep our ground, and beware of
wandering, for vain opinion has carried many a man out of ye way: and be sure
that salvation comes of Christ, or else it never was. If thou wylt have it
by merit, then thou can have no grace, for then merit should not be
merit. So if thou must needs obtain it by grace, Roma. 11. verse. 6.
then not of works, for else grace should not be grace: God and man can not so
be halues: the precious pearl is not so patched up.

Wherefore take heed of trusting to merits, so that thou fail of mercy in the
end, and acknowledge thy self utterly destitute of the grace of God, Roma. 3.
and appeal to his mercy seat, for all have sinned, and there is not one
good, no not one: every mothers son, the whole posterity of Adam is stark
naught, coming of a rotten stock: find it out betymes, and judge your
selves, that you be not judged of the Lord. When thou bear therefore that
Christ is our righteousness, look not a far off, Roma. 8. verse. 9.
but into thy own self, for he is not thine, except thou have his spirit,
whereby thou art knytte, joined, Galath. 2.
and incorporated into him: then do thou participate him, and by a lively
faith art made one with him, and he lives in thee by grace, and thou in him by
faith, and nothing can bring the like comfort to thy conscience: As the often
meditation of this righteousness, which will ravish thee more and more of all
carnal desires, and kindle spyrituall delyghts in thee: and nourish thee so by
little and little, that thou shall receive at length the earnest of thy
salvation, and then shall thou be out of all doubt in thine own heart: then
shall thou feel that thou art reconciled by him unto God. 2. Cor. 5. For so
God predestinating us before time, does yet call us in our due time, and whom
he calls, them he justifies by giving Christ to be our righteousness, and
as many as have him are happy, for they shall be glorified: For he never
leaves us, Romans 8.
until he has drawn us up unto him self: and as all our righteousness is
in him, so is our life also hyd with him in God: and when he which is our life
shall appear, Collos. 3.
then shall we also appear with him in glory, we can not therefore the whiles
but long for our perfection, seeing very natures instaunt has wrought this in
brute Beasts, and Philosophers keep a great coil to find out and defend
their summum bonum, which is worth nothing: and shall Christian hearts be
slow in looking or longing for their only joy. Shall we not rather wayle and
weep for his coming? shall we not sighe and sobbe for his kingdom, seeing
that whylste we are in the flesh, we are absent from him who is our
righteousness, our perfectness, and our only felycitie.

It can not be that Gods spyrite will be so still in us without working, for he
is not acquaynted with coldness, and true faith knows not idleness, all
things are not well therefore, except we feel this feruencie stronger and
stronger in us: except we set our cogitations a work, our affections will be
quyte carried away: and except we plye our salvation in deed, our desires
will soon wax faynte. So feeble is our flesh, so subtle is Satan to quench
the Spyrite, our ancient sworn enimye, who desires to shake and to sack our
faith, to wound our Conscience, and to break the peace between GOD and us.
But it can not be, for our righteousness is the Lord, and there is no
unrighteousness with him. And therefore are we sure against all the Deuylles
in hell: for he prays for us, and his spyrite cease not sighing in us,
helping our infirmities, so yt we are overcome our selves, and confess him all
in all, and are deep in debt, bound both body and soul, to sing out his
praises all the days of our life, who has wrote our redemption by his most
precious death. To whom with God the Father, and the holy ghost, one only
eternal and everlasting God, be all honor and glory. Amen.

FINIS.

