AN ANSWER UNTO CERTAIN CRABBED QVESTIONS pretending a real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament: Lately propounded by some secret Papist, to the
great troubling of the consciences of the simple.

Together with a Discovery of the Jesuitical opinion of Justification,
guilefully uttered by Sherwyne at the time of his execution.

Gathered and setfoorth by Peter White, very necessary and profitable for this
dangerous time.

Seen and allowed according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

fleur-de-lis VBIQVE FLORESCIT.


LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf and Henry Kirkham, and are to be sold at his
shop at the little north door of S. Paul.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, Master of
the Queens Maiestres ordinance, and Knight of the honorable order of the
Garter, and one of her Majesty's Privy Counsel, Peter White desires from God
in Christ Jesu continual increase of true godliness, with much honor in
this life and in the world to come, the Crown of eternal Glory.
THe shortness of Satan his time (most noble Earl) in this world by his
extreme rage, wherein in these days full of all danger he goes far beyond
himself, may very well appear. Apo^al. (...)
In which short time no doubt, he will so bestirre him, that the very deapth of
his crafts and mischief shall be instantly employed to the disturbance of the
Church of God, and the vpholdinge of his own kingdom (now ready to fall) in
that he possibly can, either in himself by continual temptation, or in his
instruments and members, by seditions, conspiracies, treasons, hypocrisies and
dissimulations in all things but especially in matters of religion, Ephesians. 6.
which S. Paul terms spiritual craftines in heavenly things. Which thing is
most evident in these last messengers of his, the Jesuits or rather Iebusites,
the very dregs of the bottomless pit, led by the unclean spirit of error,
which do not a little disturb the poor flock of Christ, maruelously disquiet
and trouble the consciences of the ignorant, and occupy with novelty the
heads of the multitude by their secreate conferences, where they have access:
and by their pamflets and libelles spread abroad, where they themselves cannot
come: whereunto is adioined one other perilous mischief, namelye the workinge
hand of the dissembling Papist, and Atheist, whereof the one being dispensed
withal from the Pope to conform themselves often times outwardlye unto the
laws, that thereby they may the safelier and without suspicion further the
Jesuitical attempted enterprise, is the very mischief of our time. These
insinnuate themselves oftentimes into such places wherein they can do harm,
and by flattery win great credit in the world, and ever as opportunity
serves, they give the Gospel a blow, so that sometime they wound
daungerously to the great hinderance of true doctrine, and the again
renewinge of Popery. These they be (right honorable Earl) that are the very
poison of our time. The Pope by his Jesuits and seminaries, without these is
altogether lame and can do nothing. The simple papists allthoughe obstinate,
and refuse for conscience to come to the church, in respect of these are
nothing. These under color of law dare boldly, and impudently impugn Gods
law, these deface the preachers, discredit the ministry, seduce and
deceive the people, so that where any one of these is of credit or
countenance in any parish within this land there the minister trauayleth in
vain, his doctrine is without credit and fruit be he never so painful.
There is nothing but brawles and contention, there the people have their
minds alienated from the preacher unprepared to receive the Gospel, and very
ready for these seminary Jesuits. This poisoned infection (right noble
Earl) must either have a speedy and strong purgation, or else it will breed
into an incurable leprosy. It is now past recovery by preaching and travel
of the minister. For thereof is made either a skoffe or else a matter of course
without fruit, therefore the swoorde and authority of the strong
magistrates, joined with a fervent zeal of Gods truth, must cure this
infection: the preacher is too much in contempt, and the inferior magistrate
too weak to remedy this mischief, which if it be not in time provided for,
will bring this florishinge realm and church of God therein nourished under
our gracious Debora unto such miseries and just deserved plagues, 3. Reg.
18.19.20.21.22.23.24. Paral. 28.29.34.35.36. Ierem. 52. Thren. 1.2. Cant. 2. 2.
Corr. 11. Prouer. 12.
as the sufferie of like hypocrites in the days of Ezechias and good Josias
did bring the kingdom of Israel unto. For these be those foxes that Solomon
would have taken forth of the Lords vineyarde least they utterly spoil it.
These be Operarij dolosi that can and will dissemble their countenance
agreeable unto the time, whilst they set forward the decay, and seek the
overthrow of our happy time, and no marvel hereof for the devil himself is
transfigured into an angel of light to further his own purpose. Therefore
every one of Gods children in his place and calling, are to oppose themselves
to their uttermost against these and such like enterprises of Satan: The
godly magistrates in the zeal of Phinies and Iehu with the sword to
suppress these new spronge Jesuits Numb. 25. 2. Reg^m. 10.
(as her gracious Majesty with her honorable and godly counsel have
necessarily begone to do) and wythall to root forth of this common wealth
these disguised Gybeonites, Iosu. 9. Judge 13. 1. Reg. 18.19.
and dissembling Ephramites, that can not, or will not pronounce Shiboleth
rightly, and as they should do. The Bishops, preachers and ministers with the
spirit of Elias painfully to gather the dross and popery again (lately
scattered by these Seminaries) out of the hearts of the people, both by
preaching and writing, and in like sort to enforce the true doctrine of Christ
his Gospel earnestly upon them: so shall the Lords business be done with
effect, and the Lord will withdraw his curse from us, which we have justly
deserved for doing his work hitherto so negligentlie. Herein I thought I
could not any way bestow my travel better for the time, and more for the
profit of gods Church, then to answer certain crabbed questions, touching a
pretended real presence, subtillie penned by some secret enemy, to the
troubling of the minds and consciences of the simple. Wherein I have also added
a discovery and confutation of the subtlety of the Iesuitical opinion of
justification, guilfullie vttred a late by Sherwin at his death. But by
Albertus Pighius, and others very dangerously long ago at large put forth
to the hurt of many, which answer I have offered unto your Honor, not as
things vvorthie of such a personage, but that under so good a protection they
may with more favor come into the hands of many, presuming greatly herein of
your accustomed clemency, always coupled with the fervent zeal of true
religion. Wherein the Lord daily more and more increase your godly zeal to
his glory, your own felicity, and the great comfort of his Church. Amen.

Your Honors most humble and faithful Orator, Peter White.

The Principal contents in this Aunsweare.
1 First the Papists leave the written word and fly unto unwritten verities.
2 Secondly to cleave only to the written word of God in matters of Faith and
Religion is the infallible mark of Christ's true Church. 3 Thirdly that the
doctrine of the real presence is false and untrue, against the truth of
Scriptures, and Fathers, against the certainty of the natures of Christ's
person, the truth and being of Sacraments, full of blasphemous absurdities,
renewinge again sondrie wicked heresies, it is also variable and most
unconstant. 4 Fourthly of the manner of Christ's presence in the sacrament of
his body, that it is agreeable with the nature and properties of his person,
with his presence in Baptism and in his word and that as it is certain and
true, so most effectual and comfortable. 5 Fifthly who were the first
inuentors of the real presence and how it was thruste upon the Church, and
confirmed with their name and age. 6 Sixthly that this carnal presence has
been at al times, and since the spring thereof resisted by godly learned men,
as other corruption^ have been.
THE OBJECTION.
FRom the beginning of the Christian church, until the year of our Lord.
1517. all that on the earth professed openly Christ's Catholic faith, did
believe as well in the Greek as in the Latin Church, the real presence of
Christ's body and blood under the forms of bread and wine after consecration
duly made. If this be tru^ then the matte^ is at an end. But if you think i^
untrue, then answer directly^ to the matter following.
This faith of theirs was preshevved by the delivery from hand to hand of
that doctrine, ever since the beginning of the Christian Church, and was
maintained by the preaching and vvriting of the learned Fathers, and pretested
by the godly Honor which the Christian people gave to the said Sacrament in
the time of Mass, or otherwise.

THE ANSWER.
THese Obiecters (good Reader) at the first as it were the ground of all their
religion (which in truth it is) leave the Scriptures, knowing that by them
they can not prove, tharticles of their religion, and fly unto unwritten
verities, and traditions delivered from hand to hand, and thereupon they lay
their foundation. So that and if thou vvilt give them leave this way to
proceed, spoe. 13. bess. 2.
they can easily prove what they list under the name of tradition. Yet such
is the deadly wound, that the sword of Gods spirit has given the beast,
that all their traditions and unwritten verities, are manifest and directly
contrary unto the word of God. We must therefore in all things belonging to
faith follow the counsel and example of our savior Christ, of his Apostles,
the belieuers at Thessalonica, and of all the primitive and ancient fathers,
our Savior commands us to search the Scriptures, he proves the necessity
and truth of his office, death, and resurrection out of the Scripture. He
reproves his Disciples because they were dull and, slow believers of the
Scriptures. John. 5. Luke 24. and 4. Act. 17. 2. Timoth 3. 1. Timoth. 3. 1.
Pet. 1 3. Pet. 1. Collos. 3.
The Apostles send us unto the Scriptures. The Thessalonians are greatly
commemded for searching the scriptures, and making trial of S. Paul's doctrine
by the Scriptures. Sermo Christi inhabitet vos largo, (says S. Paul) Let the
doctrine of Christ dwell in you abundantly. The Scriptures were written
(says Ireneus) that they might be fundamentum and columna fidei, l.b. 3. cap.
3.
both the foundation and pillar of our faith. Aug. super Joan. tract. 49.
When Christ our savior did and taught many things, electa sunt autem quae
scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere viderentur. Truly those things
that are sufficient for the salvation of the belieuers are chosen and written
out. In this respect did the ancient fathers against all heresies lay them
selves upon the Scriptures. Tertul. de resur. carnis. lib. 1.
Ex scripturis arguuntur haeretici, Heretics are by the scriptures reproved.
And as Tertullian vvriteth: De spiritu sanct^. Ciril super Joan. cap. 16
Aufer denique haereticis quaecunque Ethnici sapiunt, vt de scripturis solis
sistant quaestiones, and stare non poterunt. Take from the heretics the things
they have common with Infidels, and force them to ground their faith upon
the Scriptures only, and their questions shall not be able to stand. ^^ill
super (...). 16
No man (says Chrysostom) may without the Scriptures pretend the holy
ghost. August ibi. lem
Non aliam quam Christus docuit disciplinam sequetur, nec alias feret leges: he
shall follow no other doctrine then Christ has taught, he shall give none
other laws. And S. Jerome upon the words of Saint Paul: If an Angel come
from heaven, etc. Non dixit si quis docuerit contra, sed praeter, and supra. He
said not if any man shall teach contrary, but besides that already is taght.
And again, Post Apostolos quamuis sanctus sit aliquis, quamuis disertus, non
habet authoritatem, auoniam dominus narrat in scripturis. After the Apostles
though a man be learned and holy, yet has he no authority, for the Lord does
teach in the Scriptures. And Tertullian, ^e prescrip. ad^erfus hereticos.
Nobis vero nihil ex nostro arbitrio inducere licet, sed nec eligere, quod
aliquis arbitrio suo induxerit Apostolos domini habemus authors, qui nec ipsi
quicqua^ ex suo arbitrio, quod inducerent eligeru^t, sed acceptam a Christo
disciplinam fideliter, nationibus assignauerunt. We must not only bring in
nothing of our own heads, and pleasure, but also not receive or choose those
things, which have been so brought in of others. We have the Apostles of
Christ authors whom we must follow: who also brought in nothing of their
own inue^tions, but that doctrine which they received of Christ, did they set
down unto the people. We therefore co^tinuallie say with Augustine and Ambrose
Non audiaemus haec dico, haec dicis, sed audiamus haec dicit dominus, August.
contra Petiltan. Donat. cap. 9. Ambros. de Virg. lib. 4.
sunt certe libri dominici quorum authoritati vtrique credimus, vtrique
consentimus, vtrique seruimus, ibi quaeramus ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam
nostram. We must not believe that which this man and that man affirms, but
that which God him self teaches us to be true. We have the word of God, whose
authority we believe, to whom we do consent, and whom we obey, there must
we seek our Church, there must we sifte and examine our cause. Nos noua
omnia quae Christus non docuit iura damnamus, quia fidelibus via est Christus.
We justly condemn all new things that Christ taught us not: for Christ is
the way unto the faithful. And because he has not taught this Real
presence, we condemn it as you shall see. For the Lord has said, (...) 12.
and 13.
Non facietis singuli quod vobis rectum videtur, hoc tantum facito domino, nec
addas ad illud, neque minuas ex eo. You shall not do cuerie man what seems
good in your own eyes, But that which I command you, that shall you do unto
the Lord. Thou shall not add therefore any thing unto it, neither take any
thing from it.

This first position, namely that from the beginning, etc. is false and
contrary to the testimony of the Scriptures, of Fathers, th'articles of the
Christian faith, the practice of the old Liturgies, yea to the popish Mass,
and agrees with the errors of Marcion, Valentinus, and such like: it is also
contrary to the nature of a Sacrament, it draws with it a number of
blasphemous errors, touching as well the dietie as the humanity of Christ.

The Scriptures do teach us, that Christ, before his passion did tell his
disciples, that in the real presence of his natural body, John. 14. and 16.
and 17.
he would leave not the world only, but them also. For in his prayer
immediately before his passion, he vttreth these words: Now am I nor in the
world, but they are in the world. And I come unto thee, keep those, holy
Father, whom thou haste given me, that they male be one eue^ as we are one.
John. 12.
When I was with them in the world, I keept them in thy name. And a little
before he says, I leave the world, and go to my father. The poor shall you
alvvaies have with you: but me you shall not alvvaies have.

And according to these sayings of our savior Christ. S. Luke says, Luke 24.
that he ascended up into heaven.

S. Mark says, Mar. 1^.
he was taken up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God.

The Angels said, he should come in such visible manner, as his Apostles saw
him taken up.

S. Peter says, Act. 1. and 3.
heaven must hold him until the restoring of all things.

S. Paul says, Hphes. 4. Colos. 3.
that he is on the right hand of God above the heavens, and continually
appears before his father for us.

The Articles of our faith sale, Hebr. 8. and 9. and 10.
he is in heaven at the right hand of God his father. Which saying can not be
true, if Christ be really present under the forms of bread and wine.

Also S. Paul says, 1. Corinthians. ^^. huseb. in hist. ^^cle. lib. lica. 2.
August. super Loan. homil. 26.
the children of Israel being in the wilderness, did eat and drink the
self same Christ that we now do: but if we do it reallie, under the
forms of bread and wine, then is it not true that S. Paul said, for the
body and blood of Christ was not then really conceived in the womb of the
Virgin Marie, therefore not of them reallie eaten. Therefore it follows
necessarily, that they and we do eat the self and the same Christ, and
that it is spiritual that we eat, and not real.

S. Paul says, it was spiritual. S. Augustine says, although the outward
signs of the Sacraments of the Israelites: and our Christian sacraments be
diverse, yet the things thereby signified are all one, and thereto he alleges
the place of S. Paul.

And against Faustum Manicheum he says, Lib. 19. cap. 16.
Quanto errore delirant qui putant mutatis signis sacramentisque etiam res
ipsas esse diuersas. With what great error do they lie, and deceive, that
think the substance or the thing of the Iewishe and Christians sacraments are
diverse, because the signs and sacraments are changed.

Bartrame also in his time, Ad Carolum Magnume.
affirms the same thing.

It is also against the authority of the Fathers. For they teach us that
Christ concerning his humane nature is in heaven, and no where else, really
present in that nature.

They also say that there are two parts of every sacrament, the one
muisible, heavenly and spiritual, the other visible, natural, and
terrestrial.

They also with S. Paul do teach us, 1. Cor. 10. and 11
that the substance of bread and wine remain still in the sacrament after
consecration: which things be utterly untrue, if the body and blood of
Christ be reallie present under or in the sormes of bread and wine.

That Christ is only present in heaven concerning his humane nature, Aug.
super Joan. tract. 3.
S. Augustine manifestly affirms. The body of our Lord (says he wherein
he did arise, tract. 5. super Joan. cap. 12.
can be but in one place, and his truth every where diffused. And in an other
place interpreting these words of S. John. The poor you shall have always
with you, but me you shall not have always. He says, The good hear this,
and are not sorrowful, he spoke of the presence of his body. For according to
his Majesty, his providence, his ineffable and invisible grace, he performs
that which he said, Behold I am with you unto the end of the world: but
according to his flesh which the word took unto it according to that which
was borne of the Virgin, bound of the Jews, nailed to the tree, put down from
the cross, vvrapped in linen, put in the grave, and according to that which
rose again, you shall not have me with you alvvaies. Why so? because he was
conversant with his disciples, according to the presence of his body forty
days after his resurrection, and they accompanving him in beholding, not in
following, he ascended into heaven, and is not here and there. He sits at the
right hand of his father, and is here. For the presence of his majesty
departed not from us. According to the presence of his flesh it was truly
said unto his Disciples, You shall not have me alvvaies. For the Church had
him according to the presence of his flesh, but a few days, now the Church
holds by faith, but sees him not with cies.

And in his Epistle to Dardanus (says he) Doubt not but that now the man
Christ is in that place from whence he shall come. Aug. ad Darda. (...). 97.
Keep well in mind and hold faithfully the Christian confession, that he
rose from death, and ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of the
father, Act. 8^
and shall come from none other place to judge the quick and the dead, and in
the same manner shall he come again. The Angels also witnessing the same, as
he was seen go into heaven, with the same form and visible substance shall
be come again. For truly he has not taken nature or natural properties,
from that body unto the which he has given immortality. According to this
form of humanity he is not thought to be every where. For we must take
heed that we do not so stretche his diuimitie to his manhood, that we take
away the verity of his body. It follows not, that because his manhood is
inseperably united unto his Godhead, that therefore he is eurie where as God.

And in the same place God and man is one person, and Jesus Christ is both God
and man, and is therefore every where as he is God, but he is in heaven in
that he is man.

And again the same father says, Ibidem
Doubt not but that Christ is in some one place in heaven because of the manner
of his very true or natural body.

And in another place, See you Christ ascending into heaven, believe in him
being absent, trust in him that is to come, and yet by his secret mercy feel
him present.

Against the heretic Faustus a Maniche he says, that christ according to the
presence of his body, Aug. in Psalm. 46. Aug. contra Faustum. lib. 20. ca. 2.
could not be in the sun, in the moon, and upon the crosle at one time.

The same thing in effect does the same Augustine write upon the Eplstle of S.
John.

Cirill also in diverse places, Ciril. super Joan. lib. 2. cap. 3. lib. 6. cap.
14. li. 2. cn. 21.
as upon John in his second book the third chapte, in his 6. book his 14.
chapter, 14. chap. affirms the same thing that Augustine does, touching the
absence of Christ from us in the real presence of his body: Idem in Joan.
Onp. 3. lib. 2.
and among other things he says, Christ could not be present with his Apostles
in the flesh, after he had ascended into heaven unto the father.

So says Origin, Origin in Mat. 1.
that Christ as he is man, is not every day present: but his divine power that
was and is in Christ, is every day present.

Vigilius says also, Vigilius contra Eutlchen lib. 1.
that the son of God in his humanities is gone from us: but according to his
deity he says, I am with you unto the worlds end In the shape or form of a
servant, that he took from us into heaven, he is absent from us, and yet
notwithstanding he is both absent and present.

And in his fourth book, Vgilios lib. 4
If there be one nature of the word and the flesh, how is it that when the
word is every where, the flesh is not every where. For when he was in
earth, his humanity was not in heaven. And now because it is in heaven, it
is not in earth, and so certainly is it not, for we look for Christ to come
from heaven according to the same flesh, which Christ we believe now to be
with us in earth according to his word or in his divinity. Therefore
according to your opinion the word is contained in some place with his
flesh, or else his slesh is every where with the word, because one nature
does not receive diverse and contrary things into it self. And it is much
diverse, contrary, and unlike to be circumscribed in one place, and to be
eucrie where: for the word is every where, but the flesh is not every
where. Whereby it appears that one and the same Christ consists of both
the natures, the word and the flesh.

This is the faith and catholic confession which th'appostles delivered,
Simlokin Damast
the martirs confirmed; and the faithful do keep until this day.

To these might be added Fulgentius, Thrisost, de spirit. sancto. Hiero. in
explicat. Simboli. Fulgent, ad Trastmind regem.
Damasus, Chrysostomus, Hietome, Bartrame, and Barnarde, but these recited be
sufficient to teach us that Christ's body and blood are not really present in
the forms of bread and wine: for if that were true, then were it false to
say, that Christ in his humane nature is not now in earth: but in heanen, his
humanity is in one place in heaven. The Church had Christ but a few days
with it, after his resurrection, according to his manhood. He can not be in
diverse places according to his manhood, Both the natures of Christ are still
reserved in their properties without confusion, neither is the Deity tied to
one place by reason of his humanity, nor yet is the humanity in many places
by reason of the deity. These things have these fathers taught to be the
catholic, faith, which, faith by no means can stand with the real presence,
the real presence therefore is contrary to our Christian faith.

Thirdly, Liturgia Chrysest. tome. 5.
this carnal presence is contrary both to the practice of the old Liturgy,
and also the words of the Popish Masle, The Old Liturgies exhort the people to
lift up their hearts from the signs into heaven saying, Sursum corda, Dionis.
ecclesiast. Hierarchia. cap. 2.
the people answer, Hahemus ad dominum, We lift them up unto the Lord. And
this was done that the people should not so much fix their eyes upon the
signs present, as their harttes upon the Lord Christ being in heaven.

Now if Christ were really present in the bread, Canon. Missae. Te igitur. etc.
then were it not only vain, but wicked also to exhort the people from the
place that is under or before their eyes where they say Christ is really
present, into an other place where Christ is far distant. For if he be really
in the bread, then ought we not only with eyes, but also with heart, faith,
and mind to seek him there. For if he be there, then is he espeeiallie there
for us. But he is not there really, therefore according both to the practice of
the old Liturgy and Mass in this point he is to be sought by faith in heaven,
Cellos. 3.
where he is at the right hand of God.

Again, the popish Mass does twice after consecration make prayer unto God
for those things that be before them, Gabriel Bielin Cammom Miss.
namely the bread and wine in this sort. First the priest crosses the bread,
and the chalice five times, saying: In the memorial of thy resurrection, and
glorious ascension, Durandus ibidem super secreta. Iodocus. Clictouius ibidem
super secreta. Teigitur. etc.
we offer unto thee of thine own gifts, a pure host, an holy host, holy
bread of eternal life, and the cup of everlasting health, upon the which
gifts we beseech thee vouchsafe to look cherefullie and mercifully, and
receive it as thou sometime receiuedst the gifts of thy just child Abell, and
the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and that which the high priest
Melchisedech did offer.

Again immediately after the priest prays in this manner: We humbly beseech
thee almighty God, command that these gifts may be carried by the hands of
thy holy Angels in thy high altar before thy presence, or sight of thy divine
majesty. Now must this practice either deny the real presence of Christ in
the bread and wine after their consecration, or else with great blasphemy
confess, that their priests take upon them to be mediators between God the
son and God his father. For they first bless and cross him, if he be there
reallie present, the^ they desire the father to look mercifully and
cherefullie upon him, then do they desire that the Angels may carry him up
into his fathers presence. I pray you shall we think these things to agree
with the Real presence of Christ? What shall we think? that God is angry
with his son, and that he needs to be entreated for? Or shall we think
that the deity of Christ is not able without help of Angels to carry him
self into heaven, who rose from death, and ascended into heaven by the power
of his deity? Or shall we think that the real presence of Christ is at any
time absent from his father who continually makes intercession for us at the
right hand of his father? 1. Io^^. 2. Act. 2 1. Tim. 3.
No, no, this practice does declare vvwhat the first Church did think of the
simbals, namely that they were sacraments of Christ's body and not his
real and natural blood in deed and substance.

Fouthly, Magister senten. lib. 4. did. 11.
this imagination of real presence under the forms of bread and wine,
confirms two manner of ways, Guiller. Vocill. in sentto. lib. 4.
th'opinions of Marcion, Valentinus, Eutiches, and such like, which either
demed Christ to have a natural body, Linwoode in prouinc. lib. 1.
or else that his natural body was deified, and so became one nature with his
deity, Durand. rational. lib. 4. part. 1.
whereby the natural prophets of his humanity, as to be put in one place at
once, to be local to have form, quantity, lineamentes and proportion of a
natural body, were utterly destroyed and done away. This does this real
presence as I said bring in again, for the Papists say, that this real
presence in the bread and wine is without Quantum: that is, without form,
proportion, or any lineamentes or division of members, that where the flesh is,
there is also the blood, and where the head is, there are also arms, body,
feet, and all the rest. By which confusion with Marcion and the rest, they
destroy the verity of Christ's humane nature, For as the scriptures and
fathers do teach us, Christ's human nature was not, nor could not be
otherwise proved, then by form, quantity, lineamentes, and proportion of his
body. He said to Thomas, bring hither thy finger and feel: John. 2. Luke 24.
and to all his disciples when he was risen, Feel and see, for a spirit has
not flesh and bones as you see me have, 1. John. 1.
fear not therefore for it is I. And S. John says, That which we have seen
with our eyes, handled with our hands, Lambardus. Scotus. Dur. vndrs. Gabriel
Biel. Chclouius. Hardingus and eiusdent farragistis nelulones quampiurimi.
etc. When accidents by this means are taught to be without substa^ces, as
vvhitenes, woundnes in the bread, rednes in wine, and taste in them both, and
yet nothing is either white, found, red, or tastes. I pray you for as much
as this sacrament is a certain, a visible, and sensible sign of Christ's
body, nativity, death, and resurrection, shall not the heretics say in
deed, he appeared to be borne, to die, and to rise again, but in truth he did
not so? For as in the sacrament of his nativity, death, and resurrection,
there appears to our senses, vvhitenes, roundnes, and taste, and yet in
truth nothing is either white, round, or tastes: Totul. conera Marcio. lib.
4. Ireneus contra bareses. lib. 4. cap. 32. and 34. Theodoret. contra Nest.
Gelasius contra Eutiche. Chrysostom. ad Cesarium monac. Contra Apollina.
even so Christ appeared or seemed to do and suffer these things, but in deed
and truth it vvwa not so?

Against this reason can there be no exception taken, for th'auncient fathers,
Tertullian, Ireneus, Theodorite, Gelacius, Chrysostom, and others did by the
real substance of bread and wine conumce these heretics of falshoode, and
confirmed the truth of Christ's birth, death, resurrection, and ascension into
heaven. Which thing surely they could not have done, if the substance of bread
and wine remain not in the sacrament. For the heretics would have concluded
against them as aforesaid.

Fifthlie, this opinion of real presence destroieth the nature and property of
a sacrament, whose nature and property is in signifying to be like the thing
they do represent and signify. Aug. aei Bmis. epist. 23.
So says S. Augustine, Except (says he) the sacraments had some similitudes
of those things vvherof they be sacraments, they truly could be no
sacraments. 1. Cor. ^th. 10.
And because of this similitude they obtain the name of those things whereof
they be sacraments: as after a certain manner of speech the sacrament of the
Lords body is called the Lords body, the sacrament of his blood is called his
blood. etc.

This analogy and similitude stands in feeding, Aug. super John. cap. 6.
tract. 4 Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 34.
nourishing, comforting, and in union or fellowship, for bread and wine do
feed, nourish, and comfort the natural body, even so the body and blood of
Christ with the merits of his passion, do spirituallie feed, nourish, and
comfort our souls, Aug. ciuit. lib. 10. cap. 4. and 5. Crprtian. de caeiae.
and as many corns and grapes are united into one lofe, and one wine: even so
are we united in one mystical body, communion and fellowship with Christ,
who is our head. But accidents without substaunces do neither do, nor show
these things, therefore have not the nature and properties of a sacrament.
Again a sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace: but accidents
without substance can neither be seen, nor yet possibly be: and sure I am
they vvil not say these accidents are fixed and stayed in the real presence of
christ. Therefore the premises being true, namely that there must needs be a
similitude, proportion, and analogy between the sacraments and the grace
signified, the which similitude by the testimony of S. Paul, Tertullian, 1. Corinthians. 10. Tart. Cotra Mad. Irens. centra lib. 4. cap. 34.
Cyprian, and many others, stands in feding, norishing, co^forting and
uniting, as aforesaid, this real presence therefore utterly destroieth the
nature and property of a sacrament.

Sixtlie, it draws with it many blasphemous errors, both against the
deity and humanity of Christ, whereof for breaitie sake I touch but a few.

First if Christ be reallie present in the bread, Dis^isnedus de er^diton^
Christi fidelium in sacramento ardinis.
then that thing begins now to be God, which a little before was bread,
and so with Arrius the second person is made a creature. Thus in deed do
Papists with blasphemy speak of the son of God, saying, De haers inter
Scotiscitas, Thomistitas, S^^konstitas, and locustarum exan^mi^, magna est
concortatio.
the priest is the creator of his creator, or him that made him. Their practice
also affirms that that thing which is God mase and does come to corruption.
For the wine sowreth, the bread mowldeth and is burnt. Now for as much as the
humane nature of Christ is so inseperably united unto his deity, that since
his resurrection his humane nature is in no place: but there is also his
deity, it follows necessarily when that sowreth, mowleth, and is burned
that is the real body and blood of Christ, that the deity also with the same
sowreth, mouldeth, and is burned. And by this means the glorified body of
Christ which has put off mortality, and put on immortality, is not only
given to corruption and mortality again: but also the deity is given unto
corruption with the same. Next if there be a real presence, then had Christ
either two bodies, one passible wherein he died, and an other impassible
which he gave to his disciples, or else we must say with the master of
sentences, Magist. sentenc. lib. 4. did. 11.
that the Disciples did eat a mortal and passible body, Durand. rational.
lib. 4.
such as Christ then had, and we an immortal and impassible body, such as
he now has. Now whether of these opinions be holden, they are false and
blasphemous.

First, to say Christ had tuo bodies is monstrous, against scriptures, 2. Cor.
11.
and against fathers. Secondly, to say with the Master of Sentences, that he
gave his disciples a mortal body, and unto us an immortal body, is falfe
and against S. Paul, who says, That which I received of the Lord, do I give
unto you, for the Lord Jesus in the same night he was betrayed took bread, etc.

Also if there be a real presence, then the wicked do eat the flesh of
Christ and drink his blood, yea mice, yea hogs may do it, Lib. 4. did.
12. Alex. de Hales part. 4. quest. 48. Glossa. desc. 9. Guiller. Verrel. in
sentent. li. 4. did. 9.
says Alexander de Hales. The Master of sentences is brought into a maze, not
knowing what to say in this matter. Some other say, it is no inconvenience
to say, the mouse eats the body of Christ, when she gnaweth the host.
Harding in his reply.
M. Harding confesses, that the wicked, yea mise and dogs may eat the
body of Christ reallie and in deed. But whether they do or not, for as much as
it does contain no article of our says, but the vvhettinges of the scholemens
wits, it does not preiudicate the truth of Gods word, neither is hurtefull
to any man's judgment, says M. Harding. Thus it follows with great
blasphemy and monstrous absurdity, that the wicked and mice do live by
Christ also, for they eat Christ, and hogs and dogs may do the same. For
Christ says: John. 6.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, shall live for ever. But this
conclusion which by no means can be avoided if there be a real presence, is
absurd and most blasphemous, against the glory of Christ, the truth of his
word, August. super ^^^rens.
and the authority of the fathers, who say that the evil receive the
sacraments to their condemnation, but they do not eat or receive the thing
signified by the sacraments. Whereby it apeareth that no church or father either
Greek or Latin did of many hundred years after the ascentio^ of Christ,
peceiue or hold this gross and absurd opinion of real presence.

Lastly, Scetus super seus. lib. 4. did. 9. Durand. rational lib. 4. 1. Cor.
2. Romans 8.
forasmuch as this real presence depends upon the intention of the priest
consecrating, which intention by the opinion of the scholemen, (as well
appears by Scotus, Gabriel Biel, Durand, and a number mo) it is impossible to
prove the same at any time, because no proof can be made of the mind or
intention of any man, for no man knows what man intends but God alone.
And it is impossible to know what the priest intends, whose intent as it
is the ground and foundation of this real presence: so is it most uncertain,
yea more uncertain then any shadow, although twenty thousand priests
were consecrating at once, for their minds are more uncertain then the body
of any shadow, yea be it a vvether-cocke. Experience has so taught the
papists the verity of the wavering cogitations of their priests, In briou in
can^^ Missie.
that they have in the secrets of their Mass devised the stopping of their
ears, and shutting of their eyes, for fear of distractions.

THE OBJECTION.
WEll it might be, that same one in his heart thought amiss of that holy
mystery, and that somc few in corners also conspired against the tructh
thereof, as Wickliffe and some other like: as now full many may be suspected
to think that Christ is not the saut our of mankind. But as no Christian
teaches openly and in express words this day, that Christ is not the
redeemer of the world, so did no man with the tolcration or authcritie of any
spiritual Pastor, in open pulpet preach, write, or profess, hat the body of
Christ was not present in the Sacrament of the altar, if the Priest had once
fulfilled the solemn benediction which our Lord Iefus commanded.

THE ANSWER.
WHat you call spiritual pastors I know not, but well I vvote the Apostles of
Christ, the primitive fathers, Origin, Tertulian, Ciprian, Irene, Theodorete,
Chrysostom. Gelasius, Vigilius, and Augustine, Wickliffe lived in the year of
our Lord. 1376.
yea and Christ himself (who was I think a spiritual pastor) have spoken
against this real presence, not secretly and in corners, but openly in
pulpits long before Wickliffes time.

Th'untrueth therefore of this well appears by that which has already been
said. John. 6. 1. Cor. 10.
Christ himself reproves the Caphernaites gross opinion of eating his
sleshe, August.super Joan. cap. 6.
and drinking his blood real and carnally, and taught the eating and drinking
to be spiritual and by faith. So does S. Paul with the residue of the holy
fathers, and the practice of the first Church, teach us (as is already showed)
a spiritual eating, and no real. S. Cyprian says, and super Psalm. 95.
Cyprian de coena.
Nostra vero and ipsius coniunctio, nee miscet personas, nec unit substantias,
sed effectus consociat and confoeder at voluntates: Our conjunction and his,
neither blendeth the persons, not yet unites the substances, but joins the
affections, and coupleth the wills. That Bering atius, Wickliffe, Hierome de
Praga, and Hus, are noted among the first that preached and writ against the
real presence more sharp lie and more plainly, then any other before them had
done, proved not their vvriting and doctrine either to be false or new, but
rather cuide^tlie declares the time wherein the opinion of this real presence
began to be received into the Chruch. Against which corruption these men did
most sharply set the^ selves, and as the true ministers of Christ with the
authority of the scripture, the practice of the first church and fathers, did
resist and gainsaie this erroneous and new doctrine. And on the contrary
part, the Bishops, Cardinals, Monks, and Friars, with all the rest of the
clergy as the ministers of Antichrist, did by tirannie, general Councels,
false and diuelishe miracles, cause the Church to receive this opinion of real
presence, which before that time was strange and unknown.

THE OBJECTION.
ON the other side, if in the first six hundred years the Christians had
believed as the Lutherans, Protestants, Swinglians now do, he that had first
begone to have taught the real presence of Christ's body and blood, under the
forms of bread and wine, must at that time have bin noted and reputed for an
heretic, he must have bin convinced by some general or prouincial Council,
kept either in the East Church, or in the West, the Preachers and Doctors of
that age should hans written against him.

THE ANSWER.
THe diversity of these names devised by the Papists, with a number mo
besedes, as Caluinistes, Hugonites, Prescisians, and what not? bring no new
articles of faith, or diversity of opinions into the world, or be divided in
substance of Religion (Martin Luther only excepted in one point,) but hold
and teach the ancient and Catholic faith, deliured by Christ and his
apostles, in the canonical books of the old and the new Testament, wherein
they continually hear the voice of the true shepherd and savior Christ,
Apoc. 9. and 18. Es^^ 16.
and whereby they know the Romish church to be the sinagogue of antichrist,
and therefore being warned by the scripture, they flee from it as from the
bottomless pit of darkness and den of unclean beasts, from whence these five
hundred years there has flowed unmeasurable storms of Sectaries, as well
disagreing in substance of religion and worship, as in name and profession, as
appears by the Premonstatenses, Augustinians, Dunstinians, Benets, Bonames,
Monks, black and white, Barnardines, Franciscanes, Benedictes, Augustine
friars, Crossed friars, blackfriars, white friars, some beggars, some liars in
steed of preachers, some Mionres, some obstinate, with Hermites, Ankors both
men and women, with Nuns of all sorts, and last of all the sect of
Iebusites, and all these, I say, with an infinite number besides, who do
differ in sect, habit, worship of God, (or dishonouring of God rather) and
substance of religion.

But if there be any difference at any time among us, it is only about
such remainders of Popery, as the misbegotte^ bastards of Antichrist have
left among us. In deed as the dear children and servants of God, Galla. 2
Peter and Paul did sharply contend about the relics of Iudaisme: even so
at this day some contention now and then arises among the preachers of the
Gospel about some remnantes of popery, which for our great unworthiness God
has yet left among us, as he did leave a remna^t of Cananites, Iudicum^^
Hethites, Iebusites to try the children of Israel withal.

The myserie of iniquity (as the Apostle said) did work even from the
beginning with increase of loy. tering laborers, and decaie of faithful
pastors. Cyprian said in his time. De delunia and tontatioue dom. Pinl p. 2.
2. Timi 3.
Rarus hodie Phinies, qui perfoderat impudicos: rarus Moses qui occider at
sacrilegos, rarus Samuel, rarus Job, rarus Noe, and flens cum Apostolo dico:
inmicos crucis Christi, qui terrena sapiunt magistratus quorum deus venture est,
qui in hijs quae dicere nefas est, elegantur and gloriant. At this day Phinies
that may thrust through the shameless, is seldom found: Moses to slay the
idolaters is rare, Job, Aaron, and Noe be very thin. I say with the apostle
weeping, the enemies of the cross of Christ that sauer earthly things,
teachers whose belly is their God, impudentlie rejoice and glory in those
things, which once to name is wicked, venerunt periculosa tempora quae
praedixit apostolus, Math. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. John. 4. Apoc. 6. and 9.
the dangerous times which the Apostle foreshewed are come. Yet before the
general Apostasy (which our Savior Christ foretold, the apostle S. Paul
prophesied of, and is so evidently described in the Revelation) did come,
there, could no herisie no sooner arise, but that the vvatchefull pastors did
by and by note the author thereof by vvriting, and afterward through the help
of godly Emperors in Councels both general and national, condemn such
herisies with their authors, as well apeareth by ecclesiastical histories. For
although the mystery of iniquity did even in the apostles time work in the
hands of Antichrists ministers, yet throght the diligence of good pastors it
was mightily withstood: but after the departure of these faithful pastors,
through the negligence of such as afterward sought their own ease with
promotion and great dignities, and falling fast aslepe with pleasure and
security, the envious man found fit time and opportunity for the better sowing
of his cokle and darnel, Apoc. 6.
so that the ministry of the gospel decayed, the truth was greatly darkened, and
the church of God was not only with many corruptions and superstitions
defaced, but became a pray unto ra uening wolves, which utterly ouerthrewe the
first beawty thereof, and chased, banished, and put to flight the true
ministry of the Gospel of Christ. Matthew. 7. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Whereby the man of sin invaded the temple of God, sitting therein as though
he had bin God. After this ( I say) the noting and vvithstanding of heresy
waxed much colder, and for a time the church or sanctuary was trodden under
foot, and the true members of Christ's Church driven into the wilderness,
Apoc. 12. and 13.
vvher God did provide a place for the same. For after a thousand years ended,
Satan being for a time letten forth of the bottomless pit, the man of sin
invaded the Church of God, as well appears in the Revelation, Apoc. 6.20.
whereunto agrees many writers of that age. Arnolph in conci. Lio Rauensi.
anno. 1015.
Arnolphus the Bishop of Aurelianense said openly of the Bishop of Rome: Quid
hunc in sublimi solio residentem vest purpurion and aureo radiantem, quid hunc
inquam esse censetis. Nimirum si charitate destitudtur, solaque scientia
inflatur and extollitur. Antechristus est in templo dei sedens and sese
ostentans quasi sit Deus. What do you judge of him that sits in so high a
throne clothed in purple and shining with gold, Apoc. 19.
what I pray you do you think of him, truly being void of love, and puffed
up with knowledge, he is very Antichriste, sitting inthe temple of God,
bosting of him self as though he were God.

Eberchardus allo the archbishop of Salisburg said opely in the Coucel of
Reginoburg, Sub Pont. In concilio Reginol^^rg. an. 12.^0. tempore Fr^^er. ^^
secuade.
Max. titulo, pastoris pelle lupu^ seuerissimu^ (nisi coeci sumus) sentimus:
under the name of th chief or greatest Bishop, except we be blind, Math. 7.
we feel the most cruel wolf in the clothing or skin of a shepherd.

And again, among many other things, to this purpose he says, Hildebrandns
ante annos centum and septuaginta, primus specie religionis Anti. christi
imperij fundamentum iocit, Hildebrande an hundred and seventy years ago, under
the show and cullor of religion did first lay the foundation of Antichrists
Empire or kingdom. And again he says, Pontifices, Babilonis soli regnari
cupiunt, far parem non possunt, credit expert non cessahunt donec
imperatore in ordinem redacto, Romani imperij honor soluto, pastoribus veris
oppressis, per hune morem omnia extinguant, omnia pedibut suis conculcent,
atque tui templo Dei sedeant, extollanturque super omnia id quod colitur. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Apoc. 9.
The Bishops of Babylon desire to reign alone, they can abide no peer,
believe him that has made a trial of them, they will never have done until
they have brought th'Emper our unto their bow dissolved the honor or majesty
of th'Emper, and oppressed the true pastors of Christ, that in this sort they
may extinguish all things, and tread al things under their feet, and that
they may sit in the Church of God, exalting the' selves above every thing
that is worshipped.

To these may be added Ioachim Abbas, Franciscus Petrarcha, Marsilius
Patiuinus, Michael Cecenus, Baptista Mantuanus, Laurentius Valla, Hieronimus
Sauonarola, and before these four hundred years the Waldenses, with many
other that show how the Pope invaded the church, and oppresled the true
ministers and pastors of the same, whereby without resistaunce be might do
what he listed. But these few out of many have I noted, because the
propounder of these questions would bear the world in hand that his Romish
church, even from the Apostles time have holden their faith or articles of
religion without contradiction or gainsaying of any (except those that he
has named) that the Reader may well perceive, when the resistance of errors
waxed faint, and by what means the Church grew unto great decaie, and also
what little credit the papists deserve in their sayings and vvritings.

Thus also from the time of the Machabees, until the coming of John Baptist,
did the hipocriticall Pharisees without controlement corrupt the laws of
God, and yet I think no man will say that they had the truth, because
before the coming of John Baptist and our savior Christ no man did control
them. No more may any say that popish errors be no errors because no man
was able to vvithstand the^ in these last five hundred years.

THE OBJECTION.
IT is not possible that all the whole Church which to that day had bolieued
the mysteries to be consecrated upon the altar, to be no more but only bread
and wine, to be only tokens of Christ's bodily absence in substance to be
neither asacrifice propitiatory, nor the real body and blood of Christ,
should sodenlie thoroughout all nations change their catholic and universal
belief, without any trouble or tumult at all, without any contradiction or
disputation, yea without any man known or ever heard of which should first
commend unto them the new opinion of nine hundred years old. Is it credible
that so many millions of Christian men, as were in the Church at the end of
the first six hundred years, believing the one year those hallowed things
upon the altar to be still bread and vvme, should the next year after
altogether, in all countries and languages, fall down prostrate or kneel, or at
the least bow to the vorie same things, as to the true body of their maker
and savior, which before they had bin taught to be unreasonable and insensible
creatures? And did they all this without any guide or preacher who might
will them to do this? Or did all the preachers in Christendom at one moment
change their minds, and bid the people do so? Or did some few go through the
parts of the world, and without resistance of any man preach that new
doctrine? Were all the pens of vvriters of histories so tied, that none of
them all was able to write any one man's name who after the six hundred
years past taught, first, second, third, or at any time that change of
belief throughout Christendom? Was that Heretic so almighty that no man
durst write his name, neither vvhilest he lived, nor when he was departed out
of this world? If the man were unknown, at the least why had his sect no
proper name? Was not there one learned man in the Church of God, either
vvilling or able to resist the fury of nevve doctrine in the matter of
Christ's Supper.

THE ANSWER.
FIrst the true Church of God did never think so singly of the reverent
mysteries, as to saic they were no more but only bread and wine, only
tokens of Christ's body a bsent in substance, but belieueh them, and receives
them to be holy mysteries vvherby the Lords death is laid before out
remembrance, all the righteousness and benefits of his death and passion are
offered unto us, the which things being of us by a lively faith received,
bring with the^ remission of our sins, renewing and feeding of our inward
man to everlasting life. And thus after the bread and wine being once altered
from profane uses unto the nature of a Sacrament, are no more said to be
only bread and wine, onlio tokens of Christ's absence in his substance, but
they are the sacraments of the Lords death, the bread of the Lord, and the
cup of thanks giving, Corinth. 10. and 11. Aug. ep. st. 26.
wherein the vvorthie receiver is made partaker of the Lords body, and of
the Lords blood, to his great joy and comfort.

As concerning the Lords presence and absence, there is sufficiently said
before, nevertheless the first Church never acknowledged any other presence
in this sacrament, then they acknowledged in the sacrament of baptisine. Such
a presence as agrees with the verity of Christ's body being in heaven, and
with the nature of a sacrament. Both the sacraments, although they admit no real
or natural presence, yet do they admit and witness such a presence as being
spiritual and heavenly, is also most comfortable and effectual.

For as in baptism Christ by the power of his spirit is present to wash away
our sins, to regenerate us, and make us members of his mystical boide,
I^dom. Eshel. 5 Coloss. 2.
yea bones of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, and yet is there in this
work of our regeneration, no real persence of Christ, or change of any
substance imagined, Super Joan, homnilic. 50. Gallst. 3.
but al is spiritual, supernatural and heauenlle. Habes Christurrs in
presentiper baptismaties sacriame^tim, says S. Augustine, thou haste Christ
present by the sacrament of Baptism.

We are says Chrysostom in baptism made flesh of Christ's flesh, Super
epise. ad. Pip. chom. 20. Ephesians. 5.
and bones of his bones. And again speaking of Christ's presence in the
bucharist: Sic and in baptismo. Elien so is he present in the sacrament of
Baptism.

And the renerent father Beda, Bida super 1. Cor Cap. 10. Auguen formone ad
disantes.
Nulli aliquatenus ambigendum est, tunc vnumquenqse fidelium corporis and
sangumis Christi participem fieri quando in Baptismate membnum Christl
efficitur: No man may doubt bt that every faithful man is then made partake
of the bodic and blood of Christ, when he is made a member of Christ, To these
might many mo fathers be added, but these are sufticient to prove, the self
and the same presences of Christ to be in the sacrament of Baptisime that is in
the Eucharist.

For when we acknowledge our birth to be altogether spiritual, and nothing
material, natural, or corporal, and to be wrought without the real or
natural presence of Christ, by whom yet nevertheless we are regenerated and
made the sons of God, it were not only foolish, but a monster to imagine
the feeding and nourishing of this life which comes by this birth, to be
otherwise then according to the nature of the birth. The birth is altogether
spiritual, the nourishment therefore is altogether spiritual. Christ is
effectually in regneration bestowed upon us, Origin. in lib. 4. homil. 4. and
super Exnd. hornil. 13. and super lib. 4. hum. 9.1 Tertral, de carnis
resurrectione.
so is he effectually offered and bestowed in his word, and yet does no man
imagine that Christ is included in the water, or in the letter of his word.
Christus auditu deuorandus est, intellectu rumina^dus, and side digerendus.
Christ must be eaten by hearing, chowed upon again by understanding and
throghly digested by faith. De creua domiui, in medio.
And S. Cyprian, Esus huius carms, est quadam auiditas, and quodda^ desiderium
manendi in Christo, quod est esca carni, hoc est animae fides, non dentes ad
mordendum acuimus, sed side sineera panem sanctum frangimus. The eating of this
flesh of Christ is a greedy appetite, and a l^oging desire to dwelin Christ.
Look what meat is nvto the body eue^ the same is says unto the soul. We
whette not our teeth to bite with, but with a true faith we break this
holy bread. Christ is not reallie said to be present either in the letter,
or in the word, and why then should not we think the saine in the supper,
when we see and understand that his presence both in baptism and in his
word is certain and effectual, and yet neither real nor corporal.

Moreover this presence of Christ in his word and sactaments, is so far beyond
the reche of our sinple understanding, that we be not able to comprehend it
by wit and reason, and therefore believe it by faith, asluring our selves that
God is most true in his promises. We therefore rather feel the benefit and
comfort of his presence in our hearts and minds by a lively faith, then are
able to express it by our own vvitte and tongues. The fearch after this
ineffable manner of Christ's presence in this sacrament has brought a number
into a dangerous Laberinth, and in the end brought forth this absurd,
monstrous, and blasphemous opinion of the real presence by the way of
transubsta^tiation, full of al idolatry and superstltion, taking the outward
signs in this sacrament for Christ thereby signified, and th'action, which
duly performed does call Christ's death to our remembrance (which to do is
the principal end of this facrame^t) for the sacrifice of Christ's death, Malb.
26. 1. Cer. 11. Aug. de ciuita. de. lib. 10. cap. 5. Cryso. super Heb hoil. 17.
whereof this sacrament is (as says Augustine and Chrysostom) but a
remembrance. And so by this means that thing which was ordained to show
forth Christ's death effectually, did they abuse to the hiding and drkening of
the force and effect of Christ's death and passion, which is the only
sacrifice propiciatorie for sin, Iebr. 9. and 10.
for beseides this there neither is, nor ever was any other. The first Church
therefore, as they knew the death of Christ inseperably joined with the
sacrifice propiciatorie for sin, that no propiciatorie sacrifice could be
made for sin without the death of Christ, so did they never teach this
sacrament to be a sacrifice propiciatorie for sin. That sometimes in the
fathers this sacrament is called a sacrifice, Aug. ad. Bcnifa lny so. super
Heb. ^omilia.
itis because it does represent the sacrifice of Christ's death, and so it
according to the nature of Sacraments obteineth the name of the thing that it
signifies as is aforesaid. ^rene. contra hera^^s. lib. 4. cap. 32.
As also that in receiving of this sacrament, the vvorthie receivers offer unto
God their prayers, yea them selves, which is an acceptable service and
sacrifice to God, not for sin, but of thanks giving.

In this sense is it called a sacrifice, Aug. de Trinit. lib. 10. cap. 5. Aag.
ad Ianua^ Epist. 32. 1. Coren. 10. and 11 Iguasi. ad Suy^^ Epiph. ad Faw.
Epipi. Havcs.
not that it is so (as S. Augustine says) but that it does signify, and in
this sense and meaning both in scriptures and fathers it has sundry names and
callinges, as the Lords body and blood, Ganes. 17. Excd. 12.
the bread of the Lord and the cup of thankefgiuing, the communion, the holy
gathering love, the Lords supper, etc. Yet it is not all these whose names it
bears, but signifies these, and therefore is so called.

But the papists neither regarding the use nor signification of sacraments
have driven them selves, as I said, into such a Laberinth, that what to say
thereof they can find no certentie or ground: for where a sacrament is a
visible sign, seal, or testimony of an invisible grace. Ciuisate dei. li.
10. cap. 4. and 5. Petrus Lombard. sent. li. 4. did. 10.
thus S. Augustine out of the scripture does define a sacrament, saying:
Sacramentum est visibilis forma inuisibilis gratiae. A sacrament is a visible
sible form, shape, or show of an in. uisible grace. Again he calls it
visibile signum, a visible sign. The Papists define this sacrament of the
Lords body to be an invisible sign of a visible body. Thus do they define
it, Caro Christi inuisibilis, est sacramentum carnis visibilis. The invisible
flesh of Christ is the sacrament of his visible flesh. Thus both contrary to
Scripture, Fathers, the verity and truth of Christ's humane substance,
reason, common sense, yea contrary unto themselves, they say they know not
what, and again revive with Marcion and other such heretics, a fantastical
opinion of Christ's humanity, to the utter overthrow of the ground and
substance of christian religion, which chiefly stands in the certentie of
Christ's human body and nature. 1. John. 4.
They sometime say, the accidents of bread and wine, as vvhitenes, roundnes,
etc. are the sacraments of the body of Christ, and now thinuisible body (say
they) is the sacrament of the visible body. and thus they have found us out two
sacraments, and three bodies. Durand. inter miru^la huius saeram^^ti. Sent.
lib. 4. did. 4. Iamvode pro lib. 1. S^otus in sent. lib. 4. alist. 9. Durund.
rational. lib. 4. de can. Misse^
One sacrament where the accidents be the sacrament, another where the
invisible flesh is a sacrament of the visible flesh, three bodies, one mortal
that he gave his disciples in his last supper: an other visible and in heaven,
the third invisible and in the bred and wine, and in every cromb and drop
thereof. And according to this frantike and fantastical error, they have
devised a duble corporal presence, one, Cum proprijs silis demensi ouibus and
me^suris, with his proper lineaments and measure of his body, and thus he is in
heaven with his glorified body. An other presedce as his corporal body est in
hostiano^ mediantihus dime^sionibus proprijs, is in the host or cake without
the proportion or lineaments of his body. Thus thou see good reader, not only
their wicked erroneous and blasphemous opinions, Ierim. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Coliss.
2.
but also th'emptines of their childishe brain they know not whither. Are not
al they therefore, that forsaking the certentie of Gods word (laid down in
the scripture to be the ground and stabilitie of our faith and religion, Prene.
lib. 1. and 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Coloss. 2.
to follow the unwritten verities or fables rather of Popery, justly forsaken
of God, and given over to believe leasinges to their own condemnation, because
they took no pleasure in the truth. In this manner vvandred the vain bosters
of Angelical visions in the Apostles time, pretending great holiness and
religion of Angels under the name and title of Christ. So did Marcion and
Valentinus wander above the clouds after their own dreams and fancies,
utterly destroying the truth of Christ and Christian religion. Solet this
saying therefore of Augustine be always opposed against unwritten verities.
De vnitate eccles. cap. 15.
Legant nobis haec de scripturis sacris, and credimus, haec (inquam) ex canone
diuinorum librorum legant: Let them read these things unto us of the
scriptures, these things (I say) out of the canones of the divine books.
Ibidem. eap. 12.
And a little before: Credo illa quae in scripturis sanctis leguntur, non credo
ista qua ab hereticis Vanis dicuntur. I do believe those things that I read
in the holy scriptures, I do not believe those things that vain iangling
heretics do affirm. Now touching th'alteration of this faith of the Lords
supper where the Papists pretend an impossibility that it should without
tumult and stir be done, it is before declared, how that not only
th'alteration of the Lords supper, but also of many other things were easily
and without gainsaying brought into the church when the ministers thereof did
so decaie as they did after the first six hundred years, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Act. 20.
Apoc. 12.
and that the child of perdition began even then to invade the Lords
sanctuary, and in short time was Lord over the same, renting and spoiling
the flock of Christ, still persecuting the true members of his church, as is
before plainly declared.

About the time of Gregory the first in deed this matter among other like
corruptions began first to smell, and yet but a little. And after the seven
hundredth and thirty year it brake out further, as appears by Damasene, Anno.
Dom. 730
who as in Gregory the secondes time among other corruptions he defended and
maintained imagerie, even so with renewing again the blusphemous herresie of
Eutiches he dreamed of a real presence, Lib. 4. cap. 14.
Non est figura panis and vinum corporis and sanguinis Christi. (absit enim
hoc) sed ipsum corpus Domini deisicatum, ipso Domino dicente, hoc est meum (non
figura corporis) sed corpus, non figura sanguinis sed sanguis. The bread and
wine are not the figure of Christ's body and blood, but the very body of
Christ deified. For the Lord said him self, This is my body, he means
not, that it did represent his body and blood, Tertul. contrae Marc. lib. 4.
but that it was his very body and blood. But did not Tertulian interpret
these words, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, saying, Id est figura
corporis mei, that is to say, Contra. Adamant. I^^^ick.
the figure or representation of my body So did S. Augustine, saying, Non
dubitauit dominus dicere hoc est corpus meum, quando dedit nisi signum
corporis: He stuck not to say, this is my body, when he gave but the figure
of his body. Ieronim. super Math. cap. 26.
This he did says S. Herom, vt veritatem corporis and sangainis representaret,
tha he might represent the truth of his body and blood. These Fathers were
led by that spirit of God that uses the like phrases and does so interpret
them. Gones. 7.
As this is my covenant that every manchilde be circumcised. When in deed
circumcision was not the covenant, but a sign thereof. So is it in the place
interpreted, Romans 4.
and so does S. Paul interpret it. And again, Gents. 41.
the seven kine are seven years: the sene^eares are seven years, Esai. Daniel.
2. 1. Corinthians. 10.
Israel is my vine, Thou art the golden head, O king: The rock was Christ:
Apoc. 1.
the seven stars are the seven messengers of the co^gregatio^s: the 7.
candlesticks are the 7. co^gregations. The spirit of god in Joseph. in Esai,
Daniel, S. Paul, S. John, did say figuratiuly these things ar, when they but
only signifi, and were not in deed, and so of the Lords supper the fathers
have interpreted it. But Damasen beign led by an other spirit, the spirit of
error and Antichrist, gives another interpretation. Thus have you the man
named that first taught this error. And about the eight hundred year to break
further out, against the which Bartrame at the request of Charles the great
did write, Bartraine tract. de Eucharist.
and after him diverse other, Anno. 785. Anno. 1035. Anno. 1076
as Beringarius, Wickliffe, Hierome, Hus, and others, and this not in corners,
but in the most famous place of the world in the court of Charles the great,
Platina lib. 15.
iin the Council of Laterane where Pope Nicholas forced Beringarius the
Archdeacon of the famous Church of Augania, to acknowledge the real and carnal
presence in most gross manner. Polidorus historia Anglorum. lib. 19 Anno. 1420.
And in the famous University of Oxforde, Wickliffe did, with many other
well learned, impugn this real presence. In Bohemia, in the council of
Constance and Basil, was this error of real presence, among many oter
gross etrors, then by Antichrist thrust upon the Church and people of God,
impugned by good and learned men, although by the tyranny of those Councels,
the truth for a time was suppressed, banished, and put to flight, and driven
to hide her self. These places I think were no corners.

Moreover, although no man before that time did so purposelie and preciselie
preach and write against the real prsence of Christ in the sacrament, because
no man did before that time of corruption, drreame of such a presence, and
therefore no need of such preaching or vvriting: yet did our Savior Christ in
the institution of the sacraments teach us that he is absente in the real
substance of his body. Matthew. 16.
So does S. Paul, 1. Corinthians. 11.
So often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this cup (says he)you set
forth the Lords death until his coming again. The self same thing do the
Scriptures and Fathers (as it already proved) teach and write concerning the
absence of christ touching his humane presence, from this sacrament, as also
from all other places, heaucn only excepted, which must only enjoy his
presence until the day of judgment. Act. 3.


Purther, where the papists do imagine that this alteration must be in one
year, or in a shorter time, or else by no means it could be, is childishe, and
foolish toye to lead the simple into a maze. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
For as Antichrist did not in one moment of time, or in one year, enter into
the poslession of Christ's Church. But with long continuance of time, before he
could enter, although his mystery was a vvorking in the Apostles time, Epist.
John. 3.
and yet prevailed not until a long time after, even so this error of real
presence was not in one year received, but with a long continuance of time by a
little and little, as the sincerity of doctrine decayed, was it brought in and
stablished, with kneeling and worshipping, which before was not used of
Christians toward this sacrament. Before that time Christians did worship
Christ represented and signified by that sacrament, and used with reverence to
their comfort, the outward simbals as the holy mysteries by the which the
death of Christ was laid forth to their remembrance.

But after this corruption stablished, then comes the mangling of the Lords
supper, and violating of his holy institution, bringing it into one kind that
Christ ordained in two kinds, and making that private to the priest, that was
instituted especially for the people. Then transubstantiation, then
sacrificing for the quick and the dead, yea for beasts and hogs, which I am
sure the papists will not say was done all in one moment of time, or in one
year.

Do not the papists know, that aster the Church of a long time had bin assalted
by heresies, and persecuting torments, giving them the overthrow, and always
contemning the chaste spouse of Christ did at the last receive peace and
quietness, which brought with it security and idleness. Apoc. 9.
And then fell that great star from heaven (spoken of by S. John) into the
earth. Which falling star, namely the Bishop of Rome, received of the beast
the key of darkness, and therewith opened the pit, whence did, and yet dally
does, ascend the smoke of all superstition and ignorance, which in time
brought forth in finit swarms of Monks and Friars, and such like, which
corrupted all true doctrine, and waste the same even as Locusts consume all
the grene things of the earth. And in stead of true doctrine filled men's ears
with lyin dreams and superstitious fancies.

Thus came this real presence, and all other sonde and superstitious toys into
the Church, not at one instant, but by long degrees of time, not by faithful
and ture preachers, but by monks and fivars, and the infinite swarms of false
deceivers.

THE OBJECTION.
IF none were learned enough to conquer it by preaching, disputing, or
vvriting, at the least wise would none do his best, to set forth a bare
history of that tragidie? Or who ever has written that the whole Church
changed her faith in this matter? So many Councels have bin kept in all ages
and countries, so many heretics names and opinions, who were but in privy
corners, have bin of late years written unto us, as Gogonuli, Waldenses,
Petrobusiani, Pseudo Napolitani, Bogardi, Beguinae, with such like, and could
this herasie of Christ's real presnece ouerrunne the whole Church so far,
that fifty years past and upward no small chapel can be named in the vvide
world, where Christ's supper was made without adoration of his body and
blood, as present under the forms of bread and wine, and yet could no man
vvpon the earth be found in the space of eight hundred and fifty years to
leave in monument of histories when that heresy began, or by whom it was
promulgated, or what name was given to it. Did Satan in those eight hundred
years so strongly oppress Christ, that his Gospel was clean darkened, and
his kingdom lost. Did hell gates prevail against the whole Church? Did the
rock it self fail? Did the holy ghost cease to teach the people of God all
truth? I think it will be said the Bishop of Rome did preach, commend, set
forth, and maintein that heresy. But they must show which Bishop sirst began,
and who writes that of him, and by what means he was so miraculouslie obeyed,
that no resistance in the world is read to have bin made any where against
him, and yet surely he never lacked enemies in the East Church.

THE ANSWER.
IT very well appears by that I have already said, that diverse learned men
did both write and speak against it, as Bartrame and others, yet after the
botomles pit of Monkishe and Friarishe superstition was once by the bishops
opened, whose authority ruled in every Council, neither would writing or
speking take place against those. that abusing the name of Christ, did gather
Councels to suppress Christ, until the measure of their wickedness was
fulfilled, Apoc. 14.
at which time as we now see, Christ according to his promise has to his
own glory, and the great comfort of his children, Ihidem. 17.
opened their madness and sollie, vvherwith they have a long time bewitched the
Kings and other inhabitants of the earth. Likewise by these Waldenses and
others, unto which a great number mo of al ages since these corruptions
entered, may be added, who ever spoke against this matter of real presence,
well declare, that there was no time wherein this and other corrup tions were not
preached against, although the preachers and many mo with them by the tyranny
of the Monkish locusts lost their lives.

But because the first authors and deuisers of this carnal and gross presence
are so earnestly called for, I will more largely lay them forth, with their
names and time. First after the six hundred years ended diverse superstitions
crepte into the Church, Damas. 728.
whereof the adoring and worshipping of the bread in the sacrament was one
among the rest. against which superstition and idolatry, diverse learned men
did both write and speak, Bert. 800. Beren. 1049.
as Bartrame, Beringarius, and others, then the mainteiners of this idolatry
in worshipping the bread, imagined a real and carnal presence, and confirmed
the same, first under Pope Leo the ninth in the council of Vercellence, (...).
1033.
where an isfinite number of Bishops and Monks were gathered together at that
time. Yea and long after there were two opinions or judgments of this matter,
one sound and true, holding a spiritual presence, Damess (...). 14 (...)
licfi^atum.
an other false and vnture, holding a real and carnal presence, with the
substance of bread and wine. Then grew therein a third muchmore wicked then
the second, and prevailed against the two forms, that is, a real and carnal
presence by way of transubstantiation. Of these three opinions speaks the
Master of Sentences, Sent. lib. 4. did. 9.10. and 11.
condemning the first (which in deed in true and Apostolic) for heresy, the
second he something misliketh, the third he aduaunceth for the truth. Super
did. 9.10. and 11.
Diverse other upon the sentences do the same.

Linwode said, Prouinc. lib. 1. super cap. altiss. and infra.
Sciendum est quod de corpore Christi tres sunt opiniones. We must understand
that there are three opinions of the body of Christ, which are recited by
diverse upon the fourth book of sentences. By this you may perceive the
opinion of real presence is nothing so certain as the Papists do pretend,
there is nothing (as is already declared) more uncertain, unconstant, and
variable. But the propounder of these questions, either is very unskillful in
his own doctors, or else very unmindful of the old Proverb: Oportet
mendacem esse memorem, it behooves a liar to have a good memeorie. Damas. li. 4
^^ 1^. Conc. Lateran. 1059.
To return to the naming of the first authors of the real presence:
Damascine, Pope Nicholas the second of that name. by the counsel or rather the
enforcing of Hildebrande: After pope Gregory the 7. in the first Council of
Laterane, established this error without mention of transubstantiation. Then
stood up Lanfranke bishop of Tucinense, Anu. 1083.
and after of Canterbury, and took upon him the defense of this real
presence, as apeareth in his books against Beringarius. Then Pascasius, Anno.
1015
Guimu^dus, Algarus, Adelmanus Vulfus, Anselmus the bishop of Cantorburie,
Hugo, with a number beside.

Then Innocentius the 3. pope of that name, Lateran. Cont. ^ag. 1215.
with the second council of Laterane, again established this carnal and real
presence by way of transubstantiation, then followed Gratian with his
Decretals, Cone. Constable. and Basil. 1430.
Lo^bard with his sentences, Scotus with his questions, who nevertheless says
it was no heresy before the great Council of Laterane to have denied
transubsta^tiation. Petrus Commester, Alexander de Hales, Cabriel Biel,
Durande, with a milion of Locustes, and idle belies beside: and last of all
the Council of Trident with the whole rabble of Iebusitical Seminaries.

Thus have you both the beginners and the continuers of the real presence
noted, together with their time, which was the time of ignorance and
great darkness, the very kingdom of Antichrist, Apoc.^.
unto whom was given the keye of the bottomlesle pit, out of which this
article with a number mo did arise. And this was not in the spring of the
Gospel, not in the time of the primitue Fathers, but many hundred years after
their death, yea three hundred years after the death of the reverent father
Beda, was it before this real presence could get rooting in the first degree.
Satan as in the years before he had by heresies, schisms, and persecutions
(as I said) afflicted the Church: so in the middle age of the Church he did
invade the same, Apoc. 7.
holding captive at his pleasure such as had not received the marcke of the
living God that such as loved not the truth might be delighted in fables to
their condemnation, Apoc. 7. Ezech. 9.
and yet neither failed the rock, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
nor the holy ghost ceased to teach the people, no more then did the days of
Abraham when he was in Chaldee, in the days of Israel under Pharao, in the
time of Helias under the wicked Achab, and in the time of the Pharisees before
and at the coming of Christ, Math. 16 Genes. 12 Exodus 1.2.3. and 4. 1. Reg.
19. Historia Euang.
when he found all thing belonging to true religion either clean defaced, or
marvelously corrupted. No more under the tyranny of the pope did the rock
fail, but still continued, and the holy ghost did still teach those that were
builded upon the rock, leaving those that were builded upon the sands to be
a pray for Satan in the hand of Antichrist.

That the Bishop of Rome with his Monks were the first that openly taught
and confirmed th'error of the real presence, Leu. 9. and Nicholes. 2.
appears by Nicholas the second and his Monks in the council of Laterane is
so evident that it ca^ not be gainsaid, that which he had once begone, the same
did his successors with like cruelty maintain, yea although God did from
time to time stir and raise up Enoche and Elias who rebuked them of their
madness. Mal^^^. 4. Apot. 12.
We now show them what Bishop began first openly to teach and confirm this
opinion, who so ever before Nicholas the secondes time, did hear of such a
confession, as he forced Beringarius to make, which afterward a number of the
Monkish and frierish rabble did maintain, as appears by Lankefranke, Ia lib.
de sacramad^ersus (...). 2. Lombardus (...). Durand. (...). lib. 4.
Gratian, Lombarde, with scholemen and Canonistes, an infinite rabble, whereof
some greatly misliked of the ouergrosse (by their own judgment) opinion of
Pope Nicholas, who forced Beringarius to confess that the real body of
Christ was not only broken sensuallie with the priests hands, but also
crushed and torn with the teeth of the receiver. Against this opinion, diverse
of the popes friends have taken exception, saying, Corpus Christi qui
incorruptibile est, non diuiditur in parts vel dentibus laceratur, sed fractio
potest fieri in ipsa forma sacramentalis panis. The body of Christ is
incorruptible, and ca^ not be divided into parts: but the breaking may be
said to be in the very form of the sacramental bread. In sequente Missae
corporis Christi. verse. 14.15. and 20
Thomas Aquinas, Manet tamen Christus totus, sub vtraque specie, a sumente non
concisus, non confractus, no^ diuisus, etc. Nulla rei fit scissura, signi
tantum fit fractura, etc. Christ remains whole under both the kinds, not
crushed, broken, or divided of the receiver, etc. No breaking or fraction is
made of the body, the sign is only broken. etc. But yet notwithstanding this
mislike, so great was the blindness and corruption of that time, that who soever
could do any thing in the popish kingdom, showed his skill that way to the
building up of that kingdom of darkness. For the Monks and Friars as they
were the mainteiners and bringers in of the real presence, even so had they
the whole government under their Apollion the B. of Rome, to do what they
would. Was not I pray you in this 500. years all true and sincere preaching of
the gospel utterly extinguished (except in some few that were saine to hide
the^ selves) overthrown, and in steed of holy scriptures and preaching
thereof, the true honor of god and the use thereof, was brought into the Church.
Monkishe dreams and Frierish fables, as the legend of lies, the promptuarie of
miracles, and such like, whereby Gods truth and his word were not only banished
and put to flight, but with it al good learning, and in steed thereof a Monkish
barbarism received and a long time allowed, as though the purity of the Greek
and Latin tongue had never bin, which now we see with the Gospel to be
restored again. For as their time was by the providence of God limited unto
the^: so when it was ended, then did God begin to overthrow their device, that
he might again restore the gospel of his son, to prepare the way for his
coming to judgment.

THE OBJECTION.
THe truth is, that all the Bishops of Rome, yea all the Bishops of the whole
world taught this to be his real body, and this to be his blood. And this
faith dured from the last supper of Christ in all faithful men, This objection
is already answered.
without any denying or direct impugning thereof, until Beringarius began to
teach otherwise. But his own recanting, and the three Councels gathered
straight against him at Vercelles, Towers and Rome, do rather show what and
how constant the Catholic faith was of old time in that behalf, then any
thing help and abetter the opinion of those men, who now a days endeavor to
establish new inventions of their own.

THE ANSWER.
THat neither the Bishop of Rome, neither yet any other bishop or father
received from Christ and his Apostles any such gross and absurd opinion as
is this real presence, well may appear unto every simple man by that which is
already said. For there may he sce, that our fauiour Christ, his Apostles,
the primative fathers, the practice of the popish Mass, Bartrame, and others
since his time, teach us, that Christ in his humanity, in the real presence of
his body is no where but in heaven, and can not possibly be in two places or
moat once.

And to have denied this real presence had bin no heresy (by the judgment of
Scotus) something before the last five hundred years. For he in one place upon
the tenth distinction, thus concludes. Super did. 10. quest. 1.
Vnde est simpliciter herisis hodie, sentire, quod non sit ibi realliter verum
corpus Christi. Whereby to think that the very body of Christ is not therein
the host reallie is this day simply an herisie. As who should say, there
has bin a time when this real presence might without touch of herisie have
bin denied.

It therefore is false and untrue to say that the Bishop of Rome, or any
other learned man received this real presence of Christ. etc. they learned it
of the smoke that rose out of the bottomless pit, as is aforesaid. Also that
this faith of theirs had not endured from the time of the last supper until
Beringarius, appears by that treatise of the sacrament which Bartrame vvrote
unto Carolus Magnus. Further how should that endure so long, that at the last
supper was utterly unknown unto the church and people of God, as is before
largely proved. Whereunto I will add these sayings of Origin, Ciril,
Chrysostom, and Augustine. Secundum diuinitatis naturam non perigrinatur a
nobis, (...) in Matthew. (...). 33. ^^^il in John. 10. ^ap. 7.
perigrinatur secundum dispensationem corporis quod suscepit. Christ according
to his deity, or Godhead, is no stranger, or is not absent from us, but in the
dispensation of his body he is a stranger.

Etsi corpore absuero, (...). imperfect.
tamen presens ere vt Deus. Although I be absent touching my body, yet as I am
God I will be present. S. Chrysostom says: In sacris vasis non ipsum corpus
Christi, sed misterium corporis eius continetur, The very body of Christ it
self is not contained in the holy vessels, but the sacrament of his body.
Super (...) homil. 50.
And S. Augustine says, Dices quomodo tenebo Christum absentem, quomodo in
coelum manum mittam and ibi salutem teneam, fidem mitte and tenuisti, patres
tui tenueriant carne, tu tene cord. Thou vvilt say, how shall I hold Christ
being absent, how should I reach my hand into heaven, that I might have Christ
sitting there, streatch forth thy faith, and thou have hold of him. Thy
forefathers held him in the flesh or bodily, but hold thou him by faith and
in thy heart.

These Councels whereof Rome or Laterane was the chief, are so far from
signifying the constant faith of the Church before the six hundred years,
that they utterly impugn the truth in innouating new devises, altering and
changing things that were before that time, and condemning for herisie and
wickedness those things that before were holden and believed for good and
lawful, as well appears by their decrees.

Therefore these Councels, and al other gathered by the Bishop of Rome his
authority, be as good and lawful vvitnesses in this or any other matter of
controversy, as the Council gathered by Annas and Caiphas, and the rest of
the priests at that time, are vvitnesses against Christ our Savior. To whom
be praise for evermore.

Thus according to your Marginall note, you are directly, answered in this
matter, and if there be any thing to be said, or any exception to be taken
against this, it shall be further answered.

FINIS.
A DISCOVERY OF THE IESVITICAL OPINION OF Justification, guilefullie uttered
by SHERWINE at the time of his execution: Gathered and setfoorth by PETER
WHITE, very necessary and profitable for this dangerous time.

Seen and allowed according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

fleur-de-lis VBIQVE FLORESCIT.


LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf and Henry Kirkham, and are to be sold at his
shop at the little no^^^ door of S. Paul.

The Contents.
1 SHerwines confession. 2 The first division of righteousness imagined by the
Papists. 3 The Division of Justification devised by the Schooleme^, and
afterward new burnished with other terms by Pighius, Ecchius and other of
their time. 4 The Jesuitical division of Justification. 5 The Description and
Division of the Papisticall faith. 6 The substance of the matter in all these
Divisions is al one with the Schoolmen, latter papists and Jesuits,
notwithstanding their difference in terms or words. 7 The terms or words
of art used of the schoolmen the latter Papists and the Jesuits; and wherein
they differ in these terms, and wherein they agree. 8 That there is no such a
threefold difference of righteousness before God as the Papists imagine. 9 The
righteousness of the law and the righteousness of the Gospel with their
difference. 10 The Papists make Christ no more beneficial unto his Church
then is the law. 11 That the father does not only offer our Salvation unto us
wrought in Christ: but also through him does effectually bestow the same upon
us by a lively faith in Christ. 12 That this faith whereby wear justified, is
not of our selves, neither depe^ding upon our free will (as the papists
imagine) but it is the gift of God in Christ, and the work of his spirit by
the Preaching of the Gospel, and depends upon our election. 13 That this
faith only justifies before God with out the help of works. 14 That this
faith respects only the promise of God made unto us in the death and passion
of Christ, and not legal or temporal promises (as the Papists wickedly
pretend.) 15 That the promises of the Gospel are free and absolute, and not
condicional as the legal and temporal promises are. 16 That a living and
iustifiyng faith is always fruitful and never idle or barren, and although it
only and alone does justify, yet is it never alone or void of good works.
17 The distinction of the Jesuitical first and second justification, with
their terms and words of arre have the same meaning and corruption that the
schoolmen had. 18 That the Papists leave nothing unto Christ and his Gospel
in the work of our justification, but only this, that he teaches how a man
may justify him self before God. 19 That the continual remission of sin
through Christ, is our only justification before God. 20 That sanctification
and renouatio^ are not our justification before God, but the fruits thereof and
follow the same. 21 That renouatio^ and sanctification are not perfected at one
instant or moment of time (as the Papists imagine) but by continuance not
thoroughly performed until by death mortality be put off. 22 The true
interpretation of the place of S. James, that the Papists abuse to prove
justification by works. 23 That Sherwin in the form and words of his
confession meant not as they did pretend, but mere contrary, and therefore
like unto the prophecy of Cayphas. 24 Why the Papists and especially these
Jesuits refuse the terms and words of the schoolmen and conform their
words like unto the Scripture.
THE PREFACE To the Reader.
THe old serpent, The red Dragon, Genesis 3. Job. 1. Apoc. 9.12.13 1. Cor. 1.2.3.
Mat. 15. Esaias 28.
Satan the deceiuer of the whole world, the continual selau^derer and
accuser of Gods children has no way (gentle reader) more molested Gods people,
and prevailed against his Church to the great hinderance of his true worship
and glory of his blessed name, then by renting the unity of his Church into
the sects and factions of men, covering nevertheless these manifold sects
and factions under the Cloak and shadow of the Catholic Church when in deed
there most times among these factions either remains no part of Gods worship
and true religion at all, or else very little, and that so corrupted, as
therein the true glory of God may no way appear, when the true glory of God
his worship and religion is truly founded in Christ, Genesis 3 17. Deuteronomy. 18, Esaias
8.9.10.13. Mat. 3 10.28. Romans 1.3.4.5.10. 1. Cor. 1. John 1.6. Ephesians. 4.
Collos. 2. Epist. John cap 1.2.
by whom the knoweledge of God the father, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption is denied unto us through operation of his holy
spirit and ministry of his word, and we again by the same means as it
were by iointes and cooples inseparable conjoined unto Christ in whom dwells
the fulness of the Godhead substancially, and is the only head of his Church and
Savior of his body, that in him and through him we may both see and enjoy the
glorious presence of God essectually. This crafty workman Satan so cunning
li transsigureth himself as though he were an Angel of light, 1. Pet. 2. 1.
Tim. 2. Ebru 1.2.3.4.8.9.10.13. Apoc. 1.4.6.7.10.11.14. Call. 1.2.3.4. Phil.
1.2.3.
that he often renteth the parts and members of this body from Christ and
God: conioyning them unto himself through the inventions, titles, and holiness
of men, treading down the true doctrine of Christ, his precious blood, death
and merits by the doctrine of men's devises, merits, and other such like
abominations. Thus began Satan in Paradise to work at the very beginning:
Thus so soon as the law was given under Moses, wrought he by Corah, Dathan,
and Abyran, and has so continued until this day, Number. 16.
and will do unto the worlds end. Under the titles, names, and traditions of
Saduceis, Esseans, and Phariseis he advanced so far his own kingdom, that
he utterly defaced the kingdom of God, blinded both Priest and people, that
not only the name of a true Israelite in respect of a Saducie, Essea^, or
Pharisy was of no regard or estimation, he thereby so much blinded them that
they knew not Christ the true Messiah when he was come among the^: but utterly
refused him and to their great condemnation rejected him whom they daily had in
their mouths and bragged themselves to be his people, his Church, and children
of Abraham, John 1.
unto whom as unto his peculiar inheritance he was especially sent. The son
of God found none more obstinate and malicious against him, his doctrine, and
kingdom, then these men that continually vaunted and bragged of his name,
promises law, Church, and kingdom. After Christ's giorious Ascension, by false
Apostles Satan set forward again his ancient practice, which although the
great pain and diligence of the Apostles and Apostolical Pastors in their
time mightily suppressed: But when the Apostles and the Apostolical Pastors
were taken out of this life to rest with the Lord, and that the faithful
workmen and diligent Pastors wared shant and thin in the Lords vineyard, then
did Satan go forward very busily with this practice: Act. 20. 2. These 1 Apoc.
13 2 Timothy 4. Apoc. 9.
and by such as came sorth of the very bosom of the Church, speaking great
things to the drawing of Disciples and followers after the^, until he had set
his chief Preude^t, antichrist and vicar general in his sent, wherein he in
these sectaries still pretends religion and godliness: but always denies
and detesteth the substance thereof, this well appears in the sectaries of
all ages: but especially after the first seven hundredth yeered, when the
Monkish Locustes began to rise and swarm out of the bothomles pit, and to
spread themselves into the world, as the Benedictes, Augustines, Donstinians,
Cistrians, with an infinite number beads, some black, some white: and when
the admiration of these began to decay, then gives the Devil a fresh onset
again by a new supply of friars, Chanons, Nuns, Ancorettes, and Heremites,
a new band of other sectaries, which termed themselves schoolmen and
Canonists, some Sententionaries, Some Thomistes, some Scotistes, some
Canonistes, some Summistes, some Penitenciaries, Angellical Doctors, some
Cyraphicall, and some Sorbonistes: and every of these for the most part both
of sundry orders and fraternites and of diverse opinions, and yet every of these
orders, fraternities, sentences, decrees, ordinances, holiness, yea and their
houses and garments, whether they were old or new of more honor, estimation
and credit, then their Christ, his death, his passion, his merits, his in
tercestions, his Gospel, or any thing unto him any way belonging. And now
last of all as the only fray of his kingdom the Devil has transformed the
former sectaries this ne^^e found Hidra or sect of the Jesuits the very
dragges of his bothomles pit, whose beginning, falshed and abominable
hipocryste diverse learned and godly men of our time as Chimnisius, Boquin and
our own countriemen Master Charke, Master Hammer and Master Filde have both
truly and effectually described. Apoc. 12. Apoc. (...) Apoc. 18.
These (good reader) are guided by the three unclean spirits that come out of
the beasts mouth. These be sent into the universal world as the last power
and strength of Satan to repair and bold up against Christ and his gospel
the kingdom of Antichrist now even falling down. These the Pope sends into
al Countries, but especially where the gospel is preached, ^^reily to seduce
the people to draw younglings into their Seminaries, to move and fry
rebellions, to practice the euerthrow of Godly Princes and zealous magistrates
that their kingdom might again become a pray unto the Romish Antichrist, and
so to be made doublely the children of hell fire, as they themselves be. These
recapitulate into the^ selves the whole substance of Popery, and take upon them
the defense thereof more impudently then any yet heretofore new or old. These
in hipocry ^^e and al manner of disse^bling go far beyond the Monks, Friars,
Nuns, Chanons, or whatsoever dissembling brood has been heretofore. It may
seem that the Devil in these me^ has showed his whole skill of dissembling
and the very depth of his craft: for where in the former sects he rent the
Church by the names of men and with gross rearmes and homely words, opposed
man's inventions against Christ and his gospel, in these men he laboreth to
pluck Christ's ^aheritaunce from him by the title of his own name peculyar
only unto himself, and by furnishing again the corruption of the scheoleme^
leaving their known and loathsome rearmes by a new show of words and terms
of their own invention, that under them without suspicion they may deliver
again the vile and filthy puddle of frinking Popery.

These new Messengers of his therefore he Garnisheth with the N^ne and title
of Jesuits, pretending them thereby to be the true reformers of Christ's church
sent from God in these laster days. But (gentle reader) This Latet Anguis in
Herba: This name or Title of theirs is full of deceit and peril: Esaias 8.9.
First in this title (Jesuit) they blasphemously rob Christ of his special and
pecuilar title and name, of his office, that neither may nor can without great
blasphemy, Mat. 1.
be given to none other, by reason of the signification of the same. And thou
(says the Angel) shall call his Name Jesus, Phil. 3.
because he shall deliues his people from their sins, and this name is above
all names and given only to the son of God, this is ever actiuely taken and
never pastiuely, it sigmfieth to save and not to be saved by any other. These
blasphemous Jesuits therefore as they can by no mean save and deliver men
from sin: so shall they never (except they repent from this blasphemy) be
saved from the bottomless pit of hell: but there with the Devil and his Angels
for their wieked presumption shall they be everlastingly damned.

Secondly under the show of this name and title they most crastely and
wickedly dissolve the vuity of Christ's Church and mystical body, defacing the
name and title of a christian, wherewith the holy ghost has garnished and
beautified the members of his body, as a name most convenient for their
calling. This name and title (I say) as a profane thing and to base for their
holiness and profession: thus in the spring of the gospel did Satan labor
among the Corinthians to dissolve the unity from Christ, under the name of
Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, and afterward as I said thoroughly and wickedly
performed it under the names of Benedict, Frauncis, etc. Their own Gratian
long ago thus said of the like. Negat Christian, qui se negat Christianum: He
denies Christ, Causa 11. Quaesu. 5.
that denies the name of a Christian.

Thirdly, with the great hurt and extreme peril of all Christian Realms,
they daily awayte to destroy by traiterous practizes, Godly Princes, and
zealous Magistrates, by sturring up sedition and rebellions emonge their
subjects, and oftentimes procure desperate persons to attempt horrible murders
upon Noble personages, and as King John was poisoned by a besperat Monk,
sundry Emperors by such their religious pra^izes: so in these days sundry
great personages are put in great danger by these holy persons. The leagues of
Gods Children, with the wicked, whereby the mighty helping hand of God has
continually been turned even from his own dear children is no more
dangerous unto the Godly and Christian princes, Deuteronomy. 17. Leuit. 18.19. 2.
Reg. 18.19.20.21.22.32. c 35. 1. Macha. 8.9.12.14.16. Examples the of are many
both new an lamentable. Baruch. Timo. 3. Romans 13. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
then the access of this religious fraternity or holy league and brotherhood
unto the presence of Kings, Princes, or other noble me^ is dangerous unto our
state and time. The prophets of God led by his holy spirit taught us to pray
for Tyrauntes, yea for such as oppressed and persecuted the Church of God,
affirming that in their peace and safety the Church of God yet under the
Cross should prosper. But these led by the unclean spirit, prepare and
suborne desperate persons to kill and murder Godly Princes and Magistrates that
be nurses and under God the defenders of the Church. Godly Princes therefore
for the better safety of themselves, and subjects may not deal herein as
Porcenna did, who when he understood, that diverse desperate persons had s^orne
his death, fled, and left the siege to avoid that danger: But they must
follow the commandment of God in the avoiding of their flattering promises
and friendship, and depend upon the inuicible power and arm of the Lord that
never fails such as do trust only unto his help and defense, and utterly
destroy the dissembling kingedome of Popery serving the members thereof, (...).
11.
as God gave commandment of Agag and the Amatekites, of the Cananites: as
Moses served the false prophet Balaam with the Madianits: Reg. 18. Reg. 9.
as David served the children of Ammo^: Elyas and Iehu the false prophets and
priests of Baall, ester.
and all the posterity of Achab: as Mardocheus served Ammon and his posterity.
Finally as the Lord commands the strumpet of Babylon to be served: ^poc. 18.
So shall they with peace and safety reign to the glory of God and comfort of
his Church, which they can never possibly do so long as these Antichristian
members do abuse their clememcie and mercy as hitherto they to their great
imboldening have done. Therefore of them, Olim quod Vulpes oegroto cauto Leoni.
Respondet, referam, qua me vestigia terrent
omnia te aduorsum spectantia nulla retrorsum.
As the wily Fox answered the sick Lion. Well I say the steps of all men
that trusts the^, makes me afraid, we see many noble personages destroyed by
the^, from their holy Cave returns none, in their fellowship is naught but
blood and destruction. We still therefore cry with the holy Ghost, Tollite
Vulpeculas, Demoliuntur enim vineam Domini: Out with the very Cubbs, for they
destroy the Lords vineyard.

Fourthly (as it were an other Hyrostratus by burning Diana her Temple, or an
other Curtius for a years pleasure with great pride and oftentation to leap
desperately into the Gulf to win a vain report or same among the foolish
people, or as it were an other desperate Monk new returned from hell, shreuen
and houseled to poison King John (a most Noble and valiant Prince) to the end
he might through so vile and wicked a fact be accounted among the popes
Canonized saints) do these wicked and desperate Hipocrites attempt with loss
both of body and soul to murder christian princes and godly magistrates to be
Regestred in the Popes Martyrologe to have Grains, Beads, Medalles, blessed
and plenary pardons given in their names. These Hypocrites herein follow the
steps of the desperate Jews that wickedly and wilfully cast away themselves to
save the temple which God would destroy. Josephus de bello Iudeico
We may not therefore be deceived with this desperate hypocrisy of theirs: For
hereof we have infinite examples, as of the Circumcilians in S. Augustines
time, of Thomas Becket, Thomas More, John Fisher, Fekton and such like, Tertul.
August.
whose desperate deaths may not commend them unto us for Martyrs. For not the
death but the cause makes a Martyr.

Last of all as these Jesuits the last brood of Antichrist do with like
hypocrisy seem to form their speeches unto the Phrases of the Scripture, and
to use the sentences of the holy scriptures to cover and hide from the simple
the ugly and Monstrous face of filthy popery, that thereby they might with
less suspicion cure again in the hearts of the people the deadly wound of
the beast, which otherwise to do, the Devil well sees is utterly impossible.
Thus Alberius Pighius, Eruius, Andradius, the late Courcell of Trident, and
thus the late executed Jesuits attempted to perform: But among the residue
Raph Sherwin, one of the four executed at Tiburne for treason on Friday the
first of December plays this pageant most guilefully to the deceauing of a
great number then and there present, 1581.
and purchased by his deep and desperate Hipocrisse a commendation above the
rest, as though there had bin wrought in him before his death, some fast of
Christ and true religion. But all was subtlety and an hipocriticall
hipocrisse, to lead the people from the detestation of his popery to a liking
or a more tolerable judgment thereof: If Raph Sherwin (good reader) had meat
according to the good form of words by him then uttered, then would he
utterly have condemned man's merits, invocation of Saints, with the residue of
his popety to that point belonging, and contrary to the person of Christ and
free justification by his death: This he did not. But contrariwise (says he)
I die a good Catholic, that is, to wit an arrogant and an obstinate papist.
These last words of his (gentle reader) namely I die a Catholic, do well
declare his meaning nothing to agree with his good form of words, by him first
uttered. Therefore one Master Edward Fleetewood a godly learned Preacher, and
I, thought good by conference with Some of his fellows yet remaining in the
Tower, to learn out by them his meaning in the good form of words by him at
his death vttred, thereby either to sift out the bottom of their Iesuitical
practice, or to give occation unto his fellows by his worses to repent and
embrace the truth, and having co^fere^ce with James Bosgraue, John Heart, and
Henry Orton, we found their meaning in these good words uttered by Sherwin,
to be nothing less then to attribate our whole justification wholly and only
unto Christ, as the good form of his words did pretend: but partly unto
Christ and partly unto them: selves, as in the discovery more plainly will
appear, which thing all papists have heretofore done. Sherwin therefore meant
not, and the rest of the Jesuits intend not to retract any thing from the
grossenes of Popery, but guilefully and subrilly to uphold the whole. The
Lord of his great mercy speedily tread down Satan under our feet for the
better overthrow of this wicked king dome, the full restoring of the beauty
of Christ's Church, and comfort of his dear Children, So be it.

Faults in the First book.
For Elegantur, Legantur For gloriant, gloriantur. fol. 23 For purputea,
purpure^. For aurea, aureo. For tui, in. fol. 25 For presed se, presens. For so
let, let. fol. 32 For the days of Abraham, he did in the days of Abraham.
fol, 40. For Nicholas the second, Leo the ninth and Nicolas the second. fol.
40. For he had, they had. For his, theirs. For whosoever, who ever. fol. 41.
Faults in the Second Book.
For wherein the exact rule of the Law, Read wherein the righteousness of man is
compared with the exact rule of the Law. fol. 2. For applicatum, Read
explicatum. fol. 5. For your clamorous, Read our clamorous. fol. 11. For
tempored, Read tempered. fol. 12. For credamor, Read credamus. fol. 16. For cum
creditis, Read per cum creditis. fol. 17. For qui, Read cui. fol. 33. For
their, Read the. For lewd tent, Read lewd intent fol. 37 For penerall, Read
general. For then devils, Read then the devils. fol. 38. For hec loquitur,
Read hic loquitur. fol. 38.
Sherwins confession.
I Acknowledge that in me, and of me, there is nothing but sin and
abomination, and J trust only to be saved by the death and blood shedding of
Jesus Christ.

The discovery of this Confession.
FIrst for the better understanding of their sudtilitie we must remember that
of justification before God they make three differences.

The first wherein the righteousness of man is compared with the righteousness
that is in God. Albertus Pighius de fide and iuscifi. Council. Trident sess. 6.
And thus they confess, that no creature is righteous before God, compared
with his righteousness.

The second, wherein the exact rule of the law, that is absolute and perfect.
And man's righteousness compared unto this, they confess is found unrighteous,
and altogether unclean. Unto these two righteousnesses, whereof the one is in
God him self, the other absolute in his law, do they refer all the places of
scripture, condemning man's works, and righteousness. And do further acknowledge,
that man is utterly unable, to fulfill the law in this perfection.

Then do they imagine an other righteousness before God, according to the rule
of Gods justice, tempered and framed to our infirmities, to be the rule of our
life. By this neither, because no man fulfilleth every part thereof, is any man
justified, they confess.

Then after this division they proceed unto others, wherein they would seem to
mislike the Scholemens corruption in this matter of Justification: for being
pressed with the manifest light of the word in this point, so far as they can
not deny us to be justified only through Christ: yet having their hearts
hardened, Exodus 7.8.
they do with James and Iamores withstand the truth, seeking still by show of
new words and strange terms to cover the ugly opinion of the schole^^en
concerning iusrification, and to se^ a new color thereon: for it is the very
foundation of all popery and popisl^ abominations: Therefore with all d^igence
do they garnish it, as the three unclean spirits proceeding out of the Dragons
the beaste^ and false prophets mouth, Apoc. 16.
will give the^ utterance.

Some of them as Albertus Pighius, ^ighius de just. ^ickaus coutra ^utherum.
Conc. Trid. ses. 6. ^a. de inerem. custi. Can. 9.10.11.12. ^narau. in Conc.
^rid.
Ekchius, and others of their time, divide Justification into two paries,
whereof the first they wholly attributs unto Christ: the second they appoint
unto them selves, as the disposers thereof. Others of them, as the Couneel of
Trident, Alphonsus, the Censure of Colen, Andradius with this last brood of
the Iebusiticall locustes, by a distinction make two iustifications, which they
call primam and secundam, the first and the second. But before I enter the
description of this second division, for brevity sake, and to avoid tedious
repetitions, I will diseouer the first: whereof (as it is said) they make two
parts, one belonging unto Christ as the only worker thereof: the other
belonging unto them selves, as the disposers of ye thing already wroughte and
offered unto them by Christ.

Concerning the first part, and that belonging unto Christ, Conc. Trid, scs^.
6.
they say that by his death and bloudsheding we are redeemed from the
captivity of the devil, and eternal death, and reconciled unto God, and
being void of al righteousness in our selves, in him, and through his
righteousness only we are justified, that he only may be our justification,
redemption, and sanctification before God, and this without any deserte of
ours. Albert. Pigh. de fide and iustificas.
And therefore in this part belonging unto Christ, Vnicum nobis salutis
nostrae, and solidum est fundamentum, ^ighiusibidem
He is the only and sure groundworke of our salvation. In the respect of this
part of our redemption, Ibide (...)
and salvation quatenus ex Deo and Christo (as Pighius and other she Papists
co^tesse (in so much as it is, of God and Christ, She^rwin confesses there was
nothing of him or in him, but sin, and that he only trusted to be saved by
the death and bloudsheding of Christ.

But now touching the application hereof which is she second part, Sherwin and
the rest challenge unto them selves, and so leave Christ but one part of our
justification, and in this point stands the confrouersie between them and us,
concerning our justification: and with Sing subtiltle they beguile them selves,
and others. Therefore that this subtilty may plainly appear unto the very
ignorant, here follows Pighias his own words concerning this matter.
Hactenus de redemptionis ac salutis nostrae in Christo nobis redditae misterio.
etc. Vt existimo satis applicatum est, nunc de eode^ quarenus ex nobis pendet.
etc. Hitherto has it (as I think) bin sufficiently entreated, of the mystery
of our redemption, as it is given unto us in Christ: and now will we handle
it, in that which depedeth upon our selves. And this part they term ye
disposing cause of our salvation: P^^bius de fide and (...)
which they say stands upon two branches, namely faith and works, in those
which be of years of discretion. But in children they say, that the (...) of
^^ptisme is the disposing cause, and therefore they wickedly deny salvation
unto children departing before baptism. I^^^^^. de sacra^^^^^. fol. 200.
Their faith they divide into two sorts, that is, in fidem acquisitam and
infusam. Acquisitam they define to be an habit of the mind, whereby we
certainly without wavering assent unto those things which are from God, either
in his word, or by tradition revealed unto the Church for our salvation. And
they call such a faith the Catholic faith, which is of our selves, say they,
and stands of the assent of our will and reason, and so is it a perfect
faith, depending greatly upon man's freewill. And these two parts are diverse
things, and are distinguished, yea sometime separated from works, and from
fiducia, which follows faith that works by love, and yet nevertheless is
Catholic, Conc. Trid. ses. 6. Canon. 6.^.
and perfect: but yet informis, and so soon as works are thereto joined they
call it formatam, and so justifies. For so long as it is informis, that is,
without works, it justifies not although it be both catholic, and perfect,
which perfection, as they say, may be in sinners. Now their catholic faith
joined with works which they call a formed faith, they call their preparatiues
(...) our salvation, and these preparatiues they terine the disposing cause of
our salvation, whereby we receive the holy ghost either in hearing the word, or
without the word by ye sacraments, Pighius de side and iustitia.
and wheresoever these disposing causes are present, there the holy ghost is
never absent: and where they be not, there is the holy Ghost absent. And thus
say they does God impute our salvation unto our works, in respect of that part
depending upon our selves.

Thus justification, Cone. Trid ses. 6. cap. 6. Tal Tilmus. esacra. lib. 4.
which is temission of sins, reuouation and sanctification, follow the
preparing and disposing causes by a voluntarye receuling of grace. For (say
they) we are justified by faith and charilie together, as the disposing cause
of our justification, or as the necessary means to obtain grace of
justification, but rather by charity then by faith, because charity goes
before our justification as a necessary cause, to obtain at Gods hand in
Christ the grace of justification and adoption of his children. And further
they affirm that God does first require our own works, unto which he
proiniseth, that his grace shall not be wanting. For although Christ be made
the full, parfeet, and sufficient cause of our justification in so much as in
him is, yet is he effectual unto none but unto such as through these
preparations and works receive him being with that condition offered unto
them. For all the promises of our salvation are euerywhere conditional and not
absolute. Pighius. de sile and iusti. fol. 17.
And further they say, that in the matter of justification, there is no more
attributed unto ye faith, which respects the promise of God touching Christ
his death, passion, and resurrection, then unto that faith which respects any
other promise of God what soever. Thus much of their faith which they call
acquisitam.

Now their faith infused is not of our will, Johan. Damas. lib. 4. cap. 11.
nor the habit of our mind, etc. but the gift of God for the benefit of the
Church, in working miracles, and is nu^bred among the gifts of the holy ghost.
Abacuk. 2. Romans 1. Pighuis de. fide and (...) at. Conctl. Tridens. sessio. 6.


But that faith whereby the just man lives, by the which only every one of
Gods children lays hold of their justification in Christ, they utterly
reject, calling it special, heretical, and wicked.

First, the substance of the matter, as well to the scholemen, as to the later
Papists and Jesuits, is one, but the terms or words of Art, as I may call
them, are sometimes diverse, and proper unto some one of their opinions, and some
common unto them all. They all agree, both the scholemen and the rest, that
Christ has sufficiently of him self wrought our justification, and offers
the same unto us conditionallye, Pighius de iustifi Eckius contra Lutherum.
Council. Trident. de increm iusticu. Canon. 9.10.11.12. Andrad. in Try Cone.
sententi^^^ li. 3. distinci. 19. Gabriel Biel (...) sent. l. 3. did. 32^
knocking at the door of our conseience by the holy Ghost to move us to
receive it, and this knocking the scholemen call gratiam primam, gratiam
preuenientem, and gratiam operantem, the first grace, the preventing grace, and
the grace working alone, where the holy Ghost moves and stirs our will and
endeavors. Albertus Pighius and others called it justification belonging to
Christ, and offered unto us. The Council of Trident, Andradius, and the
Jesuits, Pantheologia in sent. Thome.
called it the first justification which is wrought (as they say) by the
infused righteousness of Christ, which they call Charity in hering or cleauinge
to us. Then those works which the Scholemen call Merita congrui, works of
congruence, Pighius, ye Council of Trident, and the Jesuits call works of
preparation and the disposing cause of our justification. Then those which the
scholemen did term works of condign, Pighius and those of his tune term the
answering of the condition of our salvation. The Council of Trident,
Andradius, the censure of Colen, the rest of the Jesuits call the second
justice, or justification, which stands (as they say) not in the free
remission of sum, but in satisfying and further deserving and meriting of
eternal life (as was said before.) Therefore says Gabriel Biel, Iusentens.
lib. 4.
Anima gratia informata, per actum a voluntate simul and elicitum de co^digno
promeretur vitam aeternam. The soul infourmed by grace, does through work
drawn out of the voluntary will and grace together deserve everlasting life.

The discovery of the second Division.
WHere the censure of Colon, Andradius, Opinio Iesuiterium de infuse iust^tia^
Consura Colon Andrad. in Conc. Trid s^s. 6.
and other such, divide justification into ye first and second justice, or
righteousues, they say the first justice is that inheringe and abiding justice,
wherewith the unregenerated man is first infused, receuing the habit or
quality of infused charity, and this righteousness (they say) is not the
remission of sins only, but sauctificatio^ of the inward man, whereby he is
both called just, and is so in deed, and this righteousness they call charity,
abiding or inhering to the inward man.

And when the Scripture says, that faith is reckned unto us for righteousness,
it means nothing else (say they) but that the quality of righteousness is
infused into us, for God vouchsafes the faith that he finds in us worthy to
be infused with righteousness that inhereth or abides, whereby men are justified.

The second justification (they say) is the exercise of the infused charity,
bringing forth good works, whereby the second justice both is, and ought to
be had. And this righteousness does merit more then the first infused
righteousness, for it deserves everlasting life, as a due reward thereof, and
this not by faith alone, as at ye first, but by faith and works together,
which deserve remission of sins, and satisfy Gods justice for the same, etc.
This second justice the Schoolmen term, meritum ex condigno, merit of
condign.

In the appearance of the diversity of these opinions, which in truth is
nothing in substance, but a show of words, and change of terms, we must) good
Reader) for the avoiding of subtle laberinthes, observe what is common unto
them all, as well Scholemen as the rest, and what is proper or peculiar unto
each of them by themselves, wherein they differ, or agree among the^ selves, or
with the Scholemen whose grosenesse they world seem to mislike: So shall we
without tedious repetitio^ both understand their meaning, and with brevity
discover and convince their falshode.

The terms or words of art proper to the Jesuits, ye council of Trident,
Andradius, and others of that race. Iustitia prima, Iustitia secunda, Charitas
infusa and inherens. The first Justice, the second Justice, Charity infused,
and cleaving to us, terms proper to the Scholemen, meritum congrui, meritum
condigni, merit of congruence, and merit of condign. Terms common unto all
the Papists, as, Gratia prima, gratia secunda, gratia preueniens, gratia
subsequens, gratia operans, gratia cooperans, iusti tia infu sa and inherens,
fides informis and fides formata, fides accuisita, and fides infusa.

The first grace, the second grace, the preventing grace, the following grace,
the grace working by it self, the grace workinge with our will or endeavor,
justice infused and cleaving to us faith unshapen, and formed faith, faith
gotten of our selves and faith infused, faith general and faith special.

Thus because they would seem to say something, and to be doctors of the
Law, they lead both themselves and others into an endless laborinth ofiangling
words, and vain terms, knowing not what they speak, neither whereof they
affirm: but these Sophismes have the Sorbanists first invented and your
clamarous Jesuits now follow, that by show of words and terms, without sense
they may seem to avoid such con^^^sio^s, as the true sense of the seriptures,
for the confusing of their papisticall opinions, does recessarilie enforce upon
them.

Now it remains therefore (gentle Reader) that I shortly and briefly confuse
these Sorbonicall and Jesuitical sophismes, and that not by words and terms,
as their manner is to delude their hearers, but by evident and plain
testimouies of Scriptures according to the true analogy, and meaning of the
same.

And first, touching their three fold righteousness, or justice before god, the
Scripture knows no such division.

The Scriptures lay forth unto us two kinds of righteousness before God, one
that is of the law of God, which law first engraven in man his heart before
his fall, after written in Tables of stone by the finger of God, and opened at
large by the holy Ghost, in the books of Moises, the Prophets, and Psalms:
and most cleerelie in the books of the new Testament: contains in it the
absolute and perfect righteousness, that whosoever fulfilleth the same, shall
live therein, and be judged righteous before God: and this law being the
perfect image of Gods justice, and the absolute rule of man's life, receives
no qualification, Deuteronomy. 30. Luke. 1.10. Leuit. 18. Romans 3.8. Galat. 3. Job. 15
John. 1. Mat. 15. Romans 7.8. Galat. 3. Psalm. 19. Mat. 5.
nor in no part does condescend unto our infirmity, but requires an absolute
and perfect obedience, and a conformity unto the same, and for that it finds
this in none, (Christ only excepted) it conde^neth all absolutely, shuttinge
them under sin unto condemnation, and iustifyeth none, either in whole or in
part. Heaven and earth shall perish, but not so much as a title of this law
shall diminish. For as God cannot be altered, so the Law, which is the rule of
his justice, and the true image of himself, can in no part be temperod unto
our infirmity: if it can, then let some of the Sorbonical Jesuits, or
Jesuitical Sorbonistes, lay it down by the testimony of the Scripturrs, Et
erit mihi magnus Apollo.

The other righteousness before God, is in Christ only, Que^ proposuit Deus
propitiatorem per fidem. whom God has made our propitiation through faith.
Nmo. 3.
Eum qui non nouerat peccatum, pro nobis peceatum fecit, vt nos iustitia Dei
efficeremur in ipso. Him that knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5.
did God make a sacrifice for sin for us, that we might be made ye righteousness
of God in Christ, 1. Cor.
and God has made him unto us, wisdom, righteousness, and sa^ctification, and
redemption.

Secondarilie therefore, where they attribute this rihhteousnes only unto
Christ, as ye worker and offerer thereof, and keep thapplication thereof unto
themselves, they take from God the best part of his office, and are found liars
against God. For Christ does not ouely work it for us in all things belonging
unto himself: but the Father does also bestow it upon us, inuesting us by a
lively faith into the righteousness of his son: otherwise we should gain no
more by Christ, then we do by the Law: For the Law both conteyneth and
offers perfect righteousness unto us: Romans 7.9.
but it works it not, and that for no lack that is in it self, but is in us:
For thus we should make God and Christ in the work of our redemption, no
better then a Physician, and much worse then a kind Nurse or louinge Mother. A
skillful Physician does in deed provide necessary medicine for the patient,
but the receite thereof he leaves unto himself. A good Nurse or mother will
not only provide meat for the child, but they also in what they can, bring the
child to the receiving thereof. Ierim. 23.32.


But now the Father and the Son by the holy Ghost work together in this work
of our justification. Ezec. 11.16. Esaias. 44.45. John. 5.6.10.14.15.17. Mat. 16.
Pater meus vsque adhuc operatur, and ego operor: The Father works as yet,
and I also work, and no man comes unto me, except my Father draw him. And
of his great love toward us, he has given his Son to die for us: so does
he give us the means whereby we do receive him with his benefits, which
saint Paul does evidently declare. His words are these: Ephesians. 2.
Deus qui dives est in misericordia, etc. God that is rich in mercy through his
great love wherewith he loved us, and when we were dead through sin, he has
also quickened us together through christ by whose grace ye are saved, for by
grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves: It is the gif^e
of God not of works least any man should glory: John. 6.
For we are his worke-manship created in Christ Jesus unto good works: which
God has prepared for us to walk in. Here is the great riches of Gods love
and his grace the efficient cause of justification, Mat. 3.
Christ the merit and respect: Esaias. 53.
Faith the mean and instrument between Christ and us: and withal the gift of
god, from which instrument or means, our deserts and al works whatsoever are
excluded in the apprehension of this justification, Tittus. 2.
and work ordained of god, do follow our justification to be our exercises.
Lo (good Reader) what may or can be said plainer. In this word of
justification is there nothing found of ours: The whole work is Gods, we are
no agentes herein, but workmanship wrought of God only: so that the whole work
belongs unto God, and nothing therein unto our selves. Therefore these
Sorboniticall Jesuits are herin many wais found liers against god and his
truth.

Thirdly this faith whereby we apprehend our justification in Christ is neither
of our selves, or any habit of our minds, reason or will, nor yet formed by
works, whereby together with works we should be justified: but is the free
gift of God, depending upon our election, given us in Christ Jesus, at the
hearing of the word, through the working of the holy ghost, and does only or
alone without works justify us in Christ, and brings forth such works as
the word requires, being the fruits of our justification, to the glory of
God, the profit of our brethren, and witnessing our justification both
inwardlye in our conscience, and outwardly before men: shall evidently appear.

First, that faith is the work and gift of God, in us appears by the words
of our Savior Christ, Iosm. 6. Mat. 16 Ephe. 6.
Hoc est opus Dei, vt credatis in illum quem misit ille. This is the work of
God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent. Nemo venit ad me, Philip. 1
nisi fuerit ei datum a patre meo, No man comes to me except it shall be given
him of my father. And S. Paul says, Iohes. 2.
Gratia saluati estis per Fidem, and hoc non ex vobis, dei enim donum est. Ye
are saved by grace through faith, and that not of your selves, for (this
faith) is the gift of God. And again, Romans 12.
Sicut Deus vnicuique dimisit mensuram Fidei. Even as God has divided unto
every one the measure of faith. And Augustine upon the sixth of John says,
August. super Johan. cap. 6. trast. 17.
Credere datur nobis, quid enim habes quod non accepisti? To believe is given
us, for what have thou, that thou have not received. Again, 1. Cor. 4.
Deus si opere fidem nostram miro modo agens in cordibus nostris vt credamur,
numquid metuendum est ne totu^ facere possit. If God do work faith in our
hearts by a wonderful means, what? shall we fear that he cannot work out
the rest. Ex fide ideo dicit iustificari hominem, non ex operibus, Lib. 2. de
predest. cap. 2. Ephesians. 2. co^lem lib. cap. 7.
quia ipsa prima datur, ex qua impetentur cetera Therefore does he say a man is
justified by faith without works, because faith is first given, whereby the
residue is obtained Ipsam fidem dixit esse opus dei, August. super Johan. cap.
6. tract. 25.
nec dixit hoc est opus vestrum, sed hoc est opus dei, etc. Christ said, that
Faith is the work of god, that ye do believe in him, whom he has sent,
that he that does rejoice, may rejoice in the Lord, Ieronni. in epist. ad
Ephesians. cap. 2.
Et haec Fides non est ex nobis, sed ex eo qui vocauit nos, non nostrae
voluntatis, sed Dei muneris. And this faith is not of our selves, but of him
that has called us neither is it of our wills, but of the gift of God.

Then, that this gift of god depends upon our election, it is evident. for
S. Paul calls it, Titus. 1.
Fidem Electorum, the faith of the Elect. And again, Fides non est omnium.
These. 1.
All men have not faith: Romans 9.
For, quorum vult Deus misereatur. and quos vult indurat. God shows mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. And they only believe, qui
praeordinati sunt ad salutem. Act. 13. Romans 8. Ephesians. (...).
that are ordained unto salvation, for whom he has chosen and ordained unto
salvation, those he calls. And that this faith is given us in Jesus christ
appears by these places, and many others: Nemo nouit patre^ nisi filius, Mat.
11. Luke 14.
and cuicunque voluerit filius reuelare. No man knows the Father but the
Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. Therefore seeing that the
knowledge of god comes by faith, it must necessarily follow, that this faith
is given us in Christ. Ephesians. 6.
This faith is given us says S. Paul, of God the Father, in Jesus Christ. And
further he says, that he lives by that faith which is in Jesus Christ. And
again, Audita fide vestra in Jesus Christo. Galat. 3. Coloss. 1.
When I heard of your faith that is in Jesus Christ. Philomon.
And to Philemon he says, that faith is in us thorough Jesus Christ. And saint
Peter says, 1. Pet. 1. verse. 21.
God through his mercy, begat us again unto a lively hope through the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from death, Philip. 2.
Eum creditis in deum etc. For, through him, ye believe in god, who raised
Christ from death, and gave him the glory, that your faith and hope might be
in God. Coloss. 1.
And therefore is he called the image of the invisible God, Hebr. 1.
the brightness of his glory, August. de tract. lib. 4. cap. 20. idem. cont.
^^am. cap. 36.
and the expres image of his substance. Haec fides definita est in Christo, qui
in carne resurrexit a mortuis, etc. This faith is fixed in Christ, who in the
flesh rose again from the dead. This faith of Christ is that foundation
whereby Christ dwells in our hearts, who does inwardly teach us, and
therefore as the Apostle says, Galat. 3. Romans 1.
Conclusit Scriptura omnia sub peccatum, vt promissio ex fide Jesus Christi
daretur credentibus. The Scripture shuts all under sin, that the promise by
the faith of Jesus Christ, might be given unto all that do believe. And this
faith the holy ghost works in us, through the word. Agust. de fide es
oper^^. cap. 16.
Fides est ex auditu, auditus vero per verbu^ dei. Faith comes by hearing and
hearing by the word of God. Dedit igitur ipse alios Apostolos, Romans 10. Gal
1.3. Colloss. 2. Ephe. 4
a^ios vero Prophetas, etc. ad opus ministerij, ad edificationem inqua^,
corporis Christi, donec euadamus omnes in vnitatem fidei, and agnitionem Filij
Dei, etc. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets etc. to the gathering
together of the Saints into the work of ministration, into the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all meet together, into the unity of faith, and
knowledge of the Son of God, etc. Placuit enim deo per stultitiam pre
dicationis. 1. Cor. 1
etc. It pleased God by the simplicity of preachinge, to save them that
believe: Renati estis non ex semine mortali: sed ex immortali per sermonem Dei
viui. Ye are new born, not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of
the living God. 1. Pet. 1. Jacob. 1
Is progenuit vos fermone veritatis, He has begotten you through the word of
truth. And of the silk woman Lidia S. Paul says, Act. 16
Cuius cor deus aperuit vt attenderet ijs quae diceba^tur a Paulo. And the holy
Ghost opened her heart that she harkened unto those things that were spoken by
Paul. 1. Cor. 3.
Ego plantaui, Apollos rigauit, deus autem incrementu^ dedit. I planted says
Saint Paul, Apollos watered, but god gave the increase. Habentes says the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 4.
eundem Spiritum Fidei. having ye same spirit of faith. In this work of Faith
therefore, these five concur and go together. 1. The grace of god. 2. the word
of god. 3. the preaching of the word. 4. the hearing of the word preached. 5.
the holy ghost opening the hearts of the hearers, Act. 16
whereof Lidia the Silkewoman is an evident example. But where these things
concur not, there is no faith, Proverb. 30
and there the people perish.

That this faith iustifyeth only or alone without the help of works, is most
evident. First, for that the gospel is the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.
unto every one that believes. Next the tree must be made good, before the
fruits thereof can in any respect be good. Mat. 7.2.
Conditi sumus in Christo Jesus ad opera bona. we are first made (or new
regenerated) in Christ unto good works, so that our justification goes before
the work, Iphes. 2.
and therefore faith without works does justify.

Thirdly, Romans 1.3.4.5.9. Gall^t. 3.4.
the holy ghost every where in the work of our justification before god,
seperateth works from faith. We are justified in receiving, not in giving, in
receiving remission of sins. Ephesians. 2. Romans 4. Psalm. ^2.
Beati quorum remissae sunt iniquitates. Blessed are they whose sins are
forgiven, and therefore not by works. If any works might be i^ined with faith
to justification, then the works of the Law: Romans 1.4. G^l^^. 3.4. Ph^^^. 1.
^om. 3 4. G^l^^. 3.^.
But iustificamur fide sine operibus Legis. We are justified by faith, without
the works of the Law, therefore, without all other whatsoever. If ever any
was or might be justified with the help of works before God, then Abraham,
but Abraham was not: therefore none other can be. Also, Romans 2. Romans 4. 1. Pet.
3.
the faithful are justified as their father Abraham was justified, but Abraham
was justified before God by faith, without works: by faith therefore without
works are all the faithful justified.

And thus the godly learned did always think of our justification.
Iustificati sunt gratis (says S. Ambrose) quia nihil operantes, Ambros. super
Romans cap. 4.
neque vicem reddentes, sola fide iustificati sunt dono Dei. They are justified
freelye, because they work nothing, nor give any thing in exchange but are
justified by faith only through the gift of God. Again, Ambros^ ibid^^.
Ob^de^^.
Sic decretum dieit a Deo, vt cessant Lege, solam fidem gratia Dei posceret ad
salutem. So says the Apostle, it is decreed that the law giving place, the
grace of God might require only faith to salvation. Hoc ipsum monet exemplo
prophetae, vt sine labor, and aliqua obseruatione, sola fide iustificantur
apud ipsum. This self same thing does he admonish by the Prophets example,
that without labor, and any observation, or ceremony, they may be justified
through only faith before God. Ambros. super Romans cap. 9
And in another place. Sola fides (inquit) posita est ad salutem. only faith
(says the Apostle) is set down to salvation: Ambros. super Romans ^
Manifesto beati sunt, etc. They are appara^^tlye blessed (says the Apostle)
unto whom without any labor, or work their sins be conered, and their sins
remitted: No works of r^pentaunce required of them, but Faith only. And
Hilarious, Sola Fides iustificat: Cano. 9
Faith only iustifyeth. Origin also proves by the example of ye thief Of
Mary Magdalene, Origin in Rom^ cap. 4.
And of the Publicane, And by many other reasons, that only Faith does
justify.

The same does Athanasius, Basil. homil. de fid^ Athen. in Galat. cap. 3.
Basil, Chrysostom, and other of their time, evidently prove, whom because
I would be short, here I do omit.

That this justifying Faith in Adam, Noe, Abraham, Pi^. de sule and
iustificatione. fol. 85.
or any other of Gods Elect, respected, or does respect, the Creation of the
world, the making of the Arc, the multiplying of ye posterity, or any other
promis whatsoever (as ye papists imagine it does) but only y^ promise of christ
made unto Adam, Genesis 3
and still renewed unto his Posterity, shall evidently appear,

The righteousness no doubt of God which is good before god, comes by the
faith of Jesus Christ unto al and upon all that do believe. Romans 3.
Iustificantur autem gratis, eius gratia per redemptione^ factam per Iesum
Christum, quem proposuit Deus placamen per fidem in sanguine suo. For they are
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom god has made our pacification through faith in his blood, according as it
was promised unto Adam, Et semen mulieris ipsum conteret caput serpentis. ^en.
3. Apocalip. 12.
The seed of the woman (namely Christ) shall break the serpents head. And
unto Abraham, G^n. 12.17. (...). 3. Act. 3.
In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes, non dicitur in seminibus, sed devno,
qui est Christus. In thy seed shall all nations be blessed, He said not in
seeds, as of many, Mat. 3.
but of one which is Christ. Hic est filius meus dilectus, in quo mihi
complacuit This is my beloved son, in who^ I am well pleased. Thus we see we
are justified in no other promises, but only in the promise of Jesus Christ,
and that in the promise of his death and resurrection, and thereto the holy
ghost refers our faith, Coloss. 1.2. Heb. 1.2.3.4 Romans 4.
as ye plainly see, He dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
justification. We are regenerated into the hope of life, 1. Pet. 1.
per resur rectionem Jesus Christi ex mortuis. by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from death, Coloss. 1.
For it pleased ye father that in him should all fulness dwell, and by him to
reconcile all things unto himself, 2. Cor. 5
etc. Neque sub coelo aliud datur nomen hominibus, in quo opor tet nos saluos
fieri. Neither is there any other name or mean, under heaven given unto men
wherein we must be saved.

Now what shall we think of these Papists, Act. 4. P^ghi. de side e^ iusti.
sol. 88.
that tell us, Intelligis in iustificationis nostrae negotio, vt nihil plus
euergiae, tribuat Fidei promissae iustificationis in Christo, quam fidei
alterius, cuiuscunque rei proditae, aut promi^la^ a Deo.

Thou understand therefore (says Pigh ius) that in the matter of
Iustifycation, she Apostle may attribute no more unto the faith of
Justification promised in Christ, then unto the faith of any other promise
whatsoever, foreshewed or promised by God.

Do they (good reader) make any other thing of Christ, and the promises in him,
then of Legal and transitory. Nay do they not in effect say yt whichis
reported to be dissolutely uttered of Pope Leo 10. unto Be^bo his cardinal, In
v^ta P^n^.
Quantum nobis ac nostro cetui profuerit ea de Christo fabula, satis est
seculis omnibus notum. L^o esteemed the gospel of Christ, but a fable of small
profit. They shou^ll it among other Legal and temporal promises. These men
account the scriptures of ye gospel as a nose of wax, Pig. Hos^^epres. verbo.
but the holy Ghost accountes thereof as of the mighty power of God to
salvation, as of the word of life ye immortal seed of our regeneration, as of a
two edged sword, H^^. ^. M^t. 8.
that deuideth the marow and the sinews, in respect whereof, they account al
other things as dross.

These fellows therefore though they cou^terfette ye resemblance of the Lamb,
Apoc. 4.9.13
yet in deed they come out of the bottomless pit, and speak with the mouth of
the Dragon, and are led by ye spirit of error, ^. Tim. 4.
speaking great lies in hypocrisy, ^. Tim. 3
but the Lord will not suffer them to prevail any longer.

But unto us that believe, the Apostle teaches this faith to be of the promises
of Christ his death, and therefore he calls the gospel not the word of
creation, of the flood, of the goinge out of Charran, of posterity, or of any
such thing, but he calls it the word of the cross. 2. Cor. 1.2.


That the promise of Christ is the object to our faith in justification, and
not any other promises whatsoever, which promises and our faith are
correlatiues, that this promise is absolute without condition, may by that
which is already said, plainly appear. Whereunto for better help of the
unlearned I will add somewhat more. Nether are these promises in christ
conditional, as were the legal promises, but absolute and free and therein
they differ from the promises of the law. For (says ye apostle) promissiones
dei in chri sto sunt etia^, 2. Cor. 1 Ephesians. 2 Romans 3.4. Galas. 3 4. 1. Co^r^n.
1. Apoc. 4.5.
the promises of god in Christ are absolute and firm. They are absolute in
christ that no man should brag: but only in god through Christ and that all
rejoicing of man should be taken away, that God only might have the praise.

Now (good Reader) where both in the old and new te^stament, there are found
conditional promises, they be of two sorts, the first seem to be, and are
so in deed and truth. The other unto the unskillful seem to be, but are not
so in deed. Such as be conditional, are these: Leuit. 18. Galat. 3.
Qui fecerit ea, viuet in ijs, He that fulfilleth them shall live by them. Hoc
fac, and viues. This do, Luke. 10.
and thou shall live: And such other do belong unto the Law, Mat. 6.
and are not any way to be drawn unto the gospel.

Those that seem to be, and are not, as, if you remit other men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will remitte you your trespasses. Ezech. ^8
etc. And if a Sinner does repent him of his wickedness, etc. And many other
such phrases, belonginge unto the gospel, be no conditional promises, but
speeches borrowed from us, exhorting us unto our duty, showing forth
plainlye unto us the fruits of our justification, which without al doubt we
shall bring forth when we are justified. For we are not justified to be idle,
barren, Luke 1 Ephesians. 2. Tit. 2 2. Tim. 4. Mat. 6. 2. Pet. 1.
and fruitles, but to bring forth such fruits as the Lord has ordained for us
to walk in. For, a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit.

By these and such like, we must make trial of our selves, whither we be in
the faith: when we see one eat or drink a great deal, we say he was hungry or
thirsty, because we see him eat so much or so greedely: So do we say that one
is whote, because we see him sweat, yet do we not say, that his eatinge or
drinking is the co^ditional cause of his hunger or thirst, nor yet the sweat
the cause of his heat: But contrary we say, hunger, thirst, and heat, are the
causes of eating, drinking, and sweat: even so, Ezec. 18. Mat. 6.
the turninge from iniquity, the remitting of trespasses, are not the causes
of the for geuenes of our sins, but the fruits thereof, and trial of our
state. And this would the papists see if they were not blinded by the spirit
of error, 1. Tim. 4 Ephe. 2.
that rules the children of unbelief.

That after justification, this faith brings forth such works as are
agreeable unto the law of God, appears in these words: Ephe. 2. Titus. 2.
Luke 1. Mat. 6.
Conditi sumus in Christo Jesus ad opera bona. We are created (or renewed) in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has prepared for us to walk in. Hebr.
9
Et purificaret sibi ipsi populum peculiarem, studiosu^ bonoru^ operu^ He has
purged us unto himself, a peculiar people, studious of good works.

Thus although in the work of our in stification, works be not conjoined with
Faith, yet are they not separated from faith. Romans 3 Galat. 3.
For although faith alone does justify, yet is it not otherwise alone, but
always fruitful by good works: It is one thing to be alone, and destitute
of good works, which faith never is, and another thing to iuslify alone, which
faith always does: and by this faith, Ephesians. 4 1. Tim. 1
although it be not singular unto any, but general unto the whole church of God,
yet is every faithful man speciaily justified, and thereby specially lives.
One man's faith does not justify another, but every man is justified by his own
Faith. Iustus fide sua viuet. Romans 1 (...). 2 Galat. 3 Hebr 10
The just shall live by his own faith, and not by another man's For he cannot
be sure of the stedfastnes of other men's, and therefore cannot be saved by
their general faith. Heb. 1^ Galat, 3 Phlip. 2 Hebr. 11 1. Pet. 1 Romans 5.8
This faith notwithstanding the iangling of ye sorbonistes, is unto every man
yt believes, his special hand and instrument, wherewith he apprehends
Christ certainlye, without wavering, and thereby lives. It is therefore called
of saint Paul a sure confidence of things hoped for, and the certainty of
things not seen, and thus oftentimes in ye seriptures Fides, Spes, and Fiducia
which co^teyneth both, be confounded, or put one for another.

Where the council of Trident, Andradius, with the Iesuitical brood of the last
locusis, Apoc. 9.
would with a distinction of a first and second righteousness, beguile us, and
lead us from the beholding yt only righteousness of al Gods children in Christ,
which comes no other ways, but by ye forgeuenes of sins, through the only
faith of Christ. They are by the places already alleged, Romans 3 Galat. 3
manifestly and evidently convinced: yet for the further satisfying of ye
reader, I will briefly ad something more. These men in their first justification
as they call it, or ye first grace as ye schole me^ term it, deny remission of
sin to be our justification, but say yt it is such a sanctification of the
soul, as thereby we are both call led just, and are so in deed, so that by an
iufused righteousness, which they term Charitatem inherentem, infused into
yt faith of ^urs, found in our selves before we were justified, and stirred up
by the grace of god first moving us: and thus they still speak like ye dragon,
Apoc. 13.
and not like ye lamb who by ye holy prophets and aposties continually say ye
remission of sins by the only faith of christ without works, is our
justification from time to time before God. Psalm. 32.51 Romans 4 Col. ^
For God has set forth Christ to be the continual pacifying of his Displesure
through faith in his blud, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of
sins, And in the Evangelists where sin is declared to be the cause of our
infirmities, and the devils power in man, so the remission of sins, is the
curing and healinge of all those infirmities, and the full delyuerance from the
power and tira^nie of the devil: whereby we may evidently see, that as sin
seperateth us from hod, Mat. 9 Mar. 2 Luke 5 John. 5.8. Genesis 2. Deuteronomy. 32. Ezec.
18 Esai. 43 50.59.64 O^^. 13. Mat. 12
and condemns us before him: so remission of sins does restore us again to
Gods favor and presence, and iustifyeth us before him, and therefore is the
remission of sins our only justification before God, and not the renewing of
inward man, as these deceivers do pretend. For our renouation and
sauctification follow the remission of our sins, as an effect or fruit of our
justification, which in deed is the remission of sins: for the tree being by
gods favor through remission of sins made good, the fruit thereof, which
is sanctification, must necessarily follow. And thus faith was imputed unto
Abraham for righteousness, not by deserui^ge, or receiving infused righteousness
(as Andradius, A^drad. in co^. trident. Romans 4 I^n. 3 G^^. 12.15.17.13 18 32
and the Jesuits imagine) but by remission of sins, and then followed
sanctification and obedience, with daily increase, by the workinge of gods
spirit, witnessed by his works, as well appears by the story of his whole
life.

And all these graces, Esai. 41. Rom 9. G^^^. 18 Ier^m. 18. Esai. 45. 2. Tim.
2. Ephesians. 2. Gol. 2 Pet. 1
and good things, did still depend upon Gods election, that he had ordained
and called him thereto in Christ, and no part thereof depending of him felf, as
the Lord by the prophet faith: Who calls the just man from the East, etc.
even I the Lord that am with the first and with the last. This also S. Paul
euidentive prooneth in the election of Jacob, and out of the Prophet Jeremy,
by the example of the Potter and his vessels: And to Timothy he says, that
the Elect are in the Lords house vessels to honor, thereunto created in
Christ Jesus, by whom they are quickened by remission of sins.

In their second Justification, these Jesuits say their infused Charity,
firringe up good works, Con. trident. de incre. just. sess. 6. can. 9.10.11.12
(which the Schoolmen call works of Condign) deserne both remission of
sins, and eternal life. They make a greater show, greatly pleasinge
themselves, and beguile the simple, utterly excluding only Faith, and free
Remission of sins, and punishment due for the same. as things thereunto
nothing belonging: which is as if a man would say, that in the beginning a
Tree lives by the Fatnes of the earth, and the strength of his own Sap, but
afterward lives by the Fruit, as though the Fruit did not continually take
life and nourishment from ye Tree, but did give life and moisture unto ye tree,
which of it self ye fruit has not, but is continually nourished and kept in
life by the sap and moisture of the tree

Such are the absurd opinions of our religious Jesuits, who in effect,
together with the Schoolmen and latter Sorbonistes, leave unto Christ nothing
in the work of our justification, but only this, that he opens the way how
enery man may justify himself, and so the gospel to teach nothing else,
Albert. ^ig. de ^ust. Ethius cont. a Luti^a.
but how men may justify themselves by their own works, and this euidentlye
appears unto all men, that will not be wilfullye ignorant, by these new and
old terms or words of art, which for this purpose the Papists have devised.
Coun. trid. sess. 6 An ra^dan con. trident.
As, works of preparation, or disposing causes of our salvation, Charity
infused, stirring up our free will and faith, or the holy ghost knocking at ye
door of our free will (which is also called the first Justice) works of
congruence, meeting with the first grace, or with the prene^ting grace. These
terms be equiuolent, and have all one meaning, as also have their second
justice, and works of condign, that answer the condition, as well appears
by the censure of the Jesuits of Colen, the council of trident. sess. 6 De
operibus. canon. 7. and cap. 6. canon. 4. de fide. ca. 5.6.7.8.9.12, 13. Pigln.
de just. cont trident. sess. 6. de operibus can. 7. et de imbecal.
iustificationss. ca. 1. can. 4. Pantheol g. Gal^ Bielan senten. Durand. in
senten. Li.
The master of sentences. lib. 3. distnct. 19. Pantheologia ex sententia Thome.
Gabriel Biel lib. sente^t. 3. and 4. and out of others, of the bottomless
pit an infinite table.

The like meaning have they in their terms of faith, Pighi. de just. con.
trid. de fide. sess. 6. Andrad. ut con. tridens.
formed and unformed, begotteen of their free will, and infused: So that while
in words they grant us to be justified by a formed faith (as they term if)
they pare the same so near, that they leave no thing thereof but a naked name of
says, void of Christ's merits taking utterly from us iustifycation that is by
the only faith in Christ, which Justification is the very sum of all true
virtue and godliness. But now, forasmuch as Justification before God, is the
continual remission of our sins through the only faith of Christ (as it is
already said) and that not in the beginning only, but continually so long as
we dwell in this life, Mat. 6.
and therefore Christ Jesus our Redeemer teaches us to cry from time to time
forgive us our sins. These Iebusiticall papists, and popish Sorbonistes do
herein therefore declare themselves to be led by the three unclean spirits,
(as is already said) of Anti- christ, and not by ye spirit of god as they
would pretend. Genesis 12.17 Romans 4. Galet. 2.1. 1. Cor. 1
For the spirit of god by S. Paul in the example of Abraham and david un to
whom ye remission of sins was accounted their only righteousness before God, and
ye a long time after they were first ealied yea, many years after, they were
reckned ye servants and friends of god, ye the remission of sins is our only
righteousness before god. S. Paul applies ye righteousness of abraham that he
speaks of, unto him 14. years after he was called out of carra^ And further
he says ye Abraham was at no time justified by his own works, for then he
had something wherein he might have gloried: but he says yt Abraham was
continually justified before God by faith, without works yt he might always
glory in the Lord.

The same thing we find in David, (...) Reg. 18 Psalm. 81.32.18. and ^0.143.
Act. 15. Esai. 6.64
that was a man eue^ to the liking of God. Of Esaias also, whom the Lord had
cleansed, and yet says he of himself among the rest of Gods Children, we are
all as an unclean thing, Mat. 20. Luke 17.
all our righteousness are as futhie rags. And Christ our Savior says, that
when we have done all that is commanded us, yet are we unprofitable deserving
nothing: For god is debtour unto none.

And S. Paul of the regenerated man, 2. Corrin. 1.5 Psalm. 32. Coloss. 2. Act.
13.
in his own person cries out, saying, Oh wretch that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of sin and death? He said not, my works of co^digne, or
stirred up by the first grace (as do these Jesuits) but he said, I thank
God thorough Jesus Christ our Loid, which dyed, yea rather which is raised
again, which also is at the right hand of God, making intercession for us
unto his Father, who is still in Christ reconciling us unto him self, thorough
ye remitting of our sins, in Christ therefore is remission of sins
continually preached unto us, as well after our regeneration as before, else were
it in vain, that every where in the Scripture remission of sins freely in
Christ is enforced, as the very matter of our salvation, and reconcilement to
God. 1. John. ^.^. Mat. 3. Esai. 35.
If any man sin (says Saint John) we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the pacification, or Propitiation for our
sins, and this not in the beginning, but continuallye all our life long, and
therefore he said of himself, and others already justified, If we walk in
light etc. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from al our sins. If we
acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.
Philip. 3. 1. Cor. 4.
And S. Paul fled utterly from his own righteousness, yea from that he might
any way challenge either by observing the Law, or by his painful travel or
labor in the gospel, and claue only so the righteousness of God, that comes
through the only faith of Christ.

And our savior Christ himself calls sinners unto him, Romans 1.7. Eze. 18.
Mat. 11.18.
promising continually remission and forgeuenes of sins so often as they
repent, yea to seue^tie times seven times, that is, continually. We ought
therefore at all times confidentlye through Christ to come unto the seat of
grace, Esai. 1.55. Apoc. 22. Heb. 4.
assuring our selves to find help in time of need.

We say to these Jesuits therefore with S. Augustine, Aug. de circit. de Bar.
in cant. can sermon. 23.
and S. Barnard, Iusticia sanctorum. etc. The righteousness of Saints in this
world stands rather in the forgiveness of sin, then in the perfection of
virtue. Ambro. de Iac^^ lib. 2.
And with S. Ambrose, as Jacob in the coat of his brother Esau was accepted
unto Isaac his father, so we in yt righteousness of Christ are accepted before
God. And further with Austine we say, Aug. ad Bonis. lib. 3. cap. 5.
we must still depend upon the only merit of Christ, and this being our only
hope, where is then confidence of works? Ber. super. ca^^. sermon. 16.
And again with Barnard we say, Our merit is the Lords taking of mercy, this
is the whole merit of man, if he put his whole trust in him that saves the
whole man.

There is no cause why thou should ask, by what merit we should hope for
good things when thou hear in the prophet, I will do it not for your sakes,
but for mine own, says the Lord. Barnard. in ps. 91. Super. Cant. ser. 23.
And again, O solus vere beatus qui non imputauerit dominus peccatu^. Ezech.
22.32.36.
etc. Sufficit mihi ad omne^ iustitia^ solum habere propitium cui soli peccaui.
Barn. super Cant. ser. 23.
O truly happy unto whom god will not impute sin. etc. It suffiseth me unto
all righteousness, to have him merciful, who^ I have only offended. Idem. ser. 61
Ego fidenter, quod ex me mihi deest, exurpo mihi ex visceribus domini mei,
quoniam misericordiae effluunt, nec desunt foramina per quae effluant. I do
confidently take unto my self that which wants unto me of my self, from the
bowels of my Lord, for his mercies flow out abundantly, neither do the
conduites want whereby they may still flow out. And again with Austen we say,
Aug. in confess.
Vae hominum vita^ quantumuis laudabili, si remota misericordia indicetur. Woe
unto the life of man, be it never so laudable, if it shall receive judgment
without mercy.

Therefore propter illud imperfectionis vicium si dixerimus quia peccatum non
habemus. Aug. epist. 26. ad Hieron. 1. John. 1.
etc. propter illud etia^ vitium quantumlibet profecerimus, necessarium est
nobis dicere, dimitte nobis debita nostra. Because of that imperfection of ours
if we shall say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us, yea for that imperfection of ours, how much soever we go forward
(in virtue and godliness) it is necessary for us to say, forgive us our trespases

But these Jesuits herein deceive the^ selves also, ^^ncil. trident. sess.
(...) and sess. 7. ^^llen. in his book (...) purgatory.
as in their first and second justice, that they imagine unto themselves a full
and perfect regeneration, or renouation, in their first conversion, by the
receiving of the sacrament of Baptism, and thereupon ground this false
principle of the second justification. For so long as ye most perfectest lives
in this world, so long carries he both in soul and body, ^^ne. lib. 4. ^abri.
byel. and ^urand. in. sent. ^^b. 4. Mat. 5 ^^ Romans 6.7.12. ^oloss.
the sin and corruption of the old man (which the Apostle terms, earthly
members) which are daily more and more to be mortified yt our regenerated part
or inward man may increase to further renouation, even unto a perfect man: and
therefore are we exhorted still to this further mortifying of the old man,
Ephe. 4.5. Psalm. 51.103
and pray earnestly to god that he will by clensing us more and more from our
sins perform the same. Esai. 6. 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 5. Galat. 2.5. 2. Tim. 2.
And thus David, S. Paul, Esaie, and all the godly continually expected,
knowing, 'that when this body of sin by death should be put of, it should be
performed through Christ Jesus, by whom in the mean time they lived by a lively
faith in the work of this new birth, in continual mortification and
renouation. The performance whereof is the dailye remitting of sin through the
blood of Christ. For the last enemy that herein must be destroyed is death or
mortality. S. Paul confesses, Hebr. 9.
that after his new birth and conversion, there still remained a resistance,
which he called the law of his members, 2. Ioh. 2.1
which although it did not reign in him, yet did it marueilously vex, Apo.
1.7.8.14.12.
let and hinder him, so that he confessed he had not then already attained,
Romans 7.6.
either was already perfect, 2. Cor. 12.
but still followed the prefixed mark in Christ, Philip. 3.
through whom (as he was in him comprehended, 2. Tim. 4.
so) he fought a good fight, fulfilled his course, 2. Cor. 9.
and kept y^ faith, Luke 16.
to the receiving of that crown of righteousness, 2. Cor. 2.5
which the Lord the righteous judge did give unto him at the day of his
dissolution, Philip. 1.
which day he with all the rest of Gods dear children earnestly desired and
longed after, 1. Pet. 1.
as thend of all their travel, (...)
and the full perfecting of their regeneration to their everlasting glory in
Christ.

And to be short S. Augustine says, Aug. de peceatorl meritis and remiss 2.
Cor. 4.
Non ex qua hora quisquis baptizatur omnis vetus infirmitas eius absumitur, sed
renouatio incipit a remissione omniu^ peccatoru^. etc. sed si in ipso animo qui
est homo interior perfecta in Baptismo nouitas fieret, no^ diceret apostolus,
etsi exterior homo noster corrumpi tur, interior renouatur de die in die^,
profecto enim, qui de die in die^ adhuc renouatur nondum totus est renouatus.
Al our old infirmity of concupiscence is not wyped away or consumed from yt
time that every man is baptized: but renouation begins at ye remission of
all sins. But if perfect newnes might be wrought in Baptism in the soul
which is the inward man, then would not ye apostle have said, although our
outward man be destroyed the inward man is day by day renewed: for truly he yt
is yet daily renewed, is not as yet wholly renewed. And the very form of
Sherwins confession does evidently convince these Jesuits and al other
Papists whatsoever, of great blasphemy and wickedness. For if there be nothing
in us, nor of us, but sin and abomination, and that we trust to be saved
only by the death and bloudshedding of Christ, (which is most true) the^
where is their infused righteousness, works of congruence or preparations, to
form and fashion their faith? where is their deserving merits, satisfying
works, or works of condign, stirred up and drawn forth by their first
justice? There are none at all, no not one, they are all abominable. etc. But
this confession of Sherwins was unto him self, and is unto the rest of his
fellows yet remaining as was their prophecy of Caiphas unto him and the rest
of the priests the Scribes, and Pharisees, which although it was both good and
true, and the work of the holy Ghost in that il man to declare the purpose of
god for our rede^ptio^ in ye death of christ: yet had both caiphas and the rest
of the pharisees a lewd tent and a contrary meaning in the uttering thereof,
even to the death of Christ, and presernation of their own state: even so these
Jesuits, notwithstanding the form of good words they here use, there lies
hid in their hearts a wicked and deuelish meaning, to the overthrow of
Christ's office, and glory, as by the discovery thereof hitherto has well
appeared.

Now where the Papists, and papisticall Jesuits object saint James, they do
by a double Sophisme beguile themselves and others. Mark. 3. Exodus 8 c. 10.
Ioh. 6. Act. 8. Mat. 10.26.
That is to wit, in this word Faith, and in the word Justification. For faith
in that place of S. James, is taken for such a faith as the Devil has, as
Pharao had, as the Capernaits, and such others, that for a time believed, and
such a one as Judas and Simon magus had, and like unto the Jesuitical faith,
and I think, worse then the Devils faith. They should do well therefore, and
find less damnation, if they forsake with Judas, in plain terms, the name
of Christ, and call themselves no more Jesuits, after so good a name, but
Iscariozites, and Magozites, according to the substance of their Religion.
For where Judas sold his Master but once, and Simon Magus would have bought
the holy Ghost but once, they do it infinitely, and never make an end
thereof.

Now to their sophisme, and first where S. paul in ye example of Abraham,
takes faith for the knowledge of god, and the assente unto his word, with
trust or confidence therein whereby Christ is apprehended. S. James takes it for
a shadow of faith, separated from fiducia, such a one as ye papistical,
peneral, or catholic faith is, which iustifyeth before God, no more then
devils faith can justify. S. James did not say that such men as he spoke of,
had Faith: but he says: What and if a man say he has Faith? which intrueth
Saint Ieames imports them to want.

Secondly, Romans 4. Gal. 3.4
S. Paul refers justification unto God, I have (says he) made thee a father
to many nations, even before god. And S. James refers it unto me^, and
therefore says, show me thy faith by thy works, and then brings the example
of Abraham, to conclude yt by works in the sight and judgment of men, we are
justified, and not by knowledge, which there he calls only faith, And this
agrees with our savior Christ who says, Iam. 3 Mar. 5 1. Pet, 2
Sic luceat lux vestra etc Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and so glorifye your heavenly father.

Again S. Paul and saint James bring both an example but yet unto diverse
ends, the one to prove that we be justified by faith only without works and
that before God: the other to try out a false hipocriticall shadow of faith,
from a true lively justifying Faith, that never wants his works. And this
trial he makes by works, which ever attend upon a true Faith, as the
inseparable fruits thereof. Etsi non precedunt iustificandu^, August. de Fr.
and oper^bus.
sequuntur tamen iustificatu^. Although works go not before him that is to be
justified, yet truly works follow him that is already justified.

And thus also does S. Augustine interpret this place of S. James, so does
Thomas Aquinas. Quest. 76
Haec loquitur (says S, Augustine) de operibus quae sequun tur Fidem, etc.
Vnde Apostolus ait Fide obtulit Isaac cum tentaretur. Haec oblatio est opus and
testimoniu^ Fidei and Iustitiae.

Saint James speaks here of those works which do follow Faith. Wherefore he
says, Through faith Abraham offered up Isaac, where he was tried of God. This
oblation is the work, and Testimony of his faith and justification. Aquinas
says, Opera iustifica^t declaratiue. Works declare us to be justified.

Thus thou see by the discourse of the Jesuitical confession and opinion of
Justification, drawn out of the School of the Sorbonists, that Sherwin meant
nothing less in his late confession at his death, the^ yt which the people for
the most part did suppose him to utter.

If he had meant as the good form of words do to all good Christians importe,
why did he not first detest and condemn his Jesuitical profession? Why did he
not give some open testimony of repentance from his vile and detestable
popery? For, his form of words is unto his Jesuitical Profession, Popish
Religion, as contrary, 2. Cor. 6. Psalm. 37 Luke 7.19.23. 2. Reg. Mat. 3 Apoc.
14.19.
as Light to Darcknesse, truth to Falshoode, Christ to Beliall, and he that
will do any thing acceptable to God, must first decline from evil that he may
do good. So did Mary Magdalen, Zache the Publican, the Thief upon the cross,
and all penitent sinners, for so the Gospel teaches.

But herein Sherwin follows the practice of the holy Fathers of the Trident
Council, and the sorboniticall Doctoures, in whom the Devil for the better
vpholdinge of his Antychristyan Sinagogue, (even now beginning to fall) in
all falshoode, and Religious craftines goes far beyond himself, For they,
seeing the people being long oppressed with their superstitious Tyranny, now
by the continual preaching of the gospel, in these last days to begin both to
suspecte, and to mislike the abominations of their Popish Religion, thought
it more then time to leave the gross, and homelye terms of the Schoolmen,
and barbarous Predecessors, in this matter of Justification, and to set a new.
Face, and fine color upon that vile and corrupt matter, by show of good
words, borrowed from the Gospel, according to the time, interlacing the same
with new Distinctions, and burnished Terms of art, so that except men do
very carefully examine the same, they are able to deceive, not the simple
only, but the wise and learned also: Yea, if it were possible, even the very
elect. So skillful are they to dissemble their meaning by show and color
of strange words and terms. This manner of dealing, thus dissemblinge, and
hidinge their own meanings to the beguyling of the world, is not (good Reader)
that dividing of Gods word, that S. Paul requires of the Lords Ministers.
But contrariwise, that braule of words, and profane clamors in vain, things
tending unto farther impiety, wounding the conscience of the ignorant, and
greeuing the godly like the frettinge of a Canker.

The Lord therefore deliver his Church from the hands of such subtle
workmen, whose consciences are seared with obstinate hyyocrifie, and guide it
by his holy spirit in the labor of faithful Pastors until the coming of
his son Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost,
three persons and one eternal God, be all glory and honor now and for ever.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf 1582.


