A CHOICE OF EMBLEMES, AND OTHER DEVISES, For the most part gathered out of
sundry writers, Englished and Moralized. AND DIVERSE NEWLY DEVISED, by Geffrey
Whitney. A work adorned with variety of matter, both pleasant and profitable:
wherein those that please, may find to fit their fancies: Because herein, by
the office of the eye, and the ear, the mind may reap dooble delighte
through wholesome precepts, shadowed with pleasant devises: both fit for the
virtuous, to their incoraging: and for the wicked, for their admonishing and
amendment.

To the Reader.
Peruse with heed, then friendly judge, and blaming rash refrain:
So may thou read unto thy good, and shall requite my pain.


printer's device of Christopher Plantin, featuring a hand holding compasses,
emerging from a cloud LABOR ET CONSTANTIA



Imprinted at LEYDEN, In the house of Christopher Plantyn, by Francis
Raphelengius. M.D.LXXXVI.

blazon or coat of arms of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, within the order
of the garter, beneath a chained bear and ragged staff atop a plumed helmet,
and flanked by two crowned lions QVI MAL. Y: PENSE HONI SOIT DROIT ET LOYAL.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY SINGVLER GOOD Lord and Master, ROBERT Earl of
LEYCESTER, Baron of Denbighe, Knight of the most noble orders of the garter,
and of saint Michael, Master of her Maties horse, one of her Highness most
honorable privy Counsel, and Lord Lieutenant and Captain General of her
Maties forces in the low countries.
A SOVLDIOR of King PHILLIP, of MACEDONIA, (Right honorable) suffering
shipwreck, Brusonius lib. 3.
and languishinge through necessity and extreme sickness, A Macedonian moved
with compassion, most lovingly entertained, and long cherished and relieved
him. Who being well recovered, promised at his departure if he might come to
the presence of his Sovereign to requite his friendship. At the length cominge
to the court, the souldior made report of the shipwreck, but not of the
kindness of the Macedonian: and contrariwise, so incensed the King against his
louinge countryman, that he obtained a grant of all his liuinges: But
afterward his ingratitude and treacherous practice being discovered to this
good prince, he revoked his guifte, and in detestation of his dealinge caused
him to be marked with a hot iron: Idem.
The Emperor CLAUDIUS reduced all those to their former bondage, who neclecting
the bounty and love of their Lords, in infranchisinge them: requited them in
the end with any unkindness. This foul vice Ingratitude has bin common in
all ages, and yet so odious to the virtuous and best disposed, that they have
left behind innumerable examples to the like effect, for the rooting out
thereof from all societies. If the former ages who knew not the living GOD,
nor his holy word, have bin so careful herein: Then ought we, much more,
who know not only how odious it is, to man: but how hateful it is,
cheeflie in the sight of God. For we may see in the holy scripture, how
often the children of Israel wear plagued for their unthankfulness. Exodus 14,
15, 16, 17. etc.
and how the Lord often complains thereof, saying by the Prophet I say, I
have nourished and exalted them and yet they despised me, Isaie cap. 1.
the ox knows his master, and the ass his cribbe, but Israel knows not
me etc. Also by the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. cap. 8.
The Storke, the Turtle, and the swallowe, do observe their time: but my
people do not know the judgment of the Lord. In the new Testament also,
when Christ had cleansed the ten lepers, and but one of them gave thanks, Luc
cap. 17.
our savior said, Are not ten cleansed? Mich. 6. Osee 13.
where be the other nine? etc. By which and many other like places, it is
manifest, how ingratitude is vile both in the sight of GOD and man.
Wherefore to clear my self of the suspicion of my guilt herein, which your
honor may justly conceive against me, in deferring so long before I present
some testimony of my bounden duty to your good Lordship, (having so often, and
so largely tasted of your honorable bounty and favor.) I have therefore
strained that small talent I have, to plead my cause in this behalf to your
honor: Most humbly beseeching the same, to pardon the wantes wherewith this
my simple travail is blemisshed, through my lack of leisure, and learning.
The first, denies me to perfect it, as I purposed: The other, to polishe it
as it ought, that should be presented to so noble a personage. whose
heroical virtues so many grave, and learned men have eternised to all
posterities. For leauinge your native country, where so many godly and
virtuous are countenanced: So many learned advanced, and so many studious
incoraged by your honor. What other country in Christendom, but knows that
your lordship is a Noble, and most faithful counselor to her excellent
Matie, a zealous fauorer of the Gospel, and of the godly Preachers thereof, a
louinge patron of learning, and a bountiful Mecoenas to all the professors of
worthy arts, and sciences: whereof my self is a witness, who have often hard
the same in other countries, to your everlasting memory.

Learning would be soon put to silence, without the aid and supporte of
such noble Peers as your Lordship: which was well considered by the Emperors,
and Princes many hundredth years since: whereof Artaxerxes the King of Persia
has left behind him this example, who wrat to a ruler of one of his
dominions to this effect. King of Kings great Artaxerxes to Hiscanus
governor of Hellesponte greeting. Suidas.
The fame of Hippocrates a Physician is come unto me, therefore see thou give
him as much goulde as he desires, and all other things he wants, and send
him to me. He shall be equal with any Persian in honor, and if there be any
other famous man in Europe, spare no money to make him a friend to my court.
Also Phillip of Macedonia favored Aristotle, comitting his only son
Alexander the great to his tutorship, Aul. Gell. lib. 9. cap. 3.
rejoicing that he had a son borne in such a time, as he might have such a
famous Philosopher to be his instructor. Aelian. de Var. Hist. lib. 13. ca. 7.
The same Alexander so honored the poet Pindarus, that at the destruction of
Thebes he gave chardge that the family and kindred of Pindarus should be
spared. Plutarchus in Alexand.
He loved so learning that he used to lay the Jliades of Homer (which he
learned of Aristotle) with his dagger under his beds head. Also having
learned certain private instructions of his said Scoolemaister, after having
knowledge that Aristotle had published the same to others, he was highly
offended: and although he wear busied in the great wars against Darius,
yet in the midst of those weighty affairs, he wrat unto Aristotle,
blaminge him for participating to others, that which he desired to have proper
to him self. Saying, How can I excel others, in any things I have learned
of thee: if thou make the same common to all, for I had rather go before them
in learning, then in power and abundance. Gellius sets down the Epistle of
the King to Aristotle, Aul. Gell. lib. 20. cap. 4.
with the aunsweare thereunto, being worthy to be imprinted in the minds of
the honorable, that they might be for ever remembered. Scipio Africanus used
the Poet Ennius as his companion in his great affairs, Plinius lib. 7. cap.
30. Idem, ibid.
and to show his grief for the loss of such a one, caused the image of
Ennius to be laid with him in his own tomb. Augustus countinanced Virgill,
and so loved him: that after his death, he carefully preserved his works
from the fire to the which they wear adjudged. Horatius.
Mecoenas many ways showed his noble mind unto Horace, Mossellanus super
Gell. lib. 1. cap. 26.

Cicero in orat. pro Archia.


and Plutarche was in high estimation with the Emperor Traian. Yea famous
cities and common wealths have embraced the learned, Smyrna and six other
cities so loved Homer, that after his death, there grew great controversy
amongst them, which of them should rightly claim him to be theirs. Athens
honored a long time Demosthenes: Rome reioysed for Tullie. And of later times
Florence boasted of Petrarke, Sabellicus.
and Roterodam of Erasmus. with many other cities that did the like to diverse
famous men. And these again to requite their honorable regardes, made them
famous through their worthy works to all ages, that death to the which
their bodies by nature wear subject, could not extincte nor bury their
memories: but that the same remain so long as the world shall endure. And to
speak of some of them, Aristotle, greatly honored Phillip, and was no less
careful for the education of Alexander. For when he came to be king,
besides the houlsome precepts he prescribed unto him of regiment, yet having
knowledge of his earnest desire, to understand the natures and qualities of all
creatures, compyled almost fifty books, intreatinge of the same: having by
the commandment of Alexander out of Greece and all Asia, many thowsandes of
Hunters, Faulkeners, Fowlers, Fishers, Heardmen, Aul. Gell. lib. 13. cap. 7.
and such as kept bees, birds, or any other living thing: to help and
aid him, with their knowledge and experiences, in searchinge the secrettes,
natures and qualities of all creatures. Ennius being mindful of the noble
inclination of Scipio, Petrus Crinitus de poetis Latinis.
did highly extol his worthy acts, registring them in his learned cronicles
to all posterities: Virgill to show him self thankful to Augustus: spent
many years about his famous work of Aeneiads, to derive the race of the
Emperor from Aeneas, Idem.
and the noble Trojans. Macrobius.
Horace amongst his rare and learned works stuffed full of wise and grave
precepts, oftentimes enterlaceth the same with the birthe the bounty the
learning, and the noble qualities of Mecoenas, and has made him for ever
famous, and renowned. Plutarche besides his private books he wratte to Traian,
of counsel and government: Suidas.
He framed that excellent work of lives, and comparisons between the Romans
and the Grecians: giving due commendation as well to the Romans, as to his own
countrymen. By which we may gather, that learning grounded upon virtue has
bin alwaise enemy to ingratitude, and cannot lie hid, but is evermore
workinge, and bewrays it self as the smoke bewrays the fire, And if any
thing happen worthy memory: by the benefit of the learned it is imparted, by
their travails to future time. If there chance nothing in their age famous,
yet they set them selves a work in handlinge such accidents, as have bin
done in times paste. Cornel. Nepos.
Dares Phrigius being a sowldior at the battle of Troy, made a large
discourse thereof, yet like one too much affectioned, can scarce find an end
of the praises of Hector. Homer finding small matter in his time to handle,
attempted the same argument, being loathe that his countrymen should lack
their due commendacion, and therefore almost as far on the other side,
extolleth the valor, and high prowes, of Achilles: Petr. Crinit.
and the counsel, and policy, of Ulysses. Lucan seeing nothing honorable in
Nero to entreat of, fled to former times for matter, where he found to set his
worthy muse a work, and wratte in verse (equal with the haughtines of the
argument) the battles and bloody conflicts, between Caesar, and Pompey.
Seneca dispairinge of the nature and inclinacion of his untoward scholar the
same Nero: wratte lamentable Tragedies, and books of great gravity and
wisdom. Moreover learning has that secret workinge that tyrauntes have bin
mittigated therewith, and have dissembled their affections for the time.
Dionysius the elder desired to hear Plato, Plutarchus.
and was contented a while to listen unto him, after whom his son, having
both his name and nature, did seem outwardly to love and reverence Plato,
and sent him great guiftes to Athens, and invited him to his court.
Suetonius. Petr. Crinit.
Nero for a time embraced Lucan and Seneca, although naturally he was
wickedlie inclined: but he soon did degenerate from their discipline, for
there can be no league between virtue and vice, nor perfect union of mere
contraries: And although time revealed the bloody minds, of these cruel
tirantes toward those famous men, yet we can not find the like outrage, and
cruelty done unto the learned, by those that are honorable virtuous and noble
minded: but by such as be of cruel vile and base natures, who are always
enemies to virtue, and love none, nor like any, but such as are of their own
ugly stamp. For it is a rule that fails not, that those that are most
honorable, are most virtuous: because honor always follows virtue, as the
shaddowe does the body: and it is as impossible that a body should be
without a shaddowe in the son, as the right honorable in this life should
be void of virtue. Thus it is manifest how learning has bin embraced, and
had in high estimation, by great Princes and noble Peers, and that worthelie:
Because by the benefit thereof, The acts of mighty Monarchs and great
Princes, and the matters and things of former time worthy memory, done by
sage Governors, and valiant Captains. The manners and Laws of strange
nations, and customs of oulde time. The mutabillitie of worldly felicity, and
how the wise have behaved them selves in both fortunes: have bin presented
unto them as in a glass, for their instruction, from which they might draw
understanding and good counsel, to instruct and govern them selves in all
their actions: and find approved examples for the whole course of their life,
either to be imitated, or eschewed. Of which singular benefit, we likewise
are pertakers: For hereby, this present time behouldeth the accidents of
former times, as if they had bin done but yesterdaie. and we may behoulde the
natures, and quallities, of our great grandfathers grandfathers, as if they yet
lived before our eyes. And as former time, and present time, have reaped
thereby, this inestimable Juell; So likewise, future time so long as the world
shall endure, shall taste of this blessing: For our succession, shall see what
we have seen, and behoulde hereby what famous things wear enterprised and
done in our days, as if they wear even now standing at our elbowes. Yet how
greatly learning has bin impeached since the first florishe thereof, when in
stead of such loving and bountiful princes and patrons, the world brought
forth, Bapt. Egnatius de Romany principibus lib. 1. and Pompon. Laetus in
Romans Histor. compendio.
Licinius who termed learning a poison and plague of the common wealth. And
Valentinianus his partner in that opinion, with the cursed crewe of their
companions, As Caligula, Nero, Alexandriae Bibliotheca omnium celebertima, in
qua cccc. millia volumina librorum incensa, Frecul. Cron. tom. 1. lib. 7. cap.
9. Sed Plutarchus in Caesare, and Aul. Gel. lib. 6. cap. vlt. and Sabel.
Ennead. 6. libro 7. scribunt septingenta millia in eadem consumpta. Vaticana
Romae Bibliotheca, sub Clemente 7. a militibus Germanis and Hispanis cremata.
Aeneas Syluius de Europa.

Instructiss. Budae Bibliotheca per Solimannum incensa 1526. Aug. Cur. Athenae
deletae, and funditus euersae, per Machometum 8. Turcarum Imp. 1452. idem Curio.


Diocletian, with Machomet, Bajazet, and such like monsters of nature, being
cruel persecutors, enemies of all humanity, and distroyers of all discipline:
who dispising God and all goodness, did degenerate so far from their
forfathers, that they delighted wholly to spill the blood of the worthy men,
to burn the famous libraries, and to raze and overthrow the universities, and
schools, of all arts and sciences: as in the tragical Histories of former
times is recorded, and can not be but with great grief remembered. And
although learning has bin greatly decayed in these later times, Yet we must
(with thanks unto God therefore) confess, That it has pleased him always,
to raise up some lovers and favorers thereof, who have tendered and embraced the
same, and for the preseruinge it to their posterities, have left behind
singular monuments of their care, and zealous minds in this behalf: As Charles
the great, Bapt. Egnat. de Romans principibus lib. 3.
King of France, who erected two universities, the one at Paris, the other at
Pauia, placing therein many famous men: and Sigismundus Emperor, who highly
extolled the learned, Idem ibi.
and blamed the Princes of Germany, for their small regard unto them: And
understanding by sum, that although he cherished the learned, yet it was
said they were but pore and base persons, answered: I love them who excel
others for virtue, and learning, out of the which I measure nobility. Also
Ferdinandus gave yearly out of his treasury, great sommes of money to the
readers of divinity, Physic, Rethoricke, and Philosophy, to the great
incouraginge of those that wear inclined to good studies: Pontanus de
liberalitate.
Likewise Alphonsus King of Naples, who used to say, he had never greater
pleasure, then when he was in the company of those that wear singular for
knowledge, and learning: Laurentius Valla and Panormitanus, with diverse other
tasted of his goodness, and found him a rare example for princes, for his
continual desire to advance learning. I might here likewise bring in diverse
other, not inferior to them for their love to the learned: As Frederick Duke
of Saxon Prince elector, and the Lord Ernestus his brother, who erected the
university of Wittenberge, and the said Duke nobly countinaunced and defended
Martin Luther, against the fury of Pope Leo the tenthe, and all other his
adversaries. Also Laurentius Medices Duke of Florence honored Picus Mirandula,
and Hermolaus Barbarus: Crinitus lib. 15. cap. 9.

Volaterranus in Geog.


and Borsus Duke of Ferrara, reioysed in Titus Strozza. with many other
Princes, who for their noble inclinations in this behalf, amongst these might
justly have their places.

BUT remembering I write to your good Lordship. I will therefore abridge of
purpose, that which might be more larglie amplified, knowing there needs no
Apology to be made unto your honor, in the behalf of learning: whose noble
mind has bin so addicted to the same these many years, that diverse, who are
now famous men, had bin through poverty, long since discouraged from their
studies: if they had not found your honor, so prone to be their patron. But
I confess, I have thus largely written thereof to this end, That if any
other hap to look herevppon, in knowinge your zeal and honorable care of
those that love good letters: They might also know thereby, that you have
possession of that ground from which true nobility florisheth: And likewise
that you follow the good examples of many Princes, and great personages, who
are renowned therefore, beyond any other their deserts. And likewise, if any
be could, in countinancinge the learned, (as there are tootoo many, whose
friendship is (as I may say) frozen, and stark toward them.) This might a
little thawe and mollify them: and serve as a spur to prick them forward,
to follow the steps of your good Lordship. There be three things greatly
desired in this life, that is health, wealth, and fame. and some have made
question which of these is the chief: the sick, says health. the covetous,
comendeth wealth. and both these place good name last of all. But they be
both partial judges; for he that is of sincere and vprighte judgment, is of
contrary opinion: Because that health, and wealth, though they be never so
good, and so great, determine with the body, and are subject unto time; But
honor, fame, renown, and good report, do triumph over death, and make men
live for ever: where otherwise the greatest Princes, in short time are worn
out of memory, and clean forgotten. For, what is man in this world? without
fame to leave behind him, but like a bubble of water, that now rises, and
anon is not known where it was. Which being well considered by your honor, you
have made choice of the best part, and embraced through virtue, that which
lives, and never dies. For virtue (as I said) always goes before honor,
and gives a perpetuity of felicity in this world, and in the world to
come. And although through the iniquity of time (as is declared) such
excellent learned men as have bin, are not to be expected in this oulde age of
the world, Yet as zealous care, and dewtifull affection as ever was to their
Lords and Patrons, there is no doubt does generally florishe and is
apparante: whereof your honor has had trial, by the learned labors of many
famous men. Far behind whom, my self, (although of all the meanest) yet
being pricked forward by your good Lordshipps bounty, and encouraged by your
great clemency, most humbly present these my gatheringes, and gleaninges
out of other men's haruestes, unto your honor: a work both pleasant and
pithie, which I have garnished with many histories, with the proper
applications and expositions of those Emblemes that I found obscure: Offering
it up to your honor to look upon at some hours for your recreation. I hope
it shall be the more delightful, because none to my knowledge, has assayed
the same before: and, for that diverse of the inuentio^s are of my own slender
workmanship. But chiefly, because under pleasant devises, are profitable
moralles, and no shadows, void of substance: nor any conceyte, without some
cause worthy consideration: for the wounding of wickedness, and extolling of
virtue. which may serve, as a mirror: to the lewd for their amendment. and
to the godly, for their better goinge forward in their course, that leads to
everlasting glory. Being abashed that my habillitie can not affoorde them
such, as are fit to be offered up to so honorable a suruaighe: yet if it shall
like your honor to allow of any of them, I shall think my pen set to the
book in happy hour; and it shall encourage me, to assay some matter of more
momente, as soon as leisure will further my desire in that behalf.

THE almighty God from whom all honor and true nobillitie do proceed, who
has many years, most lovingly and liberally, endued your Lordship with
the same, bless and prolonge your days here, that we may behoulde the
consummatio^ of happy old age in your honor: before you shall be summoned to
the everlasting honor, which is always permanent without mutabilitie, Amen.
At London the XXVIII. of November, Anno M.D.LXXXV.

Your Honors humble and faithful servant Geffrey Whitney.

TO THE READER.
WHEN I had finished this my collection of Emblemes (gentle Reader;) and
presented the same in writing unto my Lord, presently before his Honor
passed the seas into the low countries: I was after, earnestly required by
sum that perused the same, to have it imprinted: whose request, when I had
well considered, although I did perceive the charge was very heavy for me,
(waighinge my own weakness) I mean my want of learning, and judgment, to
set forth any thing unto the view of this age, wherein so many wise and
learned do florishe, and must have the scanninge thereof. Yet knowinge their
favors to be such unto me, as in dewtie I might not deny them any thing I
can: I did rather choose to undergo any burden, and almost fainte in
forwardnes to satisfy them, then to show any want of good will, in denyinge
their continual desires. wherefore, license being obtained for the publishing
thereof, I offer it hear (good Reader) to thy view, in the same sort as I
presented it before. Only this except: That I have now in diverse places,
quoted in the margent some sentences in Latin, and such verses as I thought
did best fit the several matters I wratte of. And also have written sum of
the Emblemes, to certain of my friends, to whom either in duty or friendship,
I am diverse ways bound: which both wear wantinge in my first edition, and
now added hereunto, for these reasons insuinge. First I noted the same in
Lattin, to help and further some of my acquaintance wheare this book was
imprinted, who having no taste in the English tongue, yet wear earnestly
addicted to the understanding hereof: and also, wheare I found any verse, or
saying agreeable with the matter, I did gather the same of purpose for my own
memory, not doubtinge but the same may be also fruitful to others.

For my intitulinge them to some of my friends, I hope it shall not be
misliked, for that the offices of dewtie and friendship are always to be
favored: and herin as I follow my auctors in Englishinge their devises, So I
imitate them, in dedicatinge some, to such persons, as I think the Emblemes
do best fit and pertain unto, which order, observed Reusnerus, Iunius,
Sambucus, and others: as by their works are apparante, Confessinge my fault
to be chiefly this, in presentinge to famous and worthy men, mean matter,
far to simple for their deseruinges: yet trustinge my good will shall be
waighed as well as the work, and that a pearl shall not be looked for in a
poor man's purce, I submit my doings herein to their censures.

Furthermore, wheare there are diverse Emblemes written of one matter, which may
be thought superfluous. As against Pride, Envy, Concupiscence, Drunkenness,
Covetousness, Usury, and such like, against every one of them severally,
sondrie devises: thereby the sundry inventions of the auctours may be
decerned, which I have collected against those vices especially, because they
are growe^ so mighty that one bloe will not beat them down, but new headdes
spring up like Hydra, that Hercules wear not able to subdue them. But many
drops pierce the stone, and with many blows the oak is overthrown, So with
many reprehencions, wickedness is wounded, and sin ashamed and gives place
unto virtue. It rests now to show breeflie what this word Emblem
signifies, and whereof it comes, which though it be borrowed of others, and
not proper in the English tongue, yet that which it signifies: Is, and has
bin always in use amongst us, which word being in Greek (...), vel (...) is
as much to say in English as To set in, or to put in: properly meant by
such figures, or works, as are wroughte in plate, or in stones in the
pauementes, or on the waules, or such like, for the adorning of the place:
having some witty devise expressed with cunning woorkemanship, something
obscure to be perceived at the first, whereby, when with further consideration
it is understood, it may the greater delighte the behoulder. And although the
word does comprehend many things, and diverse matters may be therein
contained; yet all Emblemes for the most part, may be reduced into these
three kinds, which is Historical, Natural, and Moral. Historical, as
representing the acts of some noble persons, being matter of history.
Natural, as in expressing the natures of creatures, for example, the love of
the young Storkes, to the oulde, or of such like. Pietas Ciconiae erga
parents.
Moral, pertaining to virtue and instruction of life, which is the chief of
the three, and the other two may be in some sort drawn into this head. For,
all do tend unto discipline, and moral precepts of living. I might write
more at large hereof, and of the difference of Emblema Symbolum, and Aenigma,
having all (as it wear) some affinity one with the other. But because my
meaning is to write as briefly as I may, for the avoiding of tediousnes, I
refer them that would further inquire thereof, to And. Alciatus, Guiliel.
Perrerius, Achilles Bocchius and to diverse others that have written thereof,
well known to the learned. For I purpose at this present, to write only of
this word Emblem: Because it chiefly does pertain unto the matter I have in
hand, whereof I hope this much, shall give them some taste that wear
ignorant of the same.

Lastly if any devise herein shall delight thee, and if some other shall not
please thee, yet in respect of that which does like thee, pass over the same
favorably to others, with whom perhaps it may be more agreeable: For what
one likes, an other oftentimes does not regard: and what some does loathe,
some other does chiefly esteem: whereof came the Proverb, So many men, so
many minds. But what? Should I think that my simple travail herein should
escape scot-free from the tongues of the envious, who are always ready with a
preiudicate opinion to condemn, before they understand the cause. No?
though the verse wear (as I may say) written by the pen of Apollo him
self? For in the former times, when the whole world was almost ouershadowed
with the mantle of ignorance, If then, the learned and excellent work of
Homer, Martialis.
could not shield him from the stinge of Zoilus. If Marcus Varro, was taunted
by Remnius Palemon. If Cicero had six books written against him, Textor in
officin.
by Didymus Alexandrinus. And if Vergill wear envied by Carbilius, who wrat a
book de Virgilianis erroribus, which he entitled Aeneidomastix. Petrus
Crinitus de poetis Latinis.
and diverse others whose works wear most singular, if they could not escape
the bites of such Basiliskes brood: Then how may I think, in this time
which is so blessed, generally with most rare and exquisite perfection in all
knowledge, and judgment: that this slender assaye of my barren muse, should
pass the pikes without pusshing at: where thousands are so quick sighted,
they will at the first, behoulde the least jot, or tittle, that is not rightly
placed. And although, perhaps it may be embraced a while, for the newnes
thereof, yet shortly it shall be cast aside as things that are unsavory and
not esteemed. For the nature of man is always delighted in novelties, and too
much corrupt with curiousnes and newfanglenes. The fairest garden, wherein is
great variety both of goodly coulors, and sweet smelles, can not like all
men's fancies: but some gallant colors are misliked, and some pleasant
smelles not regarded. No cook, can fit all men's tastes, nor any orator,
please all men's humors: but wheare the tasters are too dainty, his cookerie
shall be controlled: and wheare the auditors are to rash and careless in
regarding, his Rethoricke shall be condemned: and no work so absolute perfect,
but some are resolute to reprehende. Yet trustinge the learned, and those that
are of good judgment (whom I do chiefelie desire to be the perusers
hereof) with indifferency will read, and then favorably yield their
verdicte. I offer this my work, such as it is, unto them; wherein I hope the
greater sort shall find something to delighte them, and very few of what
age, or condition they be, but may herin see some devise, aunswerable to their
inclinations; trusting they will so friendly accept thereof, That I shall be rather
encouraged thereby, to assay some further matter, as soon as I shall have
leisure: then through their sinister interpreting of my good will, to
discorage me from the same, and to wish I had not yet communicated this, unto
all: which I might have kept private to a few. Yet hereby I have satisfied my
friends requests, and have in some part discharged my duty unto them:
Therefore if they shall be well pleased with my pains, I shall the less care
for any others cauillinge. Thus wishing thee the fruition of thy good desires,
I leave thee unto the same. At Leyden in Hollande, the 1111. of May.
M.D.LXXXVI.

G. Whitney.

IN GALFRIDI WHITNEI EMBLEMATA.
ILlecebris scripti genus omne EMBLEMATA vincunt,
Vtile vbi dulci miscuit EVPHROSYNE.
Hoc praestant variis distincta Asarota figuris,
Apta tenere oculos, instruere apta animum.
SAMBVCVS testis, testis mihi JUNIUS, and qui
Omne tulit punctum hoc in genere ALCIATVS.
Sed scripti quantum genus omne EMBLEMATA praestant
Illecebris, docta vermiculata manu;
Tantum operis, WHITNAEE, tui concedit honori,
Quantum est SAMBVCVS, JUNIUS, ALCIATVS.
IANVS DOVSA a Noortwijck.

IN GALFRIDI WHITNEI EMBLEMATA, MAGNI ILLIVS OLIM ANGLIAE POETAE GALFRIDI
CHAVCERI, cognominis.
VNA duos genuit GALFRIDOS ANGLIA, Vates
Nomine, PHOEBAEO numine, and art pares.
Vnum, Fama suae patriae indigitauit HOMERVM,
Anglicus hic merito dicitur HESIODVS.
Ac veluti dubiis quondam victoria pennis
Inter MAEONIDEN HESIODVMque stetit:
Sic, quibus exultat modo laeta Britannia alumnis,
GALFRIDOS palma est inter, in ambiguo.
CHAVCERI versant dudum aurea scripta Britanni:
Aurea WHITNAEVS sed sua pressit adhuc,
Nunc vero, auspiciis LEYCESTRI, EMBLEMATA lucem
Aspiciunt; and dant accipiuntque decus.
Qualis gemma micat fuluo redimita metallo
Indica, ab artificis vermiculata manu.
Perge tuae WHITNEY titulos superaddere famae,
Tollens astra super te patriamque tuam.
BONAVENTVRA VVLCANIVS Brugensis.

IN EMBLEMATA GALFRIDI WHITNEI.
QVALITER insinuant oculis se Emblemata nostris,
Quae vary augusta vermiculata domo,
Artificique nitent opere exornata, modo illa,
Hac modo perdita men's dum stupet effigy:
Sic tu dum GALFRIDE tuo hoc expressa libello
Symbola cum variis edis imaginibus;
Nos legisse beat veterum dicta aemula dictis,
Carminibus vary vermiculata tuis,
Et modo priscorum Heroum immortalia facta,
Virtutesque animo commeminisse iuuat.
Intrepidus dum CurtI animus, and Horatia corda,
Et tibi Fabricij cognita Pyrrhe, fides;
Dum fortes Decij, Junij, Curij, atque Metelli,
Et Cunctatoris men's benesuada FabI,
Ac dum Scipiadae belli duo fulmina, quosque
Est alios haud men's enumerare potis
Innumeros, per te virtutum hic clara suarum
Opponunt nostris lumina luminibus.
Quid! quod praecipuum, haec merito LEYCESTRIVS heroes
Vindicat auspiciis edita scripta suis.
Vt qui hic cuncta simul laudata Heroica dona
Possidet, in magnis singula principibus
Quae miramur. At olim etiam admirabitur aetas
Postuma, DVDLAEI illustria facta ducis.
Et simul agnoscet felici hunc alite librum
Olim per doctorum ora volare hominum.
Auguror. hinc etiam quondam tibi fama paratur,
Quae WHYTNAEE mori te quoque posse neget.
PETRVS COLVIVS Brugensis.

IN GALFRIDI WHITNEI EMBLEMATA, STEPHANI LIMBERTI ANGLI NORDOVICENSIS Scholae
Magistri Decastichon.
VIRTVTIS formam splendentiaque ora tueri,
Si Deus hic nobis, test Platone, daret:
Quantos pectoribus nostris accenderet ignes
Cuius vel Phoebo pulchrius ora nitent?
Non Veneris, Triuiae nec certet forma Dianae,
Nisos haec omnes vincit and Euryalos.
Huius at effigiem WHITNAEI Emblemata pingunt,
Zeuxide, vel docto dignus Apelle, labor.
Consulet ergo boni multum spectabilis Heroes
Et capiet facili talia dona manu.
ARTHVR BOVRCHIER TO THE READER.
PERFECTION needs no other foyles, such helps comme out of place:
For where it self, can grace it self, there needs no other grace.
Why should I then my fruiteles praise on WHITNEYS work bestow,
Where wisdom, learning, and devise, so perfectly do flow.
Yet gentle Reader by thy leave, thus much I mente to wrighte,
As one that honors these his gifts, but seeks them not t'indighte.
No long discourse, no tedious tale, I purpos'de am to tell:
Lest thou should say, where is the nutte, you feed me with the shell.
Go forward then in happy time, and thou shall surely find,
With cost, and labor well set out, a banquet for thy mind.
A storehouse for thy wise conceiptes, a whetstone for thy wit:
Where, each man may with dainty choice his fancies finely fit.
Give WHITNEY then thy good report, since he deserves the same:
Lest that the wise that see thee coye, thy folly justly blame.
D. O. M.
SINCE man is frail, and all his thoughts are sin,
And of him self he can no good invent,
Then every one, before they ought begin,
Should call on GOD, from whom all grace is sent:
So, I beseech, that he the same will send,
That, to his praise I may begin, and end.
Faults escaped in the Printing, (for the most part already corrected,) yet
in many leaves ouerpassed as follows.
Page Lin. Fault. Read. 10 3 listen their listen to their 56 4 the fame the
man 77 12 fallen, to it fallen, it 120 10 watcheman watchemen 130 1 sapientem
sapientum 198 1 in margin Chiliad. 61. Chiliad. 1. 202 10 in margin libro 6.
de libro de 217 1 in marg. Esaiae 41 Esaiae 40 223 10 which with

Te stante, virebo.
woodcut of a spire wrapped in ivy

A MIGHTY Spyre, whose top does pierce the sky,
An iuie green imbraceth round about,
And while it stands, the same does bloome on high,
But when it shrinkes, the iuie stands in dowt:
The Pillar great, our gracious Princes is:
The branch, the Church: who speaks unto her this.
I, that of late with storms was almost spent,
And bruised sore with Tirants bluddie bloes,
Whom fire, and sword, with persecution rent,
Am now set free, and ouerlooke my foes,
And whiles thou raignst, oh most renowned Queen
By thie supporte my blossom shall be green.
Qua dij vocant, eundum.
woodcut of Mercury or Hermes (in foreground) and another figure (in
background) directing a traveller on the road

THE trauaylinge man, uncertain where to go,
When diverse ways before his face did lie,
Mercurius then, the perfect pathe did show,
Which when he took, he never went awrie,
But to his wish, his journeys end did gain
In happy hour, by his direction plain.
This trauailinge man: does tell our wandringe state,
Before whose face, and eeke on every side,
By paths, and ways, appear amidd our gate,
That if the Lord be not our only guide:
We stumble, fall, and daily go astraye,
Then happy those, whom God does show the way.
Prouidentia.
woodcut of a crocodile and its eggs beside the River Nile

SVCHE providence has nature secret wroughte
In creatures wild, and eeke such knowledge strange,
That man, by them in sum things may be taught,
As some foretell, when weather fair will change,
Of heat, of rain, of wind, and tempests rage,
Some show by signs, and with their songs presage.
But leaving these, which almost all do know,
The Crocodile, by whom th'Aegyptians watch,
How far that year shall mighty Nilus flow,
For their she likes to lay her eggs, and hatche,
Such skill divine, and science to foretell,
Has Nature lent unto this Serpent fell. Nic. Reusnerus. Quo sacer excurret
Nilus in arua
Praescius: alluuie libera ponit
Oua: monens moerito nos Crocodilus
Quae fata immineant, ante videre.


Which shows, They should with due regard foresee,
When any one does take in hand a cause,
The drifte, and end, of that they do decree,
And long thereon to ponder, and to pause,
For after wits, are like a shower of rain
Which moistes the soil, when withered is the grain.
Veritas temporis filia.
woodcut of a winged male figure of Time freeing a female figure of Truth from
the three female Furies, Envy, Strife and Slander

THREE furies fell, which turn the world to ruthe,
Both Envy, Strife, and Slander, hear appear,
In dungeon dark they long enclosed truth,
But Time at length, did loose his daughter dear,
And setts alofte, that sacred lady brighte,
Who things long hidd, reueales, and bringes to light.
Though strife make fire, though Envy eat her heart,
The innocent though Slander rent, and spoil:
Yet Time will comme, and take this ladies part,
And break her bands, and bring her foes to foil.
Despair not then, though truth be hidden often,
Because at length, she shall be set alofte.
Dissidia inter aequales, pessima.
woodcut of a bird or swallow flying over a ruin carrying a grasshopper in its
beak

THE Swallowe swifte, does bear unto her neste
The Grasshopper, that did no danger fear,
For that she thought, they lou'de together best,
Because they both, obscru'de one time of year,
And both, did joy their iarringe notes to sound,
And near the house they both, their dwellings found. Alciatus. Stridula
stridentem, vernam verna, hospita laetas
Hospitam, and aligeram penniger ales auem?


Yet time, and tune, and neighborhood forgotte,
For perfect friend, a tyrant she became,
Which taxes those, whom God does hear allotte
Like gifts of grace, to win a lasting name,
Yet Envy so their virtues does deface,
It makes them foes, to them theie should embrace.
Nic. Reusnerus.
Formicae grata est formica, Cicada cicadae
Et doctis doctus gaudet Apollo choris.
Temeritas.
woodcut of a charioteer struggling to control his two horses

THE waggoner, behoulde, is hedlonge thrown,
And all in vain does take the rain in hand,
If he be dwrawen by horses fierce unknown,
Whose stomachs stowte, no taming understand,
They praunce, and yerke, and out of order flinge,
Till all they break, and unto havoc bring.
That man, who has affections foul vntam'de,
And forward runs neglecting reasons race,
Deserves by right, of all men to be blam'de,
And headlonge falls at length to his deface,
Then bridle will, and reason make thy guide,
So maiste thou stand, when others down do slide.
Intestinae simultates.
woodcut of two figures setting a house on fire with oil and a torch, while a
nearby figure stands over another with a drawn knife

WHEN civil sword is drawn out of the sheathe,
And bluddie broiles, at home are set a broache,
Then furious Mars with sword does rage beneathe,
And to the Top, deuowring flames incroache,
None helps to quench, but rather blows the flame,
And oil do add, and powder to the same.
Intestine strife, is fearful most of all,
This, makes the Son, to cut his fathers throat,
This, parts friends, this, brothers makes to bralle,
This, robbes the good, and setts the thieves a floate,
This, Rome did feel, this, Germany did taste,
And often times, this noble Land did waste.
Non tibi, sed Religioni.
woodcut of a city crowd bowing before a statue of Isis carried by an ass, with
its driver raising a stick or club

THE pastors good, that do gladd tidinges preach,
The godly sort, with reverence do embrace:
Though they be men, yet since Godds word they teach,
We honor them, and give them higheste place,
Imbassadors of princes of the earth,
Have royal Seats, though base they are by birthe.
Yet, if throwghe pride they do them selves forgett,
And make account that honor, to be theires:
And do not mark with in whose place they set,
Let them behowlde the ass, that ISIS bears,
Who thowghte the men to honor him, did kneel,
And stayed therefore, till he the staff did feel.
For, as he passed with ISIS through the street,
And bare on back, his holy rites about,
Th'Aegyptians down fell prostrate at his feet,
Whereat, the Ass grew arrogante, and stowte,
Then said the guide: oh fool not unto thee,
These people bow, but unto that they see?
Experientia docet.
woodcut of an astronomer handing his instruments to a ploughman, next to a
prince on horseback

A YOVTHEFVLL Prince, in prime of lusty years,
Would understand what weather should betide,
For that he thought, with many noble Pears
To pass the time, on huntinge forth to ride:
Th'Astronomer, did wish him stay at court,
For present rain, should hinder all their sport.
Which stayed the Prince, but rain did none discende,
Then, went he forth with many Gallantes brave,
But when he thought the clouds, did drops portend,
He road aside, a plowghmans skill to crave,
Who, looking straighte upon the varijng sky:
Said, twenty days I think it will be dry.
Proceedinge then, his judgment true was found,
Then, (quoth the Prince) wear thou the doctors Roabe,
And geeue to him, thy Harrowe on the grownde,
And in exchange, take thou his Sphere, and Gloabe:
And further said, henceforthe we will allow,
That learning shall unto Experience bow.
Sirenes.
woodcut of Ulysses or Odysseus on a ship tied to the mast, with three sirens
in the sea near rocks in the foreground, and a shipwreck in the background

Virg. Aeneid. lib. 5. and Ouidius lib. 5. Metamorph.
WITH pleasant tunes, the SYRENES did allure
Ulysses wise, to listen their song:
But nothing could his manly heart procure,
He sailde away, and escaped their charming strong,
The face, he lik'de: the nether part, did loathe:
For woman's shape, and fishes had they both. Nic. Reusnerus. Illectos nautas
dulci modulamine vocis.
Mergebant auida fluctibus Ioniis.


Which shows to us, when Beauty seeks to snare
The careless man, who does no danger dreede,
That he should fly, and should in time beware,
And not on looks, his fickle fancy feed:
Such Mairemaides live, that promise only joys:
But he that yeldes, at length him selffe distroies.
Laertij tetrasticon sic per Claud. Minoem conuersum.
Haec Venus ad musas: Venerem exhorrescite Nimphae,
In vos armatus aut amor insiliet.
Cui contra musae, verba haec age dicito marti:
Aliger huc ad nos non volat ille puer.
Res humanae in summo declinant.
woodcut of a ship or galleon running aground and of snow melting under the
sun's beams

THE gallante Shipp, that cutts the azure surge, Periand. per Auson. Si fortuna
iuuat, caueto tolli.
Si fortuna tonat, caueto mergi.


And has both tide, and wisshed winds, at will:
Her tackle sure, with shot her foes to urge,
With Captains boulde, and mariners of skill,
With streamers, flagges, topgallantes, pendantes brave,
When Seas do rage, is swallowed in the wave.
The snow, that falls upon the mountains great, Ouidius 4. pont. 3. Tu
quoque fac timeas, and quae tibi laeta vide^tur,
Dum loqueris, fieri tristia posse puta.


Though on the Alps, which seem the clouds to reach.
Can not endure the force of Phoebus heat,
But wastes away, Experience does us teach:
Which warns all, on Fortunes wheel that clime
To bear in mind how they have but a time.
Ouidius 5. Trist. 9.
Passibus ambiguis fortuna volubilis errat,
Et manet in nullo certa, tenaxque loco.
Sed modo laeta manet, vultus modo sumit acerbos
Et tantum constans in leuitate sua est.
Frustra.
woodcut of a barrel leaking water from holes all over

THE Poettes feign, that DANAVS daughters dear,
Enjoined are to fill the fatal tonne:
Where, thowghe they toil, yet are they not the near,
But as they power, the water forth does run:
No pain will serve, to fill it to the top,
For, still at holes the same does run, and drop.
Which reprehendes, three sorts of wretches vain,
The blabbe, th'ingrate, and those that covet still,
As first, the blabbe, no secretts can retain.
Th'ingrate, not knows to use his friends good will.
The covetous man, thowghe he abound with store
Is not suffis'de, but couetts more and more.
Superbiae vltio.
woodcut of Niobe being turned to stone on top of a mountain, and of her
children being shot down with arrows by two gods in the sky

Fabula Niobes Ovid. 6. Metamorph.
OF NIOBE, behoulde the ruthefull plighte,
Because she did despise the powers divine:
Her children all, wear slain within her sight,
And, while her self with tricklinge tears did pine,
She was transform'de, into a marble stone,
Which, yet with tears, does seem to wail, and moan. De numero filiorum,
vide Aul. Gellium lib. 20. cap. 6.

This tragedy, though Poetts first did frame,
Yet may it be, to every one applide:
That mortal men, should think from whence they came,
And not presume, nor puff them up with pride,
Lest that the Lord, who haughty hearts does hate,
Does throw them down, when sure they think their state.
Bapt. Gyraldus.
Este procul laeti, cernant mea funera tristes;
Non similis toto maeror in orb fuit.
Bis septem natos peperi, bis pignora septem:
Me miseram! Diuum sustulit ira mihi.
Dirigui demum lacrymis, and marmora manant.
Sic mihi mors dolor est; sic mihi vita, dolor.
Discite, mortales, quid sit turgescere fastu,
Et quid sit magnos posthabuisse Deos.
In vitam humanam.
woodcut of Democritus laughing and Heraclitus weeping with books beneath a
tree

De his, Seneca lib. De Tranquillitate vitae.
THE wicked world, so false and full of crime,
Did always move HERACLITVS to weep,
The fadinge joys, and follies of that time,
DEMOCRITVS did drive to laughter deep,
Thus heinous sin, and folly did procure
These famous men, such passions to endure.
What if they liu'de, and should behoulde this age
Which ouerflowes, with swellinge seas of sin:
Where fools, by swarms, do press upon the stage,
With hellishe Impes, that like have never binne:
I think this sight, should hasten their decay
Then help us God, and Satan's fury stay.
Horatius.
Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum peior auis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Voluptas aerumnosa.
woodcut of Actaeon, with a stag's head, being attacked by hounds in a wood,
overlooked by Diana or Artemis

Ovid. lib. 3. Metamorph.
ACTAEON hear, unhappy man behoulde,
When in the well, he saw Diana brighte,
With greedy looks, he waxed over boulde,
That to a stagge he was transformed right,
Whereat amas'de, he thought to run away,
But straighte his howndes did rent him, for their pray.
Horatius 1. Epist. 12. Sperne voluptates, nocet empta dolor voluptas.
By which is meant, That those who do pursue
Their fancies fond, and things unlawful crave,
Like brutishe beasts appear unto the view,
And shall at lenghte, Actaeons guerdon have:
And as his hounds, so their affections base,
Shall them deuowre, and all their deeds deface.
Anulus, in picta poesi.
Cornibus in Ceruum mutatum Actaeona sumptis,
Membratim proprij diripuere canes.
Plautus in Amphit.
Ita dis placitum, voluptati vt moeror comes consequatur.
Quod potes, tenta.
woodcut of armed pygmies approaching the sleeping figure of Hercules or
Heracles, dressed in a lion-skin and holding a club

WHILE, HERCULES, with mighty clubbe in hand
In Lions skin did sleep, and take his ease:
About him straighte approch'de the Pigmeis band,
And for to kill this conqueror assaies,
But foolish dwarffes? their force was all to small,
For when he wak'de, like gnattes he crushed them all. Hi homunciones extremas
Aegypti parts inhabitant agricolationi dediti, Subinde cum gruibus bellum
gerunt. Plinius lib. 7. cap. 2. and Aul. Gellius lib. 9. cap. 4.

This warns us, that nothing paste our strength
We should attempt: nor any work pretend,
Above our power: lest that with shame at length
We weakelinges prove, and fainte before the end.
The pore, that strive with mighty, this does blame:
And sottes, that seek the learned to defame.
Propertius.
Turpe est quod nequeas capiti submittere pondus,
Et pressum inflexo mox dare terga genu.
Ludus, luctus, luxus.
woodcut of a scene outside an inn or tavern, with four men seated at a table
with drinking vessels and a game of backgammon in the foreground, and two men
fighting on the ground in the background

Propertius. Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas.
Horat. 1 Epist. 19. Ludus enim genuit trepidum certamen, and iram:
Ira truces inimicitias, and sunebre bellum.

BEHOVLDE the fruits of drunkenness, and play:
Here courage, brawles with Cutthroate for a cast,
And often in fine, if that they lack to pay,
They swear it out, or blade it at the last:
This, frendshippe breaks: this, makes us laughed to scorn,
And beggerie gives, to those that rich are borne.
Virgilius.
The Lapithans, by drink wear overthrown,
The wisest men, with folly this inflames:
What should I speak, of father NOAH aloane, Genes. 9.

Or bring in LOT, or HOLOFERNES names: Genes. 19. Iudic. 13. 1 Machab. 15.

This SIMON, and his sons, did overthrow,
And BENEDAB, made flee before his foe. 3 Regum 20.

And he that liked to spend his time at dice,
This law in Rome, SEVERUS did provide:
That every man, should deem him as a vice,
And of his Lands, an other should be guide:
Like Laws beside, did diverse more devise,
And wisdom still, against such unthrifts cries.
Ouidius.
Tunc sumus incauti, studioque aperimur ab ipso,
Nudaque per lusus pectora nostra patent.
Ira subit deforme malum, lucrique Cupido
Iurgiaque, and rixae, sollicitusque dolor,
Crimina dicuntur, resonat clamoribus ether,
Inuocat iratos and sibi quisque deos.
In auaros.
woodcut of a heavily-laden ass eating a thistle

Nic. Reusnerus. Frigoris impatiens: patiens operumque, famisque:
Ecce rudes Asinus dat rudis ore sonos.

SEPTITIVS ritche, a miser most of all,
Whose liuinges large, and treasure did exceed:
Yet to his goods, he was so much in thrall,
That still he used on beetes, and rapes to feed:
So of his stoare, the sweet he never knew,
And long did rob, his belly of his due.
This Caitiffe wretch, with pined corpse lo hear,
Compared right unto the foolish ass,
Whose back is fraighte with cates, and dainty cheer,
But to his share commes neither corn, nor grass,
Yet bears he that, which settes his teeth on edge:
And pines him self, with thistle and with sedge.
Plautus in Aulul.
Perditissimus ego sum omnium in terra,
Nam quid mihi opus vita est, qui tantum auri
Perdidi, quod custodiui sedulo? egomet me fraudaui
Animumque meum geniumque meum, etc.
Propertius 3.13.
At nunc desertis cessant sacraria lucis,
Aurum omnes victa iam pietate, colunt.
Auro pulsa fides, auro venalia iura,
Aurum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor.
Nec verbo, nec facto, quenquam laedendum.
woodcut of Nemesis holding a set of reins A



HEAR, NEMESIS the Goddess just does stand,
With bended arm, to measure all our ways,
A rain she houldes, with in the other hand,
With biting bitte, where with the lewd she stays:
And pulles them back, when harm they do intend,
Or when they take in wicked speech delight,
And biddes them still beware for to offend,
And square their deeds, in all things unto right:
But wicked Impes, that lewdlie run their race,
She hales them back, at length to their deface.
Politianus eleganter NEMESIM describit in Manto suo sic incipiens.
Est dea: quae vacuo sublimis in aere pendens
It nimbo succincta latus: sed candida palam:
Sed radiata comam: ac stridentibus insonat alis.
Haec spes immodicas premit: haec infesta superbis
Imminet: huic celsas hominum contundere mentes,
Successusque datum: and nimios turbare paratus.
Quam veteres NEMESIM etc.
and paulo post:

Improba vota domans: ac summis ima reuoluens
Miscet: and alterna nostros vice temperat actus, etc.
Minuit praesentia famam.
woodcut of a shepherd and goat on a sunny hilltop, over-looking houses in a
snow-covered valley

REPORT, did ringe the snow did hide the hills,
And valleys low, there with alofte did rise:
Which news, with dowte the hearts of many filles,
And Cowardes made, for fear at home to friese:
But those that went, the truth hereof to know,
When that they came, might safely pass the snow.
For why, the Son did make the same to waste,
And all about, discovered had the ground:
So, though often times the simple be agaste,
When that reports, of this, or that, do sound,
Yet if they first, would seek the truth to know,
They often should find, the matter nothing so.
Virg. lib. 4. Aeneid. in descrip. famae. Et Ovid. Metam. lib. 12. De domo
famae sic,
Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo,
Parua metu primo, mox sese attollit in auras, etc.
Nocte dieque patet: tota est ex aere sonanti,
Tota fremit, vocesque refert, iteratque quod audit, etc.
Turpibus exitium.
woodcut of a scarab beetle in the center of a rose

THE Scarabee, cannot endure the sent
Of fragant rose, most bewtifull to see:
But filthy smelles, he always does frequent,
And roses sweet, do make him pine and die:
His house, is donge: and worms his neighbors are,
And for his meat, his mansion is his fare.
With these he lives, and does rejoice for aie,
And buzzeth fresh, when night does take her place,
From these, he dies, and languisseth away:
So, whose delites are filthy, vile, and base,
Is sick to hear, when counsel sweet we give,
And rather likes, with reprobates to live.
Propert. 3, 17.
Vos vbi contempti rupistis frena pudoris,
Nescitis captae mentis habere modum.
Flamma per incensas citius sedetur aristas,
Fluminaque ad fontis sint reditura caput, etc.
Quam possit vestros quisquam reprehendere cursus,
Et rapidae stimulos frangere nequitiae.
Nullus dolus contra Casum.
woodcut of a fox floating down the River Danube on a piece of ice, past the
town and townspeople of Regensburg

BEHOWLDE the crafty fox,
Upon Danubius plays,
What time throwgh froste, both man, and beast,
Thereon did make their ways.
At length, with PHOEBVS beams,
The froste began to slake:
So that the ice with swelling stream,
To sundry pieces brake.
Where, on a piece the fox,
Does to his tackling stand:
And in the sight of Regenspurge,
Came driving by the Land.
At which, the townsmen laugh'de,
And said, this fox, on Ice:
Does show, no subtle craft will serve,
When Chance does throw the dice.
Seneca in Oed.
Regitur fatis mortale genus:
Nec sibi quisquam spondere potest
Firmum, and stabile: perque casus
Voluitur varios semper nobis
Metuenda dies, etc.
Mihi pondera, luxus.
woodcut of a bushel of grain, corn or wheat

WHEN autumn ripes, the fruitful fields of grain,
And CERES does in all her pomp appear,
The heavy ear, does break the stalk in twain,
Wherebie we see, this by experience clear:
Her own excess, did cause her proper spoil,
And made her corn, to rotte upon the soil.
So worldly wealth, and great abundance, marres:
The sharpenes of our senses, and our wits,
And oftentimes, our understanding bars,
And dulles the same, with many careful fittes:
Then since Excess procures our spoil and pain,
The mean prefer, before immoderate gain.
Claud. 2.
-- nec te iucunda front fefellit
Luxuries praedulce malum, quae dedita semper
Corporis arbitriis, hebetat caligine sensus
Membraque Circaeis effeminat acrius herbis.
Latet anguis in herba.
woodcut of a snake or viper wrapped around a strawberry plant

OF flattringe speech, with sugared words beware,
Suspect the heart, whose face does fawn, and smile,
With trusting these, the world is clog'de with care,
And few there be can escape these vipers vile:
With pleasinge speech they promise, and protest,
When hateful hearts lie hidd within their breast.
The faithful wight, does need no colors brave,
But those that trust, in time his truth shall try,
Where fawning mates, can not their credit save,
Without a cloak, to flatter, feign, and lie:
No foe so fell, nor yet so hard to escape,
As is the foe, that fawnes with freindlie shape.
Ovid. 1. Art.
Tuta, frequensque via est, per amici fallere nomen.
Idem 2. Fast.
Sic iterum, sic saepe cadunt, vbi vincere aperte
Non datur: insidias, armaque tecta parant.
Curis tabescimus omnes.
woodcut of Pliny the Elder thinking beside, approaching, and falling into the
erupting Mount Vesuvius

IF griping greifes, have harbor in thie breast,
And pininge cares, lay seige unto the same,
Or strange conceiptes, do reaue thee of thie rest,
And day, and night, do bring thee out of frame:
Then choose a freinde, and do his counsel crave,
Least secret sighs, do bring untimely grave.
Veseuus, secundum Seruium Virgil. lib. Georg 1. mons est Liguriae sub Alpibus.
Continual care, did PLINIES heart possess,
To know what caus'de VESEVVS hill to flame,
And ceased not, now this, now that, to guess:
Yet, when he could not comprehend the same,
Such was his fate, pursuing his desire,
He headlonge fell into the flaming fire.
Non opibus mentes homini, curaeque leuantur, etc. Tibul. lib. 3. cap. 3.

O Curas hominum, o quantum est in rebus inane. Pers. 1.

Otium sortem exspectat.
woodcut of a stopped windmill, with an older man or father looking for wind
and a younger man or son sleeping beside it

A Windmill fair, that all things had to grind,
Which man could make, the father left his son:
The corn was brought, there nothing lacked, but wind,
And Customers, did freshlie to it run:
The son repoas'de his trust upon the mill,
And daily dream'de on plenty at his will.
Ovid. 1. Pont. 6. Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus?
Vt capiant vitium ni moueantur aquae.

Thus he secure, a while his days did pass,
And did not seek, for other stay at all:
And though he found, how could the profit was,
And that so small, unto his share did fall:
Yet still he hoap'de, for better luck at last,
And put his trust, in each uncertain blaste.
Plaut. Rud. -- vigilare decet hominem,
Qui vult sua tempori conficere officia.
Nam qui dormiunt libenter, sine luero, and cum malo quiescunt.

Unto this fool, they may compared be,
Which idly live, and vainlie hoape for hap:
For while they hope, with want they pine, we see:
And very few, are lul'de on fortunes lap:
While grass does grow, the courser fair does sterue,
And fortune field, the wishers turn does serve.
Dolus in suos.
woodcut of a flock of ducks flying down into a net, watched by two men behind
a tree

WHILE nets were set, the simple fowls to take,
Who kept their course alofte, and would not light,
A tamed ducke, her hoame did straighte forsake,
And flewe alofte, with other duckes in flighte,
They dowtinge not, her traitorous heart at all,
Did fly with her, and down with her did fall.
By this is mente, all such as do betraie,
Their kindred near, that do on them depend,
And often do make, the innocent a pray,
By subtle sleighte, to them that seek their end
Yea unto those, they should most friendship show,
They lie in wait, to work their overthrow.
And. Alciat. De Anate.
Perfida cognato se sanguine polluit ales,
Officiosa aliis, exitiosa suis.
In Astrologos.
woodcut of winged Icarus falling from the sunny sky into the sea

HEAR, ICARVS with mountinge up alofte,
Came headlonge down, and fell into the Sea:
His waxed wings, the son did make so soft,
They melted straighte, and feathers fell away:
So, whilste he flewe, and of no dowbte did care,
He moou'de his arms, but lo, the same were bare.
Let such beware, which paste their reach do mount,
Who seek the things, to mortal men deny'de,
And search the Heavens, and all the stars accoumpte,
And tell therebie, what after shall betyde:
With blusshinge now, their weakness rightly weye,
Least as they clime, they fall to their decay.
Martial. 1.
Illud quod medium est, atque inter vtrumque, probamus.
Ovid. Trist. 2.
Dum petit infirmis nimium sublimia pennis
Icarus, Icariis nomina fecit aquis.
Vitaret caelum Phaeton, si viueret, and quos
Optauit stulte tangere, nollet equos.
Amor in filios.
woodcut of a ring dove or barbary dove nesting in a tree

WHEN Boreas could, does bare both busshe, and tree,
Before the Spring, the Ringdoue makes her neste:
And that her young both soft, and warm, might be,
She pulles her plumes, both from her back, and breast:
And while she stryues, her brood for to preserve,
Often times for could, the tender damme does sterue.
MEDEA now, and PROGNE, blusshe for shame:
By whom, are meant you dames of cruel kind,
Whose infantes young, unto your endless blame,
For mothers dear, do tyrauntes of you find:
Oh serpents seed, each bird, and savage brute,
Will those condemn, that tender not their fruit.
In victoriam dolo partam.
woodcut of Arete, the female personification of virtue, sitting on the tomb of
Ajax, tearing out her hair D AIACIS



WHAT doleful dame is this in great despair?
This prowes is, who mournes on AJAX toombe:
What is the cause, she rentes her goulden hair?
Wrong sentence paste by AGAMEMNONS doombe:
But how? declare, ULYSSES filed tongue,
Allur'de the Judge, to give a Judgment wrong.
For when, that dead ACHYLLIS was in grave,
For valiante heart, did AJAX win the fame:
Whereby, he claim'de ACHYLLIS arms to have,
ULYSSES yet, was honored with the same:
His subtle speech, the judges did prefer,
And AJAX wrong'de, the only man of war.
Wherefore, the Knighte impatient of the same,
Did loose his wits, and after wroughte his end:
Lo, hear the cause that moou'de this sacred dame,
On AJAX toombe, with grief her time too spend:
Which warns us, and those that after live,
To bear them right, when judgment they do give.
Caecum odium.
woodcut of an envious man covering his eyes and leading another male figure
away from a burning house, while another man tries to extinguish the flames

TH'Enuious man, when neighbors house does flame,
Whose chief delighte, is in an others harm,
Does shut his eyes, and will not see the same,
But pulles away, his fellow by the arm:
And says, depart, we care not for this ill,
It is not ours, let others care that will.
Too many live, that every wheare are found
Who day and night do languishe in dispite,
When that they see, an others wealth abound:
But, those herein that most of all delighte,
Let them repent, for God who knows their hearts,
Will them reward, according to deserts.
Ovid. 2. Metamorph. De inuidia sic.
Vixque tenet lacrymas quia nil lacrymabile cernit, etc.
Horatius 1. epist. 2.
Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis.
Inuidia Siculi non inuenere tyranni
Maius termentum. --
In poenam sectatur and vmbra.
woodcut of a man wearing a knap-sack with his sword drawn against his own
shadow, cast by the light emerging from a heavenly figure

THE wicked wretch, that mischief late has wroughte,
By murder, theft, or other heinous crimes,
With troubled mind, he dowtes he shall be caughte,
And leaves the way, and over hedges climes:
And stands in fear, of every busshe, and brake,
Yea oftentimes, his shaddowe makes him quake.
A conscience clear, is like a wall of brass,
That does not shake, with every shot that hittes:
Eauen so there by, our lives we quiet pass,
When guilty minds, are rack'de with fearful fittes:
Then keep thee pure, and soil thee not with sin,
For after guilte, thine inward greifes begin.
Cato.
Conscius ipse sibi de se putat omnia dici.
Ovid. Fast. 1.
Conscia men's vt cuique sua est, ita concipit intra
Pectora, pro facto spemque, metumque suo.
Ei, qui semel sua prodegerit, aliena credi non oportere.
woodcut of a swallow flying toward Medea, with a knife or dagger drawn against
the child in her arms

Ovid. lib. 7. Metamorph.
MEDEA lo with infant in her arm,
Who kil'de her babes, she should have loved best:
The swallowe yet, who did suspect no harm,
Her Image likes, and hatched upon her breast:
And left her young, unto this tirauntes guide,
Who, peecemeale did her proper fruicte divide.
Oh foolish bird, think'ste thou, she will have care,
Upon thy young? Who has her own destroy'de,
And may it be, that she thie birds should spare?
Who slew her own, in whom she should have joyed.
Thou art deceau'de, and art a warninge good,
To put no trust, in them that hate their blood.
Borbonius.
MEDEAE statua est: natos cui credis Hirundo?
Fer alio: viden' haec mactet vt ipsa suos?
In momentaneam felicitatem.
woodcut of a pine tree enwrapped by a gourd plant

Petrus Crinitus de honesta disciplina lib. 2. cap. 14.
THE fruictfull gourde, was neighbor to the Pine,
And low at first, about her root did spread,
But yet, with dewes, and silver drops in fine,
It mounted up, and almost towch'de the head:
And with her fruicte, and leaves on every side,
Imbras'de the tree, and did the same deride.
To whom, the Pine with long Experience wise,
And often had seen, such peacockes loose their plumes,
Thus answer made, thou owght'st not to despise,
My stock at all, oh fool, thou much presumes.
In could, and heat, here long has been my hap,
Yet am I sound, and full of lively sap.
But, when the froste, and could, shall thee assaie,
Thowghe now alofte, thou brag, and freshlie bloome,
Nic. Reusnerus. Coeruleus cucumis, tumidoq. cucurbita ve^tre,
Cruda leuat, stomach^ perniciosa, sitim.

Yet, then thie root, shall rotte, and fade away,
And shortly, none shall know where was thy room:
Thy fruicte, and leaves, that now so high aspire
The passers by, shall tread within the mire.
Let them that stand, alofte on fortunes wheel,
And brag, and boaste, with puff of worldly pride
Still bear in mind, how soon the same may reele,
And always look, for fear their footinge slide:
And let not will, houlde up their heads for fame,
When inward wantes, may not supporte the same.
Aere quandoque salutem redimendam.
woodcut of a beaver hiding from a hunter and hounds

THE Beauer slow, that present danger fears,
And sees a far, the eager howndes to haste,
With grindinge teethe, his stoanes away he tears,
And throws them down, to those that have him chaste:
Which being found, the hunter does retire,
For that he has, the fruicte of his desire. Nic. Reusnerus. Mordicus ipse
sibi, medicata virilia vellet:
Insidias vafer ha^ effugit art fiber.


These, sovereign are diseases for to heal,
And for man's health, from countries far are brought,
And if herein, the writers do not fail,
This beast does know, that he therefore is sought:
And afterward, if any do him course,
He shows his want, to move them to remorse.
Thus, to his pain he does his life preserve:
Which teaches us, if foes do us pursue,
We showlde not care, if goods for life may serve,
Although we give, our treasure to a jew:
No riches, may with life of man compare,
They are but dross, and fortunes brittle ware. Crates Thebanus cum thesaurum
sponte perderet, Hinc abite, ait, malae diuitiae: satius enim est a me vos
demergi quam ego a vobis ipse.

Then life redeem, although with all thou haste,
Though thou art pore, yet seek, and thou shalt find,
Those riches pure, that evermore shall last,
Which are the goods, and treasures, of the mind:
Noe man so pore, but god can bless his days,
Who patient JOB, did from the dunghill raise.
Ovid. lib. 1. De Remed. amoris.
Vt corpus redimas, ferrum patieris and ignes,
Arida nec sitiens ora lauabis aqua.
Vt valeas animo, quicquam tolerare negabis?
At pretium pars haec corpore maius habet.
Durum telum necessitas.
woodcut of a soldier and a boy next to a bird in a cage and a wall-mounted
feeder and water-bowl

NECESSITY does urge, the Popiniaye to prate,
And birds, to draw their bucketts up, and pick their meat through, grate:
Which warns them, who needs must either serve, or pine:
With willing heart, no pains to shun, and freedom to resign.
Terent. in Adel. 4. 7.
Placet tibi factum mitio? MI. non si queam
Mutare: nunc, cum nequeo, aequo animo fero.
Inimicorum dona, infausta.
woodcut of Hector and Ajax exchanging a sword midway between two tents

IF of thy foe, thou do a gift receive,
Esteem it not, for fear the fates do lower,
And with the gift, often time thie life do reaue,
Yea gifts we read, have such a secret power,
That oftentimes, they LYNCEVS eyes do blind,
And he that gives, the taker fast does bind.
To AJAX hear, a sword did HECTOR send,
A girdle strong, to him did AJAX yield,
With HECTORS gift, did AJAX work his end,
And AJAX gift, hal'de HECTOR through the field:
Of mortal foes, then see noe gift thou take,
Although a while, a truce with them thou make.
Lacoon apud Virgilium lib. Aeneid. 2. sic de equo, loquitur Troianis.
-- aut vlla putatis
Dona carere dolis Danaum, etc.
Alciar.
Sic titulo obsequij, quae mittunt hostibiis hosts
Munera, venturi praescia fata ferunt.
Non locus virum, sed vir locum ornat.
To the Honorable Sir PHILLIP SIDNEY Knight, Governor of the Garrison and
town of Vlissing.
woodcut of a figure sitting on a rearing horse

THE trampinge steed, that champes the burnished bitte,
Is managed brave, with ryders for the nones:
But, when the fool upon his back does set,
He throws him down, and often does bruise his bones,
His courage feirce, does crave a better guide,
And eke such horse, the fool should not bestride.
Claud. 4. Honor. Tu ciuem, patremque geras, tu consule cunctu,
Nec tibi, nec tua te moueant, sed publica vota.

By which is meant, that men of judgment grave,
Of learning, wit, and eeke of conscience clear,
In high estate, are fit their seats to have,
And to be stall'd, in sacred justice cheer:
Wherein they rule, unto their endless fame,
But fools are foiled, and thrown out of the same.
Horat. 1. Ser. 6.
-- magnum hoc ego duco,
Quod placuit tibi, qui turpi secernis honestum.
Mediocribus vtere partis.
woodcut of a dog with a bone leaning over a river

WHOM fortune hear allottes a mean estate,
Yet gives enowghe, each want for to suffice:
That wavering wighte, that hopes for better fate,
And not content, his cawlinge does despise,
May vainlie clime, but likely still to fall,
And live at length, with loss of maine, and all.
Hor. 2. Car. 16. Vivitur paruo been, cui paternum
Splendet in mensa tenui salinum:
Nec leaves somnes timor, aut Cupido
Sordidus aufert.

And he that poastes, to make away his lands,
And credittes all, that wandringe heads report:
May Tagus seek, and Ganges goulden sands,
Yet come at length, with empty purse to court:
Let such behoulde, the greedy dog to moan,
By brook deceau'd, with shadow of his boane.
Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere parta tueri, Ovid. lib. 2. Art.

Casus inest illic, hic erit artis opus.
Seruiet aeternum, quia paruo nesciat vti. Horatius 1. Epist. 10.

Cui non conueniet sua res, vt calceus olim,
Si pede mayor erit, subuertet: si minor, vrget.
Laetus sort tua viues, sapienter Aristi.
Biuium virtutis and vitij.
woodcut of Hercules or Heracles, dressed in a lion-skin and holding a club,
standing in a town square between two female figures representing Virtue and
Pleasure or Vice

WHEN HERCULES, was dowtfull of his way,
Enclosed round, with virtue, and with vice:
With reasons first, did virtue him assaie,
The other, did with pleasures him entice:
They long did strive, before he could be won,
Till at the length, ALCIDES thus begone. Virgil. in Fragm. de littera y.
Quisquis enim duros casus virtutis amore
Vicerit, ille sibi laudemque decusque parabit.
At qui desidia^ luxumque sequetur inertem,
Dum fugit opposites incauta mente labores,
Turpis, inopsque simul, miserabile transiget aeuum.


Oh pleasure, though thie way be smoothe, and fair,
And sweet delights in all thy courts abound:
Yet can I hear, of none that have been there,
That after life, with fame have been renoum'de:
For honor hates, with pleasure to remain,
Then houlde thy peace, thou wastes thie wind in vain.
But hear, I yield oh virtue to thie will,
And vow my self, all labor to endure,
For to ascend the steep, and craggie hill,
The top whereof, who so attaines, is sure
For his reward, to have a crown of fame:
Thus HERCULES, obeyed this sacred dame.
Poena sequens.
woodcut of a man or thief sitting back asleep while being strangled by a sack
of meat hanging from his neck

WHEN silent night, did scepter take in hand,
And dim'de the day, with shade of mantle black,
What time the thieves, in privy corners stand,
And have noe dowte, to rob for what they lack:
A greedy thief, in shambles broke a shop,
And fil'de a sack, with flesh up to the top.
Which done, with speed he lifted up the sack,
And both the ends, about his neck he knittes,
And ran away, with burden on his back
Till afterward, as he at alehowse sittes:
The heavy load, did weye so hard behind,
That whiles he slept, the weighte did stop his wind.
Iuuenalis 13. de malis sic ait. Hic sunt qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura
pallent,
Cum tonat: exanime^ primo quoque murmr coeli.
Senec. Troad. Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, iubet.

Which truly shows, to them that do offend,
Althowghe a while, they escape their just deserts,
Yet punishment, does at their backs attend,
And plagues them hoame, when they have meriest hearts:
And though long time, they do escape the pikes,
Yet soon, or late, the Lord in justice strikes.
Venture, pluma, Venus, laudem fugiunt.
woodcut of a female figure fleeing a room in which a man and woman lie in a
bed next to a table of food and drink

WHY fliest thou hence? and turn'ste away thie face?
Thou glory brighte, that men with fame do crown:
GLO. Because, I have noe likinge of that place,
Where slothful men, do sleep in beds of down:
And fleshly lust, does dwell with foul excess,
This is no house, for glory to possess.
But, if thou will my presence never lack,
SARDANAPAL, and all his pleasures hate,
Drive VENUS hence, let BACCHVS further pack,
If not, behowlde I fly out of thie gate:
Yet, if from these, thou turn thie face away,
I will return, and dwell with thee for aie.
Propert. 4. 11.
Magnum iter ascendo, sed dat mihi gloria vires:
Non iuuat ex facili lecta corona iugo.
Ovid. 1. Pont. 6
Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus?
Vt capiant vitium, ni moueantur aquae?
Men's immota manner.
To Sir ROBERT IERMYN Knight.
woodcut of a man kneeling in prayer at a low wall facing toward five stars,
with a stag drinking from a stream beyond the wall Psalm. 41. Quemadmodum
desiderat Ceruus ad fontes aquaru^: Ita desiderat anima mea ad te Deus, etc.




BY virtue hid, behoulde, the Iron hard,
The loadestone draws, to point unto the star:
Whereby, we know the Seaman keeps his card,
And rightly shapes, his course to countries far:
And on the pole, does ever keep his eye,
And with the same, his compass makes agree.
Virg. in Aetna. Est merito pietas homini tutissima virtus.

Which shows to us, our inward virtues should,
Still draw our hearts, although the iron wear:
The hauenlie star, at all times to behoulde,
To shape our course, so right while we be hear:
That Scylla, and Charybdis, we may miss,
And win at length, the port of endless bliss.
Ovid. 4. Fast.
Conscia men's recti famae mendacia ridet.
Ovid. de medic. faciei.
Sufficit and longum probitas perdurat in aeuum,
Perque suos annos hinc been pendet amor.
Desiderium spe vacuum.
woodcut of a lion eating a carcass, with dogs in the background G



THE Lion fierce, behoulde does rent his pray,
The dog looks back, in hope to have a share,
And licked his lips, and long therefore did stay,
But all in vain, the Lion none could spare:
And yet the sight, with hope the dog did feed,
As if he had, sum part there of in deed.
This reprehendes, the sons, or greedy friends,
That long do hope, for death of aged Sires:
And on their goods, do feed before their ends,
For death often times, does frustrate their desires:
And takes away, the young before the oulde,
Let greedy heirs, this looking glass behoulde.
Ovid. 1. Metamorph.
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos:
Victa iacet pietas, etc.
Furor and rabies.
woodcut of Agamemnon holding a sword and shield, with a camp of tents and the
burning city of Troy in the background

THE crewell kings, that are inflam'de with ire:
With fire, and sword, their furious minds suffice:
And often to show, what chiefelie they desire,
Within their sheildes, they dreadefull shapes devise,
Some Griphins feirce, some ramping Lions bear,
Some Tigers fell, or Dragons like to wear. Scribit Claud. Minois super
Alciarum. Agamemnone^ Clypeum habuisse, in quo Leo depictus erat, ad retrorem
aliis ineutiendum: quod quidem scutum in Olympiae fano per aliquot tempora
pependit, cum inscriptione adiecta.

All which bewraye, their inward bloody thought,
Such one, behoulde, king AGAMEMNON was:
Who had in shield, a ramping Lion wroughte
And eke this verse, was graven in the brass:
Man's terror this, to fear them that behoulde: Terror hic est hominum,
quique hunc gerit, est Agamemnon.

Which shield is borne, by AGAMEMNON boulde.
Ovid. 1. Remed.
Dum furor in cursu est, currenti cede furori:
Difficiles aditus impetus omnis habet.
Varij hominum sensus.
To Sir HENRY WOODHOWSE Knight.
woodcut of an old woman gathering skulls, and then dropping them, in the
background is a horse and a doorway surrounded by piles of skulls

AN aged dame, in reverence of the dead,
With care did place, the sculles of men she found,
Upon an hill, as in a sacred bed,
But as she toil'de, she stumbled to the ground:
Whereat, down fell the heads within her lap,
And here, and there, they ran about the hill:
With that, quoth she, no marvel is this hap,
Since men alive, in minds do differ still:
And like as these, in sunder down do fall,
So varried they, in their opinions all.
Persius 5.
Mill hominum species, and rerum discolor vsus.
Velle suum cuique est, nec voto viuitur vno.
Mercibus hic Italis, mutat sub sole recenti
Rugosum piper, and pallentis grana cumini:
Hic satur irriguo mauult turgescere somno:
Hic campo indulget, hunc alea decoquit: etc.
Mart and art.
To Sir WILLIAM STANDLEY Knight.
woodcut of Ulysses or Odysseus, robed and holding a book, and Diomedes, armed
with sword, shield, spear and plumed helmet

WHERE courage great, and consaile good do go,
With lasting fame, the victory is won:
But separate these, then fear the overthrow,
And strength alone, does unto ruin run:
Then Captains good, must join these two, in one:
And not presume with this, or that, alone.
Andr. Alciat. Viribus hic praestat, hic pollet acumine me^tis
Nec tam^^ alterius, non egit alter open.

As valiant hearts, and courage high beseem,
The Captains boulde, that enterprise for fame:
So must they still, of policy esteem,
And wisdoms rules, to bring to pass the same:
While Caesar great, subdu'de the countries far:
In gown at home, did TVLLIE help to war.
Hor. 2. Carm. 10. Rebus angustu animosus, atque
Fortis appare: sapienter idem
Contrahes vento nimium secundo,
Turgida vela.

ULYSSES wise, and DIOMEDES form,
Are hear set down, for valiant wightes to view:
The one deuis'de, the other did perform,
Whereby, they did the Troiane force subdue:
The one, his foes with wit, and counsel harm'de,
The other, still him self against them arm'de.
Labor irritus.
woodcut of Ocnus weaving a rope and an ass eating it

HEAR, Ocnus still the roape does turn and wind,
Which he did make, of russhes and of grass:
And when with toil, his work was to his mind
He rol'de it up, and left it to the ass:
Who quickelie spoil'de, that long with pain was sponne,
Which being kept, it might some good have done.
This Ocnus shows, a man that works and toiles,
The Ass declares, a wicked wastfull wife:
Who if she may, she quickly spendes and spoils
That he with care, was getting all his life,
And likewise those, that lewdely do bestow
Such things, as should unto good uses go.
Iuuenalis 6.
Prodiga non sentit pereuntem femina sensum:
At, velut exhausta rediuiuus pullulet arca
Nummus, and e pleno semper tollatur aceruo,
Non vnquam reputant quanti sua gaudia constent.
In eum qui sibi ipsi damnum apparat.
woodcut of a wolf-cub suckling from a goat

Nic. Reusnerus. Impastus stabulis saeuit lupus: vbere raptos
Dilamatque ferus miseris cum matribus agnos.

THE ravening wolf, by kind my mortal foe,
Yet lo, infors'de, I foster up her whelpe:
Who afterward, as it did stronger grow,
Though as my own, I long the same did help:
Yet, could I not content it with my teate,
But that my self, he rent to be his meat. Claudius Minois e Graeco.
Nutritus per me, tandem fera saeuiet in me.
Vertere naturam gratia nulla potest.


And. Alciat. Improbitas nullo flectitur obsequio.

No willinge mind, to please him might suffice,
No diligence, to give the tyraunte suck,
Though whelpishe days, his nature did disguise,
Yet time at length unto my evil luck,
Bewray'de his heart, a warninge good to those,
Who in their house, do foster up their foes.
For, though through need they friendly seem a while,
Or childishe years, do cloak their cancker'd mind,
Although some do, relieve them in exile,
And spend their goods, in hope to alter kind:
Yet all their love, and care to do them good,
Such will forgett, and seek to spill their blood.
Garrulitas.
woodcut of a man in sleeping position gesturing with his right arm toward a
swallow Ecclesiast. 20. Qui multis vtitur verbis, laedet animam suam.



Paradisus poeticus. Ver non vna dies, non vna reducit hirundo:
Multiplici vigilans prudentia surgit ab vsu.

BETIME when sleep is sweet, the chattringe swallowe cries,
And does awake the wearied wighte, before he would arise:
Which carpes the pratinge crewe, who like of bablinge best:
Whose tounges do make him almost deaf, that feign would take his rest.
Horat. 1. Epist. 8. Sed tacitus pasci si posset coruus: haberet
Plus dapis, and rixae multo minus, inuidiaeque.


Quaere adolescens, vtere senex.
woodcut of an old man sitting indoors at a table with food and drink, while
outdoors a young man digs the ground

Ovid. 2. Art. Dum vires annique sinu^t tolerate labores,
Iam veniet taecito curua senecta pede.

WHILST youth does last, with lively sap, and strength,
With sweat of browe, see that for age thou toil:
And when the same, arresteth thee at length,
Then take thy rest, let younglinges work, and moyle:
And use thy goods, which thou in yowthe haste won,
To cheer thy heart, whilst that thy glass shall run.
Vitae, aut morti.
woodcut of a large flower with spiders and bees on it De littera and spiritu.
S. Paulus Cor. 2. cap. 3. Paradisus poeticus. Vsus abest manuu^? ducens pede
stamine texo,
Aluus lanigera fertilitate scatet.
Non dulcem e quouis apis ingeniosa liquorem
Flore: sed e lecto germine, mella legit.



WITHIN one flower, two contraries remain,
For proof behoulde, the spider, and the be,
One poison suckes, the be does honey draine:
The Scripture so, has two effects we see:
Unto the bad, it is a sword that slaies,
Unto the good, a shield in ghostly fraies.
Nil penna, sed vsus.
To. Pr. Dr.
woodcut of an ostrich with outspread wings

Martialis 1. Decipies alios verbis, vultuque benigno
Nam mihi iam notus dissimulator eris.

THE Hippocrites, that make so great a show,
Of Sanctity, and of Religion sound,
Are shadows mere, and with out substance go,
And being tri'de, are but dissemblers found.
These are compar'de, unto the Ostriche fair,
Who spreades her wings, yet sealdome tries the air.
Fortissima minimis interdum cedunt.
woodcut of a lion lying down before a cockerel, an elephant retreating from a
man holding a cloth, a bull retreating from a man holding a cloth, and a stag
leaping in the background

Aelian. De varia historia lib 6. cap. 22.
THE scarlet cloathe, does make the bull to fear.
The culler white, the Olephant does shun.
The crowinge cock, the Lion quakes to hear.
The smoke of cloathe, does make the stagge to run.
All which do show, we no man should despise,
But think how harm, the simplest may devise. Ovid. 2. Remed. Amoris. Parua
necat morsu spatiosum vipera taurum:
A cane non magno saepe tenetur aper.


Iniuriis, infirmitas subiecta.
woodcut of a gull and a cormorant flying low over the sea, where a large fish
or sea-serpent attacks some small fish

THE mighty fish, deuowres the little fry,
If in the deep, they venture for to stay,
If up they swim, new foes with watchinge fly,
The caruoraunte, and Seamewe, for their pray:
Between these two, the fry is still destroi'de,
Ah feeble state, on every side anoi'de. And. Alciat. Eheu intuta manens
vndique debilitas.


In dies meliora.
woodcut of a bristle-backed pig or sow with its nose to the ground, while a
man points to two distant pillars beyond the ruins of a town and bridge or
aqueduct PLUS OLTRE

VLTERIVS



Nic Reusnerus. Sylva iuuat capras: vnda lutumque sues.

THE greedy Sow so long as she does find,
Some scatteringes left, of harvest under foot
She forward goes and never looks behind,
While any sweet remains for to root,
Even so we should, to goodness every day
Still further pass, and not to turn nor stay.
Luxuriosorum opes.
woodcut of four flying crows or ravens encircling a fig tree

ON craggie rocks, and haughty mountains top,
Untimely fruicte, one sower figtree grows:
Whereof, no good mankind at all does croppe,
But serves alone, the ravens, and the crows:
So fools, their goods unto no goodness use,
But flatterers feed, or waste them on the stews.
Agentes, and consentientes, pari poena puniendi.
woodcut of a trumpeter in livery being led into a city gate from a
battlefield, with cavalry in the background

A Trompetter, the Captains captive lead,
Who pardon crau'de, and said, he did no harm:
And for his life, with tremblinge long did plead,
Whereat, quoth they, and hal'de him by the arm:
Although, thie hand did never strike a stroke,
Yet with thie wind, thou others did provoke.
In quatuor anni tempora.
woodcut of a tree and cornfield with birds flying and resting

Nic. Reusnerus de Ficedula. Cum me ficus alat: cu^ pascar dulcibus vuis:
Cur potius nomen, non dedit vua mihio

BY swallows note, the Spring we understand,
The Cuckowe comes, ere Summer does begin:
The vinefinche shows, that harvest is at hand:
The Chaffinche singes, when winter comes in:
Which times they keep, that man therebie may know,
How Seasons change, and times do come and go.
Paruam culinam, duobus ganeonibus non sufficere.
woodcut of one bird falling from a tree where another is perched

Andr. Alciat. Arbustum geminos non alit erithacos.

IN small, and little things, there is no gain at all,
One groaue, may not two redbreastes serve, but evermore they brall.
Cuncta complecti velle, stultum.
woodcut of eight boys chasing bubbles in the countryside ET TVTTO ABBRACCIO
ETNVLLA STRINGO.



THE little boys, that strive with all their might,
To catch the belles, or bubbles, as they fall:
In vain they seek, for why, they vanishe right,
Yet still they strive, and are deluded all:
So, they that like all arts, that can be thought,
Do comprehend not any, as they ought.
Alius peccat, alius plectitur.
woodcut of a man aiming a stone at a dog while the dog chews another stone on
the ground

THE angry dog does turn unto the stone,
When it is cast, and bytes the same for ire,
And not pursues, the same that has it thrown,
But with the same, fulfilleth his desire:
Even so, their are that do both fight, and brall,
With guiltless men, when wrath does them inflame,
And mortal foes, they deal not with at all,
But let them pass, to their rebuke, and shame:
And in a rage, on innocents do run,
And turn from them, that all the wrong have done.
And. Alciat.
Sic plerique sinunt veros elabier hosts,
Et quos nulla grauat noxia, dente petunt.
Aethiopem lauare.
woodcut of a black or dark-skinned man sitting and being washed by two
standing white or light-skinned men

Erasmus ex Luciano. Abluis Aethiopem frustra: qum desinis arte^?
Haud vnqua^ efficies nox sit vt atra, dies.
Horat. 1. Epist. 10. Naturam expellas furca tamen vsque recurret.

LEAVE of with pain, the blackamore to skowre,
With washinge often, and wipinge more then due:
For thou shall find, that Nature is of power,
Do what thou canste, to keep his former hue:
Though with a forke, we Nature thruste away,
She turns again, if we withdraw our hand:
And though, we often to conquer her assaie,
Yet all in vain, she turns if still we stand:
Then evermore, in what thou do assaie,
Let reason rule, and do the things thou may.
Anulus in pict. poesi.
-- equusque
Nunquam ex degeneri fiet generosus asello,
Et nunquam ex stolido cordatus fiet ab art.
Non dolo, sed vi.
woodcut of an ape pushing a dog's paw into a fireplace, with two men watching

Aelian. de var. Hist. lib. 5. ca. 26.
THE ape, did reach for Chestnuttes in the fire,
But fearinge much, the burninge of his toes,
Perforce was bar'de, long time from his desire:
But at the length, he with a whelpe did close,
And thruste his foot, into the Embers quick,
And made him, pull the Chestnuttes out perforce:
Which shows, when as ambition foul does prick,
The hearts of kings, then there is no remorce,
But oftentimes, to answer their desire,
The subjects feel, both famine, sword, and fire.
Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 2.
Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui.
Nimium rebus ne fide secundis.
woodcut of pine trees breaking under the force of the wind, emanating from a
godlike-figure in the clouds

THE lofty Pine, that one the mountain grows,
And spreades her arms, with branches fresh, and green,
The raginge winds, on sudden overthrows,
And makes her stoop, that long a far was seen:
So they, that trust to much in fortunes smiles,
Though world do laughe, and wealth do most abound,
When lest they think, are often snar'de with wyles,
And from alofte, do hedlonge fall to ground:
Then put no trust, in any worldly things,
For frowninge fate, throws down the mighty kings.
Hor. Carm. 2. Od. 10.
Saepius ventis agitatur ingens
Pinus, and celsae grauiore casu
Decidunt turres, feriuntque summos
Fulmina montes.
Ovid. 3. Trist. 5.
Vt cecidi, cunctique metu fugere ruinam,
Versaque amicitiae terga dedere meae.
Silentium. Ad D. T. C. M.
woodcut of a renaissance scholar seated in his study, with books open on a
table next to him and on a shelf

De laud silentij Aul. Gel. lib. 11. cap. 10. idem de vaniloquio lib. 1. cap.
15.
PYTHAGORAS, unto his scholars gave,
This lesson first, that silence they should keep:
And this, we read Philosophers most grave,
Yea in their hearts, this Princes printed deep:
ULYSSES words wear spare, but rightly placed:
This, NESTOR lik'de. LYCVRGVS this imbrac'de.
Epaminondas celebratur apud Pindarum qui, quanquam multa sciret, pauca tamen
loquebatur.
This, famous made EPAMINONDAS boulde:
By this, great praise did DEMARATVS gain:
This, Athens made to reverence ZENO oulde:
SIMONIDES condemned speeches vain,
Whose saying was, my words repentance had,
But Silence yet, did never make me sad. Locutu^ fuisse poenituit, tacuisse
vero nunquam.

Cato lib. 1. Proximus ille deo, qui scit ratione tacere.
And CATO says: That man is next to GOD,
Who squares his speech, in reasons rightful frame:
For idle words, GOD threatens with his rod,
And says, we must give reckoninge for the same: Cor. 1. cap. 15. Corrumpunt
mores bonos colloquia praua.

Saint PAVLE likewise, this fault does sharply tutche,
And oftentimes, condemns bablinge mutche. De vaniloquio. Paul. Timoth. 2.
cap. 2.

Guill. Lill. Est vitae ac pariter ianua lingua necis.
One calls the tongue, the gate of life, and death,
Which wisely used, extolleth men on earth:
Which lewdlie vs'de, depriueth men of breathe,
And makes them mourn, who might have liu'de in mirthe:
For evil words, pierce sharper then a sword,
Which often we rue, though they wear spoke in boorde. Pet. 1. cap. 3. Qui
enim vult vitam diligere, and dies videre bonos: coerceat lingua^ a malo.

Marc. 7. Nihil est extra hominem introiens in eum, quod possit eu^
coinquinare, sed quae de homine procedunt, etc.
Not that distroyes, into the mowthe that goes,
But that distroyes, that forth thereof does comme:
For words do wound, the inward man with woes,
Then wisely speak, or better to be domme
The tongue, althowghe it be a member small,
Of man it is the best, or worste of all.
Hor. 1. Sermon. 4. Fingere qui non visae potest, co^missa tacere Qui nequit: hic
niger est, hunc tu Roman e caueto.
The fool, is thought with silence to be wise,
But when he prates, him self he does bewraye:
And wise men still, the babbler do despise,
Then keep a watch when thou haste owght to say, Ovid. 1. Amor. 2. Quis
minor est autem quam tacuisse labor?

What labor less, then for to houlde thy peace,
Which aged days, with quiet does increase. Horat 1. Ep. 18. Nec retinent
patulae co^missa fideliter aures.

Plutarch. in Moral.
Th'Aegyptians wise, and other nations far,
Unto this end, HARPOCRATES deuis'de,
Whose finger, still did seem his mouth to bar,
To bid them speak, no more then that suffis'de,
Which sign though oulde, we may not yet detest,
But mark it well, if we will live in rest.
Written to the like effect, upon Video, and taceo. Her Majesty's poesy, at
the great Lotterie in LONDON, begone M.D.LXVIII. and ended M.D.LXIX.
Ovid. 2. Trist. Si quoties pecca^t homines sua fulmina mittaec Jupiter, exiguo
tempore inermis erit.
I See, and houlde my peace: a Princely Poesy right,
For every fault, should not provoke, a Prince, or man of might.
For if that JOVE should shoot, so often as men offend,
The Poettes say, his thunderboltes should soon be at an end.
Then happy we that have, a Princess so inclin'de.
That when as justice draws her sword, has mercy in her mind,
And to declare the same, how prone she is to save:
Her Majesty did make her choice, this Poesy for to have.
Ovid. 1. Pont. 3.

Cuique dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox. Sed piger ad poenas princeps, ad
proemia velox:
Amicitia, etiam post mortem durans. To R. T. and M. C. Esquiers.
woodcut of a grape-laden vine wrapped around a bare elm tree

A Withered Elm, whose boughs wear bare of leaves
And sap, was sunk with age into the root:
A fruictefull vine, unto her body cleaues,
Whose grapes did hang, from top unto the foot:
And when the Elm, was rotten, dry, and dead,
His branches still, the vine about it spread.
Virgil in Moecenatis obitum. Et decet, and certe viua^ tibi semper amicus, Nec
tibi qui moritur, definit esse tuus: Ipse ego quicquid ero, cineres interq.
fauillas, Tunc quoque non potero non memor esse tui.
Which shows, we should be linck'de with such a friend,
That might revive, and help when we be oulde:
And when we stoop, and draw unto our end,
Our staggering state, to help for to vphoulde:
Yea, when we shall be like senseless block,
That for our sakes, will still embrace our stock.
Ovid. 3. Pont. 2.
Ire iubet Pylades charum periturus Orestem:
Hic negat, inque vicem pugnat vterque mori,
Extitit hoc vnum quod non conuenerat illis:
Caetera pars concors, and sine lite fuit.
Potentissimus affectus, amor.
woodcut of Eros or Cupid holding a whip and reins in a chariot drawn by two
lions

THE Lions grimme, behoulde, do not resist,
But yealde them selves, and Cupiddes chariot draw,
And with one hand, he guydes them where he list,
With the other hand, he keeps them still in awe:
Theye couche, and draw, and do the whippe abide,
And lay their fierce and crewell minds aside.
If Cupid then, be of such mighty force,
That creatures fierce, and brutishe kind he tames:
Oh mighty JOVE, vouchsafe to show remorse,
Help feeble man, and pity tender dames:
Let Afric wild, this tyrauntes force endure,
If not alas, how can poor man be sure.
Ovid. Epist. 9.
Quem non mill ferae, quem non Stheneleius hostie,
Non potuit Juno vincere, vincit amor.
Quae ante pedes. To I. I. Esquier.
woodcut of a farmhouse, with an ox or bull and a chicken in the yard, and a
chicken on the roof with three broken eggs

Ovid. 1. Art. Sic ne perdiderit non cessat perdere lusor, Et reuocat cupidas
alea saepe manus.
NOT for our selves, alone we are create,
But for our friends, and for our countries good:
And those, that are unto their friends ingrate,
And not regard their ofspringe, and their blood,
Or he, that wastes his substance till he begges,
Or selles his lands, which seru'de his parents well:
Is like the hen, when she has lay'de her eggs,
That suckes them up and leaves the empty shell,
Even so their spoil, to their reproach, and shame,
Undoes their heir, and quite decays their name.
Sen. Hipp. 1.
Quisquis secundis rebus exultat nimis,
Fluitque luxu, semper insolita appetens,
Hunc illa magnae dura fortunae comes
Subit libido: non placent suetae dapes,
Non tecta sani moris, aut vilis cibus: etc.
Mutuum auxilium. To R. COTTON Esquier.
woodcut of a blind man with a stick, and a lame man carried on his shoulders
pointing the way

Quanta sit mutui auxilij necessitas, cum in co^muni hac vitae humanae
societate multis modis intelligi potest: in qua homo hominis open maxim
indiget, adeo vt in prouerbium abierit, homo homini Deus: tum vero in ipsa
corporis humani constitutione and fabrica luculentissime apparet. Neque enim
homo subsistere vlla ratione possit, nisi membra corporis mutuum sibi auxilium
praestent. Quid enim futurum esset, nisi oculi pedes ad ingressum dirigerent;
nisi rursum pedes corpus mouerent; nisi manus ori cibu^, os ventriculo atque
hepari, hepar per venas vniuerso corpori alimentum suggereret? Nihil itaque est
quod per seipsum, sine alterius auxilio, constare, aut vim suam and
perpetuitatem conseruare possit.
THE blind, did bear the lame upon his back,
The burden, did direct the bearors ways:
With mutual help, they served each others lack,
And every one, their friendly league did praise:
The lame lent eyes, the blind did lend his feet,
And so they safe, did pass both feelde, and street.
Some land aboundes, yet has the same her want,
Some yeeldes her lack, and wantes the others store:
No man so ritche, but is in some thing scante,
The great estate, must not despise the pore:
He works, and toils, and makes his showlders bear,
The ritche again, gives food, and clothes, to wear.
So without poor, the ritche are like the lame:
And without ritche, the poor are like the blind:
Let ritche lend eyes, the poor his legs will frame,
Thus should yt be. For so the Lord assigned,
Who at the first, for mutual friendship sake,
Not all gave one, but did this difference make.
Whereby, with trade, and intercourse, in space,
And borrowinge hear, and lendinge there again:
Such love, such truth, such kyndnes, should take place,
Hor. 2. sermon. 2. Nam propriae telluris herum natura neque illum, Nec me, nec
quenquam statuit, etc.
That frendshipp, with society should reign:
The proverb says, one man is deemed none,
And life, is death, where men do live alone.
Ausonius in Epig.
Non est dives opum, dives: nec pauper inopsque
Infelix: alio nec magis alter eget.
Dives eget gemmis; Cereali munere pauper.
Sed cum egeant ambo, pauper egens minus est.
In vtrumque paratus. To JOHN PAYTON Esquier.
woodcut of two arms holding a sword and a trowel, emerging from a cloud

2 Esd. cap. 4.
WHEN SANABAL Jerusalem distressed,
With sharp assaults, in NEHEMIAS time:
To war, and work, the Jews them selves addressed,
And did repair their walls, with stone, and lime:
One hand the sword, against the foe did shake,
The other hand, the trowell up did take.
Ovid. 1. Pont. 4. Nescio qua natale solu^ dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.

Of valiant minds, lo here, a worthy part,
That quailed not, with ruin of their wall:
But Captains boulde, did prove the masons art,
Which does infer, this lesson unto all:
That to defend, our country dear from harm,
For war, or work, we either hand should arm.
Murus aeneus, sana conscientia. To MILES HOBART Esquier.
woodcut of a man sheltering beneath a laurel tree from Jupiter or Zeus,
sitting on an eagle inside a cloud, holding a scepter in one hand and lightning
bolts on the other. another large bird with a laurel wreath around its neck
swims in a river in the background

Nic. Reusnerus. Missa triumphalem no^ tangunt fulmina lauru^, Cingunt hac
vates tempora lata sacri,
BOTH fresh, and green, the Laurel stands sound,
Though lightninges flasshe, and thunderboltes do fly:
Where, other trees are blasted to the ground,
Yet, not one leaf of it, is withered dry:
Even so, the man that has a conscience clear,
When wicked men, do quake at every blaste,
Does constant stand, and does no perrilles fear,
When tempests rage, do make the world agaste:
Such men are like unto the Laurel tree,
The others, like the blasted boughs that die.
Hor. 1. Carm. 22.
Integer vitae, scelerisque purus
Non eget Mauri iaculis nec arcu,
Nec venenatis grauida sagittis,
Fusce pharetra.
Sieve per Syrtes iter aestuosas
Sieve facturus per inhospitalem
Caucasum, vel qua loca fabulosus
Lambit Hydaspes.
Sic discern. To THO. STVTVILE Esquier.
woodcut of grain being separated from chaff in a hanging sieve

IN fruictefull feilde amid the goodly croppe,
The hurtful tares, and dernell often do grow,
And many times, do mount above the top
Of highest corn: But skillful man does know,
When grain is ripe, with sieve to purge the seeds,
From chafe, and duste, and all the other weeds.
Ovid. 3. Trist. 4. Viue sine inuidia, mollesque inglorius annos Exige,
aemiertias and tibi iunge pares.
By which is meant, since wicked men abound,
That hard it is, the good from bad to try:
The prudent sort, should have such judgment sound,
That still the good they should from bad descrie:
And sifte the good, and to discern their deeds,
And weye the bad, noe better then the weeds.
Interiora vide. To GEORGE BROOK Esquier.
woodcut of a man with an drawn sword pulling back a curtain to see through a
window into a house, on the ground next to which are a tied bundle and a well

THough outward things, do trim, and brave, appear,
And sightes at first, do answer thie desire,
Yet, inward parts, if that they shine not clear,
Suspecte the same, and back in time retire:
For inwardly, such deadly foes may lurk,
As when we trust, may our destruction work.
Though beauty rare, be far and near renoum'de,
Though Natures gifts, and fortunes do excel:
Yet, if the mind, with heinous crimes abound,
And nothing good with in the same do dwell:
Regard it not, but shonne the outward show,
Until, thou do the inward virtues know.
Plaut. in Amph.
Virtus omnia in se habet, omnia adsunt bona, quem
Pene'st virtus,
Fortuna virtutem superans. To FR. W. Esquier.
woodcut of armoured Brutus committing suicide by impaling himself on his
sword, with his shield on the ground next to him

Simile de Aiace seipsum interficiente (super cuius tumulum virtus plorans pro
falso iudicio) apparet ante, folio tricesimo. Nam cum Achillis arma per Agamem
nonis iudicium, Vlyssi adiudicabantur, Ajax illius iniuriae impatiens, and
postea insanus, seipsum interficiebat, sic inquiens vt Ovid. habet 13.
Metamorph. Hectora qui solus, qui ferrum, ignemque, Iouemque, Sustinuit toties,
vnam non sustinet tram: Inuictumq. viru^ vicit dolor, arripit ensem: Et meus
hic certe est, an and hunc sibi poscit Ulysses? Hoc ait, vte^dum est in me
mihi, quiq. cruore Saepe Phrygum maduit, domini nunc caedemaedebit, Ne quisquam
Aiacem possit superare, nisi Ajax, Dixit, and in pectus, etc.
WHEN BRUTUS knew, AUGUSTUS part preuail'de,
And saw his friends, lie bleedinge on the ground,
Such deadly grief, his noble heart assail'de,
That with his sword, he did him self confound:
But first, his friends persuaded him to flee,
Who aunswer'd thus, my flighte with hands shall be.
And bending then to blade, his bared breast,
He did pronounce, these words with courage great:
Oh Prowes vain, I long did love thee best,
But now, I see, thou do on fortune wait.
Wherefore with pain, I now do prove it true,
That fortunes force, may valiant hearts subdue.
Fides non apparentium. To BARTHRAM CALTHORPE Esquier.
woodcut of two fishermen in a small boat drawing in a net

THE fissherman, does cast his nets in sea,
In hope at length, an happy hale to have,
And is content, long time to pause, and stay,
Though, nothing else he see, besides the wave:
Yet, only trust for things unseen does serve,
Which feeds him often, till he does almost sterue.
If fisshermen, have then such constant hope,
For hidden things, and such as do decaie,
Let Christians then, the eyes of faith houlde open,
And think not long, for that which lastes for aie,
And on GODS word, their hope to anchor fast,
Whereof each jot, shall be fulfil'de at last.
Ovid. Epist. 18.
Non boue mactato coelestia numina gaudent,
Sed, quae praestanda est and sine test, fide.
Virtus vnita, valet. Ornatiss. inuenibus nouem fratribus GEORGII BVRGOINE
armigeri F. F.
woodcut of water in two states. In one, small and large ships or galleons
float in the sea. In the other, a farmer, surrounded by cattle, a tree, a
plant, and a sheaf or bundle of arrows, uses a spade or hoe to work land
irrigated by a channel flowing from a pipe built into a dam

THE surging Sea, does salt, and sweet remain,
And is preseru'de with working, to and froe:
And not corruptes, nor suffers any stain,
Whiles in his bounds, the same does ebb, and flow:
But if it waste, and forth by sluses fall,
It soon corruptes, and has no force at all.
The arrows sharp, that in one sheafe are bound,
Are hard to break, while they are joined sure,
But sever them, then feeble are they found,
So where as love, and concord, does endure:
A little force, does mightily prevail,
Where Princes powers, with hate and discord quail.
Gratiam referendam.
woodcut of a stork bringing food (a snake or worm) to three chicks in a nest
built on a chimney

Aelianus lib. 10. cap. 16.
SEE hear the storke prouides with tender care,
And brings meat, unto her hatched brood:
They like again, for her they do prepare,
When she is oulde, and can not get her food: Idem libro 8. cap. 22. vbi de
natura Ciconiae mira fabula.

Which teaches both, the parente and the child,
Their duties hear, which each to other owe:
First, fathers must be provident, and mild,
Unto their fruicte, till they of age do grow:
And children, must with duty still proceed,
To reverence them, and help them if they need.
Paradisus poeticus.
Defessum fertur portare Ciconia patrem,
Hinc illa pietas sancta notatur aue.
Auaritia.
woodcut of crowned Tantalus chest-high in water straining his neck to reach
the over-hanging, fruit-laden branch of a tree growing on the bank next to him.
In the background, many other figures are also in the water, some with arms
outstretched

Ovid. Metam. lib. 4.
HEAR TANTALVS, as Poettes do divine,
This guerdon has, for his offense in hell:
The pleasante fruit, does to his lip decline,
A river fair unto his chinne does swell:
Yet, twixt these two, for food the wretch does sterue,
For both do flee, when they his need should serve.
The covetous man, this fable reprehendes,
For change his name, and TANTALVS he is,
He does abound, yet sterues and nothing spendes,
But keeps his goulde, as if it wear not his:
With slender fare, he does his hunger feed,
And dare not touch his store, when he does need.
Horat. sermon. 1. Sat. 1.
Tantalus a labris sitiens fugientia captat
Flumina, quid rides? mutato nomine de te
Fabula narratur, congestis vndique saccis
Indormis inhians: and tanquam parcere sacris
Congeris etc. --
O vita, misero longa.
woodcut of Prometheus chained to a rock while an eagle eats his liver

De quo, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 6.
TO Cawcasus, behoulde PROMETHEVS chain'de,
Whose liver still, a greedy gripe does rent:
He never dies, and yet is always pain'de,
With tortures dire, by which the Poettes meant,
That he, that still amid misfortunes stands,
Is sorrows slave, and bound in lasting bands.
For, when that grief does grate upon our gall,
Or surging seas, of sorrows most do swell,
That life is death, and is no life at all,
The liver rent, it does the conscience tell:
Which being launch'de, and pricked, with inward care,
Although we live, yet still we dyinge are. Horat. 1. Epist. 1. -- hic murus
ahaeneus esto, Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.

Martial. lib. 1.
Qualiter in Scythica religatus rupe Prometheus,
Assiduam nimio pectore pauit auem, etc.
Concordia.
woodcut of two armed soldiers shaking hands, with tents and cavalry in the
background

And. Alciat. Foederis haec species: id habet concordia signum, Vt quos iungit
amor, iungat and ipsa manus.
OF kings, and Princes great, lo, Concord ioynes the hands:
And knittes their subjects hearts in one, and wealthy makes their Lands.
It bloody broiles does hate, and Envy down does thruste,
And makes the Soldier learn to plowghe, and let his armor ruste.
Remedium tempestiuum sit.
woodcut of a man with a stick raised to strike a snake or serpent emerging
tail-first from a crack in a wall

Ovid. 2. Pont. 6. Cum poteram recto transire Ceraunia velo Vt fera vitarem
saxa, monendus eram. Nunc mihi naufragio quid prodest dicere facto Qua mea
debuerit currere cymba via?
THROVGHE rased wall, a serpente backwarde slydes,
And yet, before her poisoned head appear,
The prudent man, for safety that prouides,
Does strike at first, in dowte of further fear:
So all men should, when they to danger dreede,
With all their force, prevent the same with speed.
Sero sapiunt Phryges.
woodcut of a man bent over a river between houses, gripping an eel with
fig leaves held in both hands

Tibul. 1.9. Ah miser, and si quis primo periuria caelat, Sera tamen tacitis
poena venit pedibus.
THE proverb says, so long the pot to water goes,
That at the length it broke returns, which is appli'de to those.
That long with wyles, and shifts, have cloaked wicked parts,
Who have at length been paid home, and had their just deserts.
Even as the slymie eele, that often did slip away,
Yet, with fig leaves at length was catch'de, and made the fisshers pray.
Dum viuo, prosum.
woodcut of a man gathering fallen branches next to an ancient tree

AN aged tree, whose sap is almost spente,
Yet yeeldes her boughs, to warm us in the could:
And while it grows, her offalles still be lent,
But being fallen, (...) it turns into moulde,
And does no good: so ere to grave we fall,
We may do good, but after none at all. Da tua, dum tua sunt, post mortem
tunc tua non sunt.

Noli altum sapere.
woodcut of a man aiming a bow and arrow at a flying bird while a snake on the
ground prepares to bite his leg

WITH, lime, and net, the Mauis, and the lark,
The fowler lo, deceived by his art:
But whilste alofte, he leuel'd at his mark,
And did to high exalte, his hawghtie heart,
An adder fell, that in the grass did lurk,
With poisoned stinge, did his destruction work.
Claud. 1. Ruf. -- iam non ad culmina rerum, Iniustos creuisse queror:
tollantur in altu^ Vt lapsu maiore ruant, etc.
Let mortal men, that are but earth, and duste,
Not look to high, with puff of worldly pride:
But sometime, view the place wheretoo they must,
And not delighte, the poorest to deride:
Lest when their minds, do mount unto the skies,
Their fall is wrought, by things they do despise.
Cato. Mitte arcana dei Calumque inquirere quid sit.
Some others are, that fitly this apply,
To those, who do Astronomy profess:
Who leave the earth, and study on the sky,
As if they could, all worldly things express: and alius sic. Si Christum
been scis, satis est si caetera nescis.

Yet, when to know the stars they take in hand,
Of dangers near, they do not understand.
Saepius in auro bibitur venenum.
woodcut of the courtesan Lais of Corinth, richly-dressed in renaissance style,
outside with two dogs nearby

De Laid Aul. Gel. lib 1. cap. 8.
HEAR LAIS fine, does brave it on the stage,
With muskecattes sweet, and all she could desire:
Her beauties beams, did make the youth to rage,
And inwardly Corinthus set on fire: Propertius Eleg. 2. Non ita complebant
Ephyraeae Laides ades, Ad cuius iacuit Graena tota fores.

Both Princes, Peers, with learned men, and grave,
With humble suit, did LAIS favor crave.
Horat. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 18. Non cuiuis homini contingit adire Corinthum.
Not every one, might to Corinthus go,
The meaning was, not all might LAIS love:
The manchet fine, on high estates bestow,
The courser cheat, the baser sort must prove:
Fair HELEN leave for MENELAVS grace,
And CORIDON, let MABLIE still embrace.
Claud. 2. de volupt. Still. sic, Blanda quidem vultu, sed qua non tetrior
vlla, Interius fucata genus, and amicta dolosit Illecebris, etc.
And though, the poor may not presume alofte,
It is no cause, they therefore should despair:
For with his choice, does IRVS joy as often,
As does the Prince, that has a VENUS fair:
No high estate, can give a quiet life,
But GOD it is, that blesses man, and wife.
Then make thy choice, amongste thy equalles still,
If thou mislike DIANAS steps to trace:
Though PARIS, had his HELEN at his will,
Think how his fact, was ILIONS foul deface.
And he, that most the house of LAIS hauntes,
The more he looks, the more her face enchauntes.
Praepostera fides.
woodcut of a man and woman kissing beside a mill

ANELLVS, sendes his corn unto the mill,
Which being ground, he tri'de, it by the waighte:
And finding not the measure, to his will,
He studied long, to learn, the millers sleighte:
For noe complaints, could make him leave to steal,
Or fill the sack, with fustie mixed meal.
Wherefore, to mill he sent his dearest wife,
That night, and day, she might the grindinge view:
Where she, (kind heart,) to end al former strife,
Did dubbe her Spouse, one of VVLCANVS crewe:
Oh greedy fool Anellus, of thy grain,
And of thy wife, too prodigal, and plain.
Fatuis leuia commitito.
woodcut of a man, flanked by a naked child on a hobbyhorse and a fool in
motley, bowing before a king

Com. Gall. Diuersos diuersa iuuant: no^ omnibus annio Omnia conueniunt, etc.
THE little child, is pleas'de with cockhorse gaie,
Although he ask a courser of the best:
The idiot likes, with bables for to play,
And is disgrac'de, when he is bravely dreste:
A motley coat, a cockescombe, or a bell,
He better likes, then Iewelles that excel.
So fondelinges vain, that do for honor sue,
And seek for rooms, that worthy men deserve:
The prudent Prince, does give hem often their due,
Which is fair words, that right their humors serve:
For infantes hand, the rasor is unfit,
And fools unmeet, in wisdoms seat to sit.
Homines voluptatibus transformantur.
woodcut of Circe holding a stick, an ass, a goat, a hog or pig and a dog

Virgil. Aeneid. 7. Ovid. Metam. lib. 14.
SEE here ULYSSES men, transformed strange to hear:
Some had the shape of Goats, and Hogs, some Apes, and Asses wear.
Who, when they might have had their former shape again,
They did refuse, and rather wished, still brutishe to remain.
Which shows those foolish sort, whom wicked love does thrall,
Like brutishe beasts do pass their time, and have no sense at all.
And though that wisdom would, they should again retire,
Yet, they had rather CIRCES serve, and burn in their desire.
Then, love the only cross, that clogges the world with care,
Oh stop your ears, and shut your eyes, of CIRCES cups beware.
Horat. 1. Epist. 2.
Sirenum voces, and circes pocula nosti:
Quae si cum sociis stultus, cupidusque bibisset,
Sub domina meretrice fuisset turpis, and excors,
Vixisset canis immundus, vel amica luto sus.
Iudicium Paridis.
woodcut of Paris of Troy, seated, receiving a group of female figures
including the goddesses Juno or Hera, Minerva or Pallas Athena, and Venus or
Aphrodite

TO PARIS, here the Goddesses do plead:
With kingdoms large, did IVNO make her suit,
And PALLAS next, with wisdom him assaide,
But VENUS fair, did win the goulden fruit.
No princely gifts, nor wisdom he did wey,
For Beauty, did comaunde him to obey.
The worldly man, whose sight is always dim,
Whose fancy fond each pleasure does entice,
The shadows, are like substance unto him,
And toys more dear, them things of greatest price:
But yet the wise this judgment rash deride,
And sentence give on prudent PALLAS side.
Ovid. Epist. 15. De iudicio Paridis.
Regna Iouis coniux; virtutem filia iactat.
Et postea ibidem.
Dulce Venus risit, Nec te Pari munera tangunt,
Vtraque suspensi plena timoris, ait.
Ridicula ambitio.
woodcut of Hanno standing at a door, watching birds fly out a window

Aelian. de var. Histor. lib. 14. cap. 30.
HEAR HANNO stands, and looks into the sky,
And feeds him self, with hope of future praise:
Unto his birds, he does his ear apply,
And trustes in time, that they his name should raise:
For they wear taught, before they flewe abroad,
Long time to say, that HANNO was a God.
But, when the birds from bondage wear releast,
And in the woods, with other birds wear ioin'de,
Then HANNOS name, their woonted lesson ceaste,
For each did singe, according to his kind:
Then flee this fault, Ambition works our shame,
And virtue love, which does extol our name.
Desidiam abiiciendam.
woodcut of two figures sitting under a tree

USE labor still, and leave thie slothful seat,
Flee Idleness, which beggars state does give:
With sweat of browe, see that thou get thy meat,
If thou be borne, with laboring hand to live:
And get, to eat. and eat, to live with praise:
Live not to eat, to live with wanton ease.
By DRACOES laws, the idle men should die,
Sabel. Paul. These. 2. ca. 3 Neque gratis panem manducauimus ab aliquo, sed in
labor, and in fatigatione, nocte, and die operantes etc.

and postea: Quoniam si quis non vult operari, nec manducet.


The Florentines, made banishement their pain:
In Corinthe, those that idly they did see,
Wear warn'de at first, the second time were slain:
And eke Saint Paul, the slothful thus does threate,
Who laboreth not, deny him for to eat.
Ovid. 1. Remed. Amoris.
Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter:
In promptu caussa est, desidiosus erat.
Mortui diuitiae. Ad Reuerendum virum Dn. ALEXANDRVM NOWELL Paulinae ecclesiae
Londini Decanum, doctrina and exemplo clarum.
woodcut of the shirt of Saladin displayed on a spear

Horat. 1. Carm. 4. Palleda mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, Regumq.
turres, etc.
THE Princes great, and Monarchs of the earth,
Who, while they liu'de, the world might not suffice:
Yet can they claim, by greatness of their birthe,
To bear from hence, when nature life denies,
Noe more then they, who for releife did pyne,
Which is but this, a shrouding sheet of twyne.
Propertius 2. 28. Haud vllas portabis opes Acherontis ad vndas: Nudus ab
inferna stulte, vehere rate. Victor cum victis pariter-miscebitur vmbris,
Consule cum Mario capte lugurtha seeds.
Though few there be, while they do flourishe here,
That do regard the place whereto the must:
Yet, though their pride like Lucifers appear,
They shall be sure at length to turn to duste:
The Prince, the Poor, the Prisoner, and the slave,
They all at length, are summon'de to their grave.
But, he that printes this deeply in his mind,
Although he set in mighty CAESAR'S chair,
Within this life, shall contentation find,
When careless men, often die in great despair:
Then, let them blusshe that would be Christians thought,
And fail hereof, Since Turks the same have taught.
As SALADINE, that was the Souldaine great
Of Babylon, when death did him arreste,
His subjects charged, when he should leave his seat,
And life resign, to time, and natures heste:
They should prepare, his shyrte upon a spear,
And all about forthwith the same should bear.
Vrbs Palaestinae.
Through ASCHALON, the place where he deceaste,
With trumpet Sound, and Heralte to declare,
These words alowde: The King of all the East
Great SALADINE, behoulde is stripped bare:
Of kingdoms large, and lies in house of claie,
And this is all, he bare with him away.
Quod in te est, prome. Ad eundem.
woodcut of a bird or pelican pecking it is breast to feed the chicks below it
in the nest

Parad. Poet. Cor Pharius rostro figit pelecanus acuto, Et se pro natis sic
necat ipse suis.
THE Pelican, for to revive her young,
Does pierce her breast, and give them of her blood:
Then search your breast, and as you have with tongue,
With pen proceed to do our country good:
Your zeal is great, your learning is profounde,
Then help our wantes, with that you do abound.
De paruis, grandis aceruus erit. To my brother M. BR. WHITNEY.
woodcut of a bushel of grain, corn or wheat, surrounded by individual ears
Ovid. 1. Remed. Amoris. Flumina magna vides paruis de fontibus orta: Plurima
collectis multiplicantur aquis.


Vt huic vacuo spacio aliquid adiiciam, non facile occurrit (mi frater) quod
and tibi (iam patrifamilias) and huic Symbolo magis conueniat, quam illud
Horatianum ad Iccium.
ALTHOVGHE thy store be small, for to begin,
Yet guide it well, and soon it is increaste,
For mighty men, in time their wealth did win,
Who had at first, as little as the least:
Where GOD does bless, in time abundance springes,
And heaps are made, of many little things.
1. Epist. 12.
Fructibus Agrippae Siculis, quos colligis Icci,
Si recte frueris: non est vt copia mayor
Ab Jove donari possit tibi, toll querelas.
Pauper enim non est, cui rerum suppetit vsus.
Vita irrequieta. Ad Doctiss. virum W. M. fortunae telo ictum.
woodcut of a man carrying a stick and bundle looking back over his shoulder
across a river toward a village with a mill and church, while a footless bird
with long feathers flies above

Iuuen. Sat. 10. Pauca licet ports argenti vascula puri, Nocte iter ingressus
gladium, contumque timebis, Et motae ad lunam trepidabis arundinis vmbram.
Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.
THE Apodes, which do in INDIA breed,
Still fly about, and seldom take their ease:
They have no feet, to rest them as we read,
But with their flighte, do compass land, and seas:
Unto this brood, those that about do rome,
We may compare: that have no house, nor home.
Both houses fair, and cities great, they veiwe,
But Rivers swifte, their passage still do let,
They often look back, and do their fortune rue,
Since that therein, they have no seat to set:
Thus, pass they through their long unquiet life,
Till death does come, the end of worldly strife.
Ovid. 2. Fast.
Omne solum forti patria est, vt piscibus aequor,
Vt volucri vacuo quicquid in orb patet.
In eum qui truculentia suorum perierit. Ad affinem suum, R. E. medicum
insignem.
woodcut of a beached dolphin or sea monster, with a ship in the sea in the
background

Aelian. De Animalibus lib. 9. cap. 7. and lib. 12. cap. 12.
THE Dolphin swifte, upon the shore is thrown,
Though he was bred, and fostered, in the flood:
If NEPTVNE show such wrong, unto his own,
Then, how may man in ships have hope of good: Alciatus. Nam si nec
propriis Neptunus parcit alumnis, Quis tutos homines natubus esse putat?

The raging Sea, our country does declare;
The Dolphin fish, those that exiled are.
And though this fish, was mighty in the sea,
Without regard, yet was he cast on shore:
So famous men, that long did bear the swaie, De his, Petrarcha lib. vtriusq.
fortunae in titulo de morientibus extra patriam, luculenter scribit.

Have been exiled, and lived in habit pore:
This, SOCRATES: and MARCUS TVLLIVS tri'de:
DEMOSTHENES, and thousands more beside.
Ausonius Epigr. 135.
Fortuna nunquam sistit in eodem statu,
Semper mouetur, variat, and mutat vices,
Et summa in imum vertit, ac versa erigit.
Tecum habita. Ad Agnatum suum R. W. Coolensem.
woodcut of Jupiter or Zeus enthroned, surrounded by various animals: a stag, a
horse, an ox, an ass, an eagle or bird, a lion and a snail

A Solemn feast great IVPITER did make,
And warned all beasts, and creatures to be there:
The press was much, each one his place did take:
At length, when all wear in there chiefest cheer:
At second course, the snaile crepte slowly in,
Whom JOVE did blame, cause he so slack had bin.
Who answered thus, oh king behoulde the cause?
I bear my house, wherefore my pace is slow:
Which warns all, in feasting for to pause,
And to the same, with pace of snaile to go:
And further tells, no places may compare,
Unto our homes, where we commanders are.
Admonet hoc, sectanda gradu conuiuia tardo,
Atque domo propria dulcius esse nihil.
Industria naturam corrigit. Ad D. H. Wh. patruelis mei F.
woodcut of Mercury or Hermes repairing a lute, and of a robed male figure
playing a lute while a female figure dances

THE Lute, whose sound does most delighte the ear,
Was cast aside, and lack'de both stringes, and frettes:
Whereby, no worth within it did appear,
MERCVRIVS came, and it in order settes:
Which being tun'de, such Harmony did lend,
That Poettes write, the trees their tops did bend.
Even so, the man on whom does Nature froune,
Whereby, he lives dispis'd of every wighte,
Industry yet, may bring him to renoume,
And diligence, may make the crooked right:
Then have no doubt, for art may nature help.
Think how the bear does form her vglye whelpe.
Ovid Epist. 12.
Si mihi difficilis formam natura negauit;
Ingenio formae damna rependo meae.
Infortunia nostra, alienis collata, leuiora. Ad eundem.
woodcut of an ass and ape and a mole facing each other

Ovid. 9 Metam. Quodque ego, vult genitor, vult ipsa socerque, futurus: At non
vult natura, potentior omnibus istu.
THE Ass, and Ape complain, and thought their fortunes bad:
The Ass, for want of horns. the Ape, because no tail he had.
The Mole, then answer made: I have no eyes to see,
Then wherefore can you nature blame, if that you look on me.
Which biddes us be content, with lot that God does send,
For if we others wantes do wey, our happes we may commend.
Vxoriae virtutes. To my Sister, M. D. COLLEY.
woodcut of a woman covering her mouth with her left hand and holding keys in
her right hand, with a tortoise at her feet

Plautus in Amph. Non ego illam mihi dotem duco esse, quae dos dicitur, Sed
pudicitiam and pudorem, and sedatum Cupidinem, Deum metum, parentum amorem, and
cognatum concordiam.
THIS representes the virtues of a wife,
Her finger, stays her tongue to run at large.
The modest looks, do show her honest life.
The keys, declare she has a care, and chardge,
Of husbands goods: let him go where he please.
The Tortoyse warnes, at home to spend her days.
Inuidiae descriptio. Ad Ra. W.
woodcut of an old woman, half-naked, with a snake or viper in her mouth, a
heart in her right hand, and a walking stick or staff in her left hand

Inuidiam Ovid. describit 2. Metamorph.
WHAT hideous hagge with visage stern appears?
Whose feeble limbs, can scarce the body stay:
This, Envy is: lean, pale, and full of years,
Who with the bliss of other pines away.
And what declares, her eating vipers brood?
That poisoned thoughts, be evermore her food.
Lucret. 3. Macerat Inuidia ante oculos illu^ esse pote^tem, Illum adspectari,
claro qui incedit honor: Ipsi se in tenebris volui, coenoque queruntur.
What means her eyes? so bleared, sore, and redd:
Her mourninge still, to see an others gain.
And what is mente by snakes upon her head?
The fruit that springes, of such a venomed brain.
But why, her heart she rentes within her breast?
It shows her self, does work her own unrest.
Why looks she wrong? because she would not see,
An happy wight, which is to her a hell:
What other parts within this fury be?
Her heart, with gall: her tongue, with stinges does swell.
And last of all, her staff with pricks aboundes:
Which shows her words, wherewith the good she wounds.
Ovid. lib. 1. De Art Amandi.
Fertilior seges est alienis semper in agris,
Vicinumque pecus grandius vher habet.
De Inuido and Auaro, iocosum.
woodcut of two men standing next o a chest or coffer, with three eyes on the
ground between them

Auth. de Gueuara in Epistolis suis.
THE Gods agreed, two men their wish should have:
And did decree, who first demand did make,
Should have his wish: and he that last did crave,
The others gift should double to him take.
The Covetous wretch, and the Envious man:
These wear the two, that of this case did scanne.
They long did strive, who should the first demand:
The covetous man refus'de, because his mate,
Should have his gift then doubled out of hand:
The thought whereof, upon his heart did grate
Wherefore the Gods, did plague him for his sin,
And did command, th'Enuious man begin.
Who did not crave, what MIDAS chief did choose,
Because his friend, the fruit thereof should find:
But only wish'de, that he one eye might loose,
Unto the end, to have the other blind:
Which being said, he did his wish obtain:
So but one eye, was left unto them twain.
See hear how vile, these caytiffes do appear,
To GOD, and man: but chiefly (as we see)
The Covetous man, who hurts far, and near.
Where spytefull men, their own tormentors be.
But both be bad, and he that is the best,
GOD keep him thence, where honest men do rest.
Ad ornatiss. virum Dn. PETRVM WITHIPOLE. Petre, imitare petram.
woodcut of a house or citadel built into a rock caught between four winds
emerging from the mouths of four boys' heads in the clouds

Hadrianus Iunius Harlemensis Medicus clariss. inter Emblemata sua, filio suo
Petro hoc inscripsit.
WHAT JUNIUS sent his son, lo, here I send to thee?
Because his name, and Nature both, with thine do well agree.
Despise all pleasures vain, hold virtue by the hand,
And as in rage of wyndes, and Seas, the Rock does firmly stand.
So stand thou always sure, that thou may live with fame,
Remembering how the Latins sound a Rock so like thy name.
Ovid. Epist. 15.
Permanet in voto men's mea firma suo.
Dum potes, viue. Ad veterem suum amicum Dn. GEORGIVM SALMON, qui maximo vitae
periculo Roma euasit.
woodcut of a man with a net kneeling by the sea reaching for a cuttlefish. In
the background are ships, buildings, cattle and sheep

THE Cuttle fish, that likes the muddie crickes,
To which, the sea does flow at every tide:
For to escape the fishers ginnes, and tricks,
Dame nature did this strange devise provide:
That when he sees, his foe to lie in wait,
He muddes the stream, and safely scapes deceyte.
Ovid. 3. Art. Amand. Nec quae praeteriit, cursu reuocabitur vnda: Nec quae
praeteriit hora redire potest. Vtendum est aetate, cito pede labitur aetas, Nec
bona tam sequitur, quam bona prima fuit.
Then man: in whom does sacred reason rest,
All ways, and means, should use to save his life:
Not wilfully, the same for to detest,
Nor rashly run, when tyrauntes rage with strife:
But constant stand, abiding sweet or sower,
Until the Lord appoynte an happy hour.
Paradisus poet. de Sepia.
Obscuri latices me condunt: cernere tectam
Atramenta vetant: abdita, tuta nato.
Stultitia sua seipsum saginari. Ad H. S. communem viduarum procum.
woodcut of a fox leaping to reach grapes on a vine-frame

THE FOX, that long for grapes did leap in vain,
With weary limbs, at length did sad depart:
And to him self quoth he, I do disdain
These grapes I see, because their taste is tarte:
So thou, that hunt'st for that thou long have mist,
Still makes thy boast, thou may if that thou list.
Virescit vulnere virtus.
woodcut of a man treading down docks or docken leaves

THE dockes (though trodden) grow, as it is daily seen:
So virtue, though it long be hid, with woundinge waxes green.
Impar coniugium. To Aphilus.
woodcut of a living person being tied to a dead person by two men, while king
Mezentius looks on from his throne, with crown and scepter

Virg. 8. Aeneid. Mortua quinetia^ iungebat corpora viuis, Cemponens manibusque
manus atque oribus ora.
THE tyrant vile MEZENTIVS, put in ure,
Amongst the plagues, wherewith he murdered men:
To bind the quick, and dead, together sure,
And then, to throw them both into a den.
Whereas the quick, should still the dead embrace,
Until with pine, he turned into that case.
Those wedding webbes, which some do weaue with ruthe,
As when the one, with strange disease does pine:
Or when as age, be coupled unto youth,
And those that hate, enforced are to join,
This representes: and does those parents show,
Are tyrauntes mere, who join their children so.
Yet many are, who not the cause regard,
The birthe, the years, nor virtues of the mind:
For goulde is first, with greedy men prefer'de,
And love is last, and likinge set behind:
But parents hard, that matches make for goods:
Can not be free, from guilte of childrens bloodes.
Ovid. Epist. 9.
Quam male inaequales veniunt ad aratra iuuenci,
Tam premitur magno coniuge nupta minor.
Frontis nulla fides. Ad Lectiss. iuuenes Dn. Edm. Freake, and Dn. Anth. Alcock.
woodcut of a man seated drawing the outline of a figure on a tablet or canvas
supported by a standing man. In the background another figure is chased away by
a dog, with an ox nearby

THE lions roar: the Bores their tuskes do whet.
The Griphins graspe their tallantes in their ire:
The dogs do bark; the bulls, with horns do thret.
The Serpents hiss, with eyes as red as fire.
But man is made, of such a seemly shape,
That friend, or foe, is not discerned by face:
Then hard it is the wickeds wiles to escape,
Since that the bad, do mask with honest grace.
And Hypocrites, have Godly words at will.
And ravening wolves, in skins of lambs do lurk;
And CAIN does seek, his brother for to kill,
And saints in show, with IVDAS hearts do work.
Now, since the good no cognizance do bear,
To teach us, whom we chiefly should embrace:
But that the same the wicked sort do wear,
And show them selves, like them in every case. De vera Amicitia Pontius
Paulinus, Auson. scribit Epist. 2 Hoc nostra ceruice tugum non saeua resoluit

A table lo, herein to you I send,
Whereby you might remember still to write,
His words, and deeds, that bears the face of friend,
Before you choose, such one for your delight. Fabula, non terris absentia
longa diremit, Nec perimet; toto licet abstrahar orb, vel auo: Nunquam animo
diuisus agam; prius ipsa recedet Corpore vita meo, qua^ vester pectore vultus.

And if at length, you try him by his tuche,
And find him hault, whereby you stand in dout,
No heart, nor hand, see that you join with such
But at the first, be bold to raze him out.
Yet if by proof, my words, and deeds agree,
Then let me still within your tables be. Horat. 1. Sermon. 3. At pater vt
gnati, sic nos debemus amici, Si quod sit vitium non fastidire; etc.

Animi scrinium seruitus. Ad ornatum virum, D. ELLISEVM GRYPHITH.
woodcut of a bird or nightingale in a cage set on the ground, with ships at
sea in the background

THE Proverb says, the bound must still obey,
And bondage bringes, the freest man in awe:
Who serves must please, and hear what other say,
And learn to keep Silentij deus apud Aegyptos.
HARPOCRATES his law:
Then bondage is the Prison of the mind:
And makes them mute, where wisdom is by kind.
The Nightingall, that chaunteth all the spring,
Whose warblinge notes, throughout the wooddes are hard,
Being kept in cage, she cease for to singe,
And mournes, because her liberty is barde:
Oh bondage vile, the worthy man's deface,
Be far from those, that learning do embrace.
In sortis suae contemptores.
woodcut of a flambard or flame-bladed sword suspended from a cloud Cicero
Tusc. 5. and Valor. Max. and Sidon. Apollinaris lib. 2. epist. 13.


Horat. Sermon. 1. Satyra 1. Qui fit Moecenas, vt nemo, quam sibi sorte^ Seu
ratio dederit, seu fors obiecerit, illa Contentus viuat: laudet diuersa
sequentes? O fortunati mercatores, grauis annis Miles ait, etc.
HERE DAMOCLES, desirous for to taste,
The princely fare, of DIONYSIVS king,
In royal seat, was at the table plaste,
Where pages brave, all dainty cates did bring:
His bed of goulde, with curious coueringes spread,
And cubbourdes ritche, with plate about his bed.
Horat. Carm. 3. Ode 1. Districtus ensis cui super impta Ceruice pendet, non
Siculae dapes Dulcem elaborabunt saporem: Non auium, citharaeque cantus Somnum
reducent, etc.
No where he stay'de, but music sweet did sound;
No where he went, but he did odors smell;
Now in his pomp, when all things did abound,
Being asked, if that this life did please him well:
He answer made, it was the heaven alone,
And that to it, all other lives wear none.
Seneca Oed. Act. 3. Qui sceptra duro saeuus imperio reget, Timet timentes:
metus in auctorem redit.
Then, did the king comaunde a naked sword,
Unto the roof, should with a hear be knit:
That right should hang, when he was placed at bourde,
Above his head, where he did use to sit:
Which when he saw, as one distracte with care,
He had no joy in mirthe, nor dainty fare.
But did beseech, the Tyrant for to give,
His former state, and take his pomp again: Claud. 4. honor. Qui terret, plus
iste timet: sors ista tyrannis Conuenit, inuideant claris fortesque trucident,
Munits gladiis viuant, septique venenis Ancipites habeant arts, trepidiq.
minentur.

By which, we learn, that those who meanly live,
Have often more joy, them those who rule and reign:
But cheifelye, if like him they do appear,
Who night, and day, of subjects stood in fear. Periander apud Ausonium.
Multis terribilis caueto multos.
Aelianus de tyrannis lib. 10. cap. 5. and lib. 6. cap. 13. De Var. Hist.

Interdum requiescendum. Ad Dn. PETRVM COLVIVM Brugensem.
woodcut of two female figures, both with helmets, spears and shield. One sits
by a barren tree and field, the other stands by a fruitful tree and field

CONTINVAL toil, and labor, is not best:
But sometimes cease, and rest thy weary bones,
The day to work, the night was made to rest,
And students must have pastimes for the nones:
Sometime the Lute, the Chesse, or Bow by fittes,
For overmuch, does dull the finest wits.
For lack of rest, the feilde does barren grow,
The winter could, not all the year does reign:
And daily bent, does weak the strongest bow:
Yea our delights still used, we do disdain.
Then rest by fittes, amongste your great affairs,
But not too much, lest sloathe does set her snares.
Lucanus ad Pisonem.
-- Nec enim facundia semper
Adducta cum front placet: nec semper in armis
Bellica turba manet: nec tota classicus horror
Nocte dieque gemit: nec semper Cnossius arcu
Destinat, exempto sed laxat cornua neruo.
Et galea miles caput, and latus ense resoluit.
THE SECOND PART OF EMBLEMES, AND OTHER DEVISES, gathered, Englished, and
moralized, And diverse newly devised, by Geffrey Whitney.

depiction of the chained bear and ragged staff emblem of the Dudley family,
encircled by the order of the garter HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



IN PRAISE, OF THE TWO NOBLE EARLS, WARWICK, AND LEYCESTER.
TWO Bears there are, the greater, and the less,
Well known to those that travail far, and near:
Without whose sight, the shipman sails by guess,
If that the Son, or Moon, do not appear.
They both do show, to th'Equinoctiall line,
And one, unto the ANTIPODES does shine. Pes, vrsae maioris ad Antipodes lucet.

These, have their light from PHOEBVS goulden rays,
And all the world, by them receives good:
Without whose help, no man might pass the seas,
But ever stand in danger of the flood;
Oh blessed lights, the work of heavenly hand,
You, millions save from ruthe of rock, and sand.
Two noble peers, who both do give the bear,
Two famous Earls, whose praises pierce the sky:
Who both are placed in honors sacred cheer,
Whose worthy fame shall live, and never dye:
In English court do spend their blessed days:
Of public weal, two great, and mighty stays.
And as those stars by PHOEBVS light are seen,
So, both these Earls have honor, might, and power:
From PHOEBE brighte, our most renowned Queen,
Whose fame, no time, nor envy can deuower:
And under her, they show to others light,
And do rejoice ten thousand with their sight.
But, since that all that have bin borne, have end,
And nothing can with natures laws dispense:
Vowchsafe oh Lord, long time their lives to lend,
Before thou call these noble persons hence:
Whose fame, while that the Bears in sky shall show,
Within this land, all future times shall know.
In praise of the Right Honorable my good Lord, and Master, the Earl of
LEYCESTER.
HE that desires to pass the surging Seas,
Because they are so wonderful to see,
And without skill, does venture wheare he please,
While that the waves both caulme, and quiet be,
We are better far, to keep him on the land,
Then for to take such enterprise in hand.
For, if he lack his compass, and his card,
And art therefore, to shape his course arighte:
Or pylottes good, that dangers may regard,
When surge does swell, and winds do show their might,
Does perrill life, through wanton wreckles will,
And does to late lamente his lack of skill.
So, he that should with will, be stirred to write,
Your noble acts, your gifts and virtues rare:
If PALLAS aid he lack, for to indite,
He should but haste his folly to declare.
And wrong your right, deserving VERGILS pen;
And HOMERS skill, if they wear here again.
Then, best for such to take a longer pause,
Then to attempt a thing so far unfit:
For, they may know to write of such a cause,
Beseems best, the fine, and rarest wit.
Yet those that would, I wish their learning such,
That as they should, they might your virtues tutche.
An other of the same.
SINCE fame is wighte of winge, and through each clymate flies,
And worthy acts of noble peers, does raise unto the skies.
And since she has extolled your praises long ago,
That other countries far, and near, your noble name do know.
Although I houlde my peace, through want of learned skill,
Yet shall your passinge fame be known, and be renowned still.
And those that have desire, upon your praise to look,
May find it truly penned by fame, within her goulden book.
Where, on the foremost front of honors hautie stage,
She places you, in equal room, with any of your age.
Wherefore to fame I yield, and cease what I begone:
Because, it is in vain, to set a candell in the Son.
Respice, and prospice.
woodcut of Janus, with two faces, holding a mirror in his left hand and a
scepter in his right hand

THE former part, now paste, of this my book,
The second part in order does ensue:
Which, I begin with IANVS double look,
That as he sees, the years both oulde, and new,
So, with regard, I may these parts behoulde,
Perusinge often, the new, and eeke the oulde.
And if, that fault within us do appear,
Within the year, that is already done,
As IANVS biddes us alter with the year,
And make amends, within the year begone,
Even so, my self suruayghinge what is past;
With greater heed, may take in hand the last.
Quid per geminum Ianum significatur. Plin. Nature. Hist. lib. 34. cap. 7.
This Image had his rites, and temple fair,
And called the GOD of war, and peace, because
In wars, he warn'de of peace not to despair:
And warn'de in peace, to practice martial laws:
And furthermore, his looks did teach this sum;
To bear in mind, time past, and time to comme.
To the honorable Sir PHILIPPE SIDNEY Knight, Gouuernour of the Garrison, and
town of Vlissinge.
SINCE best deserte, for valor of the mind,
And prowes great, the Romans did deserve;
And sith, the world might not their matches find,
In former times, as aucthors yet reserve:
A few of them I mean for to recite,
That valiant minds may have therein delighte.
And but to tutche the naked names of some,
As Romulus, that first the wall did lay: Romulus.

And so, from thence to nearer times to come,
To Curtius boulde, that did the gulf assaye: Marcus Curtius.

Or Cocles eeke, who did his foes withstand, Horatius Cocles.

Till bridge was broke, and armed swamme to land.
Then Posthumus, I might with these repeat, Aulus Posthumus

That did repulse the Latins, from the waules.
And Manlius, a man of courage great, Manlius Capitolinus.

Who did defend the Capitol from Gauls:
And Fabius name, of whom this does remain, Fabij.

Three hundredth six, wear in one battle slain.
With these, by right comes Coriolanus in, Martius Coriolanus.

Whose cruel mind did make his country smarte;
Till mothers tears, and wives, did pity win:
Fabricius then, whom bribes could not peruerte. C. Fabricius. De cuius fide,
sic Pyrrhus apud Eutropium De bello Terentino. Ille est Fabricius qui
difficilius ab honestate, quam Sol a cursu suo auerti posset.

And Decij eeke; and Iunij void of dreede: Decij. Iunij.

With Curij; and Metelli, do succeed. Curij. Metelli.

Dentatus next, that six score battles fought, Sicinius Dentatus

Who, Romans call'de ACHILLES, for his force:
Unto his grave no wound behind he brought,
But forty five before, did carue his corse. Aul. Gell. lib. 2. cap. 11. and
Plin. lib. 7. cap. 28.

Torquatus eeke, his foe that overcame, Manlius Torquatus.

And took his chain; whereby he had his name.
With Claudius blind, and Claudius Caudax nam'de, Appius Claudius Caecus.
Appius Claudius Caudax.

Two brothers boulde, for valor great renoum'de:
Attilius Calatinus.
And Calatine, that all SICILIA tam'de,
And one the Sea, Hamilcar did confound: Cornel. Nepos.

Luctatius eeke, that Carthage fleet subdu'de, Luctatius Catulus.

Whereby, for peace they with submission su'de.
Fabius Maximus. Marcus Marcellus
And Fabius great, and Marc Marcellus boulde,
That at the length did SYRACVSA sack:
Marcus Portius Cato.
And eeke the acts of Portius we behoulde,
Whose life though long, yet Rome to soon did lack:
Cn. Duillius. Liuius Salinator.
Duillius yet, and Liuius we do know,
Though they wear turned to poulder long ago.
Claudius Nero. Eut^op. de secundo Bello Punico.
What should I speak of Claudius Neros heart,
When HANIBAL, did royal Rome dismaye:
And HASDRVBAL did have to take his part,
But Claudius, lo, did meet him by the way,
And reau'd his life, and put his host to flighte,
And threw his head to HANIBAL his sight.
Scipio Africanus.
Then Scipio great, that CARTHAGE waules did race.
A noble prince, the second unto none:
Flaminius then, and Fuluius have their place; Quintius Flaminius. Fuluius
Nobilior.

Aemilius acts, and Gracchus, yet are known: Paulus. Aemilius. Sempronius
Gracchus.

With Sylla fierce, and Caius Marius stout, Cornelius Sylla. Caius Marius
pater.

Whose civil wars, made Rome ten years in doubt. Appianus De Bello
Civil. lib. 1.

Sertorius, next, and eeke Gabinius name, Quintus Sertorius Aulus Gabinius.

With Crassus, and Lucullus, high renoum'de: Licinius Crassus. Lucius
Lucullus.

And Caesar great, that prince of endelesse fame, Julius Caesar.

Whose acts, all lands, while world does last, shall sound.
Augustus great, that happy most did reign, Octauius Augustus.

The scourge to them, that had his uncle slain.
M. Antonius.
Anthonius then, that fortune long did friend,
Yet at the length, the most unhappy man:
Lepidus.
And Lepidus, forsaken in the end,
With Brutus boulde, and Cassius, pale and wan: M. Brutus. Cassius.

With many more, whom aucthors do report,
Whereof, ensue some tutch'd in larger sort.
Mutius Scaeuola. Pietas in patriam.
woodcut of a hand holding a short sword upright immediately above a smoking
fire

THIS hand, and sword, within the furious flame, Cornelius Nepos.

Does show his heart, that sought PORSENNAS end:
Whose countries good, and eeke perpetual fame,
Before his life did SCAEVOLA commend:
No pain, had power his courage high to quail,
But boldly spoke, when fire did him assail.
Which sight, abashed the lookers on, but most
Amaz'de the king; who pardoned straighte the knight:
And ceased the siege, and did remove his host,
When that he saw one man so much of might:
Oh noble mind, although thy days be paste;
Thy fame does live, and eeke, for aye shall last.
Habet and bellum suas leges.
woodcut of eight boys with whips beating an old man between a camp with tents
and a horseman and a walled town

Furius Camillus.
CAMILLVS then, that did repulse the Gauls,
And unto Rome her former state did give:
When that her foes made spoil within her waules,
Lo here, amongst his acts that still shall live.
I made my choice, of this example rare,
That shall for aye his noble mind declare. Verba Camilli apud Plutarchum,
Xylandro interpret. Grauis est inquit res bellum, vt quae multis iniustis
multisque violentis factis conficiatur. and tamen apud bonos viros, habentur
etiam belli quaedam leges, neque tantopere victoria expetenda est, vnt non
fugienda sint officia quae per scelus ac malitiam offeru^tur, magnum enim
imperatorem suae vittutis, no^ alienae improbitatis fiducia, conuenit bellum
gerere.

Wherefore, in brief then this his worthy part,
What time he did besiege FALERIA strong:
A scoolemaster, that bare a IVDAS heart,
Unto the place where he was fostred long,
Often walked abroad with scholars that he toughte,
Which cloak he vs'de, so that no harm was thought.
At length, with sons of all the best, and most,
Of noble pears, that kept the town by might:
He made his walk into the Roman host,
And, when he came before CAMILLVS sight,
Quoth he, may Lord, lo these? thy prisoners be,
Which being kept, FALERIA yeeldes to thee.
Whereat, a while this noble captain stayed,
And pondering well the straungenes of the cause:
Unto his friends, this in effect he said.
Though wars be ill, yet good men's wars have laws,
And it behooues a General good to gain,
With valiant acts, and not with treacherous train.
With that, he caus'de this SINON to be stripte, Virgil. lib. 2. Aeneid.

And whippes, and rods, unto the scholars gave:
Whom, back again, into the town they whipte,
Which fact, once known unto their fathers grave:
With joyful hearts, they yielded up their Town:
An act most rare, and glass of true renoume.
M. Valerius Coruinus. Insperatum auxilium.
woodcut of man's head in a plumed helmet with the visor raised, and a black
bird or raven perched on it

IF LIVIES pen have written but the truth, Aul. Gell lib. 9, cap. 11.

And diverse mo, that acts of old declare.
Then know, when Gauls did dare the Roman youth,
VALERIVS, lo, a Roman did prepare
By dinte of sword, the challenger to try,
Who both in arms incountred by and by. Eutropius rerum Romanarum, lib. 2.

And whilst with force, they proou'd their weapons brighte,
And made the sparks to fly out of the steel,
A Raven, straight, upon VALERIVS light,
And made his foe a new encounter feel:
Whom he so sore did damage, and distress,
That at the length, the Roman had success.
For, when his foe his forces at him bente,
With wings all spread the raven dimmed his sight:
At length, his face he scratched, and all to rent,
And peck'd his eyes, he could not see the light,
Which shows, the Lord in danger does preserve,
And ravens raise our wordlie wantes to serve.
Regulus Attilius. Hosti etiam seruanda fides.
woodcut of Marcus Atilius Regulus, lying bound next to a nail-spiked barrel
and lid, guarded by a soldier with a pike, but receiving the beams of the sun
with a human face

THE Consul boulde ATTILIVS, here regard,
That AFRIC made to tremble at his name;
Who, for his faith received this reward,
Cornelius Nepos.
Two hundredth thousand men, he overcame.
And three score ships, and eeke two hundredth towns,
Yet flattringe fate, in fine upon him frowns.
For, after by XANTIPPVS overthrown,
Eutropius lib. 2. De Bello punico.
To CARTHAGE brought, in dungeon deep was cast;
Yet, with desire for to redeem their own,
Their messenger they made him, at the last:
And in exchange, he unto Rome was sent,
For prisoners there, and on his word he went.
Silius Italicus lib. 6. Belli Punici, copiosissime pulcherrimis
elegantissimisque versibus hanc historiam narrat.
Who promised this, he would return to bands,
If that he failed of that, they did require:
But when he saw so many in their hands,
Though Romans glad, did grant him his desire:
Yet could he not theretoo, in heart agree,
Because for him, so many should be free.
Thus, countries love, was dearer then his life,
Who back retourn'de, to keep his promise true:
Where he did taste long time of torments rife,
But yet, his heart no tortures could subdue.
Aul. Gellius lib. 6. cap. 4.
His mangled eyes, the Son all day assailes;
And in the end, was thruste in tonne with nails.
Marcus Sergius. Fortiter and feliciter.
woodcut of a metal forearm holding a lance from which hang four garlands or
wreaths

MARC SERGIVS now, I may record by right,
A Roman boulde, whom foes could not dismaye: Plin. Nature. hist. lib. 7.
cap. 28.

Gainste HANNIBAL he often shewde his might,
Whose right hand lost, his left he did assaye
Until at length an iron hand he proou'd:
And after that CREMONA siege remoou'd.
Then, did defend PLACENTIA in distress,
And wanne twelve houldes, by dinte of sword in France,
What triumphs great? were made for his success,
Unto what state did fortune him advance?
What spears? what crounes? what garlandes he possessed;
The honors due for them, that did the best.
Cn. Pompeius Magnus. Celsa potestatis species.
woodcut of a lion standing rampant, holding a sword in its front paws

WHEN POMPEY great, with fortune long was bleste,
And did subdue his foes, by land, and sea,
Primus in Hircanum, Rubrum, and Arabicum mare vsque peruenit. Cornelius Nepos.
And conquestes great obtained in the East,
And PARTHIANS, and ARABIANS, made obaye,
And seas, and Isles, did in subjection bring,
Whose name with fear, did through IVDAEA ringe.
De cuius maximis victoriis and triumpho long splendidissimo aetatis suae,
anno 35. Appianus libro De Bellis Mithridaticis.
And had restor'de king MASINISSAS right,
And overcame SERTORIVS with his power:
And made the King of PONTVS know his might.
Yet, at the length, he had his hapless hour:
For overcome by CAESAR, fled for aid,
To AEGYPTE land; wherein he was betrayed.
Within whose ringe, this form above was wroughte,
Whereby, his force, and noble mind appears;
Which, with his head to CAESAR being brought,
For inward grief, he washed the same with tears,
And in a fire with odours, and perfumes:
This princes head with mourning he consumes.
Marcus Scaeua. Audaces fortuna iuuat.
woodcut of numerous arrow-shafts embedded in a shield

THIS monumente of manhood, yet remains, Suetonius.

A witness true, or MARCUS SCAEVAS heart: Valerius Maximus.

Whose valliancie, did purchase him such gains,
That death, nor time, can blemishe his deserte.
In battle, boulde: no fear his heart could wound,
When sixe-score shaftes within his shield wear found,
And in that fight, one of his eyes he lost,
His thighe thrust through, and wounded sore beside:
Such soldiers, had great CAESAR in his host,
As by him self, and others, is discride.
But, those that would more of these Knights behoulde,
Let them peruse the Roman Aucthours oulde.
Inuidia integritatis assecla.
woodcut of a palm tree with snakes or serpents and frogs at its base

Nic. Reusnerus. Haec ramis tanquam digitis, sublime renitens Ponderibus,
superum monstrat ad astra vta^.
THE gallant Palm with body straighte, and tall,
That freshelie shows, with branches sweet of smell:
Yet, at the foot the frogs, and septentes crall,
With ercksome noise, and eke with poison fell:
Who, as it wear, the tree do still annoye,
And do their worste, the same for to destroy.
When noble peers, and men of high estate,
By just deserte, do live in honor great:
Yet, Envy still does wait on them as mate,
And does her worste, to undermine their seat:
And MOMVS brood does arm, with all their might,
To wound their fame, whose life did give them light. Eusebius. apud Stob. Iter
facientes per solemn, necessario comitatur vmbra: incedentibus vero per gloriam
comes est inuidia.

Ex damno alterius, alterius vtilitas.
woodcut of a lion and boar fighting, while above a vulture perches on the
branch of a tree

THE Lion fierce, and savage bore contend,
The one, his paws: his tuskes the other tries:
And ere the broile, with bloody blows had end;
A vulture lo, attendes with watchinge eyes:
And of their spoil, does hope to praeie his fill,
And joys, when they each others blood do spill.
When men of might, with deadly rancor swell,
And mortal hate, twixte mighty Monarchs reigns;
Some gripes do watch, that like the matter well,
And of their loss, do raise their private gains:
So, SOLIMAN his Empire did increase,
When christian kings exiled love, and peace. Georgius Sabinus. Sic modo dum
faciant discordes proelia reges, Turcius Europa diripit hostis opes.

Hic magnus sedet Aeneas secumque volutat
Euentus belli varios, etc. Virg. Aeneid. 10.

Et pendebat adhuc belli fortuna, diuque
Inter vtrumque volat dubiis victoria pennis. Ovid. Metam. 7.

Vigilantia, and custodia. Ad reuerendiss. Dn. D. GVLIELMVM CHATTERTONVM
Episcopum Cestrensem.
woodcut of a round church or temple with a lion sitting at the door and a
weathercock on the roof facing right

THE Heraulte, that proclaims the day at hand,
The Cock I mean, that wakes us out of sleep,
On steeple high, does like a watchman stand:
The gate beneath, a Lion still does keep.
And why? these two, did alder time decree,
That at the Church, their places still should be.
Aug in Epist. 124 Episcopi munere vt in hac vita nihil difficilius, ita apud
Deum nihil beatius.
That pastors, should like watchman still be priest,
To wake the world, that sleeps in his sin,
And rouse them up, that long are rocked in rest,
And show the day of Christ, will straighte begin:
And to foretell, and preach, that light divine,
Even as the Cock does singe, ere day does shine.
Quid per gallum and leonem significetur, Claud. Minos super Alciarum Emb. 15.
lucule^ter scribit.
The Lion shows, they should of courage be,
And able to defend, their flock from foes:
If ravening wolfes, to lie in wait they see:
They should be strong, and boulde, with them to close:
And so be arm'de with learning, and with life,
As they might keep, their charge, from either strife.
Festina lent. Ad Amplissimos viros Dn. FRANCISCVM WINDHAM, and Dn. EDWARDVM
FLOWERDEWE Iudices integerrimos.
woodcut of a crab holding a butterfly by the wings Cicero pro Rabir. Est
sapientia iudicis in hoc, vt non solum quid possit, sed etiam quid debeat
ponderet: nec quantum sibi permissum meminerit, sed etia^ quatenus commissum
sit.


Idem 3. Offic. Nec contra Remp. nec contra iusiurandum amici caussa vir bonus
faciet: nec si iudex quidem erit de ipso amico. ponit enim personam amici, cum
induit iudicis: nam si omnia facienda sunt, quae amici velint, non amicitiae
tales, sed coniurationes putandae sunt.
THIS figure, lo, AUGUSTUS did devise,
A mirror good, for Judges just to see,
And always fit, to be before their eyes,
When sentence they, of life, and death decree:
Then must they haste, but very slow away,
Like butterfly, whom creepinge crabbe does stay.
The Prince, or Judge, may not with light report,
In doubtful things, give judgment touching life:
But try, and learn the truth in every sort,
And mercy join, with justice bloody knife:
This pleased well AUGUSTUS noble grace,
And Judges all, within this tracke should trace. Claud. Manil. Th. -- diis
proximus ille est Quem ratio non ira mouet: qui facta rependens Consilio,
punire potest mucrone cruento.

Senec. O^t. act. 2.
Consulere patriae, parcere afflictis, fera
Caede abstinere, tempus atque irae dare,
Orbi quietem, seculo pacem suo,
Haec summa virtus, petitur hac coelum via.
Sine iustitia, confusio. Ad eosdem Iudices.
woodcut of a celestial scene, featuring a crescent moon, clouds, winds,
shooting starts, and the Greek word for chaos AOS



WHEN Fire, and Air, and Earth, and Water, all wear one:
Before that work divine was wroughte, which now we look upon.
There was no form of things, but a confused mass: Ovid. in Metam. lib. 1.
-- quia corpore in vno Frigida pugnabant calidis: humentia, siccis: Mollia, cum
duris: sine pondere, habentia pondus.

A lump, which CHAOS men did call: wherein no order was,
The Could, and Heat, did strive: the Heavy things, and Light.
The Hard, and Soft. the Wette, and Dry. for none had shape arighte.
But when they wear disposed, each one into his room:
Tibul. 1. 3. Non domus vlla fores habuit, non fixus in agris Qui regeret
certis finibus arua lapis: Ipsae mella daba^t quercus, vltroque ferchant Obuia
securis vbera lactis oues: Non acies, non ira fuit, non bella, nec enses,
Immiti sauus duxerat art faber, etc.
The Fire, had Heat: the Air, had Light: the Earth, with fruits did bloome.
The Sea, had his increase: which things, to pass thus brought:
Behoulde, of this imperfect mass, the goodly world was wroughte.
Then all things did abound, that served the use of man:
The Rivers great, with wine, and oil, and milk, and honey, ran.
The Trees did yield their fruit: though planting then unknown.
And CERES still was in her pomp, though seed wear never sown.
The season, Summer was: the Groves wear always green,
And every bank, did bear the badge, of fragrant FLORA Queen.
This was the goulden world, that Poettes praised most,
No hate, was harbor'd then at home: nor hatched, in foreign cost.
But after, when the earth, with people did increase:
Ambition, straighte began to spring: and pride, did banishe peace.
For, as all times do change: even so, this age did pass.
Ovid. 1. Metam. Iamque nocens ferrum, ferroq. nocentius aurum Prodierat,
prodit bellu^, quod pugnat vtroq. Sanguineaq. manu crepitantia concutit arma;
Viuitur ex rapto, non hospes ab hospite tutus, Non socer a genero: fratrum
quoque gratia raera est, etc.
Then did the silver age ensue. and then, the age of brass.
The Iron age was last, a fearful cursed time:
Then, armies came of mischiefs in: and filled the world with crime.
Then rigor, and revenge, did spring in evil hour:
And men of might, did manadge all, and poor oppressed with power.
And he, that mighty was, his word, did stand for law:
And what the poor did ploughe, and sow: the rich away did draw.
None might their wives inioye, their daughters, or their goods,
No, not their lives: such tyraunts brood, did seek to spill their bloodes.
Then virtues wear defaced, and dimmed with vices vile, Isidor. 2. Ethy. Factae
sunt leges, vt earum metu coerceatur audacia, tutaque fit inter improbos
innocentia, and in ipsis improbis formidato supplicio refraenetur nocendi
facultas.

Then wrong, did mask in cloak of right: then bad, did good exile.
Then falsehood, shadowed truth: and hate, laughed love to skorne:
Then pity, and compassion died: and bloodshed foul was borne.
So that no virtues then, their proper shapes did bear:
Nor could from vices be decern'd, so strange they mixed wear.
That now, into the world, an other CHAOS came:
But GOD, that of the former heap: the heaven and earth did frame.
Anselmus de Iustitia. Iustitia est animi libertas, tribuens vnicuique suam
propriam dignitatem, maiori reuerentiam, pari co^cordiam, minori disciplinam,
Deo obedie^tiam, sibi sanctimoniam, inimico patientiam, egeno operosam
mifericordiam.
And all things placed therein, his glory to declare:
Sent JUSTICE down unto the earth: such love to man he bare.
Who, so suruay'd the world, with such an heavenly vewe:
That quickley virtues she advanced: and vices did subdue.
And, of that world did make, a paradise, of bliss:
By which we do infer: That where this sacred Gods is.
That land does florishe still, and gladness, their does grow:
Because that all, to God, and Prince, by her their duties know.
Imago Iustitiae videtur apud Plutarch. lib. De Iside and Osiride, and apud
Gell. lib. 14. cap. 4.
And where her presence wantes, there ruin reigns, and wrack:
And kingdoms can not long endure, that do this lady lack.
Then happy England most, where JUSTICE is embraced:
And eeke so many famous men, within her chair are placed.
-- sed comprime motus, De officio optimi Iudicis, Claudianus ad Honorium sic,

Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecisse licebit,
Occurrat, mentemque domet respectus honesti.
Amicitia fucata vitanda.
woodcut of two male figures shaking hands, one wearing a round helmet, the
other with the ears and tail of a fox; a third man crouches behind trees in the
background

Hor. Art Poet. Nunquam te fallant animi sub vulpe latentes.
OF open foes, we always may beware,
And arm our selves, their Malice to withstand:
Yea, though they smile, yet have we still a care,
We trust them not, although they give their hand:
Their Foxes coat, their fained heart bewraies,
We need not doubt, because we know their ways.
But those, of whom we must in danger be,
Are deadly foes, that do in secret lurk,
Who lie in wait, when that we can not see,
And unawares, do our destruction work:
No foe so fell, (as BIAS wise declares)
As man to man, when mischeife he prepares.
Bias.
Pernicies homini quae maxima? solus homo alter.
Sobrie potandum.
woodcut of a dog drinking from the River Nile, watched by a crocodile, and
near to a naked man lying on his front on the bank with a bowl held to his
mouth

De Crocod. Aelian. de Animal. lib. 8. cap. 25. and lib. 9. cap. 3. De
praescientia eius, de qua, in prima part huius libri, fol. 3. idem Ael. lib.
5. cap. 52. and lib. 8. cap. 4.
A Thirsty dog, to NILVS runs to drink,
A Crocodile, was ready in the flood:
Which made the dog, to lap hard by the brinke,
As one that much in fear of poisoning stood:
And sparingly, began to cool his heat,
When as he saw, this Serpent lie in wait.
Contra Ebrietatem.
This careful dog, condemns those careless wightes,
Although he be of brutisshe kind, because
Those reason lack, that spend both days, and nights,
Without regard, in keeping BACCHVS laws: Paul. Gal. cap. 5 Ephesians. ca. 5. Pytha.
apud Stob. Primum poculu^ sanitatis est, alterum voluptatis, tertiu^
contumeliae, vltimum insaniae.

And when through drink, on feet they can not stand,
Yet as they lie, they have their boales in hand.
Nemes. Eclog. 3. contra potores.
Cantharon hic retinet: cornu bibit alter adunco:
Concauat ille manus, palmasque in pocula vertit:
Pronus at ille lacu bibit, and crepitantibus haurit
Musta labris, etc.
Insignia poetarum. Ad Nobiliss. and doctiss. virum Dn. IANVM DOVSAM A
NOORTWIICK.
woodcut of a shield hanging from a tree with a swan depicted on it, while two
swans swim in the background among rushes

Ovid. Metam. 2.
THE Martial Captains often, do march into the field,
With Egles, or with Griphins fierce, or Dragons, in their shield.
Nic. Reusnerus. Hunc volucre^ Phoebo fertur sacrasse verusta: Quod reserat
cantus, Delphice magne, tuos.
But Phoebus sacred bird, let Poettes most commend.
Who, as it were by skill divine, with song forshowes his end.
And as his tune delights: for rarenes of the same.
Hor. de art poet. Natura fieret laudabile carmen, an art, Quaesitum est. ego
nec studiu^ sine diuite vena, Nec rude quid prosit video ingenium: alterius
sic. Altera poscit opem res, and coniurat amice.
So they with sweetenes of their verse, should win a lasting name.
And as his color white: Sincerenes does declare.
So Poettes must be clean, and pure, and must of crime beware.
For which respects the Swanne, should in their Ensign stand.
No foreign foul, and once suppos'de king of LIGVRIA Land.
Ovid. 3. Art. amandi.
Cura ducum fuerant olim, regumque poetae,
Praemiaque antiqui magna tulere chori.
Sanctaque maiestas, and erat venerabile nomen
Vatibus, and largae saepe dabantur opes.
Ennius emeruit Calabris in montibus ortus,
Contiguus poni Scipio magne tibi,
Nunc ederae sine honor iacent: operataque doctis
Cura vigil Musis, nomen inertis habet.
Sed famam vigilare iuuat, quis nosset Homerum
Ilias aeternum si latuisset opus.
Cum laruis non luctandum.
woodcut of a group of hares or rabbits attacking a dead lion lying on its back

WHEN Hectors force, through mortal wound did fail,
And life began, to dreadefull death to yield:
The Greeks most glad, his dyinge corpse assail,
Who late did flee before him in the field:
Which when he saw, quothe he now work your spite,
For so, the hares the Lion dead do byte.
Look here upon, you that do wound the dead,
With slanders vile, and speeches of defame:
Or books procure, and libelles to be spread,
When they be gone, for to deface their name:
Who while they liu'de, did fear you with their looks,
And for their skill, you might not bear their books.
Nullum cum victis certamen, and aethere cassis. Virg. Aeneid. 11.

Captiuus, ob gulam.
woodcut of a mouse with its head trapped in a closed oyster-shell, which lies
on a beach or seashore with ships visible in the background

THE mouse, that long did feed on dainty crommes,
And safely searched the cupborde and the shelfe:
At length for change, unto an Oyster commes,
Where of his death, he guilty was him self: Felo de se.

The Oyster gaped, the Mouse put in his head,
Where he was caught, and crushed till he was dead.
Isidorus lib. 1. de summo bono. Gulae saturitas nimia acie^ mentis obtundit
ingeniumque euertere facit.
The Gluttons fat, that dainty fare devour,
And seek about, to satisfy their taste:
And what they like, into their bellies pour,
This justly blames, for surfettes come in haste:
And biddes them fear, their sweet, and dulcet meats,
For oftentimes, the same are deadly baits.
Lucanus 4.
-- O prodiga rerum
Luxuries nunquam paruo contenta paratu,
Et quaesitorum terra pelagoque ciborum
Ambitiosa fames, and lautae gloria mensae.
Constanter.
woodcut of a flooded town, with only the rooftops and the points of spires and
towers above water; some ships and boats are afloat and one boat is beached on
the land

Cicer. 2. Offic. Praeclara est in omni vita aequabilitas, idemque vultus,
eademque frons.
THE raging Sea, that roares, with fearful sound,
And threatens all the world to ouerflowe:
The shore sometimes, his billows does rebounde,
Though often it winnes, and gives the earth a blow
Sometimes, where ships did sail: it makes a land.
Sometimes again they sail: where towns did stand.
So, if the Lord did not his rage restrain,
And set his bounds, so that it can not pass:
The world should fail, and man could not remain,
But all that is, should soon be turned to was:
By raging Sea, is meant our ghostly foe,
By earth, man's soul: he seeks to overthrow.
Bern. in Epist. Perseuerantia est finis virtutum, and virtus sine qua nemo
videbit deum.
And as the surge does work does day, and night,
And shakes the shore, and ragged rocks does rent:
So Satan stirs, with all his maine, and might,
Continual siege, our souls to circumuente.
Then watch, and pray, for fear we sleep in sin,
For cease our crime: and he can nothing win.
Dicta septem sapientum. To Sir HVGHE CHOLMELEY Knight.
woodcut depicting the emblems of the seven sages or sophoi of ancient Greece,
as defined by Andrea Alciato or Alciati. These are: a scales or balance (for
Cleobulus); a mirror or looking glass (for Chilon); a herb (for Periander); a
turbaned figure on an ass (for Bias); a flower (for Pittacus); an overturned
statue (for Solon); and a bird or foul walking across a net to a crate or cage
CLEOBV

CILON

PERIANDI

BIAS

PITAC

SOLON

THALES



THE sages seven, whose fame made Grecia glad,
For wisdom great, amongst their sainges wise:
Each one of them, a goulden sentence had,
And Alciat, did the pictures thus devise,
For to observe the use of Emblems right,
Which represent the meaning to our sight.
Keep still the mean, did CLEOBULVS teach:
For measure, lo, the balance loyn'd thereto.
And Know thy self, did CHILON always preach:
The glass behoulde, that thou the same maiste do.
Restrain thy wrath, does PERIANDER tell:
And shows an herb, that choler does expel.
Nothing too mutche, did PITTACVS commend,
Thereto Semen quod dicitur gith, quod pharmacopolae vocant Nigellam Romanam.
a flower, whereof too much destroys.
And SOLON sai'd, Remember still thy end,
Before the which, none can have perfect joys:
A pillar formed, declininge down he shows,
Which tells that death, the strongest overthrows.
Plutarch. de lib. educand. Cum reliqua omnia tempore diminuantur, sapientia
sola senectute augescit.
Of wicked men the number does exceed:
This BIA'S used: and cause for foul defame,
SARDINIA most is stained, as we read,
On asses back, behoulde one of the same.
And THALES, last of all the Sages, said:
Flee sewertiship, for fear thou be betrayed.
Bernard. Sapientiae otia negotia sunt: and quo otiosior est sapientia, eo
exercitatior in suo genere.
And underneath, a bird upon the net,
That does not fear, the crafty foulers call,
Hereby we often, do pay an others debte,
And free our friends, and bring our selves in thrall:
Which sayings wise, who keep them in their breasts,
By proof shall find, they harbor happy guestes.
Scripta manent. To Sir ARTHVRE MANWARINGE Knight.
woodcut of a city falling into ruin, with walls collapsing, and books on a
table and on the ground

IF mighty TROIE, with gates of steel, and brass,
Be worn away, with tracte of stealinge time:
If CARTHAGE, raste: if THEBES be grown with grass. Propertius. Et Thebae
steterant, altaque Troia fuit.

If BABEL stoop: that to the clouds did clime:
If ATHENS, and NVMANTIA suffered spoil: Demosth. in Arg. lib. 1. Clarissimae
olim vrbes, nunc nihil sunt, Quae maxim nunc superbiunt, eandem aliquando
fortunam experientur.

If EGYPT spires, be euened with the soil.
Then, what may last, which time does not impeache,
Since that we see, these monumentes are gone:
Nothing at all, but time does over reach,
It eats the steel, and wears the marble stone:
But writings last, though yt do what it can,
And are preserved, even since the world began. Virg. in Moecenatis obitu.
Marmora Maeonij vincunt monumenta libelli: Vuiitur ingenio, cetera mortis
erunt. and

And so they shall, while that they same does last,
Which have declared, and shall to future age:
What things before three thousand years have paste,
What martial knights, have marched upon this stage:
Whose acts, in books if writers did not save,
Their fame had ceaste, and gone with them to grave. Ovid. 1. Amor. 10.
Scinde^tur vestes, gemmae frange^tur and auru^. Carmina quam tribuent, fama
perennis erit.

Of SAMSONS strength, of worthy IOSVAS might.
Of DAVID'S acts, of ALEXANDERS force.
Of CAESAR great; and SCIPIO noble knight,
How should we speak, but books thereof discourse:
Then favor them, that learn within their youth:
But Jove them best, that learn, and write the truth.
De morte, and amore: Iocosum. To EDWARD DYER Esquier.
woodcut of Eros or Cupid and Mors or Thanatos shooting arrows from behind
clouds in the sky, with an elderly man and woman walking arm-in-arm, and a
young man lying dead on the ground

Ioachim. Belleius. Mutarunt arma inter se Mors atque Cupido Hic falcem gestat,
gestat at illa facem. Afficit haec animum, corpus sed conficit ille: Sic
moritur iuuenis, sic moribundus amat.
WHILE furious Mors, from place, to place did fly,
And here, and there, her fatal darts did throw:
At length she met, with Cupid passing by,
Who likewise had, been busy with his bow:
Within one Inn, they both together stayed,
And for one night, away their shooting laid.
The morrow next, they both away do haste,
And each by chance, the others quiver takes:
The frozen darts, on Cupiddes back wear placed,
The fiery darts, the lean virago shakes:
Whereby ensued, such alteration strange,
As all the world, did wonder at the change.
For gallant youths, whom Cupid thought to wound,
Of love, and life, did make an end at once.
And aged men, whom death would bring to ground:
Began again to love, with sighs, and groans;
Thus natures laws, this chance infringed so:
That age did love, and youth to grave did go.
Till at the last, as Cupid drew his bow,
Before he shot: a younglinge thus did cry,
Oh Venus son, thy darts thou doste not know,
They pierce too deep: for all thou hittes, do die:
Oh spare our age, who honored thee of oulde,
These darts are bone, take thou the darts of goulde.
Which being said, a while did Cupid stay,
And saw, how youth was almost clean extinct:
And age did doat, with garlandes fresh, and gaye,
And heads all balde, wear new in wedlock linckt:
Wherefore he showed, this error unto Mors,
Who miscontent, did change again perforce.
Yet so, as both some darts away conuay'd,
Which wear not theirs: yet unto neither known,
Some bonie darts, in Cupiddes quiver stayed,
Some goulden darts, had Mors amongst her own.
Then, when we see, untimely death appear:
Or wanton age: it was this chance you hear.
Prudentes vino abstinent.
woodcut of a grape-laden vine wrapped around an olive tree

Max. lib. 6. Mulier quae vini vsum immoderate appetit, and virtutibus ianuam
claudit, and delictis aperit.
LO here the vine does claspe, to prudent Pallas tree,
The league is naught, for virgins wise, do Bacchus friendship flee.
Alciat. Quid me vexatis rami? Sum Palladis arbor,
Auferte hinc botros, virgo fugit Bromium.
Englished so.

Why vex ye me ye boughs? since I am Pallas tree:
Remove away your clusters hence, the virgin wine does flee.
In colores. To EDWARD PASTON Esquier.
woodcut of a dyer lowering cloth on the end of a pole into a steaming bath of
liquid

Ovid de Trist. Infoelix habitum temporis huius habe Nec te purpureo velent
vaccinia succo: Non est conueniens luctibus ille color.
Alciat. Nos sperare docet viridis. spes dicitur esse in viridi quoties irrita
retro cadit.
THE dier, lo, in smoke, and heat does toil,
Men's fickle minds to please, with sundry hues:
And though he learn new colors still to boil,
Yet varijng men, would feign some newer choose:
And seek for that, which art can not devise,
When that the old, might very well suffice.
And some of them, here briefly to recite,
And to declare, with whom they best agree:
For mourners, black. for the religious, white.
Which is a sign, of conscience pure, and free.
The green, agrees with them in hope that live:
And eeke to youth, this color we do give.
The yelowe next, unto the covetous wighte.
And unto those, whom jealousy does fret.
The man refused, in Taunye does delight.
The color Read, let martial captains get.
And little boys, whom shamefastnes did grace,
The Romans decked, in Scarlet like their face.
The mariners, the Blewe becomes well.
Because it shows the color of the sea:
And Prophettes, that of things divine foretell,
The men content, like Violet arraie.
And last, the poor and meaner sort provide,
The medley, graye, and russet, never died.
Lo here, a few of colors plain expreste,
And eeke the men, with whom they best agree:
Yet every one, does think his hew the best,
And what one likes, an other lothes to see:
For Nature though ten thousand colors have,
Yet unto man, more varrijng minds she gave.
Now strangers, who their countries still commend,
And make us muse, with colors they recite:
May think our land, small choice of hues does lend.
Because so few, of many I do write.
Yet let them know, my Aucthor these presents,
Inoughe for those, whom reason still contents.
But say we lack, their herbs, their worms, their flies,
And want the means: their gallant hues to frame.
Yet England, has her store of orient dies,
And eeke therein, a DYER most of fame,
Who, always has so fine, and fresh, a hew,
That in their lands, the like is not to vewe.
In studiosum captum amore.
woodcut of an old man sitting on a throne, surrounded by Eros or Cupid,
Minerva or Pallas Athena, and two young women

A Reverend sage, of wisdom most profounde,
Began to doat, and lay away his books:
For CUPID then, his tender heart did wound,
That only now, he lik'de his ladies looks?
Oh VENUS stay? since once the price was thine,
Thou ought not still, at PALLAS thus repine.
Propert. 2.
Omnes humanos sanat medicina dolores:
Solus amor morbi non amat artificem.
Abstinentia. Ad ampliss. virum Dn. CAROLVM CALTHORPE Regiae Matis procuratorem
in Hibernia, Dn. mihi omnibus modis colendissimum.
woodcut of a pitcher, jug, or ewer, and a basin or bowl of water with a towel,
sitting on top of a marble tomb

WHO so are placed, in sacred Justice room,
And have in charge, her statutes to observe:
Augusto super Psalm. 37 Apud iustum Iudicem sola conscientia propria timenda
est.
Let them with care, behoulde this garnished toome,
That such a one, at length they may deserve:
Of marble hard, suppose the same to be,
August. De comm. vit. Cler. Non vos iudicetis maleuolos esse, qua^do alterius
crimen iudicatis: magis quippe noce^tes estis, si fratres vestros, quos
iudicando corrigere potestis, tace^do petire permittatis.
An Ewer eeke, upon one corner stands,
At the other end, a basin we may see:
With Towell fair, to wipe their washed hands:
Th'effecte whereof, let Judges printe in mind,
That they may leave a lasting name behind.
The marble shows: they must be firm, and sure,
And not be pierced, nor moved from the truth:
The rest declare: they must be clean, and pure;
Stobaeus ex Plutarchi Sermon. 44. retulit imagines iudicum apud Thebas esse,
sine manibus, at summ^ in sicis imaginem clausis oculis: Eo quod iustitia nec
muneribus capi, nec hominum vultu flecti debeat.
And not inclined to rigor, or to ruthe.
But, when a cause before them shall be hard,
With conscience clear, let them the same decide:
No Ritche, or Poor, or friend, or foe, regard.
For fear, they do through their affections slide:
But let them wash, their hands from every crime,
That GOD may bless, and here prolonge their time.
Auson. de viro bono Edyll, 18.
Non prius in dulcem declinat lumina somnum,
Omnia quam longi reputauerit acta diei;
Quae praetergressus? quid gestum in tempore? quid non?
Cur isti facto decus abfuit, aut ratio illi?
Quid mihi praeteritum: cur haec sententia sedit,
Quam melius mutare fuit? miseratus egentem,
Cur aliquom fracta persensi mente dolorem?
Quid volui, quod nolle bonum foret? vtile honesto
Cur malus antetuli? number dicto, aut denique vultu
Perstrictus quisquam? cur me natura, magis quam
Disciplina trahit? sic dicta and facta per omnia
Ingrediens, ortoque a vespere cuncta reuoluens,
Offensus prauis, dat palmam, and praemia rectis.
Constantia comes victoriae. To MILES CORBET Esquier.
woodcut of a large ship or galleon under full sail being blown by a strong
wind over rough water

THE ship, that long upon the sea does sail,
And here, and there, with varrijng winds is toste:
On rocks, and sands, in danger often to quail.
Yet at the length, obtaines the wished coaste:
Which being won, the trompetts ratlinge blaste,
Does tear the sky, for joy of perils paste.
Boni gubernatoris est, ventoru^ se flatibus accommodare: viri autem sapie^tis,
animi affectibus. Arist. apud Stob.
Though master rest, though Pilotte take his ease,
Yet night, and day, the ship her course does keep:
So, whilst that man does sail these worldly seas,
His voyage shortes: although he wake, or sleep.
And if he keep his course direct, he winnes
That wished port, where lasting joy begins.
Demetrius Phaler. Tarde aggredere, quod aggressurus sis perseueranter
prosequere. Nam vt inquit Greg. lib. 1. Mor. Incassum bonum agitur, si ante
vitae terminum deseratur: Quia frustra velociter currit, qui prius, quam ad
metas venerit, deficit.

Ex Bello, pax. To HVGHE CHOLMELEY Esquier.
woodcut of a helmet, with visor down, sitting upright on the ground,
surrounded by bees

THE helmet strong, that did the head defend,
Behold, for hyue, the bees in quiet served:
And when that wars, with bloody bloes, had end.
They, honey wroughte, where soldier was preserved:
Which does declare, the blessed fruits of peace,
How sweet she is, when mortal wars do cease.
De falce ex ense, Martialis.
Pax me certa ducis placidos curuauit in vsus:
Agricolae nunc sum, militis ante fui.
Calumniam contra calumniatorem virtus repellit.
woodcut of an arrow striking a wall, with another lying against the wall

WHO so with force against the marble wall,
Or pillar strong, does shoot, to pierce the same:
It not preuailes, for down the arrows fall,
Or back rebounde, to him from whence they came:
So slanders foul, and words like arrows keen,
Not virtue hurtes, but turns her foes to teene.
Sic spectanda fides. To GEORGE MANWARINGE Esquier.
woodcut of a hand with a ring emerging from a cloud, resting a French coin
(with three fleurs-de-lis on a shield under a crown) on a tile or square
HEN^^VS DEI GRATIA FRA^COR REX



Claud. 2. Still. de fide. Haec and amicitias, longo post tempore firmat,
Mansuroque adamante ligat, nec mobile mutat Ingenium, paruae strepitu nec
vincula noxa Dissolui patitur, necfastidire priorem Allicitur veniento nouo,
etc.
THE touch does try, the fine, and purest goulde:
And not the sound, or else the goodly show.
So, if men's ways, and virtues, we behoulde,
The worthy men, we by their works, shall know.
But gallant looks, and outward shows beguile,
And often are clokes to cogitacions vile.
Illicitum non sperandum.
woodcut of a conversation between the female figures of Nemesis, standing and
holding a set of reins, and Hope, sitting on a barrel and holding a bow

Alciatus. Spes, simul and Nemesis, nostris altaribus ad sunt: Scilicet vt
speres non nisi quod liceat.
HERE NEMESIS, and Hope: our deeds do rightly try.
Which warnes us, not to hope for that, which justice does deny.
Feriunt summos fulmina montes. To I. T. Esquier.
woodcut of a large dog pulling a cart while a child threatens it with a stick
and two small dogs bark and snap at it; another small dog sits in the lap of a
sleeping woman

Gregor. in mor. Cum quis positus in prosperitate diligitur, incertum est,
vtrum prosperitas an persona diligatur. Amissio aute^ foelicitatis interrogat
vim dilectionis: nec prosperitas quidem amicum indicat, nec aduersitas inimicum
celat.
THE bandogge, fit to match the bull, or bear,
With burdens great; is laden every day:
Or draws the carte, and forced the yoke to wear:
Where littell dogs do pass their time in play:
And often, are bold to bark, and eeke to bite,
When as before, they trembled at his sight.
Yet, when in bonds they see his thrauled state,
Each bragginge curre, begins to square, and brall:
The freer sort, do wonder at his fate,
And think them best, that are of stature small:
For they may sleep upon their mistress bed,
And on their lappes, with daynties still be fed.
Eras. in Epist. Nihil aduersum, nisi quod nobis obstat ad aeternam
foelicitatem properantibus: nihil prosperum, nisi quod deo conducit.
The lofty pine, with axe is overthrown,
And is prepared, to serve the shipmans turn:
When bushes stand, till storms be ouerblowne.
And lightninges flashe, the mountain tops does burn.
All which do show: that pomp, and worldly power,
Makes monarchs, marks: when varrijnge fate does lower.
Ovid. 2. Art. Amandi.
Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis,
Nec facile est aequa commoda mente pati.
Perfidus familiaris. To G. B. Esquier.
woodcut of Brasidas dressed in armor, pierced by a arrow which has passed
through his shield

Lacedaemoniorum dux apud Plutarchum.
WHILE through his foes, did boulde BRASIDAS thruste,
And thought with force, their courage to confound:
Through targat fair, wherein he put his trust,
His manly corpse received a mortal wound.
Being asked the cause, before he yielded ghost:
Quoth he, my shield, wherein I trusted most.
Even so it happes, we often our bayne do brue,
When ere we try, we trust the gallante show:
When friends suppoas'd, do prove them selves untrue,
When SINON false, in DAMONS shape does go:
Then gulfes of grief, do swallowe up our mirthe,
And thoughts often times, do shrowed us in the earth. Sape sub agnina latet
hirtus pelle Lycaon: Subque Catone pio, perfidus ille Nero.

All is not goulde that glittereth to the eye:
Some poison strong, a sugared taste does keep;
The crabbe often times, is beautiful to see.
The Adder fell, within the flowers does creep:
The brauest tomb, has stinking bones within:
So fawninge mates, have always faithless bin.
Yet, to prevent such harms before they fall,
Think how thy friend, may live to be thy foe:
Then, when your love exceeds most of all,
Look that thy tongue, do not at randonne go:
For fear thy speech, do turn unto thy smarte,
If that thy mate, do bear a IVDAS heart.
Plaut. Capt. Fac fidelis sis fideli: cave fluxam fidem geras.
But, if thou do inioye a faithful friend,
See that with care, thou keep him as thy life:
And if perhaps he do, that may offend,
Yet way thy friend: and shun the cause of strife,
Remembringe still, there is no greater cross;
Then of a friend, for, to sustain the loss. Cato. Damnaris nunqua^ post
longum tempus amicu^, Mutauit mores, sed pignora prima memento.

Yet, if this knotte of friendship be to knitte,
And SCIPIO yet, this LELIVS can not find?
Content thy self, till some occasion fit,
Allot thee one, according to thy mind:
Then try, and trust: so maiste thou live in rest,
But chiefly see, thou trust thy self the best?
In copia minor error.
woodcut of a fox looking up at an ape in a tree, behind which is a man

THE ape in tree, began at fox beneath to rail:
And said, he was a shameless beast to wear so great a tail.
Then answer made the fox, I may thee more deride,
Because thou haste no tail at all, thy shameless parts to hide.
Which shows the bitter fruit, that does of mocking spring:
For scorners often, such mares do meet, that worse then serpents stinge.
Vindice fato. To G. B. sen. Esquier.
woodcut of a hand with a ring emerging from a cloud, losing hold of a quill
pen

Valens Imperator, Arrianae sectae fautor, tandem per Gothos victus, in
domuncula qua absconditus erat, combustus anno Domini 380. Sabel. and Sex. Aur.
WHEN sentence wrong, of will, and rigor vile,
Was framed, to please the Emperor VALENS mind:
Which should condemn Saint BASIL to exile:
And nothing lacked, but that it was not signed:
The Emperor thought to take no longer pause,
But took his pen, for to confirm the cause.
But all in vain, the quill would take no ink,
Yet still herein, he lewdlie did persiste:
Until his hand began to shake, and shrink,
Whereby, the pen did fall out of his fiste:
Wherefore for fear, he rent the writ in twain,
Then fear the Lord, and rash attemptes refrain.
Homo homini lupus.
woodcut of Arion and his lyre being thrown from a small ship by three men,
while a dolphin or sea-serpent waits to receive him; in the background Arion
rides the dolphin while playing the lyre

Sicut Rex in imagine sua honoratur: sic Deus in homine diligitur, and oditur.
Non potest hominem odire, qui deu^ amat. nec potest deu^ amare qui hominem
odit. Chrysostom. super Matthew 22.
NO mortal foe so full of poisoned spite,
As man, to man, when mischief he pretendes:
The monsters huge, as diverse aucthors write,
Yea Lions wild, and fishes wear his friends:
And when their death, by friends supposed was sought,
They kindness showed, and them from danger brought. Mira fabula de Androde
and Leone. Aul. Gel. li. 5. ca. 14.

Idem de Arione lib. 16. cap. 19.
ARION lo, who gained store of goulde,
In countries far: with harp, and pleasant voice:
Did shipping take, and to CORINTHVS would,
And to his wish, of pilottes made his choice:
Who robbed the man, and threw him to the sea,
A Dolphin, lo, did bear him safe away.
Parad. poeticus.
Quis nescit vastas olim delphina per vndas,
Lesbida cum sacro vate tulisse lyram?
In curiosos.
woodcut of a man at a doorway pointing at an ape, whose foot is trapped under
a pile of wood; a hatchet or axe and a hammer or mallet lie nearby

Horat. Epist. lib. 2. cap. 1. -- Quod medicorum est Promittunt medici,
tractant fabrilia fabri.
LET maidens sow; let scholars: plie the schools.
Give PALINVRE: his compass, and his card.
Let MARS, have arms: let VVLCANE, use his tools.
Give CORYDON, the ploughe, and harrowe hard.
Give PAN, the pipe: give bilbowe blade, to swashe.
Let Grimme have coals: and lobbe his whippe to lashe.
Let none presume an others art to use,
But try the trade, to which he has been kept:
But those that like a skill unknown to choose,
Let them behoulde: while that the workman slept,
The toying ape, was tempringe with his blocks,
Until his foot was crushed within the stocks.
Propert. 2. 1.
Nauita de ventis; de tauris narrat arator;
Enumerat miles vulnera; pastor oues.
in iuuentam.
woodcut of Dionysus or Bacchus holding grapes and Phoebus Apollo holding a
lyre, standing facing each other on a tomb

TWO sons of JOVE that best of man deserve,
APOLLO great, and BACCHVS, this impartes:
With diet good, the one does health preserve,
With pleasante wine, the other cheares our hearts.
And these, the world immortal Gods would have,
Because long life, with sweet delighte, they gave.
But if these are so sovereign unto man,
That here, with joy they do increase his days,
And fresh do make the careful color wanne:
And keep him long from sickness, and disease:
I grant, they ought to be renowned more,
Then all the Gods, the Poettes did adore.
Alciat. ad eosdem sic.
Tu vino curas, tu victu dilue morbos,
Vt lento accedat curua senecta pede.
Fell in melle.
woodcut of Eros or Cupid surrounded by bees from two hives, watched by Venus
or Aphrodite seated on the ground

LO CUPID here, the honey hyes to taste,
On whom, the bees did straight extend their power:
For whilst at will he did their labors waste,
He found that sweet, was sauced with the sower:
And till that time he thought no little things,
Wear of such force: or armed so with stinges.
The hyues wear placed according to his mind,
The weather warm, the honey did abound.
And CUPID judged the bees of harmless kind,
But whilste he tri'de his naked corpse they wound:
And then to late his rash attempt he ru'de,
When after sweet, so tarte a taste insu'de. Paradis. poeticus. Melle gerunt
perfusa, gerunt perfusa veneno, Et sua spicula apes, and sua spicula amor.

So often it happes, when we our fancies feed,
And only joy in outward gallant shows.
The inward man, if that we do not heed,
We often, do pluck a nettle for a rose:
No bait so sweet as beauty, to the eye,
Yet often, it has worse poison then the be.
Fere simile ex Theocito. To LAVRA.
woodcut of Eros or Cupid running to Venus or Aphrodite away from bees flying
from the hollow of a tree

WHILST CUPID had desire to taste the honey sweet,
And thrust his hand into the tree, a be with him did meet.
The boy no harm did doubt, until he felt the stinge:
But after to his mother ran, and often his hands did wringe.
And cried to her for help, and toulde what hap befell:
How that a little beast with prick, did make his finger swell.
Then VENUS smiling said, if that a little be?
Do hurt so sore: think how thou hurt'st? that art a child to see.
For where the be can pierce no further then the skin:
Thy darts do give so great a wound, they pierce the heart within.
Cum quo conuenit aliud ex Anacreonte.
As VENUS son within the roses played,
An angry be that crept therein unseen,
The wanton wagge with poisoned stinge assayed:
Whereat, aloude he cri'de, through smarte, and teene.
And sought about, his mother for to find:
To whom, with grief he uttered all his mind.
And said, behoulde, a little creature wild,
Whom husbandmen (I hear) do call a be,
Has pricked me sore alas: whereat she smil'de,
And said: my child, if this be grief to thee,
Remember then, although thou little art?
What grievous wound, thou make with thy darte.
Amor sui. To D. E.
woodcut of Narcissus knelt over a stream staring at his reflection, while a
figure in the distance has its arm raised

Ovid. Metam. lib. 3.
NARCISSUS lou'de, and liked so his shape,
He died at length with gazinge there upon:
Which shows self love, from which there few can escape,
A plague too rife: bewitcheth many a one. Anulus in pict. poes. Narcissus
liquidis forma^ speculatus in vndis, Contemnent alios, arsit amore sui, etc.

The ritche, the pore, the learned, and the sotte,
Offend therein: and yet they see it not. Terent. And. 2. and 4. Verum illud
verbu^ est, vulgo quod dici solet Omnes sibi malle melius esse, quam alteri.

This, makes us judge too well of our deserts,
When others smile, our ignorance to see:
And why? Because self love does wound our hearts,
And makes us think, our deeds alone to be.
Which secret sore, lies hidden from our eyes,
And yet the same, an other plainly sees. Suum euique pulchrum est. ad huc
neminem cognoui poetam, qui sibi no^ optimus videretur, sic res habet, me
delectant mea, te tua. Cicer. 5. Tuscul.

What folly more, what dotage like to this?
And do we so our own devise esteem?
Or can we see so soon an others miss?
And not our own? Oh blindness most extreme.
Affect not then, but try, and prove thy deeds,
For of self love, reproach, and shame proceeds.
Nusquam tuta fides.
woodcut of an elephant standing beside a tree, behind which stands a man with
an axe

Aelian. de Animal. lib. 13. cap. 8. scribit quod Elepha^ti sunt, altitudinis
9. cubitorum, latitud. 5. and lib. 17. ca. 7. quod viuunt ad aetatem 200.
Annorum and nonnulli ad 300. and multa mira de illis, lib. 10. cap. 15.
NO state so sure, no seat within this life
But that may fall, though long the same have stood:
Here fauninge foes, here fained friends are rife:
With pickthankes, blabbes, and subtle Sinons brood,
Who when we trust, they work our overthrow,
And undermine the ground, whereon we go.
Cato lib. 1. Fistula dulce canit voluerem dum decipit auceps.
The Olephant so huge, and strong to see,
No peril feared: but thought a sleep to gain
But foes before had vndermin'de the tree,
And down he falls, and so by them was slain:
First try, then trust: like goulde, the copper shows:
And NERO often, in NVMAS clothinge goes. Numa Pompilius Roman. Rex 2.

Silius 13.
Foedera mortales ne saeuo rumpite ferro,
Sed castam seruate fidem: fulgentibus ostro
Haec potior regnis, etc.
Quod non capit Christus, rapit fiscus.
woodcut of a king with crown and scepter squeezing a sponge onto the ground,
while in the background three figures hang from a scaffold, and many people
stand at the base of a ladder leaning against the scaffold

WHERE covetousness the scepter does supporte,
There, greedy gripes the King does often extol:
Because, he knows they, do but make a sport,
His subjects poor, to shave, to pill, and poll?
And when he sees, that they are fat, and full?
He cuttes them of, that he may have their wolle?
Unto a sponge, these are resembled right:
Which dry at first, when it with water swelles,
The hand that late did wette it, being light:
The same again, the moisture quite expelles.
And to the flood, from whence it lately came,
It runs again, with wringinge of the same.
Petrus Arbiter.
Orbem iam totum victor Romanus habebat,
Qua mare, qua terrae, qua sidus currit vtrumque,
Nec satiatus erat, grauidis freta pulsa carinis,
Iam peragrabantur, si quis sinus abditus vltra,
Si qua foret tellus, quae fuluum mitteret aurum, etc.
Paupertatem summis ingeniis obesse ne prouehantur. Ad Doctiss. virum Dn. W.
MALIM.
woodcut of a man with his left leg and winged left arm raised toward a godlike
figure in the heavens, while his right arm is held down by a large stone tied
to its wrist

ONE hand with wings, would fly unto the stars,
And raise me up to win immortal fame:
But my desire, necessity still bars,
And in the duste does bury up my name:
That hand would fly, the other still is bound,
With heavy stone, which houldes it to the ground.
My wish, and will, are still to mount alofte.
My want, and woe, deny me my desire:
I show their state, whose wit, and learning, often
Excel, and would to high estate aspire:
But poverty, with heavy clogge of care,
Still pulles them down, when they ascending are.
Inuenalis.
Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res. angusta domi, etc.
Pro bono, malum.
woodcut of a stag in the woods being shot with an arrow by a hunter with two
dogs, while two more archers walk in the background Duodecem haec sequentia, ob
elegantiam, and venustarem: e G. Faerni, selectis fabulis sumpta.


THE stagge, that hardly skap'd the hunters in the chase,
At length, by shadow of a tree, found refuge for a space.
And when the eger hounds had left their wished pray,
Behoulde, with biting of the boughs, him self he did bewraye.
Through which, the hunter straight did pierce him to the heart:
Whereat, (quoth he) this wound I have, is justly my deserte.
For where I good did find, I ought not ill requite:
But lo, these boughs that saved my life, I did unkindly bite.
Wherefore, although the tree could not revenge her wrong:
Yet now by fates, my fall is wrought, who might have lived long.
In pace de bello.
woodcut of a boar and a fox looking round a tree at each other

THE bore did whette his tuskes, the fox demanded why:
Since that he had no foes at hand, that should their sharpnes try.
To which, he answer made, when foes do me beset,
They all advantage gladly take, and give no leave to whet.
Which teaches us, in peace, our force for wars to frame:
Whereby, we either shall subdue, or loose the field with fame.
Aliena pericula, cautiones nostrae.
woodcut of a lion sitting beside a large pile of game including a stag, a fox
sitting beside a small pile looking up at the lion, and an ass lying behind
them dead

THE lion, ass, and fox, go forth to hunte for pray:
Which done: the lion bad the ass, the spoil in parts to lay.
Then he with great regard, three parts alike did share:
Whereat, the lion in a rage, the ass in pieces tare.
The fox he charged then, for to perform the same:
Who, all the best, upon one heap, did for the lion frame:
And littell of the worste, did for him self reserve:
Then being asked, what taught him so unequally to carue?
This spectacle (quoth he) which I behoulde with care:
Which shows, those happy that can be by others harms beware.
Indulgentia parentum, filiorum pernicies.
woodcut of a prisoner biting off the nose of an old woman, surrounded by
soldiers with pikes and one on horseback; a crucifixion cross lies on the
ground nearby

A Thief, condemned to dye, to execution lead:
His woeful mother did behold, for sorrow almost dead.
And whilst she kissed her son, whom she did tender dear:
The toward child did kiss with teeth? and off her nose did tear?
Whereat, the standers by exclaymed at his act:
Then quoth the thief, my masters mark, I will defend the fact.
My mother, in my youth, did with my faults dispense:
And evermore did like me best, when I did most offense.
So that, she was the cause that made me do amiss:
For if she had correction vs'de, I had not come to this.
Wherefore, I did revenge my wrong, in what I might:
In hope my fact shall mothers warn, that do behold this sight.
For if the Children steal, and come unto the rope:
It often is the parents fault, for giving them such scope.
Dolor e medicina.
woodcut of a woman sitting on a chair in an empty house, while a man leaves
through the doorway carrying objects

A Purblinde dame agreed with one to help her sight;
Who, daily when he home retorn'd, did steal what so he might.
At length when all was gone, the pacient began to see:
And then, the false Physician asked the price, they did agree.
Whereat quoth she, alas, no remedy I find:
Because my senses either fail, or else my eyes be blind.
For, where my house before was garnished every nooke:
I, now can see no goods at all, though round about I look.
Dura vsu molliora.
woodcut of a fox cowering before a lion

WHEN first the fox, the lion did behoulde,
He quaked for fear, and almost dead did fall:
The second time, he waxed somewhat boulde;
But at the third, he had no fear at all.
Which shows, that arts at first most hard to see,
With trial often, both plain, and easy be.
In eos, qui, proximioribus spretis, remotiora sequuntur.
woodcut of an astronomer falling into a hole while he looks toward the stars;
a Ptolemaic sphere lies nearby

TH'ASTRONOMER, by night beheld the stars to shine:
And what should chance an other year, began for to divine.
But while too long in skies, the curious fool did dwell,
As he was marchinge through the shade, he slipped into a'well.
Then crying out for help, had friends at hand, by chance;
And now his peril being past; they thus at him do glaunce.
What foolish art is this? (quoth they) thou hould'st so dear
That does forshowe the perilles far: but not the dangers near.
Morus in Epig.
Saturnus procul est, iamque olim caecus, vt aiunt,
Nec prope discernens a puero lapidem:
Luna verecundis formosa incedit ocellis,
Nec nisi virgineum virgo videre potest:
Jupiter Europam, Martem Venus, and Venerem Mars,
Daphnen Sol, Hersen Mercurius recolit:
Hinc factum, Astrologe, est, tua cum capit vxor amantes,
Sidera significent vt nihil inde tibi.
Post fata: vxor morosa, etiam discors.
woodcut of four men reasoning with another man beside a strong river

COLASMVS wife, in raging flood was drowned?
Who long did seek her corpse, against the stream:
His neigbours thought his senses wear not sound?
And did deride his madness most extreme:
Who called aloude, thy wife beneath did fall?
Then dounwarde seek, or seek thou not at all.
To whom, quoth he, the place below I see,
Yet in her life, against reason she did strive:
And contrary to every one, would be;
Wherefore, I know this way she needs must drive?
Then leave, quoth they, and let her still be drowned,
For such a wife is better lost then found?
Dum aetatis ver agitur: consule brumae.
woodcut of a grasshopper and a group of ants at the foot of a bare tree

IN winter could, when tree, and bushe, was bare,
And frost had nip'd the roots of tender grass:
The antes, with joy did feed upon their fare,
Which they had stor'de, while summers season was:
To whom, for food the grasshopper did cry,
And said she starved, if they did help deny.
Whereat, an ante, with long experience wise?
And frost, and snow, had many winters scene:
Inquired, what in summer was her guise.
Quoth she, I song, and hoped in meadows green:
Then quoth the ante, content thee with thy chance,
For to thy song, now art thou light to dance?
Bilingues cauendi.
woodcut of a man and a satyr at a dining table A



A Satyr, and his host, in mid of winters rage,
At night, did hye them to the fire, the could for to assuage.
The man with could that quaked, upon his hands did blow:
Which thing the Satyr marked well; and craved the cause to know.
Who answer made, herewith my fingers I do heat:
At length when supper time was come, and both sat down to eat;
He likewise blewe his brothe, he took out of the pot:
Being likewise asked why: (quoth he) because it is to whotte.
To which the Satyr spoke, and blow'st thou whotte, and could?
Hereafter, with such double mouths, I will no friendship houlde.
Which warns all, to shonne a double tonged mate:
And let them neither suppe, nor dine, nor come within thy gate.
Ars deluditur art.
woodcut of a fox lying in a hollow cave beneath a tree, and a lion standing
outside with its tongue extended

THE sickly fox, within her hole was hid,
Where, to the mouth, the lion straight did hye;
And did demand most friendly, how she did,
And said, his tongue would help her, by and by?
Because there was such virtue hid therein,
That all he healed, if he did lick their skin.
Then quoth the fox, my Lord? I do not doubt,
But that your tongue is sovereign, as I hear:
But yet, it has such neighbors round about?
It can not help, I judge, while they be near.
Wherefore, I wish you would them banishe all?
Or else, I think your pacients wilbee small.
In eos qui multa promittunt, and nihil praestant.
woodcut of a mother sitting on a bed scolding a child lying there, while a
wolf looks round the outside corner of the house

In malis promissis rescinde fide^, in turpi voto muta decretu^, quod incaute
vouisti, non facias: impia est promissio, quae scelere ad-impletur Isid. 2.
Solilo.
THE crying babe, the mother sharply threats,
Except he ceased, he should to wolf be thrown:
Which being hard, the wolf at window waits,
And made account that child should be his own:
Till at the length, again he hard her say
Fear not sweet babe, thou shall not be his pray.
For, if he come in hope to suck thy blood,
We will him kill, before he shall depart:
With that the wolf returned to the wood,
And did exclayme thus wise with heavy heart:
Oh Jupiter? what people now do live,
That promise much, and yet will nothing give.
Pietas filiorum in parents.
woodcut of Aeneas carrying his father Anchises on his shoulders away from the
burning city of Troy

AENEAS bears his father, out of Troy,
When that the Greeks, the same did spoil, and sack:
His father might of such a son have joy,
Who through his foes, did bear him on his back:
No fire, nor sword, his valiant heart could fear,
To flee away, without his father dear. Foelix proles, quae efficit vt
genuisse iuuet, and generare libeat. Max. lib. 4.

Which shows, that sons must careful be, and kind,
For to relieve their parents in distress:
And duringe life, that duty should them bind,
To reverence them, that God their days may bless:
And reprehendes ten thowsande to their shame,
Who often despise the stock whereof they came.
Ovid. 4. Fast.
Hinc satus Aeneas: pietas spectata per ignes:
Sacra patremque humeris: altera sacra, tulit.
Aliquid mali propter vicinum malum. To my Father M. GEFFREY WHITNEY.
woodcut of two pots floating in a river Virgilius. Mantua vae miserae nimium
vicina Cremonae.


Et Angel. Politianus in Manto sua.
TWO pottes, within a runninge stream wear toste,
The one of earth, the other, was of brass:
The brazen pot, who wished the other lost,
Did bid it stay, and near her side to pass.
Whereby they might, together joined sure:
Without all doubt, the force of flood endure. Tu tamen o, misera nimium vicina
Cremonae, Quid fles amissum: quid fles mea Mantua campum

Pascentem niueos herboso flumine cycnos etc.



Et etiam apud Plautum, pauper Euclio recusat affinitatem cum diuite Megadora,
facetissime.
The earthen pot, then thus did answer make,
This neighborhood does put me much in fear?
I rather choose, my chance far of to take,
Then to thy side, for to be joined near,
For if we hitte, my part shall be the wurste,
And thou shall escape, when I am all to burste. Ecclesiast. 13. Et ditiori^e ne
socius fueris: Quid communicabit cacabus ad olla^? quando enim se colliserint,
confringetur, Dives unjust egat, and fremet: pauper aute^ laesus, tacebit. etc.

The running stream, this worldly sea does show;
The pottes, present the mighty, and the pore:
Who here, a time are tossed too, and froe,
But if the mean, dwell nighe the mighties door,
He may be hurt, but cannot hurt again,
Then like, to like: or best alone remain. Ovid. 3. Trist. 4. Viue fine
inuidre, mollesque inglorius annos Exige, am^^itius and tibi iunge pares.

Post amara dulcia. To M. THOMAS MYNORS.
woodcut of a man reaching toward a thorny rose bush

Claud. in nuptiis honorij. Non quisquam fruitur veris odoribus, Hyblaeos
latebris nec spoliat fauos, Si fronti caveat, si timeat rubos. Armat spina
rosas, mellategunt apes.
SHARP pricks preserve the Rose, on every part,
That who in haste to pull the same intendes,
Is like to prick his fingers, till they smarte?
But being got, it makes him straight amends
It is so fresh, and pleasant to the smell,
Though he was pricked, he thinks he ventured well.
And he that feign would get the gallant rose,
And will not reach, for fear his fingers bleed;
A nettle, is more fitter for his nose?
Or hemblocke meet his appetite to feed?
None merits sweet, who tasted not the sower, Dulcia non meruit qui non
gustauitamara.

Who fears to climb, deserves no fruicte, nor flower.
Which shows, we should not fainte for any pain,
For to atchieue the fruictes of our desire:
But still proceed, and hope at length to gain,
The things we wish, and crave with hearts entire:
Which all our toil, and labor, shall requite,
For after pain, comes pleasure, and delighte.
When winter ends, comes in the pleasant spring.
When night is done, the gladsome day appears.
When greifes be gone, then joy does make us singe,
When storms be paste, the varijng weather cleares.
So after pains, our pleasures make us glad,
But without sower, the sweet is hardly had.
Veritas inuicta To my uncle GEFFREY CARTWRIGHTE.
woodcut of a winged, transfigured book being drawn into the cloudy heavens by
a hand, away from a horned, devilish figure holding the book down by a chain,
with two other demonic figures watching; in the book is written the Latin for
"and thy faithfulness reaches unto the clouds" (Psalm 36.5) ET VSQVE NUBES
VERITAS TVA



THOVGHE Satan strive, with all his maine, and might,
To hide the truth, and dim the law divine:
Yet to his word, the Lord does give such light,
That to the East, and West, the same does shine:
And those, that are so happy for to look,
Salvation find, within that blessed book.
Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos?
woodcut of a hand emerging from a cloud with a viper or snake hanging off one
finger by its mouth, over a smoking fire De Vipera Aelian. lib. 15. ca. 16 and
Plin. De nature. hist. lib. 8. ca. 39. and lib. 10. cap. 62.


Act. 28.
HIS servants GOD preserues, though they in danger fall:
Even as from vipers deadly Tremellius.
bite, he kept th'Appostle Paul.
Cum tempore mutamur. Ad Dn. IOHANNEM CROXTON.
woodcut of an old man supported by two crutches and a baby in a cradle

Ovid. 6. Fast. Tempora labuntur tacitisq. senescimus annis. Et fugiunt fraeno
non remorante dies.
TIMES change, and we do alter in the same,
And in one stay, there nothing still may be:
What Monarchs great, that wanne the chiefest fame,
But stealinge time, their birthe, and death, did see:
First NESTOR sucked, and HOMER first was taught,
Both famous once, yet both to dust are brought.
We first are young, and then to age we yield,
Then flit away, as we had not been borne:
No wight so strong, but time does win the feelde,
Yea wonders once, are out of memory worn:
This Aegypte spires, and Babell, saw in fine,
When they did mount, and when they did decline.
Claud. de Senec. Veronensi.
Foelix qui propriis aeuum transegit in auris,
Ipsa domus puerum quem videt ipsa senem;
Qui baculo nitens, in qua reptauit arena,
Vnius numerat saecula longa casae:
Illum non vario traxit fortuna tumultu,
Nec bibit ignotas mobilis hospes aquas. Et paulo post.

Ingentem meminit paruo qui gramine quercu^.

Aequaeuumque videt consenuisse nemus.



Ovid. 2. Art.
Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as. To M. MATTHEW PATTENSON.
woodcut of Homer and the nine Muses outside a closed door with two female
figures looking down from upstairs windows

Ovid. 3. Amor. 7. Ingenium quonda^ futrat preceosius auro. At nunc barbaria
est grandis, habere nihil.
SOMETIME was wit esteem'de, of greater price then goulde:
But wisdom pore, may now go beg? and starve without for could.
Yea, though that Homer come, with all the Muses guarde,
Yet if he nothing bring? must fast, and stand within the yard?
Ingenium superat vires.
woodcut of a crossbow with a winding mechanism to draw back the string

Ovid. 2. Pont. Add quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts, Emmollit mores,
nec finit esse feros.
MAN'S wisdom great, does far surpass his strength,
For proof, behoulde, no man could bend the bow:
But yet, his wit devised at the length,
To wind the stringe so far as it should go:
Then wisdom chief, and strength, must come behind,
But both be good, and gifts from God assignde.
Male parta male dilabuntur. In foeneratores.
woodcut of an ape throwing coins from an upstairs window of a house; more
treasure on a table can be seen through the doorway

Si necessariis contenti essemus, minime vsurariorum genus pessimum inueniretur
Plutarch. de vsur. vit.
AN vserer, whose Idol was his goulde,
Within his house, a peeuishe ape retained:
A servant fit, for such a miser oulde,
Of whom both mockes, and apishe mowes, he gained.
Thus, every day he made his master sport,
And to his clogge, was chained in the court.
Auaritia omnia in se vitia habet. Aul. Gell. lib. 11. cap. 2. Et idem lib. 3.
cap. 1.
At length it hap'd? while greedy graundsir din'de?
The ape got loose, and found a window open:
Where in he leap'de, and all about did find,
The GOD, wherein the Miser put his hope?
Which soon he broch'd, and forth with speed did flinge.
And did delighte on stones to hear it ringe?
The sight, right well the passers by did please,
Who did rejoice to find these goulden crommes:
That all their life, their poverty did ease.
Of goods ill got, lo here the fruicte that commes.
Look herevppon, you that have MIDAS minte,
And be posseste with hearts as hard as flinte.
Shut windows close, lest apes do enter in,
And do disperse your goulde, you do adore.
But would you learn to keep, that you do win?
Then get it well, and hourde it not in store.
If not: no boultes, nor brazen bars will serve,
For GOD will waste your stock, and make your sterue.
Fere simile praecedenti, ex Alciato.
woodcut of a bird or kite perched on a rock looking at another bird or kite
sitting in a tree with vomit or its intestines falling from its beak

THE greedy kyte, so full his gorge had cloy'de,
He could not brook his late devoured pray:
Wherefore with grief, unto his damme he cry'de,
My bowelles lo, alas do waste away.
With that quoth she, why doste thou make thy moan,
This loss thou haste is nothing of thy own. Cato De re Rust Peior ciuis
existimatur foenerator, quam fur.

De male quasitu non gaudet tertius haeres.
By which is mente, that they who live by spoil,
By rapine, theft, or gripinge goods by might,
If that with loss they suffer any foil,
They loose but that, wherein they had no right?
Hereof, at first the proverb oulde did grow:
That goods ill got, away as ill will go.
Vsus libri, non lectio prudentes facit. Ad D. A. P.
woodcut of two scholars, one wearing glasses or spectacles, in a study or
library full of books on shelves and lecterns

THE volumes great, who so does still peruse,
And daily turns, and gazeth on the same,
If that the fruicte thereof, he do not use,
He reapes but toil, and never gains fame:
First read, then mark, then practice that is good,
For without use, we drink but LETHE flood.
Of practice long, experience does proceed;
And wisdom then, does evermore ensue:
Then printe in mind, what we in printe do read,
Else loose we time, and books in vain do vewe:
We may not haste, our talent to bestow,
Nor hide it up, whereby no good shall grow.
Lectio multorum voluminum, and omnis generis auctorum, habet aliquid vagum and
instabile: certis melius ferte, certis, ingenia immorari
ingeniis immorari and innutriri oportet, si velis aliquid trahere, quod in
animo fideliter sedeat. Senec. 1. Epist. 2. Studiis inuigilandum. Ad iuuentutem
Scholae Aldelemensis in Anglia.
woodcut of a table with lion- or griffin-feet in a bare room with two round
windows; against the table is a shield with an emblem of a tied bushel of corn
or wheat, and on the table are an hourglass, a lit candle and a book, on which
is written the Latin for "God is opposed to evil" DEVS OP MA



Ovid. 3. Art. Nec qua praeterut cursu, reuocabitur vnda: Nec quae praeteriit
hora, redire potest. Vtendu^ est aetate, cito pede labitur atas, Nec bona tam
sequitur quam bona prima fuit.
WHILES prime of youth, is fresh within his flower,
Take houlde of time: for it does haste away.
Watch, write, and read, and spend no idle hour,
Inritche your minds with some thing, every day:
For loss of time, all other loss exceedes,
And evermore it late repentance breeds.
The idle sort, that ignorance do taste,
Are not esteemed, when they in years do grow:
The studious, are with understanding graced,
And still preferred, though first their caulinge low.
Then have regard, to banishe idle fittes,
And in your youth, with skill adorn your wits.
Studia, quae sunt in adolescentia, tanquam in herbis significant, quae
virtutis maturitas, and quantae, fruges industriae sint futurae Cicero pro
Coelio.
Whereby, in time such hap may you advance,
As both your Town, and country, you may friend:
For, what I would unto my self should chance:
To you I wish, wheare I my prime did spend.
Wherefore behoulde this candle, book, and glass:
To use your time, and know how time does pass.
Praecocia non diuturna. Doctissimo viro D. STEPHANO LIMBERTO Nordouicensis
Scholae Magistro.
woodcut of an old man in robes holding a fruit next to flowers including a
thistle, and a naked child in a fruit-laden tree

THE fruicte that soonest ripes, does soonest fade away.
And that which slowly has his time, will not so soon decaie.
Our writing in the duste, can not endure a blaste:
But that, which is in marble wroughte, from age, to age, does last.
Even so it is of wits, some quick, to put in ure:
Some dull to learn, but oftentimes the slow are sound, and sure.
And though the apt, and prompte: soon learn, and soon forget.
Yet often the dull do bear in mind, what first therein was set.
Hereof the proverb comes: Soon ripe, soon rotten turns:
And greenest wood, though kindlinge long, yet whottest most it burns. Omnis
profectus ex lectione and meditatione procedit. quae enim nescimus, lectione
diseimus, quae didicimus, meditatione conseruamus. Isid. lib. 3. De summo bono.

Virg. Eclog. 2.
O formose puer, nimium ne creed colori.
Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.
In foecunditatem, sibiipsi damnosam.
woodcut of a nut-laden tree and two men with sticks raised toward it

IF sense I had, my own estate to know;
Before all trees, my self has cause to cry:
In every hedge, and common way, I grow,
Where, I am made a pray, to passers by:
And when, they see my nuttes are ripe, and broune,
My bowghes are broke, my leaves are beaten down.
Alciatus Quid sterils posset contingere turpius? theu, Infelix, fructus in mea
damna fere.
Thus every year, when I do yield increase,
My proper fruicte, my ruin does procure:
If fruictlesse I, then had I grown in peace,
Oh barrennes, of all most happy, sure
Which words with grief, did AGRIPPINA groan,
And mothers more, whose children made them moan. Sueton. in vita Neronis.

Locus e nuce Ouidiana.
Certe ego si nunquam peperissem, tutior essem:
Ista Clytemnestra digna querela fuit.
Otiosi semper egentes.
woodcut of a sunken figure of Idleness sitting ahead of a healthy figure of
Labor (with a cornucopia in its right hand and corn or wheat in its left hand
and forming a crown in its hair), both riding in a chariot drawn by ants

HERE, Idleness does weep amid her wantes,
Near famished: whom, labor whippes for Ire:
Here, labor sittes in chariot drawn with antes:
And does abound with all he can desire.
The grasshopper, the toyling ante derides,
In Summers heat, cause she for could prouides.
But when the could of winter did increase,
Out of her hill, the ante did look for news:
Whereas she hard the grasshopper to cease,
And all her songs, she now with sighing rues:
But all to late, for now for food she starved,
Whereas the ante had store, she had preserved.
All which do warn, while that our Summer lastes,
Which is our youth: with fresh, and lively strength.
We must provide, for winters bitter blastes.
Which is our age: that claims his right at length.
Wherefore in youth, let us provide for age;
For ere we think he steals on the stage.
Semper praesto esse infortunia.
woodcut of three female figures in renaissance dress seated round a circular
table with three dice

THREE careless dames, amongste their wanton toies,
Did throw the dice, who first of them should die:
And she that lost, did laughe with inward joys,
For that, she thought her term should longer be:
But lo, a tyle upon her head did fall,
That death, with speed, this dame from dice did call.
Cuiuis potest accidere, quod cuiquam potest. Senec. de tranquil. animi.
Even so, it falls, while careless times we spend:
That evil happes, unlooked for do comme.
But if we hope, that GOD some good will send,
In earnest prayer, then must we not be domme:
For blessings good, come seild before our prayer,
But evil things do come before we fear.
Ovid. 4. Pont. 3.
Ludit in humanis diuina potentia rebus,
Et certam praesens vix habet hora fidem.
Vnica semper auis. To my countrymen of the Namptwiche in Chesshire.
woodcut of a phoenix surrounded by flames emerging from a pile of feathers

Paradis. poet. Solus in Eois ales reparabilis oris, Igne suo vitam dum rapit,
igne capit.
THE Phoenix rare, with feathers fresh of hew,
ARABIAS right, and sacred to the Son:
Whom, other birds with wonder seem to vewe,
Does live until a thousand years be run:
Then makes a pile: which, when with Son it burns,
She flies therein, and so to ashes turns. Mart. lib. 5. Epigt. 7. Qualiter
Assyrios renouant incendia nidos: Vna december queties secula vixit auis.

Quae quidem auis, iuxta Plinium, Natural. histor. lib. 10. cap. 2. viuit ad
sexcentos sexaginta annos. quo loco and alia quaedam prodigiosa commemorantur.
quae, quoniam ad Emblematis sententiam nihil attinent, cui libebir, legenda
relinquo. and apud Aelian. De Anim. lib. 6. cap. 58.
Whereof, behoulde, an other Phoenix rare,
With speed does rise most beautiful and fair:
And though for truth, this many do declare,
Yet thereunto, I mean not for to swear:
Although I know that Aucthors witness true,
What here I write, both of the oulde, and new.
Which when I wayed, the new, and eke the oulde,
I thought upon your town destroyed with fire:
And did in mind, the new NAMPWICHE behoulde,
A spectacle for any man's desire:
Whose buildinges brave, where cinders wear but late,
Did represente (me thought) the Phoenix fate.
Ovid. Met. lib. 15. Vna est quae reparet seq, ipsa reseminet ales, Assyrij
Phoenica voca^t, nec fruge, necherbis, Sed Thuris lachrymis and succo viuit
amorat, etc.
And as the oulde, was many hundredth years,
A town of fame, before it felt that cross:
Even so (I hope) this WICHE, that now appears,
A Phoenix age shall last, and know no loss:
Which GOD vouchsafe, who make you thankful, all:
That see this rise, and saw the other fall.
Hor. lib. 1 Ep. 11.
Caelum, non animum. To R. P.
woodcut of a leopard wrestling a lion; in the background figures (some in
turbans) walk along a river-bank

WHY fleest thou through the world? in hope to alter kind:
No foreign soil, has any force to change the inward mind.
Thou doste but alter air, thou alterest not thy thought:
No distance far can wipe away, what Nature first has wroughte.
The fool, that far is sent some wisdom to attain:
Returns an Idiot, as he went, and bringes the fool again.
Propertius 3, 7. Natura sequitur se^^ina quisque sua.
Where rancor first has root, it grows, live where we shall:
And where as malice is by kind, no absence helps at all.
The catte, in countries kept, where are no myse for pray,
Yet, being brought where they do breed, her self she does bewraye.
The beasts of crewell kind, where hate, by nature grows,
Though parted long, yet when they meet, become most deadly foes,
Which proves, no travail far, no coaste, nor country strange:
Has any force to alter kind, or Natures work to change.
Propert. 2, 30.
Quo fugis ah demens? nulla est fuga: tu licet vsque
Ad Tanaim fugias, vsque sequetur amor.
Auri sacra fames quid non?
woodcut of a shipwrecked figure, with a large bundle strapped to his back,
swimming near an inhabited coastline

Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1. Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos, Per mare
pauperiens fugiens per saxa per ignes.
DESIRE to have, does make us much endure,
In travail, toil, and labor void of rest:
The merchant man is carried with this lure,
Through scorching heat, to regions of the East:
Oh thirste of goulde, what not? but thou can do:
And make men's hearts for to consent thereto.
The trauailer poor, when ship does suffer wrack,
Who hopes to swim unto the wished land,
Does venture life, with fardle on his back,
That if he escape, the same in steed may stand.
Thus, hope of life, and love unto his goods,
Houldes up his chinne, with burden in the floods.
Verbum emissum non est reuocabile.
woodcut of a man with a bag grasping with both hands for a bird which is just
out of reach

Praui sicut in sensu leaves, ita sunt in locutione praecipites: Quia quod leuis
co^scientia concipit, leuior protinus lingua prodit. Greg. Homil. 5.
WHO looks, may leap: and save his shinnes from knockes.
Who tries, may trust: else flattringe friends shall find.
He saues the steed, that keeps him under locks.
Who speaks with heed, may boldly speak his mind.
But he, whose tongue before his wit, does run,
Often speaks to soon, and greeues when he has done.
Horat. Epist. 18. Et semel emissum volat irreuocabile verbum.
A word once spoke, it can return no more,
But flies away, and often thy bale does breed:
A wise man then, settes hatche before the door,
And while he may, does square his speech with heed.
The bird in hand, we may at will restrain,
But being flowen, we call her back in vain. Et si vtile est subito saepe
dicere, tamen illud vtilius, sumpto spacio ad cogitandum paratius, atque
accuratius dicere. Cicero 2. De Orator.

In occasionem. To my Kinsman M. GEFFREY WHITNEY.
woodcut of a naked female figure with winged feet, hair long on top and short
at the back, a long scarf, and an open razor in her right hand; she is standing
on a wheel floating in the sea near two ships

Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 11. ad Bullatium. Tu quamcumque Deus tibi fortunauerit
hora^, Grata sum mana: nec dulcia differ in annum.
WHAT creature thou? Occasion I do show.
On whirling wheel declare why doste thou stand?
Because, I still am tossed too, and froe.
Why do thou houlde a rasor in thy hand?
That men may know I cut on every side,
And when I come, I armies can divide.
But wherefore have thou wings upon thy feet?
To show, how light I fly with little wind.
What means long locks before? that such as meet,
May houlde at first, when they occasion find.
Thy head behind all balde, what tells it more?
That none should houlde, that let me slip before.
Why do thou stand within an open place?
That I may warn all people not to stay,
But at the first, occasion to embrace,
And when she comes, to meet her by the way.
Lysippus so did think it best to be,
Who did devise mine image, as you see.
Potentia amoris.
woodcut of Eros or Cupid sitting on a rock, with a fish in his left hand and a
flower in his right, instead of a bow and arrow

Palladius Soranus. Omnia vincit amor, superum rex mugit in aruis,
Palluit and Titan, omnia vincit amor.
Omnia vincit amor, flexit Proserpina ditem,
Marte^ blanda Venus, omnia vincit amor.
Omnit vincit amor, barbam Polyphemus adornat,
Pan se vidit aquis, omnia vincit amor.
Omnia vincit amor, feruet Neptunus in vndis,
Neuit and Alcides, omnia vincit amor.
Omnia vincit amor, Salomo^, and Scipio victi,
Ilion euersum est, omnia vincit amor.
Omnia vincit amor caelos, and Tartara, and vrbes,
Et memora, and pisces, omnia vincit amor.

HERE, naked love does sit, with smilinge cheer,
No bended bow, nor quiver he does bear:
One hand, a fish: the other houldes a flower:
Of Sea, and Land, to show that he has power.
Pulchritudo vincit. To the fairest.
woodcut of a female figure lying by a stream, being crowned by a cherub; a
fish, a hare, a lion, a horse and a bird are also pictured

WHEN creatures first wear formed, they had by natures laws,
The bulls, their horns: the horses, hoofes: the lions, teeth, and paws.
To hares, she swiftenes gave: to fishes, finnes assign'de:
To birds, their wings: so no defense was left for woman kind.
But, to supply that want, she gave her such a face:
Which makes the boulde, the fierce, the swifte, to stoop, and plead for
grace.
Qui me alit me extinguit.
woodcut of a burning torch pointing downward, with the motto "that which
nourishes me destroys me" written in latin on a banner QVI ME ALIT ME EXTINGVIT



EVEN as the wax does feed, and quench the flame,
So, love gives life; and love, despair does give:
The godly love, does lovers croune with fame:
The wicked love, in shame does make them live.
Then leave to love, or love as reason will,
For, lovers lewd do vainlie languishe still.
Scribit in marmore laesus.
woodcut of a stonemason cutting words into a marble tablet or slab TROIA MIHI
LICET TAMEN



IN marble hard our harms we always grave,
Because, we still will bear the same in mind:
In duste we write the benifittes we have,
Where they are soon defaced with the wind.
So, wrongs we houlde, and never will forgive,
And soon forget, that still with us should live.
Nec sibi, nec alteri. To Aphilus.
woodcut of a dog lying in a manger snarling at an ox nearby

A, SNARLINGE curre, did in the manger lie,
Who rather steru'd? then made the hay, his meat,
Yet showed his fanges, and offered for to fly
Upon the ox, who hungered for to eat.
And there through spite, did keep the ox from food:
Until for want, he faynted as he stood.
Inuidus alienas iacturas, suos quaestus existimat. Chrysostom. super Math. Homil.
41.
The covetous man envious, here behoulde,
Who has inowghe, yet use thereof does lack:
And does envy his needy neighbor, should
But get a groate, if he could houlde it back?
Who, though they do possess the diuill, and all?
Yet are they like the dog, in oxes stall?
Scripta non temere edenda. Ad doctiss. virum D. ST. BVLLVM.
woodcut of Quintilian seated at a table with pen and ink reaching to restrain
a younger man from passing a manuscript to an angelic figure with a trumpet

Quinctilij Vat. censura de scriptis ede^dis Horat. Art. poet.
LO, here QVINCTILIVS sittes, a grave and reverend fire:
And pulles a younglinge by the arm, that did for fame desire.
For, he with pace of snayle, proceeded to his pen;
Lest haste should make him wish (too late) it wear to write again.
And therefore still with care, would every thing amend:
Yea, often each word, and line suruaye, before he made an end.
And, if he any saw, whose care to write was small:
To him, like words to these he used, which he did mean to all.
My son, what work thou writes, correct, reform, amend,
But if thou like thy first assaye, then not QVINCTILIVS friend? Quid. 3. Fast.
Differ, habent parua commoda magna mora.

The fruicte at first is sower, till time give pleasante taste:
And very rare is that attempt, that is not harmed with haste.
Perfection comes in time, and form and fashion gives:
And ever rashenes, yeeldes repent, and most despised lives. Senec. Agam.
Proinde quicquid est, da spartum and tempus tibi: Quod ratio nequit, sape
sanauit mora.

Then, alter often, and change, peruse, and read, and mark:
The man that softly settes his steps, goes safest in the dark.
But if that thirst of fame, do prick thee forth too fast:
Thou shall (when it is all to late) repent therefore at last.
Orphei Musica. Ad eundem.
woodcut of Orpheus with a lyre, seated and surrounded by animals: a unicorn,
lions, a goat, an antelope, an ape, a stork, a drinking dog or fox, a stag, and
a bird or parrot

LO, ORPHEUS with his harp, that savage kind did tame:
The Lions fierce, and Leopardes wild, and birds about him came.
For, with his music sweet, their natures he subdu'de:
But if we think his play so wroughte, our selves we do delude.
For why? besides his skill, he learned was, and wise:
And could with sweetenes of his tongue, all sorts of men suffice.
And those that wear most rude, and knew no good at all:
And wear of fierce, and cruel minds, the world did brutishe call.
Yet with persuasions sound, he made their hearts relente,
That meek, and mild they did become, and followed where he went. Horat Art.
poet. Syluestres homines sacer interpresq. deorum, Caedibus and foedo victu
deterruit Orpheus; Dictus ob hoc lenire tigres, rapidosq. leones.

Lo these, the Lions fierce, these, Bears, and Tigers wear:
The trees, and rocks, that left their rooms, his music for to hear.
But, you are happy most, who in such place do stay:
You need not THRACIA seek, to hear some impe of ORPHEUS play.
Since, that so near your home, Apollos darlinge dwelles; E. P. Esquier.

Who LINVS, and AMPHION staynes, and ORPHEUS far excelles. Propert. lib. 2.
de Lino. Tum ego sim Inachio notier art Lino. De Amphione Horat. in Art. poet.
Dictus and Amphion Thebanae conditor vrbis Saxa mouere sone testudinis, and
prece bla^da Ducere quo vellet, etc.

For, hearts like marble hard, his harmony does pierce:
And makes them yielding passions feel, that are by nature fierce.
But, if his music fail: his courtesy is such,
That none so rude, and base of mind, but he reclaimes them much.
Now since you, by deserte, for both, commended are:
I choose you, for a Judge herein, if truth I do declare.
And if you find I do, then often therefore rejoice:
And think, I would such neighbor have, if I might make my choice.
In statuam Bacchi.
woodcut of Dionysus or Bacchus sitting playing a drum or tabor next to
grape-vines and a cup

Ovid. 3. Met.
THE timely birthe that SEMELE did bear,
See here, in time how monsterous he grew:
With drinkinge much, and daily belly cheer,
His eyes wear dim, and fiery was his hue:
His cup, still full: his head, with grapes was croun'de;
Thus time he spent with pipe, and tabret sound. Anac. apud Diog. Vitis tres
vuas fert, primam voluptatis, secu^dam ebrietatis, tertiam moeroris.

Chrysostom. Hom. 46. Ebrietas, tempestas est tam in animo, quam in corpore.
Which carpes all those, that love to much the can,
And does describe their personage, and their guise:
For like a beast, this does transform a man,
And makes him speak that most in secret lies;
Then, shun the sort that brag of drinking much,
Seek other friends, and join not hands with such.
Johan. Samb. in Epigr.
Iunge tibi socios pulchrae virtutis amore,
Nam Venere and Baccho iuncta repent cadunt.
Propertius.
Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas,
Vino saepe suum nescit amica virum?
Caecus amor prolis.
woodcut of a large ape sitting, holding a small ape in its arms

In bello ferrum auto praestat; in vita autem eruditio diuitiis. Socrat. apud
Stob.
WITH kindenes, lo, the Ape does kill her whelpe,
Through clasping hard, and lulling in her arms.
Even so, the babes, whose nature, Art should help:
The parents fond do hazard them with harms,
And work their spoil, and bring them unto naught,
When foolish love forbiddes them to be taught.
Nic. Reusnerus.
Admirata putat formosum Simia foetum:
Nempe solet pulchrum cuique placere suum.
Maturandum.
woodcut of an echeneis, fish, or snake wrapped around a downward-pointing
arrow Gellius lib. 10. ca. 11. Mature, inquit, est quod neque citius est, neque
serius, sed medium quiddam, and temperatum est: nam and in frugibus and in
pomis, matura dicuntur, quae neq. cruda and immitia, neque caduca and nimium
cocta, sed tempore suo temperate adulta.


Aelian. de Animal. lib. 2. ca. 17. and Plin. lib. 9. cap. 25. and lib. 32.
cap. 1. vbi multa mirabilia de Echeneide pisce scribit. and quaedam notatu
digna quae sua memoria accideru^t.
ABOVTE the arrowe swifte, ECHENEIS slow does foulde:
Which, biddes us in our actions haste, no more then reason would.
In sinu alere serpentem. Ad Doctiss. V. D. FRANCISCVM RAPHELENGIVM in
obsidione Antwerpiana periclitantem.
woodcut of the cloaked figure of Sinon looking down on a renaissance city
surrounded by the tents, cannons, and soldiers of a siege force

THOVGHE, city strong the cannons shot despise,
And deadly foes, beseege the same in vain:
Yet, in the walls if pining famine rise,
Or else some impe of SINON, there remain.
What can prevail your bulwarks? and your towers,
When, all your force, your inward foe deuoures.
In desciscentes.
woodcut of a female figure raising her arms in annoyance as a goat kicks and
breaks a pot, spilling its contents

WHEN that with milk, the goat had filled the pot,
She brake the same, that all about it ran.
Whereat, the maid her patience quite forgot,
And in a rage, the brutishe beast did banne?
Which toye, though short, yet sharply reprehendes
Beginnings good, that have unhappy ends.
Stultorum quanto status sublimior, tanto manifestior turpitudo.
woodcut of a group of men looking up at an ape climbing a tree, and of an ape
on the ground holding a playing card, the ace of clubs

PROMOOTE the fool, his folly does appear,
And is a shame to them, that make him clime:
Whose faults, before could not be seen so clear,
For low estate did shadow every crime:
But set him up, his folly soon is hard,
Then keep him down, let wise men be prefer'de.
Bis dat qui cito dat.
woodcut of a wealthy man with a sword standing, handing something to a poor
man sitting on the ground

DO not thine alms defer, when need does bid thee haste:
For why, one gift is double thought, that in due time is plaste.
Or so.
WHEN to the pore thou give, make speed the same to do:
Because one gift in time bestowed, is worth some other two.
Spes vana.
woodcut of a lure, birds wings on a frame hanging from a rope

Ovid. Epist. 16. Fallitur augurio spo^ bona sape suo.
THE eager haulke, with sudden sight of lure
Does stoop, in hope to have her wished pray:
So, many men do stoop to sightes unsure:
And courteous speech, does keep them at the baye.
Let such beware, lest friendly looks be like,
The lure, to which the soaring haulke did strike?
Audi, tace, fuge. To my Nephew TO. BORRON.
woodcut of three figures near a fallen column: a man with very large ears; a
man in robes; and a man jumping away from a snake

HEAR much; but little speak; and flee from that is naught:
Which lessons, by these forms in brief, to every one are taught.
Importunitas euitanda.
woodcut of a man breaking his sword on an anvil, with hammer and tongs nearby

WHO that with force, his burnished blade does try
On anuill hard, to prove if it be sure:
Does Hazard much, it should in pieces fly,
Aduentring that, which else might well endure:
For, there with strength he strikes upon the stithe,
That men may know, his youthful arms have pithe.
Which warns those, that louinge friends inioye,
With care, to keep, and friendly them to treat,
And not to try them still, with every toye,
Nor press them down, when causes be too great,
Nor in requests importunate to be:
For ouermuche, does tier the courser free?
Strenuorum immortale nomen. To the honorable Gentleman, Sir WILLIAM RVSSELL
Knight.
woodcut of Thetis standing ankle-deep in the sea next to the tomb of Achilles
with three laurel branches on top and a palm tree reaching over it; a dolphin
or sea-serpent is in the sea

Alij in Rhetaeo littore: sed aliter Claud. Min. super Alciatu^, Emblem. 48.
and Emblem. 135. and Plin. Natural. Histor. libro 5. cap. 30.
ACHILLES tomb upon SIGAEA A shore,
This representes: where THETIS often was seen:
And for his loss, did seem for to deplore,
With gallant flower the same was always green:
And at the top, a palm did freshelie bloome;
Whose branches sweet did ouerspread the toombe.
Which shows, though death the valiant overthrow,
Yet after fate, their fame remains behind:
And triumphs still, and does no conquest know,
But is the badge of every noble mind:
And when in grave their corpse enclosed lie,
Their famous acts do pierce the azure sky.
Sen. Her. Fur. Oet. act. 5.
Nunquam Stygias fertur ad vmbras
Inclyta virtus: viuite fortes
Nec Lethaeos saeua per amnes
Vos fata trahent: sed cum summas
Exiget auras consumpta dies,
Iter ad fuperos gloria pandet.
Vel post mortem formidolosi. To the honorable Sir JOHN NORRIS Knight, Lord
president of Munster in Irelande, and Colonel General of the English
Infanterie, in the low countries.
woodcut of two armed men beating drums, and one blowing a bugle or horn; in
the background are tents and soldiers or pike-men

A Secret cause, that none can comprehend,
In natures works is often to be seen;
As, death can not the ancient discord end,
That reigns still, the wolf, and sheep between: Plin. De Not. Hist. lib.
17. cap. 4.

The like, beside in many things are known,
The cause revealed, to none, but GOD alone,
For, as the wolf, the sillye sheep did fear,
And made him still to tremble, at his bark:
So being dead, which is most strange to hear,
This fear remaynes, as learned men did mark;
For with their skins, if that two drommes be bound,
That, clad with sheep, does jar: and has no sound. Claud. Min. super
Alciatum, Emb. 117.

And, if that stringes be of their intrailes wroughte,
And joined both, to make a silver sound:
No cunninge ear can tune them as they ought,
But one is hard, the other still is droun'de:
Or discordes foul, the harmony do mar;
And nothing can appease this inward war.
So, ZISCA thought when death did short his days,
As with his voice, he erste did daunte his foes;
That after death he should new terror raise,
And make them flee, as when they felt his bloes. Aeneas Sisuius 3. Comment.
De rebus gestis Alphons.

Wherefore, he charged that they his skin should frame,
To fit a dromme, and march forth with the same.
So, HECTORS sight great fear in Greeks did work,
When he was showed on horseback, beeinge dead:
HVNIADES, the terror of the Turk, Coelius Curio.

Though laid in grave, yet at his name they fled:
And cryinge babes, they ceased with the same,
The like in FRANCE, sometime did TALBOTS name. Forres, and magnanimi habendi
sunt, non qui faciunt, sed qui propulsant iniuriam Cic. 1. offic.

Victoria cruenta. To Sir WILLIAM STANDLEY Knight.
woodcut of an elephant lying on top of a serpent or lizard; in the background
are a figure standing and another impaled on an upright sword with blood
flowing from the wound

THE Olephante with stinge of serpent fell,
That still about his legs, with winding cralles:
Through poison strong, his body so did swell,
That down he sinkes, and on the serpente falls:
Which creature huge, did fall upon him so,
That by his death, he also killed his foe. Non est tanti gauch) excelsa
tenere, quanti meeroris est, de excelsis corruere: nee tanta gloria sequi
potest victoriam, quanta ignominin potest sequi reinam. Awb,

Those sharp conflictes, those broiles and battles maine,
That are atchieude, with spoil on either part:
Where streams of blood the hills, and valleys stain,
And what is won, the price is death, and smarte:
This does importe: But those are captains good,
That win the field, with sheddinge least of blood.
Pennae gloria perennis. To EDWARD DIER Esquier.
woodcut of a figure of winged Fame, carrying a pen with leaves and blowing a
trumpet; it flies in the clouds over three spires or pyramids, and a winding
city wall

The Earl of Surrey, that wrat the book of Songs and Sonetres.
WHEN frowning fatal dame, that stoppes our course in fine,
The thread of noble SVRREYS life, made have for to untwine.
APOLLO changed his cheer, and laid away his lute,
And PALLAS, and the Muses sad, did wear a mourninge suit.
And then, the goulden pen, in case of sables cladde,
Was locked in chiste of Ebonie, and to Parnassus had.
But, as all times do change, so passions have their space;
And cloudie skies at length are cleared, with Phoebus cheerful face.
For, when that barren verse made Muses void of mirthe:
Sir Philip Sidney Knighte.
Behoulde, LVSINA sweetly sounge, of SIDNEYS joyful birthe.
Whom mighty JOVE did bless, with graces from above:
On whom, did fortune friendly smile, and nature most did love.
And then, behoulde, the pen, was by MERCVRIVS sent,
Wherewith, he also gave to him, the gift for to inuente.
That, when he first began, his vain in verse to show.
More sweet then honey, was the style, that from his pen did flow.
Wherewith, in youth he used to bannishe idle fittes;
That now, his works of endless fame, delighte the worthy wits.
No haulting verse he writes, but matcheth former times,
No Horat. lib. 2. Epist. 1. ad Augustum.
Cherillus, he can abide, nor Poettes patched rimes.
What volumes has he writ, that rest among his friends,
Which needs no other praise at all, each work it self comendes.
So, that he famous lives, at home, and far, and near;
For those that live in other lands, of SIDNEYS gifts do hear.
And such as Muses serve, in darkness mere do dwell;
If that they have not seen his works, they do so far excel.
Wherefore, for to extol his name in what I might,
This Emblem lo, I did present, unto this worthy Knight.
Who, did the same refuse, as not his proper due:
And at the first, his sentence was, it did belong to you.
Wherefore, lo, fame with trompe, that mountes unto the sky:
And, far above the highest spire, from pole, to pole does fly.
Here houereth at your will, with pen adorned with baies:
Which for you both, she has prepared, unto your endless praise.
The laurel leaf for you, for him, the goulden pen;
The honors that the Muses give, unto the rarest men.
Wherefore, proceed I pray, unto your lasting fame;
For writings last when we be gonne, and do preserve our name.
And whilst we tarrye here, no treasure can procure,
The palm that waits upon the pen, which ever does endure.
Homerus vixit, post Roman conditam, sed natus ante, Aul. Gell. lib. 17. cap.
21.
Two thousand years, and more, HOMERVS wrat his book;
And yet, the same does still remain, and keeps his former look.
Sed Plinius secu^dus, qui ante Gellium, tempore Vespasiani Imperatotis vixit:
De Homeri aetate, lib. 7. ca. 16. Nature. Histor. sic scribit: Iam vero ante
annos prope mill, vates ille Homerus non cessauit, etc. Et Cornelius Nepos
primo Chronicorum ante Romam, Homerum vixisse scribit.
Wheare Aegypte spires be gonne, and ROME does ruin feel,
Yet, both begone since he was borne, thus time does turn the wheel.
Yea, though some Monarche great some work should take in hand,
Of marble, or of Adamant, that many worlds should stand,
Yet, should one only man, with labor of the brain,
Bequeathe the world a monument, that longer should remain.
And when that marble waules, with force of time should waste;
It should endure from age, to age, and yet no age should taste.
Oh happy you therefore, who spend your blessed days
In serving GOD, your Prince, your land, unto your endless praise.
And daily do proceed, with travail of the mind,
To make you famous here, and eeke, to leave a fame behind. De Pyramidum
aetate, incertum, Plin. Natural hist. lib. 36. cap. 12. tamen quasdam post
Homerum conditas, probabile. De his, Herodotus.

Which is the cheifest thing, the greatest Prince can have,
For, fame does triumph over death, when corpse are closed in grave.
Even so, your worthy works, when you in peace shall sleep,
Shall make report of your deserts, and DIERS name shall keep.
Whom, I do reverence still, as one of PALLAS pears:
And pray the Lord, with joyful days for to prolonge your years.
Animus, non res. To EDWARD PASTON Esquier.
woodcut of Alexander the Great dressed as a king with crown and scepter
opening the door of large barrel in which sits Diogenes with a book, and next
to which Codrus sits using a stool as a table

IN crystal towers, and turrets richly set
With glittering gemmes, that shine against the son:
In regal rooms of Jasper, and of Iette,
Content of mind, not always likes to won:
But oftentimes, it pleases her to stay
In simple cotes, dos'de in with walls of claye.
Erasm. Chiliad. 1. Centuria 8. de Diogene, and quid per vitam doliatem:
significatur.
DIOGENES, within a tonne did dwell,
No choice of place, nor store of pelf he had;
And all his goods, could BIAS bear right well,
And CODRVS had small cates, his heart to glad:
Iuuenalis: Tota domus Codrirheda componitur vna.
His meat was roots: his table, was a stool,
Yet these for wit, did set the world to scoole?
Horat. lib. 1. epist. 2. Qui cupit, aut metuit, iuuat illum sic domus, aut res;
Vt lippum picta tabulae, fomenta podagram;
Auriculas eithara collecta sorde dolenteis.

Who couettes still, or he that lives in fear,
As much delighte is wealth unto his mind,
As music is to him, that can not hear,
Or pleasante shows, and pictures, to the blind:
Then sweet content, often likes the mean estate,
Which is exempte, and free, from fear, and hate.
Quis dives? qui nil cupiat. quis pauper? auarus. Biantis dictum per Ausonium.
What man is ritche? not he that does abound.
What man is pore? not he that has no store.
But he is ritche, that makes content his ground.
And he is pore, that couettes more and more.
Which proves: the man was ritcher in the tonne,
Then was the King, that many lands had won.
Claud. 1. Ruf. Contentus honesto Fabritius paruo spernebat munera regum:
Sudabatque graui consul Serranus aratro: Et casa pugnaces Curios angusta
tinebat.
If then, content the chiefest riches be,
And greedy gripes, that do abound be pore,
Since that, inoughe allotted is to thee,
Embrace content, then CAESAR has no more.
Give MIDAS, goulde: and let him pine with shame.
Use you, your goods, to live, and die, with fame.
Quae sequimur fugimus. To THOMAS WILBRAHAM Esquier.
woodcut of the bearded figure of Time, supported by clouds, holding a scythe
over a man and woman walking away from a coffer or chest sitting next to steps
of a large house or villa

WE flee, from that we seek; and follow, that we leave:
And, whilst we think our web to skante, and larger still would weaue,
Lo, Time does cut us of, amid our carke: and care.
Which warns all, that have enoughe, and not contented are.
For to inioye their goods, their howses, and their lands:
Because the Lord unto that end, commits them to their hands.
Yet, those whose greedy minds: enoughe, do think too small:
Whilst that with care they seek for more, often times are reu'd of all,
Wherefore all such (I wish) that spare, where is no need:
To use their goods whilst that they may, for time apace does speed.
And since, by proof I know, you hourde not up your store;
Whose gate, is open to your friend: and purce, unto the pore:
And spend unto your praise, what GOD does largely lend: Plautat Rud. Bonus
quod benefit, haud perit,

I chiefly made my choice of this, which I to you commend.
In hope, all those that see your name, above the head:
Will at your lamp, their own come light, within your steps to tread.
Whose daily study is, your country to adorn:
And for to keep a worthy house, in place where you wear borne.
Patria cuique chara. To RICHARD COTTON Esquier.
woodcut of a swarm of bees returning to a hive

THE bees at length return into their hiue,
When they have sucked the sweet of FLORAS bloomes;
And with one mind their work they do contriue,
And laden come with honey to their rooms:
A work of art; and yet no art of man,
Can work, this work; these little creatures can.
Aelian. de animal. lib. 1. ca. 59. and 60. Et lib. 5. cap. 11. Et Plin.
Natural. hist. lib. 11. cap. 5. and 16.
The master be, within the midst does live,
In fairest room, and most of stature is;
And every one to him does reverence give,
And in the hiue with him do live in bliss:
He has no stinge, yet none can do him harm,
For with their strength, the rest about him swarm.
Lo, natures force within these creatures small,
Some, all the day the honey home do bear.
And some, far off on flowers fresh do fall,
Yet all at night unto their home repair:
And every one, her proper hiue does know,
Although there stand a thousand on a row.
Plin. Natural. Hist. li. 11. cap. 5.
A Comon-wealthe, by this, is right expreste:
Both him, that rules, and those, that do obaye:
Or such, as are the heads above the rest,
Whom here, the Lord in high estate does stay:
By whose supporte, the meaner sort do live,
And unto them all reverence duly give.
Which when I waied: I called unto my mind
Your CVMBERMAIRE, that fame so far commendes:
A stately seat, whose like is hard to find,
Where mighty JOVE the horn of plenty lendes:
With fish, and foul, and cattaile sondrie flocks,
Where crystal springes do gushe out of the rocks.
There, fertile fields; there, meadows large extend:
There, store of grain: with water, and with wood.
And, in this place, your goulden time you spend,
Unto your praise, and to your countries good:
This is the hiue; your tennaunts, are the bees:
And in the same, have places by degrees.
And as the bees, that far and near do straye,
And yet come home, when honey they have found:
So, though some men do linger long away,
Yet love they best their native countries ground.
And from the same, the more they absent be,
With more desire, they wish the same to see. Ovid. 1. Pont. 4. Rursus amor
patriae ratione valentior omni, etc.

Primus gradus pietatis est iste, vt quos auctores tibi voluit esse deus,
honores obsequns, abstineas co^tumelu^s, nec vultu laedenda est pietas
parentum. Amb.
Even so my self; through absence many a year,
A stranger mere, where I did spend my prime.
Now, parents love does hale me by the ear,
And says, come home, defer no longer time:
Wherefore, when hap, some goulden honey bringes?
I will return, and rest my weary wings.
Quid. 1. Pont. 4. Quid melius Roma? Scythico quid frigore peius?
Huc tamen ex illa barbarus vrbe fugit.
Erasmus Chiliad. 2. Centur. 4. Adag. 25.
Aureae compedes. To G. M. Esquier.
woodcut of a man in renaissance dress sitting with his legs in stocks Diogenes
dicebat Aristippum (philosophum aulicum) aureis teneri compedibus ne posset
exire.


Tertullianus lib. De habitu muliebri cap. 4. Apud Barbaros quosdam (quia
vernaculum est aurum) auro vinctos in ergastulis habent. idem narrat in lib. De
cultu feminar. Plutarchus scribit autem in Erotico apud Aethiopas hoc in vsu
esse. De quo etiam Aul. Gell. lib. 11. cap. 18.
IT better is (we say) a cotage poor to houlde,
Then for to lie in prison strong, with fetters made of goulde.
Which shows, that bondage is the prison of the mind:
And liberty the happy life, that is to man assign'de,
And though that some prefer their bondage, for their gains:
And richely are adorned in silks, and priest with massy chains.
Yet many others live, that are accounted wise:
Who liberty do chiefly choose, though clad in gounes of frise,
And waighe not POMPEYS port, nor yet LVCVLLVS fare:
So that they may adorn their minds, they well contented are.
Yea, rather do accept his dwelling in the tonne,
And for to live with CODRVS cates: a root, and barley bonne.
Erasmus Chiliad. 1. Centuria 6. Adag. 76 de Codro.
Where freedom they inioye, and uncontrolled live:
Then with the chiefest fare of all, attendance for to give.
And, if I should be asked, which life does please me best:
I like the goulden liberty, let goulden bondage rest.
Auxilio diuino. To RICHARD DRAKE Esquier, in praise of Sir FRANCIS DRAKE
Knight.
woodcut of a ship or galleon balanced on top of a globe, which is encircled by
a girdle or rein held at one end by a hand emerging from a cloud

THROVGHE scorchinge heat, through could, in storms, and tempests force,
By ragged rocks, by shelfes, and sands: this Knighte did keep his course.
By gapinge gulses he passed, by monsters of the flood;
By pirattes, thieves, and cruel foes, that longed to spill his blood.
That wonder great to escape: but, GOD was on his side,
And through them all, in spite of all, his shaken ship did guide.
And, to requite his pains: By help of power divine.
His hap, at length did answer hope, to find the goulden mine.
Let GRAECIA then forbear, to praise her JASON boulde?
Who through the watchful dragons passed, to win the fleece of goulde.
Since by MEDEAS help, they wear inchaunted all, Ovid. Met. lib. 7.

And JASON without perrilles, pass'de: the conqueste therefore small?
But, he, of whom I write, this noble minded DRAKE,
Did bring away his goulden fleece, when thousand eyes did wake.
Wherefore, ye worthy wightes, that seek for foreign lands:
If that you can, come alwaise home, by GANGES goulden sands.
And you, that live at home, and can not brook the flood,
Give praise to them, that pass the waves, to do their country good.
Before which sort, as chief: in tempeste, and in calm,
Sir FRANCIS DRAKE, by due deserte, may wear the goulden palm.
Auaritia huius saeculi. To ARTHVRE BOVRCHIER Esquier.
woodcut of two hatch doors in a large double door; a richly-dressed man is
being led through one and a poorly-dressed man is being led through another

WITH double door this Palace lo, does open;
The one, unto the gallant rooms does show,
Whereas the ritche with goulden gifts have scope;
The other, to an empty benche does go,
And there, the pore have leave for to resort,
But not presume unto the other port.
For, always that is shut unto the pore,
But open to them, that have the mines of goulde:
Then, though the world of Poettes have no store,
No marvel tho, since bounty is so could; Ovid. 2. Art. Carmina laudantur:
sed munera magna petuntur,
Dummodo sit dives barbarus, ille placet.


For, if there did MECOENAS gifts abound,
New HORACE soon, and VIRGIL should be found.
Martial. lib. 8. Epig. 55. ad Flaccum.
Ingenium sacri miraris abesse Maronis,
Nec quenquam tanta bella sonare tuba:
Sint Maecenates, non deerunt Flacce, Marones;
Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt.
Pulchritudo sine fructu. To ARTHVRE STARKEY Esquier.
woodcut of a cypress tree

THE Cipresse tree is pleasinge to the sight,
Straighte, tall, and green, and sweet unto the smell:
Yet, yeeldes no fruicte unto the trauaylinge wighte,
But naught, and bad, experience does us tell:
Where, other trees that make not such a show,
Yield pleasante fruicte, and plentifully grow.
This gallante tree that good, and fruictfull seems,
In couerte sort, a kind of men does check:
Whose courtesy, no man but much esteems,
Who promise much, and faune about our neck:
But if we try, their deeds we barren find,
Or yield but fruicte, like to the Cipresse kind.
Alciatus.
Pulchra coma est, pulchro digestaeque ordine frondes;
Sed fructus nullos haec coma pulchra gerit.
Tempore cuncta mitiora. IANO DOVSAE, nobiliss. viri, Dn. IANI DOVSAE a
Noortwijck, F.
woodcut of a woman holding grapes standing beside a man pulling grapes from a
vine on a wall-frame and stamping them under his foot; on the wall are drawn a
face an X a G the alchemical symbol for mercury, and a crescent moon; in the
background a still figure sits against a clockwork mechanism

THE grapes not ripe, the trauailinge man does waste,
And under foot does tread, as sower, and naught:
Which, being ripe, had sweet, and pleasant taste
Whereby, we may this lesson true be taught.
How simple men, do simply judge of things.
And do not waighe that time perfection bringes.
For in this world, the things most fair, and rare,
Are hard at first, and seem both harshe, and sower:
But yet in time, they sweet and easy are,
Then stay for time, which gives both fruit and flower:
And use our time, and let us still suppose
No greater loss, then time that we do lose.
Ovid. 1. Remed.
Nam mora dat vires, teneras mora percoquit vuas,
Et validas segetes, quod fuit herba facit.
Imparilitas. To M. WILLIAM HAREBROWNE, at Constantinople.
woodcut of a bird or falcon flying over four ducks or geese pecking at the
ground

THE faulcon mountes alofte unto the sky,
And over hills, and dales, does make her flighte;
The duckes, and geese, about the house do fly,
And in each diche, and muddie lake do light,
They seek their food in puddles, and in pittes,
While that alofte, the princely faulcon sittes.
Such difference is in men, as may appear;
Some, through the world do pass by land, and sea:
And by deserte are famous far, and near,
So, all their life at home, some others stay:
And nothing can to travail them provoke,
Beyond the smell of native countries smoke.
Alciatus.
In sublime volans tenuem secat era falco:
Sed pascuntur humi graculus, anser, anat.
Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 19.
Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet. To M. THOMAS WHETELEY.
woodcut of a man seated at a chess-board while another man gets up and
gestures at a house on fire

AWAKE from sleep secure, when perrill does appear:
No wisdom then to take our ease, and not the worst to fear.
Still ARCHIMEDES wroughte, when foes had won the Syracusa.
town,
And would not leave his work in hand, till he was beaten down. Plutarch.
in vita Marcelli. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 37.

No surety is within, when roof alofte does flame:
It is a madness then to stay, till we have done our game.
Vegetius. Nunquam imperatot ita paci credat, vt non se praeparet bello Et
Bern. in Not. Dom. Ser. 6. Ex consideratione remedij, periculi aestimatur
quantitas.
Yea, those that help defer, when neighbors house does burn:
Are like with grief, to see their own, with speed to cinders turn.
Then, cut of all delays when dangers are begone,
For if beginnings we withstand, the conquest sooner won.
Ovid. 4. Pont. 11.
Temporis officium est solatia dicere certi,
Dum dolor in cursu est, dum petit aeger opem.
Ex morbo medicina. To W. TO.
woodcut of Opimius asleep in bed with a doctor or physician standing nearby, a
man reaching toward a closed chest or coffer with a bunch of keys, and another
man dropping coins on a table beside an open coffer or chest Horat. Sermon. lib.
1. Satyra 3. Demosth. apud Volat. Qui animum curat, seipsum curat: qui corpus,
non se sed sua curat: qui pecuniam, non se, nec sua curat, sed valde aliena
curat. Plut. de Polit. Maiori odio diuitem populus persequi solet, nihil per
benignitate^ and gratiam depromentem quam inopem, qui bona subripiat publica.
hoc enim necessitate domina stimulante, illud malignitate, atq. contemptu fieri
arbitratur. Gregor. in Homil. Res suas, cum moreretur, dives secum tolleret, si
ad petentis vocem, cum viueret, tulisset: nam terrena omnia, quae seruando
amittimus, largiendo seruamus.


WHEN that OPIMIVS ritche, had scraped many a pound;
And filled his baggs, and cofers full, that wealth did most abound.
Yet lived he still in awe, as if it wear offense
To open his purce, for any need; he spared so his pence.
At length, this greedy carle the Lythergie posseste:
That uneath he could stere a foot, with sleep so sore oppreste.
And languishinge therein, not like for to escape:
His heir, was joyful of that sight, who for his goods did gape.
But, when that nothing could OPIMIVS sleepinge let,
The quick Physician did command, that tables should be set
About the misers bed, and budgettes forth to bring,
And pour the goulde upon the bourde, that he might hear it ringe.
And bad the heir to tell, and all the standers bye:
With that, he to the sick man call'de, what mean you thus to lie?
And will not have regard your treasure to preserve:
Behoulde your heir, and all the rest, how largely now they carue?
With that, he started up; half dead, and half a live;
And staringe on his heaps of goulde, long time for life did strive.
So that, when nothing could his drousie eyes awake,
Such virtue, had the sight of goulde, that sleep did him forsake.
Which shows, when dreadful death presents the lasting sleep:
They hardly can depart in peace, whose goulde is rooted deep.
Auson. Epig. 55.
Effigiem Rex Croese tua^ ditissime Regum
Vidit apud Manes, Diogenes Cynicus.
Co^stitit vtque procul solito maiore cachinno
Concussus, dixit. quid tibi diuitiae
Nunc prosunt Regum Rex o ditissime, cum sis
Sicut ego solus, me quoque pauperior?
Na^ quaecunq. habui, mecu^ fero, cum nihil ipse
Ex tantis tecum Croese feras opibus.
Fraus meretur fraudem.
woodcut of a lion asleep in a cave with a fox at the entrance

Horat. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
THE Lion oulde that could not get his pray,
By swifte pursuit, as he had done of late:
Did faigne him sick, and in his den did stay,
And praede on those, that came to see his state:
At length, the fox his duty to declare,
Came to the door, to know how he did fare.
Who answered, sick, my oulde beloved friend?
Come in, and see, and feel my pulses beat:
To whom, quoth he, I dare not now intend,
Because, these steps some secret mischief threate:
For, all I see have gone into thy den,
But none I find, that have retorn'd again.
Zelotypia.
woodcut of Cephalus shooting Procris through trees with a bow and arrow, while
a small dog runs nearby

A Sickness sore, that does in secret wound,
And gripes the heart, though outward nothing show;
The force whereof, the paciente does confound,
That oftentimes, despair thereof does grow:
And Jealousy, this sickness has to name,
An hellishe pain, that first from PLVTO came.
Which passion strange, is always beauties foe,
And most of all, the married sort enuies:
Oh happy they, that live in wedlock so,
That in their breasts this fury never rise:
For, when it once does harbor in the heart,
It soiournes still, and does too late depart.
Ovid. Metam. lib. 7.
Lo PROCRIS hear, when wounded therwithall,
Did breed her bane, who might have bath'de in bliss:
This corsie sharp so fed upon her gall,
That all to late she mourned, for her amiss:
For, whilst she watched her husbands ways to know,
She unawares, was praeye unto his bow. Similem de vxore Cyanippi, scribit
Plutarchus in Moral.

Medici Jcon. Ad ornatiss. viros D. IOANNEM JAMES, and LANCELOTTVM BROWN
Medicos celeberrimos.
woodcut of bearded Asclepius or Aesculapius, crowned with laurels and holding
a scepter and knotted or ragged staff, seated on a throne surrounded by a dog,
a cockerel, and a serpent or snake

THIS portrature, does AESCVLAPIVS tell.
The laurel crown, the fame of phisike shows.
The bearde, declares his long experience well:
And gravity therewith that alwaie goes.
The scepter, tells he rules like a king
Amongst the sick; commanding every thing. Ovid. 3. Pont. 4. Ad medicam
dubious confugit aeger opem.

The knotted staff, declares the crabbed skill
Most hard t'attaine; that does supporte his state:
His sittinge, shows he must be settled still,
With constant mind, and rash proceedinge hate:
The Dragon, tells he does our age renew,
And soon decerne, to give the sick his dew. Hier. in Epist. Corporis
debilitas nimia, etiam a nimi vites frangit, mentis quoque ingenium marcescere
facit: quicquid cum modo, and temperamento fit, salubre. sit.

The cock, does teach his watchinge, and his care,
To visit often his pacientes, in their pain:
The couchinge dog, does last of all declare,
That faithfulness, and love, should still remain:
Within their breasts, that Phisike do profess.
Which parts, they all should in their deeds express.
Inanis impetus. Clariss. omnique doctrinae and virtutis laud ornatissimo viro
D. IVSTO LIPSIO.
woodcut of a crouching dog barking at the moon with a face behind stars and
clouds

BY shininge light, of wannishe CYNTHIAS rays,
The dog behouldes his shaddowe to appear:
Wherefore, in vain aloude he barks, and baies,
And always thought, an other dog was there:
But yet the Moon, who did not hear his queste,
Her woonted course, did keep unto the weste. Ovid. 1. Remed. Ingenium liuor
magni detrectat Homeri; Quisquis es, ex illo Zoile nomen habes.

This reprehendes, those fools which baule, and bark,
At learned men, that shine above the rest:
With due regard, that they their deeds should mark,
And reverence them, that are with wisdom bleste:
But if they strive, in vain their wind they spend,
For worthy men, the Lord does still defend.
Martial. lib. 5. ad Regulum.
Esse quid hoc dicam, viuis quod fama negatur,
Et sua quod rarus tempora lector amat?
Hi sunt inuidiae nimirum Regule mores;
Praeferat antiquos semper vt illa nouis.
In diuitem, indoctum.
woodcut of Phrixus riding the ram with a golden fleece through the sea

ON goulden fleece, did Phryxus pass the wave,
And landed safe, within the wished baie:
By which is meant, the fools that riches have,
Supported are, and borne through Land, and Sea:
And those enrich'de by wife, or servants goodds,
Are borne by them like Phryxus through the floodds.
An other of the like argument. To M. I. E.
Plaut. in poen. Pulcrtun ornatum turpes mores peius coeno collinunt. Lepidi
mores turpem ornatum sacile factis comprobant.
A Leaden sword, within a goulden sheathe,
Is like a fool of natures finest moulde:
To whom, she did her rarest gifts bequethe.
Or like a sheep, within a fleece of goulde.
Or like a clothe, whom colors brave adorn,
When as the ground, is patched, rent, and torn.
Bern. in Epist. Decor, qui cum vest induitur, and cum vest deponitur:
vestimenti est, non vestiti.
For, if the mind the chiefest treasures lack,
Though nature both, and fortune, be our friend;
Though goulde we wear, and purple on our back,
Yet are we poor, and none will us comende
But only fools; and flatterers, for their gain:
For other men, will ride us with disdain.
Interminabilis humanae vitae labor. To M. JOHN GOSTLINGE.
woodcut of Sisyphus pushing a rock up a hill

Ovid. Metam. lib. 4.
LO SISYPHVS, that roles the restless stone
To top of hill, with endless toil, and pain:
Which being there, it tumbleth down alone,
And then, the wretch must force it up again:
And as it falls, he makes it still ascend;
And yet, no toil can bring this work to end.
Plat. de prosper. Hanc rationem deus sequitur in bonis viris, quam in
discipulis suis praeceptores: qui plus laboris ab his exigunt, in quibus
certior spes est.
This SISYPHVS: presents Adams race.
The restless stone: their travail, and their toil:
The hill, does show the day, and eeke the space,
Wherein they still do labor, work, and moile.
And though till night they strive the hill to clime,
Yet up again, the morning next betime.
Aul. Gell. lib. 11. ca. 2.
Vita humana proprie vti ferrum est: Ferrum si exerceas, conteritur: si non
exerceas, tamen rubigo interficit. Item homines exercendo videmus conteri. Si
nihil exerceas, inertia atque torpedo plus detrimenti facit, quam exercitatio.
Qui se exaltat, humiliabitur. Luc. cap. 18.

woodcut of a pot or cauldron boiling over a fire

THE boylinge brothe, above the brinke does swell,
And comes to naught, with falling in the fire:
So reaching heads that think them never well,
Do headlonge fall, for pride has often that hire:
And where before their friends they did despise,
Now being fallen, none help them for to rise.
Sol non occidat super iracundiam vestram. Ephesians. cap. 4.

woodcut of two men embracing with laurel branches in their hands with two
swords lying on the ground nearby; in the background are the sun and a palm
tree

CAST swords away, take laurel in your hands,
Let not the Son go down upon your ire.
Let hearts relente, and break oulde rancors bands,
And frendshippes force subdue your rash desire.
Let desperate wightes, and ruffians, thirst for blood;
Win foes, with love; and think your conquest good. Roman. 12.

Omnis caro foenum. Esaiae 4
To M. ELCOCKE Preacher.
woodcut of a bundle of grass hanging from a forked stick

Quis est, quamuis sit adolescens qui exploratum habeat se ad vesperum esse
victurum?
ALL flesh, is grass; and withers like the haie:
To day, man laughes, to morrow, lies in claie.
Then, let him mark the frailty of his kind,
For here his term is like a puff of wind,
Like bubbles small, that on the waters rise:
Or like the flowers, whom FLORA freshlie dies. Sensim sine sensu aetas
senescit, nec subito frangitur, sed diuturnitate extinguitur. Cicer. Philip. 11.

Yet, in one day their glory all is gone:
So, worldly pomp, which here we gaze upon.
Which warns all, that here their pageantes play,
How, well to live: but not how long to way.
Horat. 1. Epist. 4
Inter spem curamque, timores inter and iras,
Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum.
Grata superueniet, quae non sperabitur, hora.
Peruersa iudicia.
woodcut of Midas, with scepter, crown and ass's ears, lying on the ground
close to Pan, playing pipes or bagpipes, and Phoebus Apollo, with a quiver or
arrows on his back, playing a lute

Ovid. Metam. lib. 11.
PRESVMPTVOVS PAN, did strive APOLLOS skill to pass:
But MIDAS gave the palm to PAN: wherefore the ears of ass
APOLLO gave the Judge: which does all Judges teach;
To judge with knowledge, and advise, in matters paste their reach?
Mulier vmbra viri.
woodcut of a man running toward his shadow, and another man running away from
his shadow

OUR shadow flies, if we the same pursue:
But if we fly, it follows at the heel.
So, he through love that most does serve, and sue,
Is furthest off his mistress heart is steel.
But if he fly, and turn away his face;
She follows straight, and groans to him for grace.
In amore tormentum.
woodcut of flies flying into the flame of a candle set on a table or pedestal;
in the background a female figure leans over a fire and another female figure
tastes food while kneeling beside a different fire COSI DE BEN AMAR PORTO
TORMENTO



EVEN as the gnattes, that fly into the blaze,
Do burn their wings and fall into the fire:
So, those too much on gallant shows that gaze,
Are captives caught, and burn in their desire:
And such as once do feel this inward war,
Though they be cur'de, yet still appears the scarre.
For wanton LOVE although he promise ioies,
Yet he that yeeldes in hope to find it true,
His pleasures shall be mated with annoyes;
And sweetes suppos'de, be mixed, with bitter rue:
Because, his darts not all alike, do wound:
For so the friends of coye ASPASIA found.
They loved, she loth'de: they craved, she still deni'de.
They sighed, she song: they spoke, she stopped her ear.
They walked, she satte: they set, away she hi'de.
Lo this their bale, which was her bliss, you hear.
O love, a plague, though graced with gallant gloss,
For in thy seats a snake is in the moss.
Then stop your ears, and like ULYSSES waulke,
The SYREENES tunes, the careless often hears:
De malignitate Crocutae ferae Ael. lib. 7. cap. 22. and Plin. lib. 8. cap. 30.
CROCVTA killes when she does friendly taulke:
The Crocodile, has treason in her tears.
In gallant fruicte, the core is often decayed;
Yea poison often in cup of goulde assayed.
Then, in your ways let reason strike the stroke,
ASPASIA shonne, although her face do shine:
But, if you like of HYMENAEVS yoke,
PENELOPE prefer, though spinninge twine,
Yet if you like, how most to live in rest,
HIPPOLYTVS his life, suppose the best.
Vincit qui patitur.
woodcut of an oak tree breaking beneath the force of a wind produced by a
godlike head in the clouds

THE mighty oak, that shrinkes not with a blaste,
But stiflie stands, when Boreas most does blow,
With rage thereof, is broken down at last,
When bending reeds, that couche in tempests Iowe
With yielding still, do safe, and sound appear:
And look alofte, when that the clouds be clear.
Erasm. in Epist. Vere magni animi est, quasdam iniurias negligere, nec ad
quorundam conuitia aures, vel linguam habere.
When Envy, Hate, Contempt, and Slander, rage:
Which are the storms, and tempests, of this life;
With patience then, we must the combat wage,
And not with force resist their deadly strife:
But suffer still, and then we shall in fine,
Our foes subdue, when they with shame shall pine.
Aculei irriti.
woodcut of a lily flower surrounded by thorn branches

WHERE as the good, do live amongst the bad:
And virtue grows, where seed of vices springes.
The wicked sort to wound the good, are glad:
And vices thrust at virtue, all their stinges:
The like, where wit, and learning do remain,
Where folly rules, and ignorance does reign.
Yet as we see, the lilly freshlie bloomes,
Though thorns, and briers, enclose it round about:
So with the good, though wicked have their rooms,
They are preserved, in spite of all their route:
And learning lives, and virtue still does shine,
When folly dies, and ignorance does pine.
Neglecta virescunt. To M. RAWLINS Preacher.
woodcut of ivy growing on a wall near a seated figure wearing a helmet and
holding a scroll and a spear

THE Iuie green that does despised grow,
And none does plant, or trim the same at all,
Although a while it spreades it self below,
In time it mountes, with creepinge up the wall.
So, though the world the virtuous men despise,
Yet up alofte in spite of them they rise.
Impunitas ferociae parens. To M. STEEVENSON Preacher.
woodcut of sixteen mice running or dancing around two cats, each trapped in a
cage

WHEN worthy men, for life, and learning great,
Who with their looks, the wicked did appall,
If frouninge fates, with persecution threate;
Or take them hence, or shut them up in thrall:
The wicked sort rejoice, and play their parts,
Though long before, they clok'd their fained hearts.
Nemo potest duobus dominis seruire. To M. KNEWSTVB Preacher. Luc. 16.

woodcut of a man struggling or bowed beneath the weight of a globe carried on
his shoulder toward the sea; behind him two tablets lie on the ground ASIA

EUROP

AFRICA



HERE, man who first should heavenly things attain,
And then, to world his senses should incline:
First, undergoes the world with might, and maine,
And then, at foot does draw the laws divine.
Thus GOD he bears, and Mammon in his mind:
But Mammon first, and GOD does come behind. Matthew. 6. Non potestis deo
seruire and Mammonae.

Oh worldlinges fond, that join these two so ill,
The league is naught, throw down the world which speed:
Take up the law, according to his will.
First seek for heaven, and then for wordly need. Primum quaerite regnum dei,
etc. Ibidem.

But those that first their wordlie wish do serve,
Their gain, is loss, and seek their souls to sterue.
Sic probantur. To M. ANDREWS Preacher. Matthew. 24.

woodcut of three prisoners facing a fire, threatened by two men holding swords
and two dogs; above them an arm in the sky holds out a laurel wreath

THROVGHE torments strange, and persecutions dire,
The Christians pass, with patience in their pain:
And end their course, sometime with sword, and fire,
And constant stand, and like to lambs are slain.
Because, when all their martyrdom is past,
They hope to gain a glorious croune at last.
Noli tuba canere Eleemosynam. Matthew. cap. 6.

woodcut of a man blowing a trumpet while putting a coin in the alms-bowl of a
beggar lying beneath a tree

WHEN that thou give thy alms unto the pore,
In secret give, for GOD thy gifts does see:
And openly, will thee reward therefore.
But, if with trompe thy alms must published be,
Thou give in vain: since thou thereby do show,
Thy chief desire is, that the world may know.
Superest quod supra est.
woodcut of a man facing the Hebrew tetragrammaton or name of God in the
clouds, with his back turned from and his heel spurning a globe lying on the
ground

ASI

EUROPA

AFRICA



Peregrinus Christianus loquitur.
ADVE deceiptfull world, thy pleasures I detest:
Now, others with thy shows delude; my hope in heaven does rest.
Enlarged as follows.
Jacob. 1. Ecclesiast. 14. Isaiae 40.
EVEN as a flower, or like unto the grass,
Which now does stand, and straight with sith does fall;
So is our state: now here, now hence we pass:
For, time attendes with shredding sith for all.
And death at length, both oulde, and young, does strike:
And into dust does turn us all alike.
Yet, if we mark how swifte our race does run,
And waighe the cause, why we created be:
Then shall we know, when that this life is done,
We shall be sure our country right to see.
2 Corinthians: 5.
For, here we are but strangers, that must flitte:
The nearer home, the nearer to the pit.
O happy they, that pondering this arighte,
Before that here their pilgrimage be past,
Resign this world: and march with all their might
Within that pathe, that leads where joys shall last. Via veritas vita. Joan.
14. Matthew. 6.

And whilst they may, there, treasure up their store,
Where, without rust, it lastes for evermore.
Apocal. 6. Apocal. 21.
This world must change: That world, shall still endure.
Here, pleasures fade: There, shall they endless be.
Here, man does sin: And there, he shall be pure
Here, death he tastes: And there, shall never die. 1 Corinthians. 15. Apocal.
21. 1 Corinthians. 2.

Here, death he grief: And there shall joys possess,
As none has seen, nor any heart can guess.
Amico ficto nulla fit iniuria.
woodcut of two men in renaissance dress, one striking the other on the head
with a sword or stick

SINCE fauninge looks, and sugared speech prevail,
Take heed betime: and link thee not with these.
The gallant clokes, do hollow hearts conceile,
And goodly shows, are mistes before our eyes:
But whom thou find'st with guile, disguised so:
No wrong thou do, to use him as thy foe.
Fere simile, in Hypocritas.
A Face deform'de, a visor fair does hide,
That none can see his ugly shape within;
To Ipocrites, the same may be applide,
With outward shows, who all their credit win:
Yet give no heat, but like a painted fire;
And, all their zeal, is: as the times require.
Sic aetas fugit. To M. JAMES IONSON.
woodcut of three bare-backed horses running toward a standard or flag held up
by a staff with a fleur-de-lis at the top; on each of the rear two horses sits
a naked figure with a whip raised overhead

Two horses free, a third do swiftly chase,
The one, is white, the other, black of hew:
None, bridles have for to restrain their pace,
And thus, they both, the other still pursue:
And, never cease continual course to make,
Until at length, the first, they overtake.
This for most horse, that ronnes so fast away,
It is our time; while here, our race we run:
The black, and white, presents night, and day:
Who after have, until the goal be won;
And leave us not, but follow from our birthe,
Until we yield, and turn again to earth. Psalm. 89.

Ovid. 1. Amor. 8.
Labitur occulte, fallitque volatilis aetas,
Et celer admissis labitur annus equis.
Philipp. 4.
Soli Deo gloria. To M. HOWLTE Preacher.
woodcut of a man cutting a tree with an axe

HERE, man with axe does cut the boughe in twain,
And without him, the axe, could nothing do:
Within the tool, there does no force remain;
But man it is, that might does put thereto:
Like to this axe, is man, in all his deeds;
Who has no strength, but what from GOD proceeds.
Then, let him not make vaunt of his desert,
Nor brag thereof, when he good deeds has done:
For, it is GOD that works in his heart,
And with his grace, to good, does make him run:
And of himself, he weak theretoo, does live;
And GOD gives power, to whom all glory give. Iud. Epist.

Dominus viuit and videt.
woodcut of Adam kneeling behind a tree, naked, hiding from the question "Where
are you?" written in Latin in the heavens VBI ES



Genes. 3.
BEHIND a figtree great, him self did ADAM hide:
And thought from GOD he there might lurk, and should not be espide.
Oh fool, no corners seek, though thou a sinner be;
For none but GOD can thee forgive, who all thy ways does see.
Ex maximo minimum.
woodcut of a human skull and a bone lying on the ground

WHERE lively once, GODS image was expreste,
Wherein, sometime was sacred reason plac'de,
The head, I mean, that is so ritchly bleste,
With sight, with smell, with hearing, and with taste.
Lo, now a skull, both rotten, bare, and dry,
A relike meet in charnell house to lie, Nic. Reasnerus. Vt rosa mane viget,
sero mox vespere languet: Sic modo qui fuimus, cras leuis vmbra sumus.

CONCLVSIO OPERIS Ad Illustrissimum Heroem D. Robertum Dudlaeum, Comitem
Leicestriae, Baronem de Denbighe, etc. Dominum meum vnice colendum.
Tempus omnia terminat.
woodcut of an oak tree fallen into a river, beside which two others stand; in
the background the sun is setting

THE longest day, in time resignes to night.
The greatest oak, in time to duste does turn.
The Raven dies, the Egle fails of flighte.
The Phoenix rare, in time her self does burn.
The princely stagge at length his race does run.
And all must end, that ever was begone.
Even so, I, here do end this simple book,
And offer it unto your Lorshippes sight:
Which, if you shall receive with pleasinge look,
I shall rejoice, and think my labor light.
And pray the Lord your honor to preserve,
Our noble Queen, and country long to serve.
FINIS.

