An answer to a certain Libel entitled, An admonition to the Parliament, By
JOHN VVHITGIFTE, D. of Divinity.

1. COR. 8.2. If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing
yet as he ought to know.

1. COR. 11.16. If any man be contentious, we have no such custom, neither
the Churches of God.

GALA. 5.26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, for Humfrey Toy. Anno. 1572.

To his loving Nurie the Christian Church of England. I. VV. a member and
minister of the same, wishes peace in Christ, and continuance of his glorious
gospel, even to the worlds end.
THere be diverse things, and especially five, that when I first took this
labor in hand, had almost utterly dissuaded me from the same.

First, because I do with all my heart hate contention and strife, and
especially in matters of religion, among such as profess ye self same Gospel.

Secondly, for that I feared greatly least some slander might redounde to the
Gospel by this open contention, seeing that God is not the author of
contention or confusion, but of peace.

Thirdly, I doubted whether this kind of dealing by writing, might minister
matter to the common adversaries of the Gospel, to rejoice and glory, and to
flatter them selves the more in their damnable errors.

Fourthly I, greatly suspected the slanderous reports of the backbiter and of
the unlearned ton^ue* the (...) because he loves to speak evil, and hear
evil of all those that be not in all points inclinable to his fancy,
whereof I have great experience, being my self most unjustly slandered by
that viperous kinds of men: the other, because they be not able to judge of
controversies according to learning and knowledge, and therefore are ruled by
affection, and carried hedlong with blind zeal, into diverse sinister
judgments and erroneous opinions.

Lastly, because I know sundry (in all respects) worthy men, much more
able to deal in such matters, than I am.

But when I considered my duty toward God, to his Church, and to our most
gracious Lady and sovereign Elizabeth her Majesty (by whose ministry God
has given his Gospel free passage unto us) ye first stop and hinderaunce
was answered. For I thought that, that duty ought not to be omitted for any
such cause, seeing God and not man, shall be my Judge: and also that not he
which defends the truth, and confuseth errors, but he that impugneth the
truth, and spreddeth sects, is the author of contention.

Likewise when I remembered ye it was no new thing to have contentions, sects,
and schisms in the Church of Christ, (especially when it enjoys external
peace) and that we had manifest examples thereof from time to time, (first in
Peter, and Paul. ad Gala. 2. Paul and Barnabas, Acto. 15: then in the Church
of the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 1. and.3. Afterward betwixt the oriental Church
and occidentall Church, touching Easter and such like matters: Betwixt the
Bishops of Aphrica and the Bishops of Italy, for rebaptising of heretics: and
sundry times, yea usually in ye external peace of the church, as may be more
at large seen in Eusebius, Lib. 4. eccle. histo. ca. 6. and lib. 5. ca.
24.25.26. and li. 8. etc. Likewise in Ruffinus li. 1. ca. 1. In Zozom. Li. 6.
ca. 4. In Basilius magnus epist. 61. ad fratres and Episcopas in accidente: and
epist. 69. and in sundry other ancient and learned histories and writers.

For the second point I was satisfied, for I thought, that, that could be no
slander to this Church which by the malice of Satan has been practiced in all
Churches even since the ascension of Christ.

Thirdly when I perceived ye these men against whom I now write, did agree
with the adversaries in defacing ye state of religion, the order of common
prayers, the ministry, the sacraments, the kind of gouerme^t. etc. used and
allowed in this realm of England, and that in as opprobrious and spiteful
manner as the adversaries do: likewise that they seek to overthrow the self
same pillars of this Church with the adversaries (although not by the self
same means) I thought that the confutation and overthrow of the one should be
the confutation and overthrow of the other, and therefore the adversaries to
have small cause in deed of rejoicing.

Against backbiters, slanderers, and unlearned tongs, I shall by Gods grace
arm my self with patience, for their taulke is no sufficient cause for a man
to absteyne from doing his duty.

To conclude, I, (although the unworthiest and vnmeetest of a great number) was
bold to take upon me this enterprise, partly to show, that the book called the
Admonition, is not such, but that it may easily be answered, and especially to
satisfy mine own conscience: for I considered that if no man had taken upon
him ye envy of the common sort, in withstanding the enterprises and
proceedings of the Anabaptists when they began in Germany, Anabaptisme had
ouerrunne those Churches and utterly destroyed them.

These were the reasons that satisfied the former objections, and especially
moved me to take upon me this labor: wherewith, if I can also satisfy
others, I have my desire: if not, yet have I done my duty, and satisfied mine
own conscience. And for as much as the matter touches the state of the whole
Church of England, I thought it most meet to dedicate this my book, rather
unto the same generally, than to any one particular member thereof: protesting
that if I have affirmed any thing therein, that by learning and good reasons
may be proved erroneous, I will reform the same, for I wholly submit it to the
rule of Gods word, and the judgment of those that he learned, discrete, and
wise. The Lord bless the (o dear spouse of Christ) with the continuance of
his Gospel, of the Queen's Majesty, and of godly peace and quietness. Amen.

A brief examination of the reasons used in the book, called an Admonition to
the Parliamente.
FIrst, in that book the scripture is most vntollerably abused, and
unlearnedly applied, quoted only in their margent to delude both such, as for
lack of learning, can not, and such, as either for slothfulness or some
preiudicate opinion, will not, examine the same: as I have particulerly
declared in my answer following.

Secondly their proofs consist especially of these arguments. The first is ab
eo quod est secundum quid, ad id quod simplicitorest as, such and such things
were not in the Apostles time, Ergo they ought not to be now. Which kind of
argument is very deceiptfull, and the mother and welspring of many both old
and new schisms: of old, as of them that called them selves Apostolicos, and
of the Aerians: of new, as of Anabaptists, who considering neither the
diversity of times concerning the external ecclesiastical policy, nor the
true liberty of the christian religion in externe rytes and ceremonies, in
matters neither commanded nor forbidden in Gods law, nor the authority of
Christian magistrates in the Christian congregation, concerning the same have
boldly enterprised to stir up many and heinous errors: For if these reasons
should take place: the Apostles used it not, Ergo it is not lawful for us to
use it: or this either: they did it, Ergo we must needs do it: then no
Christians may have any place to abide in: they may have no Christian Princes:
no ministration of sacraments in Churches and such like: for the Apostles had
no place to abide in, they had no Christian Princes to govern them, no
churches to minister sacraments in. etc. Likewise we must have al things
common: we must depart with all our possessions when we be converted to the
Gospel: baptize abroad in the fields: minister the communion in private
houses only: be always under the cross and under Tyrants, and such like: For
the Apostles had al things common, departed from their possessions, baptized
abroad in fields, ministered the communion in private houses, were always
under persecutors and Tyrants. etc.

2. Another kind of argument is much like unto this, and is taken ab
authoritate negatine, which in matters of salvation and damnation holds when
we reason ab authoritate scripturae, from the authority of the scripture, but
not else: For this argument (it is not commanded in the scripture to be done
nor there expressed, Ergo it ought not to be done) is so far out of the way and
so erroneous, that it is not tolerable: for it takes away the most part of
all due circumstances, without the which either after one manner or other, the
very institutions of Christ cannot be observed: For how is it possible to
receive the holy Communion, but either sitting, standing, kneelling, walking,
or lying: either at one time or other: in ye morning, or at night: before
meat, or after meat: clothed or naked: in this place or in that place. etc.
and yet none of these circumstances are in scripture commanded, or by
necessary collection may thereof be gathered: the same is to be said of the
observation of times, of common prayers, and other convenient and necessary
orders in the Church. If this argument were good, then all good laws and
ordinances made for the advancing of true religion, and establishing of good
orders, were to be abolished, which were the very root and welspring of
stubbornness, obstinacy, sedition, disobedience, and confusion.

3. The third kind of argument is called petitio principij, which is when a
man frames unto himself principles of his own devise, grounded neither upon
authority, neither yet upon substantial reason, and then upon the same will
conclude his purpose: which is vit ^^sissimum gen^^ argumentands: a very
erroneous kind of reasoning as these men do in using these two false
principles: the one, when they say, that to be invented by an Antichristian
Pope which was not so invented: the other, when they say that nothing may be
used in the Church of Christ which was invented by the Pope, or used in the
Popes Church: which can not be true, as in sundry places of the book I have
declared. The self same reasons moved the Aerians to forsake the order of the
Church, and to command their Disciples to do the contrary of that that the
Church did. We borrow good laws of the Gentiles, and we use the Churches,
Belles, Pulpits, and many other things used of Papists. etc.

4. The fourth kind of reason is, of negatiues by comparison: as this,
Priests and Ministers are to be known by their doctrine, not by their apparel,
Ergo they ought not to have distinct apparel from other men. This argument
follows not, for negatives by comparison are not simply to be understood,
but by the way comparison: And therefore of the former sentence thus we may
conclude, that the apparel is not to be esteemed as a note of difference in
comparison to learning and doctrine, and yet a note. As when Paul says that
Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: 1 Cor. 1. And God
by his Prophet I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Ose. 6. and Mat. 9.

5. The fifth is ab eo quod est non causam vt causam ponere, when that is taken
for the cause of any thing, which is not the cause: as when they condemn the
book of common prayer, and a prescript form of service, because (as they say)
it mainteineth an unlearned (or as they term it) a reading ministry, when as
the book is not ye cause of it, neither yet a prescripte form of prayer, but
either the parties themselves that be unlearned, or they that do admit them,
or else both. This kind of argument is usual in the Admonition.

There be other unlearned and unskillful reasons used in this book, which may
easily be discerned even of children: and therefore I here omit them.

Thus much I thought good generally to write, which being duly considered, the
book it self needs no other kind of confutation.

To the Christian Reader.
I Am not ignorant to what dangers (especially of uncharitable and slanderous
tongs) I have made my self subject by taking upon me this work:
notwithstanding my reaconing is made, and I have armed my self against the
worst, being taught so to do by the opprobrious speech of diverse, who as busy
bodies intermedling in other men's matters more than it becomes them, do
thereof judge most unchristianly, and report most untruly: believing as partial
Judges, whatsoever is reported, howsoever falsely and unjustly. But as I with
all my heart for my part forgive them, and wish unto them more Christian
hearts, indifferent ears, and charitable mouths. So do I exhort thee
(Christian reader) to abstain from all such rancor, and other partial and
sinister affections in reading of this my book: And think of me as of one
that to speak the truth, to testify his conscience, to mainteyne the peace
and quietness of the Church, to withstand erroneous opinions, or contentious
doctrine, will neither spare his labor nor his fame: and yet not so stiffely
addicted to his own opinion, but that he can be contented to submit him
self to better authority and reasons than he him self has. And I besee thee
receive this admonition at my hand: Try before thou trust: believe not lightly
every report: as thou have two ears, so use them both: condemn no man before
he be heard: abstain from speaking evil of any when he is not present to make
thee answer, (for that is a great injury:) respect not the person, but the
cause, and let not every pretenced zeal carry thee headlong thou know not
whether: and suspende thy judgment of this book, until thou have advisedly
and indifferently read the same.

Correction of faults escaped in this book.
In the end of the Epistle dedicatorie, for (O dear spouse) read (O dear
spouse of Christ)

Folio. 23. line. 8. for est. read sunt.

Fol. 32. lin. 34. for the trusts read he trusts.

Fol. 33. lin. 24. for are not come, read, are not scarce come.

Fol. 42. lin. 20. for all do not so, read, but all do not so.

Fol. 73. lin. 23. for Anthomum, read, Antoninum.

Fol. 104. lin. 20. for baptized by faith, read, baptized faith.

Fol. 115. lin. 26. in these words, put out (in.)

Fol. 211. lin. 2. not the charge, put out one (the)

Fol. 287. in the margent, for 1. Tim. 1.2. read, 1. Tim. 5.2.

Fol. 231. lin. 26. for by changing, read, the changing.

Fol. 232. lin. 11. for pulls, read, poulleth.

Fol. 242. lin. 8. for disobedience, read, obedience.

Fol. 244. in the margent for 1. Tim. 1.2. read, 1. Tim. 3.2.

In Gualters epistle in latin lin. 9. for Non read, Nam. and lin. 17. for
episculor, read, exosculor, and lin. 30. for rogabant, read, rogabat.

In the same epistle in englysh, line. 3. for only, read, old.

In the 5. page and 4. line of the answer to the Pamphlets, for impuritie,
read, impunitie.

An Exhortation to such as be in authority and have the government of the
Church committed unto them, whether they be Civil or Ecclesiastical
Magistrates.
Considering the strangenes of the time, the variety of men's minds, and the
marvelous, inclinations in the common sort of persons (especially where the
gospel is most preached) to embrace new invented doctrines and opinions,
though they tend to the disturbing of the quiet state of the Church, the
discrediting and defacing of such as be in authority, and the maynteining of
licenciousnesse and lewd liberty: I thought it good to set before your eyes
the practices of the Anabaptists, their conditions and qualities, the kind
and manner of their beginnings and proceedings, before the broching of their
manyfolde and horrible heresies, to the intent that you understanding the same,
may the rather in time take heed to such as proceed in like manner: least
they being suffered too long, burst out to work the same effect. I accuse
none, only I suspect the authors of this admonition, and their fautours: What
cause I have so to do, I refer to your selves to judge, after that I have
set forth unto you the Anabaptisticall practices, even as I have learned in the
writings of such famous and learned men, as had themselves experience of them,
when they first began in Germany, and did both personally reason with them,
and afterward very learnedly write against them: neither will I in this point
write one word, which I have not mine author to show for.

Bulling aduers Anabap. fol. 1.
1 First Anabaptisme tends to this end, that (in these places where the
Gospel has been for a time preached, and where Churches be reformed) the Gospel
may be hindered, the churches disquieted, the simple brought to doubt of the
religion that has been taught them: contentious and unquiet mynds may have
matter to work on, the preaching of the Gospel become odious: finally that
magistrates and such as be in authority, may be contemned and despised of
their subjects and inferiors.

Idem. fol. 1.11.18.87.102.244.
2 Secondly they bitterly inueyed against ministers and preachers of the
Gospel, saying that they were not ordinarily and laufully called to the
ministry, because they were called by the Magistrate, and not by the people:
that they preached not the Gospel truly, that they were Scribes and Phariseis:
that they had not those things which Pause required in a minister. 1. Timo. 3.
That they did not themselves those things, which they taught unto other: that
they had stipendes, and labored not, and therefore were ministers of the belly:
That they could not teach truly, because they had great livings, and lived
wealthily and pleasantly: that they used not their authority in
excommunication, that they attributed too much unto the Magistrate.

Fol. 9 18.
3 Thirdely, the whole reformation that was then in the Church displeased them,
as not spiritual enough and perfect. For the Sacraments were not (as they
said) syncerely mynistred, things were not reduced to the Apostolic Church,
Excommunication not ryghtly used, no amendment of life appeared since the
preaching of the Gospel: therefore the Church then reformed, no more the true
Church of Christ, than was the Papisticall church.

4 Fourthly, Fol. 9.18.77.
they had their private and secret conuenticles, and did divide and separate
themselves from the Church, neither would they communicate with such as were
not of their sect, either in prayers, Sacraments, or hearing the word.

5 Fifthly, Fol. 1.
they compted all them as wicked and reprobate, which were not of their sect.

6 Sixthly, Fol. 10.
they pretended in all their dooyngs, the glory of God, the edifying of the
Church, and the purity of the Gospel.

7 They earnestly cried out against pride, Fol. 11.17.
gluttony. etc. They spoke much of mortification: they pretended great
gravity: they sighed much: they seldom or never laughed: they were very
austere in reprehendyng: they spoke gloriouslye: To be short, Magna and varia
erat ipsorum hypocrisis, they were great hypocrites, thereby to win
authority to their heresy, among the simple and ignorant people.

8 If they were at any time punished for their errors, Fol. 11.
they greatly complained, that nothing was used but violence, that the truth
was oppressed, that innocent and godly men which would have all things
reformed, according to the word of God, could not be heard, nor have liberty
to speak. That Zuinglius stopped their mouths, and defended his cause, not by
the word of God, but by the authority of the magistrate.

9 They found great fault with the baptizyng of children, Fol 10.214
and ceremonies used in the same: But afterward did utterly condemn it.

10 They taught that the civil magistrate has no authority in
Ecclesiastical matters, Fol 19.
and that he ought not to meddle in causes of religion and faith.

Fol. 19.95.242.
11 That no man ought to be compelled to faith, and to religion.

Fol 178.
12 That Christians ought to punish faults not with imprisonement, not with the
sword, or corporal punishment, but only with excommunication.

Fol. 11.242.
13 They complained much of persecution.

Fol. 11.
14 They bragged that they would defend their cause not only with words, but
with the shedding of their blood also.

Fol. 17.77.
15 Their whole intent was to make a separation and a schism, and to withdraw
men from their ordinary Churches and pastors, and therefore most odiously they
inueyed against such pastors, and sought by all means to discredit them.

Fol. 18.
16 There was no stay in them, but daily they invented new opinions, and did
run from error to error.

Fo. 78.244
17 They were very stubborn and wilful, which they called constancy: they were
weywarde and froward, without all humanity, they judged and condemned all
other men.

Fol. 78.
18 They sought to overthrow commonweals, and states of government.

Fol. 79.
19 They gave honor and reverence to none, and they used to speak to such as
were in authority without any signification of honor, neither would they call
men by their titles, and they answered churlishly.

Fol 85.
20 They attributed much unto themselves, and pleased themselves very well,
other men they contemned, and therefore their minds were full of pride and
contempt.

Fol. 88.
21 They went not to preach in such places where the Gospel was not planted,
but only they insinuated them selves into these places, wherein the Gospel had
been diligently preached: and where there were godly and quiet men: there they
made a stir, they raised up factions and bredde discord.

22 They sought to be free from all laws, Fol. 95.
and to do what they list.

23 They were animated by crafty and subtle Papists, Fol. 11.
which did seek the overthrow of the Gospel, and the restoring of papisme.

24 To be short, Fol. 11.
the people had them in great admiration, because of their hypocrisy and
straightness of life, and such as were of contentious natures joined with
them, and commended their doings.

These were the manners, conditions, practices, and proceedings of the
Anabaptists in Germany, before they uttered their sedicious and monstrous
heresies.

I leave the application hereof to your wysedomes, who easily can conjecture,
what kind of men they be that come nearest to those steps. Only I desire you to
be circumspect, and to understand, that Anabaptisme (which usually follows
the preaching of the Gospel) is g^^^tly to be feared in this Church of
England, and almost plainly professed in this Admonition, the authors whereof
agree with them in these forenamed practices and qualities.

Moreover it may also please you to consider the conditions and practices of
the Donatists, who divided them selves from the congregation, and had their
peculiar Churches, or rather Conuenticles, in Africa: They taught also that all
other Churches were spotted and impure, because of their Ministers. Finally,
that there ought to be no compulsion used in matters of Religion and says, and
that none should be punyshed for their conscience.

To conclude, these men ^^atly join with the Papists, and by the self same
assertions, bend their force against this Church of England. For,

First, the Papists affirm that we are not the true Church, no, that we have
not so much as the outward face and show of the true Church. And so do these
men almost in flat and plain terms.

2 Secondly the Papists say, that we have no ministry, no Bishops, no
Pastors, because they be not ritely and canonically called to these functions:
the self same do these men affirm.

3 Thirdly, the Papists say, that our Sacraments be not rightly ministered: and
so say they likewise.

4 Fourthly, the Papists wholly condemn our book of Common prayers, set out
by public authority, and the whole order of our service: In that point these
men do fully join with them also, for they condemn it wholly, and that with
most bitterness.

5 Fifthly, the Papists would not have the Scriptures read in the Church to
the people: no more would they. For they say, reading is not feeding, but as
evil as playing upon a stage, and worse too.

6. Sixthly, the Papists deny the civil Magistrate to have any authority in
Ecclesiastical matters: and so do they.

7 To be short, the Papists refuse to come to our Church, to communicate
with us in the Lords supper: and these men would not have them by laws and
punishment compelled there unto.

Hereby it is manifest, that the Papists and they jointly seek to shake, nay
to overthrow the self same foundations, grounds, and pillars of our Church,
although not by the self same instruments and engines. Wherefore it is time to
awake out of sleep, and to draw out the sword of discipline, to provide that
laws which be general and made for uniformity, as well of doctrine as
Ceremonies, be generally and universally observed: that those which according
to their conscience and duty execute them, be maynteyned, and not discoraged,
either boldly to defend the religion and kind of government in this Realm
established, or else (if you can) to refourme and better the same: for it can
not be, but that this freedom given unto men, to obey and disobey what they
list, to speak what they list, against whom they list, and where they
list, to broche what opinions and doctrine they list, must in the end burst
out into some strange and dangerous effect. The Lord both grant unto you
that be Magistrates, the spirit of government, and to all other that be
Subjects, the spirit of true obedience. Amen.

The preface of the Admonition.
To the godly Readers, Grace and peace from God. etc.
TWo treatises ye have here ensuing (beloved in Christ) which ye must read
without ^. Thessalonians 5.21. Iam. 1.19 20. Iam. 2 1.
parcialitie or blind affection. For otherwise you shall neither see their
meaning: nor refrain your selves from rashely condemning of them without just
cause. For certain men there are of great countenance, which will not lightly
like of them, because they principally concern their persons and unjust
dealings: whose credit is great, and whose friends are many, we mean the
lordly Lords, Archbishops, bishops, Suffraganes, Deanes, Doctors, Archdeacons,
Chauncelours, and the rest of that proud generation, whose kingdom must
down, hold they never so hard: because their tyrannous Lordship can not
stand Math. 15.23. Luc. 16.15.
with Christ's kingdom. And it is the special mischief of our English Church,
and the chief cause of backwardness, and of all breach and dissension. For
they whose authority is Math. 20.25.26. Math. 23.8.9.10. Marc. 10.42.43. Luc
22.15 etc.
forbidden by Christ, will have their stroke without their fellow servants,
yea, though vngratiously, cruelly and Popelike they take upon them to Math.
24.48.49.
beat them, and that for their own childish Articles, being for the most
part, against the manifest truth of God: First, by experience their rigor
has too plainly appeared ever since their wicked reign, and specially for
the space of these five or six years last past together. Of the enormities,
which with such rigor they maintain, these treatises do in part make
mention, justly craving redress thereof. But the matters do require a larger
discourse. Only the authors of these, thought it their parts to admonish you
at this time, of those inconveniences which men seem not to think upon, and
which without reformation, can not but increase further dissension: the one
part being proud, pontifical, and tyrannous: and the word of God for the
other part express and manifest, as if it pleased the state to examine the
matters, it would be evident. And would to god, that free conference in these
matters might be had. For howsoever learned and many they seem to be, they
should and may in this realm find inowe, to match them and shame them to, if
they hold on as they have begone. And out of this realm they have all the best
reformed churches thoroughout Christendom against them. But in a few words to
say what we mean. Either must we have a Math. 9.37.38. Ephesi. 4.11.12.
right ministry of God, and a right Mat. 18.15.16.17.
government of his church, according to the scriptures set up (both which we
lack) or else there can be no right religion, nor yet for contempt thereof can
pro. 29 18.
Gods plagues be from us any while differred. Amo^. 8.11.12. etc. Ma. 21.23.
etc 1. Cor. 11.30.
And therefore though they link in together, and slanderously charge poor men
(whom they have made poor) with grievous faults, calling them Puritans, worse
tha^ the Donatists, exasperating and setting on, such as be in authority
against them: having hitherto miserably handled them with reuilings
deprivations, imprisonements, banishmentes, and such like extremities, yet is
these poor men's cause never the Mat. 10.16.26.
worse: nor these chale^gers the better: nor God his Esai. 59.1.
hand the further of, to link in with his against them: nor you (christian
brethren) must never the rather without examination Exodus 23.1.2. Math. 7.1.2.
Iam. 4.11.12.
condemn them. But thankfully take this taste which God by these treatises
offreth you, and weigh them by the word of god, and do your endeavor, every one
in his 1. Cor. 5.20. 1. Cor. 7.27.
calling, to promote his cause. And let us al with more Psalm 50.15. Math. 7.7.
1. Tim. 2.1.2.
earnest prayer than we are wont, earnestly commend it to God his blessing,
and namely that it will please him by his spirit, to lighten the heart of our
most gracious sovereign, and the rest in authority, to the benefit of his
small flock, and the overthrow of their proud enemies, that godliness may
by them proceed in peace, and God his glory through Jesus Christ, be
thoroughly advanced. Which we call God to witness, is our only labor and
suite. And so presently, we leave you: heartily beseeching God to grant it.
Amen.

An answer to the Preface of the Admonition.
THESE TWO treatises contained in this admonition, as they be void of sound
learning, so are they full of blind affection, and stuffed with uncharitable
and unchristian terms and phrases: wherefore it is to be feared, that they
proceed not of love, but of hatred, not of zeal, but of malice, not of
humility, but of arrogancy, not of minds desirous to reform, but of
stomachs seeking to deforme and confound, that which is in due form and
order by lawful authority established. For what charitable, zealous, and
humble spirit, would so spitefully and slanderously speak of their
brethren, whose doctrine is pure, whose zeal is fervent, whose suffering for
the Gospel has been in time of trial, comparable with any man's that now
lives: who have also paynfully taught the word of God in this realm, and do
at this day, and by whose ministry the Gospel has taken root, and is come
to that increase that now (God be thanked) appears. Surely these opprobrious
terms, proud generation, tyrannous lordships, ungracious, cruel, Popelike,
wicked reign, proud enemies. etc. applied to brethren, proceed not from the
humble and mylde spirit of GOD, but from the proud and arrogante spirit of
Satan. Therefore by this unseemly preface it may appear, from what spirit
the rest of this admonition spryngeth. Touching the cruelty and rigeure these
men complain of, I shall need to speak little, being manyfeste to all that
be not with synister affections blinded, that lack of severity is the
principal cause of their licentious liberty. But who sees not their
hypocrisy, which would make the world believe that they are persecuted when
they be with too much lenity punished for their intolerable contempt of good
laws, and other disordered dealings? Nay such is their perverseness, or
rather arrogancy, that if they be debarred but of the least part of their will
and desire, by and by they cry out of cruelty and persecution. It is to be
doubted what these men will do when persecution comes in deed, which now
make so much of a little or rather of nothing. As for this great brag, For how
so ever learned and many they seem to be, they should and may in this realm
find inowe to match them, and shame them too, if they hold on as they have
begone, Satis arroganter dictum est: And verifieth that to be true, that is
commonly spoken of these kind of men, that is, that they contemn all other in
comparison of themselves: that they think themselves only zealous, only
learned etc. But it is possible they may be matched, and I know no man of
learning afraid to encounter with them, either by word or writing. Touching
the ministry and government of the Church, what faults there is to be therein
found, we shall understand when we come to their reasons. God grant us humble
and meek spirits, that godly unity may be maynteyned in the Church.

One thing I must desire thee to note (gentle reader) (wherein the folly of
these men maruellously appears) how they have painted the margent of their
book, with quoting of scriptures, as though al were Scripture they write, when
as in deed they abuse both the Scripture and thee: For what one place of
scripture is in all this preface alleged to any purpose, and yet how many is
there quoted?

To prove that we must read these two Treatises without parcialitie or
blind affection, here is noted in ye marge^t. 1 Thessalonians. 5. verse. 21. James. 1.
James. 2. The place to ye Thessalonians is this, Try all things, and keep
that which is good. The place of the first of James is this, Wherefore my
dear brethren, let every man be svvifte to hear, slovve to speak, and slovve
to wrath: And the second place of James is this, My brethren, have not the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons. And to what purpose
are these places alleged? What prove they? Or what need is there to allege
them? These Apostles in these places speak not of railing libels, but of
hearing the word of God, and judging of matters of faith according to ye
truth, and not to the persons.

To prove that tyrannous lordship can not stand with Christ's kingdom, they
allege the.15. of Mat. and Luc. 16. The place in the 15. of Mat. verse. 23. is
this, But he answered her not a word. Then came to him his disciples, and
besought him, saying: Send her away for she cries after us. In the sixteenth
of Luke it is thus: Then he said unto them, ye are they which justify your
selves before men, but God knovveth your hearts: for that which is highly
esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of god. I would gladly know how
their assertion, and these two textes hang together. I allow not tyrannous
Lordshyp to stand with Christ's kingdom: But it may well enough for any thing
in these two places to the contrary. Tyrannous Lordship is not esteemed among
men, but hated.

To prove that they whose authority is forbidden by Christ, will have their
stroke without their fellow servants, etc. is quoted, Math. 20. Math. 23.
Mark. 10. Luke. 22. In the.20. of Math. it is thus written, Ye know that the
lords of the Gentiles have domination over them etc. In the.23. of Matthew. But
be ye not called Rabbi, for one is your doctor or teacher, to wit, Christ. The
places in Mark and Luke be all one with that in the 20. of Matthew. The
conclusion that is gathered of these places is very dark and general: they
should^ have declared who they be that have this authority forbidden, and what
the authority is. Touching these places alleged in the 20. of Mat. 10. of
Mar. 22. of Luke, Musculus and diverse other learned men think, that they
extend not only to the Apostles and men of the Clergy, as we call them, but
to all Christians, of what state soever they be. And it is the common opinion
of all writers, that these words of Christ do not condemn superiority,
Lordeshippe, or any such like authority, but the ambitious desire of the
same, and the tyra^nical usage thereof.

Musculus expounding these places says in this sort: Whosoever will be
great among you. etc. He says not, no man ought to be chief among you, which
he should have said, if it had not ben lawful in the kingdom of God for some
to be great and chief, or if it had been necessary, that all should have been
in all things equal: the Celestial spirits are not equal, the stars be not
equal, the Apostles them selves were not equal: Peter is found in many places
to have been chief among the rest, which we do not deny. Therefore this is
not Christ's meaning to have none great or chief among Christians, seeing the
very necessity of our state requires that some be superiors and betters, so
far is it from being repugnaunt to charity. In a common weal it is
necessary that some should excel other; so is it in a well ordered family:
In like manner there must be in the Church governors, presidents, rulers, of
whom Paul makes mention. To. 12. 1. Cor. 12. Heb. 13. As there is also in
the body some principal members, some inferior. etc. Therefore Christ does not
require that in his kingdom all should be equal, but this he does require,
that none should desire to be great, or to be thought and counted chief.
Hitherto Musculus.

Which interpretation must needs be true, else we may say, that Christ in
this place rejects and disalloweth the Princes and Magistrates of the
Gentiles, and also forbids the same among Christians, which is false and
Anabaptisticall.

Likewise the same Musculus says, that Christ teaches in this place, what he
ought to be in deed that desires to bear rule over other, to wit, that he
ought to be a servant to other, that is (as he does interpret it) to profit
other, and to serve for the commodity of other, for though the name of a
prince and of a lord be a name of honor and dignity, yet is it the office of
a prince and lord to serve those which be under the^ in governing of them
carefully, and in providing for their wealth and peace.

Moreover the Greek words that Christ uses in all these places, as (...),
and (...), do signify to rule with oppression, and to rule as a man list.

Furthermore Christ does not say, that no man shall be great among them or
bear rule, but he says: Quicunque voluerit inter vos magnus fieri. etc. He
that desires to be great among you. etc.

To conclude, it is manifest that in Matthewe and Mark, he reproves the
ambition of the sons of Zebedie, who ambitiously desired the one to sit on
his right hand, the other on his left. And in Luke the ambition of the rest
of the Apostles, who contended among themselves which of them should be
greatest.

So that it is plain, that these places suppress ambition and desire of rule,
in all kind of men: and not superiority, not magistracy, not jurisdiction in
any kind of persons.

Touching the place in the.23 of Mat. where Christ said unto his disciples, Be
not you called Rabbi, call no man father, be not called masters. Who is so
ignorant, to think that Christ forbids by these words one Christen man to
call another, lord, master, father? shall not children call their parents
father? shall not scholars call their teacher, master? And shall not
servants call him master, under whose government they are? Is it not lawful
for one to call an other master, doctor, father, lord. etc? Paul
(notwithstanding these words of Christ) 1. Cor. 4. calls himself their
father: and. 1. Ti. 2. he calls himself the doctor of the Gentiles. Wherefore
it is manifest that these names be not here prohibited, much less the
offices: but only the pharisaicall, ambitious, and arrogant affection of
superiority: As it is also manifest by this that follows: Who so ever
exalts himself. etc. And surely as Christ condemns here the ambitious
affection of such as ambitiously desire these names of superiority, so does he
in like manner condemn those who be so puffed up with pride and arroga^cie,
that they contemn and disdain to call men in authority by the titles of
their offices: For pride, contempt and arrogancy, is, as well in refusing to
give honor and reverence, as it is in ambitious desiring the same.

But the chief purpose of Christ in this place is, to teach us not so to
depend upon men, as though it were not lawful to break their decrees, or to
decline from their authority: For there is one only Father, Lord, and
master, to whom we are so bound, that by no means we may declyne at any
time from his precepts.

These places therefore may be aptly alleged against the pride, tyranny, and
ambition of the Bishop of Rome, which seeks tyrannically to rule, and not to
profit: But it makes nothing at all against the lawful authority of any
other in any state or condition of men.

How aptly that place of the.24. of Matthew, But if the evil servant shall
say in his heart. etc. is alleged, let all men judge. I think it forbids
not to punish such as break good laws. But Lord how these men are beaten,
which do as they list, say what they list, and that with rejoicing thereto:
that is, if they be no otherwise beaten than hitherto they have been, they will
not only with schisms and factions tear in sunder this Church of England,
but in time overthrow the whole state of the common wealth.

To prove that either we must have a right ministry of God, and a right
government of his Church, according to the Scriptures set up. etc. or else
there can be no right religion. etc. is alleged the ninth of Matthew. the fourth
to the Ephe. and the eightenth of Math. In the ninth of Mat. the place they
allege is this, Surely the harvest is great, but the laborers be fevve:
wherefore. etc. In the fourth to the Ephe. He therefore gave some to be
Apostle. etc. In the eightenth of Matthew, If thy brother trespass against
thee. etc. The first place declares that Ministers of the words are necessary
in Christ's Church. The second, that there is diverse kinds and degrees of
them. And the third shows an order of correcting secret sins, and private
offenses, and medleth not with those that be open and known to other. Now
therefore consider to what purpose those places be noted in the margente, and
how little they prove that which is concluded.

As for all the rest of the places of Scripture that follows noted in the
margent of this preface, I know not to what purpose they be alleged, but
only for vayneglorie to bleare the eyes of ye ignorant people, and to make
them believe that all that which is written in this book, is nothing else, but
Scripture it self. They have dealt very subtly, to cote the places only, and
not to set them down in plain words, for by this means they think that of
the most part it shall never be understood, how unaptly, and to what small
purpose they be alleged.

This name Puritan is very aptely given to these men, not because they be pure
no more than were the Heretics called Cathari, but because they think them
selves to be mundiores cateris, more pure than others, as Cathari did, and
separate them selves from all other Churches and congregations as spotted and
defiled. Because also they suppose the Church which they have devised to be
without all impuritie.

An answer to the admonition.
Admonition.
Seeing that nothing in this mortal life is more diligently to be sought for,
and carefully to be looked unto 2. Reg. 23. 2. Chro. 17. 2. Chro. 29.30.31.
Psalm. 132.2.3.4. Mat. 21.12. Johan. 2.15.
than the restitution of true religion and reformation of Gods church: it shall
be your parts (dearly beloved) in this present Parliament assembled, as much
as in you lies to promote the same, and to employ your whole labor and
study, not only in abandoning all Popish remnants both in ceremonies and
regiment, but also in bringing in and placing in Gods church those things
only, which the Lord himself Deute. 4.2. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
in his word commands. Because it is not enough to take pains in taking away
evil, Psalm. 37.27. Romans 12.9.
but also to be occupied in placing good in the stead thereof. Now because many
men see not all things, and the 1. Cor. 2.14.
world in this respect is maruellously blinded, it has been thought good to
prosfer to your godly considerations a true platform of a Church reformed, to
the end that it being laid before your eyes, to behold the great unlikeness
between it and this our English church: you may learn either with perfect
Psalm. 31.6. Psalm. 13 9.22
hatred to detest the one, and with singular love to embrace, and careful
endeavor to plant the other: or else to be without excuse before Johan. 15.21
the majesty of our God, who (for the discharge of our conscience, and
manifestation of his truth) has by us revealed unto you at this present, the
sincerity and simplicity of his Gospel. Not that you should either 1. Tim
3.8.
wilfully with stand, or vngratiously tread Math. 7.6.
the same under your feet, for God does not disclose his will to any such
end, but that you should yet now at the length with all your main and might,
endeavor that Christ (whose Math. 11.31.
easy yoke and light burden we have of long time cast of from us) might
rule and reign in his Church by the scepter of his word only.

Answer.
I Will not answer words, but matter, nor bare affirmations or negations, but
reasons: and therefore in as few words as I can, I will comprehend many lines.

But before I enter into their reasons, I think it not amiss to examine that
assertion which is the chief and principal ground (so far as I can gather)
of their Book: that is, that those things only are to be placed in the
Church, which the Lord him self in his word commands: As though they
should say, nothing is to be tolerated in the Church of Christ, touching
either doctrine, order, ceremonies, discipline, or government, except it he
expressed in the word of God. And therefore the most of their arguments in
this book be taken ab authoritate negative, which by the rules of Logique
prove nothing at all.

It is most true, that nothing ought to be tolerated in the Church, as
necessary unto salvation, or as an article of faith, except it be expressly
contained in the word of God, or may manifestly thereof be gathered: and
therefore we utterly condemn and reject Transubstantiation, the sacrifice of
the Mass, the authority of the bishop of Rome, woorshipping of Images, etc.

And in this case an argument taken Ab authoritate Scripturae negative, is
most strong: As for example: It is not to be found in Scripture, that the
Bishop of Rome ought to be the head of the Church, and therefore it is not
necessary to salvation, to believe that he ought to be the head of the
Church. etc.

It is also true, that nothing in ceremonies, order, discipline, or government
in the Church is to be suffered, being against the word of God: And therefore
we reject all ceremonies, wherein there is any opinion to salvation,
woorshipping of God, or merit: As creeping to the cross, holy bread, holy
water, holy candle. etc.

But, that no ceremony, order, discipline, or kind of government may be in
the Church, except the same be expressed in the word of God, is a great
absurdity, and breeds many inconveniences.

The Scripture has not prescribed any place or time wherein or when the Lords
Supper should be celebrated, neither yet in what manner. The Scripture has
not appointed what time or where the congregation shall meet for common
prayer, and for the hearing of the word of God, neither yet any discipline for
the correcting of such as shall contemn the same.

The scripture has not appointed what day in the week should be most meet
for the Sabbath day, whether Saturday, which is the Jews Sabbath, or the day
now observed, which was appointed by the church.

The Scripture has not determined what form is to be used in Matrimony, what
words, what prayers, what exhortations.

The Scripture speaks not one word of standing, sitting, or kneelyng at the
Communion, of meetyng in Churches, fields, or houses, to hear the word of
God: of preaching in pulpets, chaires, or otherwise: of baptizing in fontes, in
basins, or rivers: openly or privately, at home, or in the church, every day in
the week, or on the Sabbath day only. And yet no man (as I suppose) is so
simple to think that the Church has no authority to take order in these
matters. I pray you what mente Saint Paul in the.1. Corinth. 14. after he had
prescribed certain orders unto them to be observed in the Church, thus
generally to conclude? Omnia decenter and ordine fiant, Let all things be
done decently and in order. Does he not there give unto them authority to
make orders in the Church, so that all things he done in order and
decently? The best interpreters do understand this as a general rule given
unto the church to examine her traditions and constitutions by: And therefore
without all doubt their judgment is, that the Church has authority in
external things to make orders and appoynte laws, not expressed in the word
of GOD, so that this rule of the Apostle be observed.

Now if either godly Councels or ancient fathers were any thing at all
regarded of these men (as they be not, such is their arrogancy) this
controversy might soon be decided.

For the most ancient fathers and best learned, as Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus,
Tertulian, Cypria^ and other do expressly declare, that even from the Apostles
time, the Church has always had authority in such matters, and has
observed diverse orders and ceremonies not once mentioned in the word of God.

That notable learned father Augustine has diverse sayings touching this
matter worthy to be noted. In his Epistle ad Casulanum. 86 he says thus: In
his rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura diuina, mos populi Dei, vel
instituta maiorum, pro lege tenenda est. In those things wherein the holy
Scripture has determined no certainty, the custom of the people of God and
the traditions or decrees of our forfathers, are to be holden for a law.
Whereby it is manifest, that those things may be retained in the Church,
which are not expressed in the Scripture. In the same Epistle he reports the
answer that Ambrose made unto him, being demanded whether it were lawful
to fast on the Sabbath day, or not to fast, seeing that among the Churches
there was some diversity in this point. Quando hi^ sum (says he) non ieiuno
Sabbato quando, Romae sum, iei^no Sabbato: and ad quamcunque ecclesiam
veneritis, eius morem seruate, si pati scandalum non vultis aut f^cere. When I
am here, I fast not on the Sabbath, when I am at Rome I do fast on the
Sabbath: and to what Church soever you come, keep the custom thereof, if
you will neither suffer offense nor give offense. The whole Epistle is
worthy of reading.

That which he writes in his Epistle Ad Ianuarium.118. is a most plain
declaration of his Judgment in this matter: Illa autem quae non scripta sed
tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orb obseruantur, dantur
intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenarijs concilijs, quorum est in
ecclesia saluberrima authoritas, co^mendata atque statuta retineri, sicuti quod
Domini passio and resurrectio, and ascensio in coelum, and aduentus de coelo
Spiritus sancti anniuersaria solennitate celebra^tur, and si quid aliud tale
occurrerit, quod seruatur ab vniuersa quacunque se diffundit ecclesia, Those
things which be not written, but kept by tradition, which are observed
thorovv the whole world, are to be understood either to be delivered unto
us from the Apostles themselves, or else decreed by general Councels, whose
authority is great in the Church, as that we yearly with solemnity
celebrate, the passion of the Lord and his resurrection, his ascension into
heaven, and the coming of the holy Ghost, and if there be any other thing
that is observed of the whole Church.

And again, Quod neque contra fidem neque contra bonos mores iniungitur,
indifferenter est habendum; and pro eorum inter quos viuitur societate
seruandum est, That which is enjoined, being neither against faith nor good
manners, is to be counted indifferent; and to be observed as the society of
those with whom we live requires.

In the same epistle answering this question (whether upon the Thursday before
Easter, the Lords Supper should be celebrated in the morning, or at night,
because Christ did institute this sacrament, and deliver the same to his
disciples after Supper) he gives these three rules worthy to be noted, the
first is this, If the holy Scripture prescribe any thing to be done, there is
no doubt but that must be observed, as it is there prescribed. The second is
this, That if any thing be universally observed of the whole Church (not
repugnant to the Scriptures) (for so he means) not to keep that, or to
reason of that is madness. The third, If it be not universally observed but
diversely in diverse Churches: Faciat quisque qu^d in ^a ecclesia in qua venit
inuenerit* Let every man do as he finds in that church in to the which
he comes: mod^ non sit contra fidem aut contra mores* So that it be not
against faith or good manners. For so he ^ddeth.

In the same Epistle again he says, That the Lord has not in scripture
declared in what order and manner his Supper should be celebrated, but left
that to his disciples. And in his hundred and ninteenth Ad Ianuarium: In those
things (says he) that be diversely observed in diverse places, this rule as most
profitable is to be kept, that those things which be not against faith,
neither good manners, and make something to exhort unto a better life,
wheresoever they are instituted, we ought not only not to disallovve them,
but to praise them, and to follovv them. By all these places of this learned
father it is euidente, that it has been received from time to time as a
certain troth, that the Church of Christ has authority to ordeyn and
constitute as shall be necessary in those things before of me rehearsed.

For a further proof hereof, I could allege, that ancient and learned
father Justinius Martyr in his second Apology pro Christianis, and in his
book of questions. Tertullian in his book De corona militis. Basile also in
his.63. Epistle written to the mynisters in Neocesaria* Eusebius libr. 5.
Ecclesiasti. histor. cap. 25. and. 26. and diverse other, but I omit them for
brevity sake. Neither do I allege these learned Fathers, because I think
their authority any thing at all preuayleth with the authors of the Libell,
but for the wise, discreet, humble and learned, whose humility and wisdom
will not suffer them to despise the judgments of so learned and godly fathers.

But I trust master Caluines judgment will wey somethyng with them, who in
his Institutions Cap. 13. Sects. 31. C. 32. speaking of Traditions, says on
this sort.

Because the LORD has both faithfully and plainly comprehended and declared
in the holy ^criptures, the whole sum of true righteousness, and all the
parts of the true vvoorshippyng of him, and what so ever is necessary unto
salvation, therefore in those things he is only to be heard as a master or
teacher: But because in external discipline and ceremonies, he would not
particularly prescribe what we ought to follow, because he foresaw that this
depended upon the state and condition of the time, neither did judge one form
or manner to be agreeable to all ages: here we must have respect to those
general rules which he gave, that according to them might be examined such
things as the necessity of the Church requires to be commanded for order
and decency. Finally, because in these things he has expressed nothing,
(for that they are neither necessary to salvation, and may be diversely applied
to the edifying of the church according to the manner and custom of every
countreye and age,) Therefore as the commodity of the Church requires, and as
shall be thought convenient, both the old may be abrogated, and new appointed.
I grant that we must not rashely nor often, nor for every light cause make
innouations. But what hurts, and what edifyeth, Charity will best judge,
which if we will suffer too be the moderatrix, all shall be safe and
well. Now it is the office of Christian people with a free conscience,
without Superstition, with a godly mind, and ready and vvyllyng to obey,
to observe those things which are appointed according to this rule, not to
contemn them, nor negligentely to omit them, so far off ought they to be
from breaking them openly through disdain and contumacie.

But thou vvylte say, what liberty of conscience can there be in so precyse
and straighte obseruyng of them? Truly the liberty of conscience may well
stand with it, if we shall consider that these Laws and decrees to the
which we are bound, be not perpetual, or such as are not to be
abrogated: but only external rudimentes of man's infirmities: whereof,
notvvithstanding we all stand not in need, yet we all use them because one
of us is mutually bound to an other, to nourishe love and Charity among our
selves. This we may learn in the examples used before. What? does religion
consiste in a vvomans veil, that by no means she may go abroad bare
headed? Or is the commandment touching her silence, such as it may not be
broken without wickedness? or is there any mystery in kneeling, or in
burying the dead, that may not be omitted without great offense? no truly. For
if such have be required of a woman to help her neighbor, that she can have
no leisure to cover her head, she does not offend though she run out
bare headed. And there is a time and place, when and where it is as meet for
her to speak, as it is else where to hold her peace. Him also to pray
standing, which being let with some disease, can not kneel, there is
nothing forbids. To be short, it is better in time to burye the dead, than
to tarrye for a vvynding sheet, or some to carry him, until he stink above
the ground. But there is somevvhat even in those things which the custom
of Religion, laws, and decrees, humanity it self, and the rule of modesty
wills us to do, and to take heed of, wherein, if we shall thorough
ignorance and forgetfulness offend, there is no sin committed: But if
thorough contempt or contumacie, it is to be reproved. In like manner it
skilleth not what days be appointed, what hours, what manner of places
touching the buyldyng, what Psalms are to be song this day or that day:
And yet there must certain days be appointed, and certain hours, and a
place meet to receive all if we have any respect to keep unity and peace.
For what confusion were it, and of how great contentions and bravvlyngs
the seed and cause, if every man as he lists, might alter and change
those things which pertayne to the common state: Seeing that it vvoulde never
be brought to pass, that one thing could please all men, if such matters
were left indifferente, and committed to every man's arbitremente: now if
any man repyne or grudge, and will here seem vvyser than it behooves him,
let him consider by what reason he can excuse his vvayvvardnesse to the Lord.
Notvvithstanding that saying of Saint Paul must satisfye us: We have no
custom to contend, 1. Corin. 11.
neither the Churches of God. Thus far Calvin.

In which words we have these things to consider. First, that GOD has in
Scripture fully and plainly comprehended all those things that be necessary
to salvation.

Secondly, that in Ceremonies and external discipline, he has not in
Scripture particularly determined any thing, but left the same to his Church,
to make or abrogate, to alter or continue, to add or take away, as shall be
thought from time to time most convenient for the present state of the
Church, so that nothing be done against that general rule of Saint Paul.
1. Cor. 14. Let all things be done decently and in order.

Thirdly, that it is the duty of a Christian man without superstition
willingly to obey such constitutions, not to contemn them, not to neglect
them, much less stubbornly and arrogantly to break them.

Fourthly, that the obseruyng of them takes not liberty from the conscience,
because they be not made to be perpetual and inviolable, but to be altered as
time, occasion, and necessity requires.

Fifthely, that all ought to obey such ordinances, for charity sake,
though all stand not in need of them.

Sixthly, that if a man do violate them by ignorance or forgetfulness, he
does not offend: if by contempt or stubbornness, he does greatly offend.

Seventhly, that confusion (which is to suffer every man to do what he list)
is the seed of contention and brauling.

Last of all, that the true Ministers of God be not contentious, neither yet
the Churches of God.

These things (among other) I thought good to note out of master Caluines
words, which if they were diligently considered such contentions might soon be
ended.

Of the same judgment in this matter is master Bucer, as it apeareth in his
Epistle to master Alasco: These be his words: If you will not admit such
liberty and use of vesture to this pure and holy Church, because they have no
commandment of the Lord, nor example of it: I do not see how you can
grant to any Church, that it may celebrate the Lords Supper in the morning,
and in an open Church, especially consecrated to the Lord: that the Sacrament
may be distributed to men kneeling or standing, yea, to women as well as to
men. For we have received of these things neither commandment of the Lord,
nor any example, yea, rather the Lord gave a contrary example. For in the
evening, and in a private house he did make his Supper, and distributed the
Sacraments, and that to men only, and sitting at the table. Hac Buc^rus.

But to end this matter, is it not as lawful for a godly Prince, with the advice and consent of godly and learned Bishops, and other of the wysest, to
make orders in the Church, and laws Ecclesiastical, as it is for every
private man to use what manner and form of service he list, and other order
and discipline in his own parish, which these men seek and strive to do?

An examination of the places of Scripture alleged in this portion of the
admonition.
TO prove that nothing in this mortal life is more diligently to be sought
for, and carefully to be looked unto than the restitution of true religion and
reformation of Gods Church, there is noted. 2. Reg. 23. 2. Chron. 17. 2.
Chron. 29.30.31. Psalm. 132. Math. 21. John. 2. In the first place it is
declared how Josiah after he had found the book of the Law, reformed the
Church. In the second place Iehosaphat took away the high places and groves
out of Judah. etc. In the. 29.30.31. of the. 2. Chron. is described the doings
of Ezechias, in repayring the temple and reforming Religion. etc. In the. 132.
Psalm it is declared with what care David went about to build the temple of
God after that he was once established in his kingdom. In the. 21. of Math.
Jesus went into the temple, and cast out all them that sold and boughte in
the temple. etc. the like he did in the second of John. All this is confessed
to be true, and no man denies it. And I pray God make us thankful for the
Queens majesty, who has not been slack in this point, but has like a
virtuous, religious, and godly Prince, in the very entering into her reign,
notwithstanding the multitude of her adversaries both at home and abroad,
abolished all superstition, and restored the simplicity of the Gospel. But
these men allege these places to the discredit of this reformation, and of
the whole gouernemente of this Church. How aptly and how truly, let godly,
wise, and learned men judge.

To prove that these things only are to be placed in Gods Church, which God
him self in his word commands, is noted the fourth and the twelfth of
Deuteronomy. Ye shall put nothing to the word that I command you, neither shall you
take any thing therefrom. etc. And in the other place: Whatsoever I command
you, take heed you do it, thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought
therefrom. God in the old law to his people, prescribed perfect and absolute
laws, not only moral and judicial, but ceremonial also: neither was there
the least thing to be done in the Church omitted in the law. And therefore for
them at that time, and during that state, it was not lawful to add any thing,
nor to take any thing away, no not in ceremonies or other civil laws: now in
the time of the Gospel God has left unto his Church expressed in his word,
a perfect rule of faith, and manners, and sufficient to salvation, and cursed is
he that shall add any thing to it, or take any thing from it in that behalf,
for therein it is perfect and absolute. But as he has left the Judicial law
to the discretion of the Magistrate, to add thereunto, or take therfrom, or
alter and change the same, so that no law be made against the rule of faith
and good manners expressed in the word of God: so has he left authority unto
his Church to make laws, and appoynte orders and ceremonies, as shall from
time to time be thought most expedient and profitable for the same: so that
nothing be done contrary to his word, or repugnaunt to the same. And this
authority has the Church used even from the Apostles time, as it is manifest
both by the Scriptures, Acto. 6. Acto. 15. 1. Cor. 11. and other
Ecclesiastical stories and ancient fathers, as is before by me proved.

But to come to the words of Deuteronomy. themselves, what is it to add to the word
of God, or to take from it? truly to think otherwise, or teach otherwise of
God than he has in his word revealed: those take from the word that believe
less tha^ in ye word is expressed: those add to the word, first, which teach
or decree any thing either in matters of faith or ceremonies, contrary to the
word. Secondly, those that make any thing necessary unto salvation, not
contained in the word. Thirdly, such as make any religion, or opinion of
merit in any thing that they them selves have invented besides the word of
God. Last of all, they add to the word, which forbid that for a thing of it
self unlawful, which Gods word does not forbid, and make that sin, which
Gods word does not make sin. But such as truly and sincerely embrace the
word of God, and admit nothing contrary unto it, if in government and
ceremonies without any wicked or superstitious opinion, they appoint or retain
such as they know not to be against the word of God, and profitable for the
present state of the Church, can not truly be said to add any thing to the
word of God, or take any thing from it, though the same be not expressed in
the word.

The other places noted in this margent, as Psalm. 37. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 2. and
the rest, are not alleged to prove any thing in controversy, but only
without judgment placed in the margente to make a show: how aptely they be
applied I leave to the consideration of the diligent Reader.

This one thing I can not but marvel at, that these fellows so please them
selves in the platform of their Church, and attribute so much thereunto,
that they exhort, nay rather charge the court of Parliament, with perfect
hatred to detest the present state of the Church, and with singular love to
embrace that which they prescribe in this book, and so move them rather to
this perfect hatred of us, and singular love of them selves, they use the
authority of the 31. and 39. Psalm. In the one David says, that he has
hated them that give themselves to dec^pfull vanities, because the trusts in
the Lord. In the other speaking of the contemners of God, of wicked and bloody
men, and of such as blaspheme God, and be his enemies, he says, I hate the^
with an unfeigned hatred. etc.

As though all such as like or allows of the present state of the Church of
this Realm of England, gave them selves to deceytfull vanities, were
contemners of God, wicked and bloody men, blasphemers of God, and his enemies.
I will not aggrauate this blasphemy of theirs: let Prince, nobles, and all
other lovers of God and his word consider diligently this spirit, and in time
prevent the burning malice of the same: no Turk, no Jew, no Papist, could
possibly have spoken more spightfully of this Church and state: but such is
the spirit^ of arrogancy. To the like effect they allege the.15. of John. 1.
Tim. 3. Mat. 7. and.11. as though they only had the word of God, and were of
the Church, and we contemners and reiecters of the same. O where is humility?
Truly if these men be not by discipline bridled, they will work more harm to
this church, tha^ ever ye Papist did.

Admonition.
May it therefore please your wisdoms to understand, we in England are so
far of, from having a Church rightly reformed, according to the prescripte
of Gods word, that as yet we are not come to the outward face of the same.
For to speak of that wherein all consent, and whereupon all writers accord.
The outward marks whereby a true christian church is known, are preaching of
the word purely, ministering of the sacraments sincerely, and Ecclesiastical
discipline, which consists in admonition and correcting of faults severely.
Touching the first, namely the ministers of the word, although it must be
confessed, that the substance of doctrine by many delivered is sound and good,
yet herein it fails, that neither the ministers thereof are according to Gods
word proved, elected, called or ordained: nor the function in such sort so
narrowly looked unto, as of right it ought, and is of necessity required.

Answer.
The proposition that these libellers would prove is, that we in England are
so far from having a church rightly reformed according to ye prescript of
Gods word, that as yet we are not come to the outward face of the same. For
proof hereof they use this argument: There be three outward marks whereby a
true christian Church is known: preaching of the word purely, ministering of
the sacraments sincerely, and Ecclesiastical discipline, which consists in
admonition and correction of faults severely. But this Church of England (for
so in effect they say) is void of all these, Ergo, it has not so much as the
external face of a Church. To prove that the word of God is not preached
truly, they reason on this sort: The ministers of the word are not according
to Gods word proved, elected, called or ordained: nor the function in such sort
so narrowly looked unto, as of right it ought, and is of necessity required:
And therefore the word of God not truly preached. Here (thanks be to God) they
allege not one article of faith, or point of doctrine, nor one piece of any
substance to be otherwise taught and allowed of in this church (for not every
man's ^olly is to be ascribed to the whole church) than by ye prescript word of
God may be justified, neither can they. Now how this conclusion follows
(though the antecedent were true) lef those judge that be learned. The
ministers are not rightely proved and elected. etc. Ergo the word of God is
not truly preached: how wicked soever the man is, howsoever he intrude himself
into the ministry, yet may he preach the true word of God: for the truth of
the doctrine does not in any respect depend upon the goodness or euilnesse
of the man: I pray you how were you and some other of your adherents, called,
elected. etc. But to come to the purpose: They would prove that the ministers
of the word in this Church of England, are not according to Gods word
proved, elected, called, or ordained.

What force and pithe is in their arguments shall appear in the several
answers to every one of the^. This one thing I must let you understand, that
these men seek to defaco this Church of England by the self same grounds
that the Papists do: although by another kind of proof. For what have the
Papists else to say, but that we have no Ministers, because they ^e, (...)
rightly called, and so consequently, no word, no sacraments, no discipline, no
Church. And certainly if it were well examined, I believe it would fall out,
that the authors of this book have conspired with the Papists to overthrow
(if they could) the state both of this Church and Realm, howsoever subtly
they seem to detest Papistrie. But now to their reasons.

The first is this. For whereas in the old church a trial was had Acts. 1.12.
Acts. 6.3. 1. Tim. 3.2.7.8 Tit. 1.6.
both of their ability to enstructe, and of their godly conversation also:
now by the letters commendatorie of some one man, noble or other, tag and rag,
learned and unlearned, of the basest 1. Reg. 12.31
sort of the people (to the slander of the gospel in the Romans 2.14.
mouths of the adversaries) are freely received.

It is true that in the old Church trial was had of their ability to
instruct, and of their godly conversation: But the place in the margent
alleged out of the first Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles makes nothing
for that purpose: being therein no mention at all of any trial made either of
learning or manners, but only of presenting two, and of praying and casting of
lottes: And master Calvin in his Institutions says plainly, that out of this
place of the Acts and example, there can be no certain rule gathered of
electing and choosing Ministers, for as that ministry was extraordinary, so
was the calling also. Read master Calvin and you shall soon see how little
this place, so often in this margent coted, makes for that purpose for the
which it is coted. In the sixth of the Acts, mention is made of Deacons only,
whom you will not allow to be ministers of the word, and therefore this
place serves not your turn, neither is there any thing spoken of any trial,
but only they are willed to look out among them, seven men of honest report,
and full of the holy Ghost and wisdom to be appointed Deacons. The rule of
saint Paul in the.1. Timo. 3. and Tit. 1. is to be followed. And the Book of
ordering Ministers and Deacons, set forth and allowed by this Church of
England requires, that who soever is to be admitted into any order of the
ministry, should so be tried, examined, and proved, both for learning and
life, as saint Paul there requires. Read the Book with indifferency and
judgment, and thou can not but greatly commend it. If any man neglect his
duty in that point, his fault must not be ascribed to the rule appointed,
neither yet to the whole Church. Is the law evil, because some Lawyers in
their office swerve from it? This is a fallation a non causa ad causam. Again
if some be admitted into the ministry, either void of learning, or lewd in
life, are all the rest for their sake to be condemned? Or is this a good
argument, some be admitted into the ministry without trial, therefore none is
lawfully admitted into the ministry? or some ministers be unlearned and
evil, Ergo, there is none good? I think you will not deny, but that there is
now within this Church of England, as many learned, godly, grave, wise, and
worthy ministers of the word, as there is in any one realm or particular
Church in all Christendom, or ever has been heretofore.

Touching letters commendatorie of some one man noble or other, it may be that
the parties which give these letters be of that zeal, learning, and
godliness, that their particular testimony ought to be better credited, than
some other subscribed with an hundred hands. And I think there is both noble
men and other, who may better be trusted in that point, than a great number of
parishes in England, which consist of rude and ignorant men, easily moved to
testify any thing: And in many places for the most part, or altogether,
drowned in Papistrie. I know no reason to the contrary, and I see no
scripture alleged, why one learned, godly and wise man's testimony, may not be
received in such a case, and yet the book expresses no such thing, but
requires due examination of learning, and sufficient testimonial of
conversation, and gives liberty to any one particular man, to object any
crime against any such as are to be ordered, and wills that the party
accused be kept from the ministry, until he have cleared himself of the
crimes objected. If tag and rag be admitted, learned and unlearned, it is the
fault of some, not of all, nor of the law: And if they were called and elected
according to your fantasy, there would some creep in, as evil as any be now,
and worse too.

You say that there be admitted into the ministry of the basest sort of the
people: I know not what you mean by the basest sort: This I am sure of, that
the ministry is not now bound to any one tribe, as it was to the tribe of
Leui, in Ieroboams time: Now none is secluded from that function of any degree,
state, or calling, so that those qualities be found in him, which in that
office are to be required.

I marvel to what purpose the twelfth chapter of the first book of Kings is
here quoted, for Jeroboam is there reproved because he took the preesthood from
the tribe of Leui, to the which only it did apperteyne.

The Papists never took so great occasion of s^andring the gospel, at the
ignorance of the ministers (for they have of them selves those that be as
ignorant and inore) as they do at your schisms and fond opinions, wherewith
you disquiet the peace of the Church, and lay stumbling blocks before the
weak, for the which God will surely call you to account.

The second chapter to the Romans is here quoted only to paynt the margent.

The second. In those days Hebr. 5.4. Ezech. 44.10 12.13. Ierem. 23.
no idolatrous sacrificers of Heathenish priests were appointed to be preachers
of the Gospel: but we allow and like well of Popish mass mongers, men for all
seasons, King Henry's priests, King Edwards priests, Queen Mary's preests,
who of a truth if Gods word were precisely followed, should from the ^ame be
utterly removed.

The place in the fifth chapter of the Hebrews quoted in the Margent, speaks
nothing of Idolatrous sacrificers or Heathenish priests, but only by the
example of Aaron proves, that no man ought to intrude himself into the office
of a Bishop or Pree^t, except he be called of God. Lord how dare these men thus
wring the scriptures? In the.23. of the Prophet Hieremie there is much spoken
against false Prophets: but not one word (for any thing that I see) to
prove that idolatrous sacrificers may not be admitted to preach the Gospel.
The places of the.44. of Ezechiell have some show in them, for there the Lord
commands the Levites which had committed Idolatrye to be put from their
dygnitie, and not to be received into the Priests office, but to serve in
inferioure mynisteryes. I think you will not make this a general rule to
debarce such from preaching of the gospel, as have through infirmity fallen,
and be now with hearty repentance returned. We have many examples to the
contrary, Peter forswore his master Christ, which was as evil as
sacrifising to idolles, and yet he was not put from his Apostleshippe. We
have diverse examples in the Primitive Church, of such as by fear being
compelled to sacrifise to strange gods, after repented, and kept still the
office of preaching the Gospel, and did most constantly dye in the same.

I pray you what say you to master Luther, Bu^er, Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley,
etc. were not all these somtymes Massemongers, and yet singular and notable
instruments of promoting the Gospel and preaching the same? whereof many have
given testimony by sheding their blood.

And by whose Ministry especially has the Gospel been publyshed, and is as
yet in this Church of England, but by such as have been Massemongers, and
now zealous, godly, and learned preachers? God in that place of the Prophet
Ezechiel shows how grievous a sin idolatry is, especially in the preests, but
he prescribes no general rule of secluding them from their ministry, if
they falling, afterward repent.

Besides this, there is a great difference betwixt the severity of the law,
and the lenity of the Gospel, betwixt the external regimente of the Church
before Christ, and the Church after Christ, neither can you make the one in
all points correspondent to the other: Likewise betwixt the declining of those
Preests, which was wholly from God to Gentilitie, and the falling of ours to
Papistrie, which confesses the same articles of faith that we do, (although
not syncerely.) It is one thing wholly to worship false gods, an other thing
to worship the true God falsely and superstitiously. But among all other things
I would gladly know wherein king Edwards priests have offended you? It is
happy you let Queen Elizabeth's priests alone: I marvel whose Preests you
are?

The third. Then 1. Tim. 4.11.
they taught others, now they must be instructed them selves, and therefore like
young children they Ministers of London enjoined to learn master Novvels
Catechism.
must learn Catechismes.

God be thanked, there is a great number of ministers that can teach others,
and may be your schoolemasters in all kind of learning, except you have more
than you utter in these treatises.

If they that find some want of learning in themselves, or that be crepte into
the ministry unlearned, either of their own accord, or by commandment of
their ordinary, read and learn godly and learned Cathechismes, they are to
be commended, and so is he that provoke them thereunto.

That Catechism which you in derision quote in the margent, is a book fit
for you to learn also: and I know no man so well learned, but it may become him
to read and learn that learned and necessary book. But some arrogant
spirits there be, that think them selves of all men best learned, and
disdain to learn of any.

That place of the fourth chapter of the first to Timothy does not forbid a
man to learn.

He that is a good and modest preacher will not disdayn as well to be taught, as
to teach.

The fourth. Then election was made by the common Act. 1.26.
consent of the whole Church: now every one picketh out for himself some
notable good benefice, he obteyneth the next aduouson, by money or by favor,
and so thinks himself sufficiently chosen.

To prove that the election was then made by the common consent of the whole
Church, you quote the first of the Acts. I told you before master Caluines
judgment of that place: There is no mention of electing by any common
consante: And in the place by you quoted which is the. 26. verse, it is
declared how they gave forth their lottes, and that the lot fell on Mathias,
and that he was by a common consent compted with the eleven Apostles: here is
no mention of any election: But when he was extraordinarily through Gods
providence by lot appointed, then they all compted him and esteemed him as one
of the Apostles, where as before, some of them would have had Barsabas.

I think your meaning is not to have always two at once to be presented to the
ministry, and then one of them to be chosen by lot: I know none of that
opinion. Wherefore this example is singular and extraordinary, and therefore no
general rule to be followed.

If any man seeks a benefice extraordinarily or unlawfully. If any man desire
honorem, the honor: not onus, the burden: opes, the riches: not opus, the
work: he has to answer for it: but I trust you will not accuse all,
though perhaps you know some, I mean of your selves, and peradventure your
own self.

The fifth. Then the congregation Act. 6.2.3.
had authority to call ministers: in steed thereof now they run, they ride,
and by unlawful suit and buying, preuente other suitors also.

To prove that the congregation had then authority to call ministers, you
allege the sixte of the Acts, which place of the Acts I touched before: It
speaks not of ministers of the word, but of deacons, which were appointed to
make provision for the poor only, (as you say) neither did the multitude of
the disciples (for so they be called) elect them, before they were willed so
to do by the twelve Apostles.

It may be that some use to run and ride, and by unlawful suit and buying,
prevent others, and it may be that you have experience hereof, all do not so,
this is the fault of the man, not of the calling: you may not ascribe men's
infirmities to a lawful order. The rule may be good, though it be by some
broken.

The sixth. Then no Act. 14.13. 2. Cor. 8.19.
minister placed in any congregation, but by the consent of the people, now
that authority is given into the hands of the Bishop alone, who by his sole
authority thrusts upon them such, as they many times, as well for dishonest
life, as also for lack of learning, may, and do justly dislyke.

To prove that no minister was placed in any congregation, but by consent of
the people, you allege the. 14. of the Acts, and of the. 2. to the Corinth.
the. 8. chapter. In the 14. of the Acts, verse. 23. for the which you have
quoted the 13. it is thus written: when they (that is Paul and Barnabas) had
ordained them elders by election (for so is some tra^slatio^) in every church,
and prayed and fasted. etc. The text is plain that Paul and Barnabas did
ordeyn them elders: and the greek word (...), although it signify to elect by
putting up of hands, yet it is the common opinion almost of al ecclesiastical
writers, that this word in scripture is used for the solemn manner of ordring
mynisters by the imposition of hands. Surely howsoever the word is taken, yet
here is no general rule prescribed of electing ministers. You may as well
conclude, that al things ought to be common, among Christians, because we
read Acts. 2. that all those which believed had all things common among them:
and that those which be converted to the Gospel ought to sell their goods
and lands to be distributed at the discretion of the mynisters, because they
did so, Art. 2. and 3. In the. 2. to the Corinthians. 8. The Apostle declares
how the Churches had chosen Luke (or as some think Barnabas) to be his
companion in his journey* But what makes this for electing of Mynisters and
How follows this argument? The Churches had chosen Luke or Barnabas, to be
Paul's companyon in his journey: therefore ministers of the word must be
elected by the people.

These three last reasons are all one, and the places of scripture which I have
set down and answered be alleged of you to prove that the election of
ministers, was then made by the common consent of the people, and that every
congregation had authority to call their ministry.

I do not deny but in the apostles time, and after even to Cyprians time, the
peoples consent was in many places required in the appointing of ministers: But
I say, that in the whole Scripture, there is no commandment, that it should
so be, nor any example that makes therein any necessary or general rule, but
that it may be altered as time and occasion serves. For in such matters not
commanded or prohibited in Scripture touching ceremonies, discipline, and
government, the Church has authority from time to time to appoynte that
which is most convenient for the present state as I have before declared.

And I add, that howesoeuer in the Apostles time, that kind of electing and
calling ministers was convenient and profitable: now in this state of the
Church, it were most pernicious and hurtful.

First because in the apostles time, the church was under the cross, and
therefore very few in comparison was there that embraced the gospel, and
commonly they kept together, or at the least met oftentimes, so yt one of them
was thoroughly known to another, and they themselves could best judge who among
them was the ^ittest to teach and instruct, having always diverse fit for that
function. Now the church is in prosperity, and therefore the number that
professes, great, and dispersed into diverse places, and in most parishes not
one fit for the ministry among them or known unto them: so that they should
call they know not whom.

Secondly in the Apostles time, all or the most that were Christians were
virtuous and godly, and such as did sincerely profess the word, and therefore
the election of their pastor might safely be committed to them: now the
church is full of hypocrites, dissemblers, drunkardes, whore mongers. etc. so
that if any election were committed to them, they would be sure to take one
like to themselves.

Thirdly, in the Apostles time, all that professed Christ had knowledge, and
were able to judge who were meets to be their pastor. Now the most be
ignorant and without judgment in such matters.

Fourthly, in the Apostles time there was in the Church no Idolaters, no
superstitious persons, no Papists: now the Church is full of Papists,
Atheistes, and such like. Who sees not therefore what strange ministers we
should have, if the election of them were committed to their several parishes?

Fifthly, in the Apostles time there was no Church established, being then no
christian Magistrates, and therefore the state of the Church was popular: now
there is christian Magistrates, and a Church established and subject to rulers.
etc.

Therefore this diversity of the state of the Church requires a diverse kind
of government, and an other kind of ordeyning Ministers. For this cause in
Concilio Laodicensi, which was Anno. 334. it was decreed, that the election of
Ministers should not be permitted to the people.

This alteration of government and orders in the Church of Christ is well set
out by Ambrose in the. 4. to the Ephe. upon these words, Et ipse dedit. etc.
where he says on this sort: That the number of Christians might increase and
be multiplied, in the beginning it was permitted to every one to preach the
Gospel, to baptize, and to expound the Scriptures, but when the Church was
enlarged there were certain parishes appointed, and governors and other
officers ordained in the Church. etc. Therefore the vvritings of the Apostles
do not in all things agree with the orders that are now in the Church. Thus
far Ambrose.

Musculus also in his common places answering to this question, why that
ministers of the word are not chosen now by the ministers and the people, as
they were in the primative Church, but appointed by the Magistrate, says thus:
Talis tum Ecclesiarum erat statiu vt aliter non essent eligendi ministri, quia
Christiano magistratu destituebantur. Sireuocas temporum illorum mores, primum
conditiones and statum quoque illorum reuoca. Such was then the state of
Churches, that they could choose their Ministers no otherwise, because they
had no christian Magistrates. If thou would have the manners and customs of
those times observed, then must thou call back their condition and state.

That Bishops have authority to admit ministers (which is here denied) it is
plain by that which is written. 1. Timo. 5. Manus cito ne cus imponas, Lay
thy hands rashly on none. These words Ambrose, Chrysostom, and al learned
writers, for the most part, do say to be an admonition to Timothy, that he
ought to be circumspect in appoynting of ministers. And to Titus. ca. 1. Paul
says that he left him at Creta, vt constitnat oppidatim presbiteros, that he
should appoint ministers in every town. This Hierome and others do expound
of the authority that Titus had in placing ministers in every Church. It is
the general consent of all the learned fathers, that it pertains to the
office of a Bishop to order and elect ministers of ye word. In this says
Hierome in Epist. ad Euagriu^. A Bishop does excel al other ministers, in that
the ordring, and appoynting of ministers does properly pertayne unto him. And
yet these men say that the right of ordring ministers does at no hand
apperteyne to a bishop. But for the order and manner of making ministers, peruse
the book made for that purpose, and as I said before, so I say again, if thou
have any judgment thou can not but like it, and allow of it.

The seventh. Then none admitted to the ministry, but Acts. 1.25.
a place was void aforehande, to which he should be called: but now bishops
(to whom the right of ordering Ministers does at no hand appertain) do
make 60.80. or 100. at a clap, and send them abroad into the country like
masterlesse men.

To prove this you cite in the margent the first of the Acts, where it is
declared how Mathias was chosen into the place of Judas, to make up the number
of the twelve Apostles. Surely this is but a slender reason: Mathias was chosen
into the place of Judas: Ergo no man must be admitted into the ministry,
except a place beforehande be void, to the which he should be called. Every
mean Sophister will laughe at the childishness of this argument.

Mathias was chosen to be an Apostle, and not to any certain cure, and
therefore this example proves nothing: If you had used mo reasons I would
have answered them. What certain cure had Paul, Barnabas, Philippe,
Epaphroditus, Andronicus, Iunius, and yet they were not of the twelve Apostles?
It is a strange doctrine to teach that a man may not preach out of his own
cure: It is more strange to say, that it is not lawful for him to preach,
except he have some Pastoral cure, being of him self able to live, and not
mynding to be burdensome to the Church. If you seek for any text in
Scripture to confirm this doctrine, you can find none: if you seek for
examples to the contrary, you shall find plenty.

That the ordering of Ministers does appertain to Bishops properly, which you
here utterly deny, I have proved before: they be best able to judge of men's
ability to that function. It is their especial charge to see that there be
meet ministers in the Church, and therefore good reason that they should have
the chief stroke in ordering of them: and yet in that business they trust not
them selves alone, they have other godly and learned ministers to assist them
in examining such as are to be admitted: they also require a testimonial of
life and conversation from that place wherein those that are to be Ministers,
have been latest and longest remaining.

If such numbers as you say be admitted at one time and sent abroad like
masterlesse men, that is the fault of the person, not of the law: neither is
it a sufficient cause to debar any learned, godly and meet man from the
ministry, able to live of him self, or having any other Ecclesiastical
living, as Prebende, fellowship in some college of either University, or such
like, though he have no pastoral charge and cure, neither shall you ever be
able to prove, but that a man disposed and able to ^o good in the Church of
Christ, may be admitted into the ministry, although he have no
Ecclesiastical living at all.

I mislike runnagates and masterlesse men, and such as are compelled to seek
up and down to get them services, as well as you, and I hope the redress
thereof is already determined.

The eight. Then after just trial and vocation they were admitted to their
function, by laying on of the hands of the company of the 1. Tim 4.14.
eldership only: Now there is (neither of these being looked unto) required
an Albe, a surplesse, a vestiment, a pastoral staff, beside that ridiculous,
and (as they use it to their new creatures) blasphemous saying, receive the
holy Ghost.

Of trial and vocation I have spoken before. To prove laying on of hands. etc.
is alleged the first of Timothy the fourth chapter, this is but a ceremony,
and it is now used: For the Bishop and other learned and grave ministers there
present, do lay their hands upon such as are admitted into the mynisterie.

Now if you would know what is here mente by Seniors, you may learn if you
please of Oecumenius, a learned and old writer, who expounds this place of
Timothy on this sort, (...). By Seniors he means Bishops: and so says
Chrysostom in like manner.

In the book now allowed of making Deacons and Ministers, and consecrating of
Bishops, there is neither required Albe, Surplesse, Uestiment, nor pastoral
staff, read the Book from the beginning to the ending. And therefore this is
a false and untrue report.

To use these words (receive the holy ghost) in ordering of ministers, which
Christ him self used in appoynting his Apostles, is no more ridiculous and
blasphemous, than it is to use the words that he used in the supper: But it is
blasphemy, thus outragiously to speak of the words of Christ. The Bishop by
speaking these words, does not take upon him to give the holy ghost, no more
than he does to remitte sins, when he pronounces the remyssion of sins:
but by speaking these words of Christ, receive the holy ghost, whose sins
soever ye remitte, they are remitted. etc. he does show the principal duty
of a minister, and assures him of the assistaunce of Gods holy spirit, if he
labor in the same accordingly.

You call them his new creatures, these be but words of scurrilitie, to be
hissed at, not to be answered.

The ninth. Then every pastor Act 20.28 Ephe. 4.11. Tit. 1.5. 1. ^^t 5.2.
had his flock, and every flock his shepherd, or else Act 14.23.
shepherds: Now they do not only run fisking from place to place (a
miserable disorder in Gods church) but Esaie 5.8.
courtously join living to living, making shipwreck (...)
of their own consciences, and being but one shepherde (nay, would to God
they were shepherds and not wolves) have many flocks.

To prove this, you allege the twentieth of the Acts, the.4. to the Ephe.
the.1. to Titus, the.5. chapter of the.1. of Peter: which places declare that
there were Pastors which had flocks: but they prove not that every Pastor had a
flock: nevertheless howsoever you prove it, true it is, that if he be a
Pastor he must have a certain flock, for therein does a Pastor differ from the
rest of the degrees of m^nisters in Christ's church, mentioned in that fourth
chapter to the Ephesians. But you must learn, that there be not only Pastors
in the Church, but also Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors, Ephe. 4. 1.
Cor. 12. who all are called Ministers, and have their place in the Church of
Christ: as it shall be proved if you deny it.

You say also that every flock had his shephearde or else shepheardes. And to
prove that one flock had mo shepherds, you cite Acts. 14. which makes
nothing for your purpose: yet I deny not but one flock may have mo Pastors,
for I see nothing in the word of God against it.

To be short, you say now they go fisking from place to place, and couetously
join living to living. etc. And being but one shephearde have many flocks.
If you mean by fisking from place to place, such as preach in diverse places,
and not in their own cures only, your phrase of fisking, is too light and
scurrilous: when you allege any reason why men may not go from place to place
to preach, where they think it necessary, you shall either be answered or
yielded to: In the mean time I think it agreeable both to Gods word and
conscience.

Against couetously joining of living to living, you allege the fifte of Esaias,
which is far from your purpose, for the Prophet speaks there of such as
oppress the poor, and will not suffer them to have a place to dwell in: Yet I
do not allow such as couetously join living to living, of what kind or
degree of men soever they be. But I see no cause why one good and diligent
Pastor, may not rather be credited with mo flocks, than a slothful,
unskillful, or negligent with one. You think I suppose that there be diverse
parishes in England which might^ be joined in one, and so committed to one
man: and why may they not be so in like manner when they be distinct? For who
divided paryshes? and who has authority to join them? Did not Dionisius a
Monk, and Pope of Rome For it is thus written of him, Tom. 1. conci. Dionisius
Monachus Papa presbiteris Eccles^as diuisit, and caemiteria* parochiasque and
Dioeceses constituit. Dionisius a Monk and Pope divided to Priests, Churches
and Churcheyardes, and appointed parishes and dioces.

I speak not this to encourage any man to take more upon him than with a good
conscience he may well discharge. And I would wish you to abstain from
judging to far, when you see a man that has mo livings use him self
uprightly and carefully in them all, and otherwise profitably to the whole
Church.

The tenth. Then the ministers were Philip. 2.20 25. Colos. 1.7. Luke. 9.2.
preachers: now bare readers. And if any be so well disposed to preach in their
own charges, they may not without my Lords license.

Your places of Scripture alleged to prove that Ministers were then Preachers,
prove not that all were then Preachers. The place in the.2. to the Philip. 20.
verse, is this: For I have no man like minded, who vvil faithfully care for
your matters: And in the.25. verse: But I suppose it necessary to send my
brother Epaphroditus to you, my companion in labor and fellow soldier,
even your messanger, and he that ministered unto me such things as I vvanted.
Coloss. 1. verse.7. As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellovv servant,
which is for you a faithful minister of Christ. Quorsum haec?

How prove these places that al ministers then preached? That of Luke, ca. 9.
proves as well that they cured diseases, as that they preached, and therefore
out of that place you might as well conclude that all ministers ought to be
curers of sickenesses, as well as preachers: This I write, only to let you
understand your vanity and ignorance in quoting so many Scriptures to so
small purpose.

I wish that every minister were a preacher, but that being impossible as the
state is now, I see not how you can condemn reading ministers, seeing
reading is necessary in the Church, and faith comes as well by readyng the
Scriptures in the book, as by rehearsing of them without book. In the 31. of
Deuter. it is thus written: Leges verba legis huius coram omni Israel. etc.
Thou shall reed the words of this book before al Israel. etc. S. Paul says
in the.15. to the Rom: Quaecu^que scripta sunt. etc. whatsoever is vvritte^,
etc. But I never heard reading of the scripture, reading of prayers, reading of
Homilies, taken out of the scripture, condemned, but only by the authors of
this book, and by the Zuinfildians.

You here find fault that if a preacher be disposed to preach in his cure, he
may not do it without my Lords license.

Where the word of God is professed, and Christian Magistrates govern, there
it is meet that no man should take upon him any function, except he be by
the magistrate* (to whom it does apperteyne) thereunto admitted: And for as
much as there be always in the Church hypocrites, heretics, schismatikes,
and other evil disposed persons which study for nothing more than to
disquiet the state of the Church, and to occupy the people with their
factions, it is necessary that none should be admitted to preach in any
place, without he be thereunto licenced by the Bishop, who ought to have a
diligent care in that matter.

I suppose you are not of that mind, that men may now in this Church under
christian magistrates preach without license: It has always ben the opinion of
wise, learned, and godly men, that since the apostles time none were ordinarily
called to the office of preaching, but such as were called of God by man: only
Anabaptists and some other sect of heretics teach the contrary.

The eleventh. In those days known 1. Samuel. 9.28 Mat, 26.48 Mat. 26.73.
by voice, learning, and doctrine: now they must be discerned from other by
popish and antichristian apparel, as cappe, gown, tippet. etc.

To prove that in those days ministers were known by voice, learning, and
doctrine, you cite the ninth of the first of Samuel: and the.26. of Matthew. In
all that ninth chapter of Samuel, there is not one word that makes for this
purpose, except you mean this, that when Saul asked of Samuel where the
Seers house was: Samuel answered again that he was the Seer: I^ this be to be
known by voice, learning, and doctrine, the ignorantest mynister that is, may
soon be known by his voice, lerning, and doctrine: for if you ask him where
is such a man, he can answer you I am he. In ye.26. of Matthew the first place,
verse.48. is this, Now he that betrayed him, had given them a token, saying:
Whosoever I shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him. The multitude that
came with Judas, knew Christ by Judas kissyng of him, therefore, in those days
ministers were known by voice, learning, and doctrine, the second place in
that chapter alle^ged verse.73. is this, They that stood by, said unto Peter,
surely thou art also one of them: For even thy speech bevvrayeth thee. Peter
was suspected by his speech to be a Galilean, and therefore one of Christ's
apostles, Ergo a mynister was then known by voice, learning, and doctrine. You
may as well of that place gather thus. Peter preached not Christ then, but
denied him, Ergo, a mynister must be known by denying of Christ. Lord God,
what dare not these men allege for their purpose?

I know that the chief tokens whereby a mynister ought to be known, is
doctrine and learning: But you, childyshly abuse the Scripture, and play with
the same.

Now, you say, ministers must be discerned from other, by Popish and
Antichrystian apparel, as cappe, gown, tippet. etc. do you think that
because a minister ought to be known by his voice, learning, and doctrine,
therefore he may not be also known by his apparel? John the Baptist had
peculiar apparel, and was known by it: Christ had distinct apparel from
other, for his coat had never a seame.

Eusebius says, that Saint John the Apostle ware on his head a leaf or
thin plate like unto a Bishops miter. But what if none of the Prophets, what
if none of the Apostles (which you are not able to prove either of the
prophets or apostles) were known by their apparel? May not therefore Christian
magistrates in Christian commonweals, for order and decency appoint a
several kind of apparel, as well to mynisters as to other states of men?
^udges, Sergeantes, Aldermen, and Citizens, are known by their apparel, and
why may not ministers be so likewise? are they not under subjection? be they
not subject to civil laws and ordinances? ought they not to obey their
governors in all things not against the word of God?

If you doubt whether a particular kind of apparel differing from the lay
men, were ever appointed for ministers in the Church before the Popes
tyranny, and whether in these days it may be appointed in reformed
Churches, or no, hear the judgment of master Bulli^ger and master Gualter
in an Epistle written by them to master N. and master M. Their words be
these.

That in the ancient Church there was a particular fashion of apparel for
Priests, it appears in the Ecclesiastical history of Theodoret. libr. 2.
cap. 27. and of Socrat. libr. 6. cap. 22 No man is ignorant, which has but
lightly read over the monumentes of the ancient fathers, but that the
ministers used a cloak in their service. And therefore I said before that the
diversity of garments had not his original of the Pope. Eusebius cites out
of the ancient vvriters, that saint John the Apostle vvare on his head a
leaf or thin plate like unto a Bishops miter. Pontius Diaconus witnesses of
saint Cyprian the martyr, that when he offered his neck to the executioner,
he first gave him his cap, and the Deacon his upper garment, and so stood
apparelled in white linen. Moreover Chrysostom makes mention of white
apparel of ministers. Hitherto Bullinger and Gualter.

Peter Martyr likewise in an Epistle written to master Hoper says on this
sort: I will not grant that these diversities of vestures have their
beginnings of the Pope, for so much as I read in the Ecclesiastical
history, how that John the Apostle wore at Ephesus, where he dvvelled, a
Bishops apparel, terming it Petalum, seu lamina Pontificalis. As touching
saint Cyprian the holy martyr, Pontius the deacn vvriteth that a little
before he should be beheaded, he gave unto him that was appointed to behead
him, his vesture called Birrus, after he had put it of, and to the deacons he
gave his other vesture called Dalmatica, and so stood in linen. Chrysostom
makes mention of the white vesture of the ministers of the Church. Haec ille.

Socrates also in the second book of his Ecclesiastical history says, that
the father of Eustathius being bishop of Cesarea, did deprive the said
Eustathius his son being a priest, of his place and dignity, because he wore
apparel not comely for a priest to wear, nor agreeable to his order.

Therefore it is certain that ministers even from the Apostles time, have had
a distinct and several kind of apparel from other men.

But cappe, gown, tippet etc. You say, is Popish and Antichristian: This is
only said, and not proved. If you call it Popish and Antichristian, because it
was first invented by an Antichristian Pope: It is first to be considered
whether that be true or no. Then if it be true, whether every thing so
invented, is of necessity to be abolished.

It is certain that this apparel of ministers which you find your selves so
much grieved with, was appointed long before the Church of Rome declined from
the purity of Christ's religion, for Stephanus bishop of Rome, who lived the
year of our Lord.256. is said to be the first which did appoint this kind
of apparel for ministers, neither are you able to show that any antichristian
Pope invented the same: But admit it were so that this apparel was either
borrowed of the Jews, or taken from the Gentiles, or invented and used by some
Antichristian Pope, yet it follows not, but that the same may be well used of
Christians in the Church of Christ.

Augustine in his epistle ad Publicolam has this notable saying, Et cum
templa, idola, luci, and si quid huiusmodi data potestate euertuntur, quamuis
manifestum est cum id agimus, non ea nos honorare, sed potius detestari, ideo
tamen in vsus nostros priuatos duntaxat and proprios, non debemus inde aliquid
vsurpare, vt appareat nos pietate ista destruere, non auaritia. Cum vero in
vsus communes, non proprios ac priuatos, vel in honorem dei very conuertuntur,
hoc de illis fit quod de ipsis hominibus, cum ex sacrilegis and impijs in veram
religionem muta^tur. etc. When temples, idols, groves, and such like things by
authority be overthrown, although it is manifest, when we do that, we honor
them not but detest them, yet for all that we may not therefore convert them
or use them to our own private uses only and commodity, that it may appear
that we destroy them for religion sake, and not for covetousness: but when
they are converted, not into private and our own use, but into common uses or
to the honor of the true God, that is done and brought to pass in them, which
is done and brought to pass in men themselves, when of Idolaters and wicked
persons they are changed into true religion. This has God him self taught
in those testimonies which thou thy self have used, when as god him self
commanded that of that same grove which was dedicated to strange Gods,
there should be wood taken for his sacrifices: and of Hierico, that all the
gold and silver, and brass should be brought into the tresurie of the Lord.
Wherefore that also which is written in Deuteronomie, thou shalt not covet
their silver nor their gold, neither shalt thou take any thing thereof to thy
self least thou offend, because it is abomination unto the Lord thy God. etc.
It manifestly appears that either private uses is forbidden in such things,
or that nothing should so be brought into thy house that it be honored: for
then it is abomination etc. Hitherto Augustine.

By these words it does manifestly appear that even things altogether
dedicated to Idols and used in idolatry may be converted to common uses, and
used in the service of God and to his honor: But not to private uses nor
superstitiously.

Peter Martyr in the Epistle before mentioned touching this matter, writes on
this sort.

But let us consider your other argument, that is to say: It is not lawful to
use these kind of vestures, because they were invented of the Popes tyranny.
In this point I do not well perceive how it may be affirmed for a surety, that
we can use nothing that perteined to the Pope, and is used in Popery. Truly we
must take good heed that we bring not the Church of Christ into such bondage,
that it may not use any thing that the Pope used. It is very true that our
forfathers took the temples of Idols and turned the into holy Churches where
Christ should be worshipped: And they took also the salarie and revenues
consecrated to the Idols of the Gentiles, to their wicked shows and plays,
and to their holy votaries virgins, and transposed it to find the ministers of
the Church: And yet all these things did not only service unto Antichrist, but
unto the Devil: yea the holy ecclesiastical writers did not stick to take
the verses of Poets, which had bin dedicated unto Muses, and to other diverse
gods and goddesses, for to be plaide in plays, and spoken in shows, to
obtain the favor of their gods: I say they did nothing stick or fear to
use the^, when it seemed to them convenient, imitating Paul the Apostle who
stuck nothing at all to rehearse for his purpose Mena^der, Aratus, and
Epymenides, and that he did in entreating the holy Scripture, applying profane
words to set forth Gods religion. We read also how that wine was consecrated
unto Bacchus, bread unto Ceres, water unto Neptune, oil unto Minerua, letters
unto Mercury, song unto the Muses and unto Apollo, and many other things
Tertullian reherseth in his book entitled de Corona Militis Christiani,
where almost he entreats this self same argument: Yet for all that we
stick not to use all these things freely asvvell in holy as in profane uses,
although at one time or other before, they had bin consecrated to Idols and to
devils. Hitherto Peter Martyr.

Bucer in an epistle that he writ to John Alasco, is of the same judgment,
his words are worthy to be noted and be these. For if by no means it be
lawful to use those things with were of Aarons preesthod or of the Gentiles,
the^ is it not lavvfull for us to have Churches, nor holidaies. For there is no
express commandment by word in the holy scriptures of these things. It is
gathered notvvithsta^ding from the example of the old people, that they are
profitable for us to the increase of godliness, which thing also experience
proves. For any thing to be a note of Antichrist, is not in the nature of any
creature in it self (for to that end nothing was made of God) but it hangs
algither of consenting to Antichrists religion and the professing thereof. The
which consent and profession being changed into the consent and
profession of Christianity, there can stick in the things themselves no note
or mark of Antichrists religion. The use of belles was a mark of
Antichristianitie in our Churches, when the people by them were called to
Masses, and when they were rong against tempests: Now they are a token of
Christianity, when the people by them are gathered together to the Gospel of
Christ, and other holy actions. Why may it not then be, that the self same
garments may serve godly with godly men that was of wicked signification
with the ungodly? Truly I know very many ministers of Christ, most godly
men who have used godly these vestures, and at this day do yet use them: So
that I dare not for this cause ascribe unto them any fault at all, much less
so heinous a fault of communicatyng with Antichrist, for the which fault we
may utterly refuse to communicate with them in Christ. The priests of devils
did celebrate in their sacrifices, the distribution of bread and the cup, as
Justinius Martyr and Tertullian make mention. What let is there why we may
not use the same ceremonies also? you will say we have a commandment of
the Lord touching this ceremony. Very well. And by the self same it
appears that same thing to serve among the children of God to the service of
Christ, which the wicked abused in the service of devils, if the
commandment of Christ be added thereto. But it is the commandment of Christ,
that in our holy actions we institute and use all things so as comeliness and
order be observed, that faith may be edified.

The same master Bucer in an other Epistle written to master Cranmer
Archbishop of Canturburie, says on this sort: All true godly men may godly
use those rites which wicked men have abused howsoever ungodly.

Bullinger and Gualter in the Epistle before alleged, answering this question,
whether we may wear such apparel as the Papists do? say on this sort: If
we should have nothing common with them, then must we forsake al our
churches, refuse all livings, not minister baptism, not say the Apostles or
Nicene creed, yea and quite cast away the Lords prayer, neither do you
borrow any ceremonies of them. The matter of apparel was never taken away at
the beginning of reformation, and is yet retained, not by the Popes law, but
by the kings commandment, as an indifferent thing of mere policy. Yea truly
if you wear a cap or a peculiar kind of apparel, as a civil and politic
thing, it smells neither of Iudaisme nor Monachisme: For these will seem to
separate themselves from the civil and common life, and account a meritorious
deed in the wearing of a peculiar garment. So Eustachius Bishop of Sebastia,
was not simply condemned for wearing a peculier kind of garmente: but for that
he did put religion in his garment. The Cannons of the council of Ga^gren,
Laodicen, and of the sixth counsel, are well known. If in case, any of the
people be persuaded that these things Sauoure of Papisme, Monachisme, or
Iudaisme, let them be told the contrary, and perfectly instructed therein.
And if so be thorough the importunate crying out hereon before the people by
some men, many be disquieted in their conscience, let them beware which so
do, that they bring not greater yokes on their own necks, and provoke the
Queens majesty and bring many faithful ministers in such danger, as they
cannot rid themselves out of again. Hitherto Bullinger.

I have the rather set down these men's sayings at large, because they be both
pithie, learned, and wholly to the co^futatio^ of your assertion. Wherefore I
conclude that a Christian magistrate may retain any civil, politic or
Ecclesiastical orders and rites, of whomesoeuer they were inverted, or
howsoever they have bin abused, so that, First, they be not against the word of
god: Secondly that justification and remission of sins be not attributed unto
them: Thirdly that the Church be not troubled with the multitude of them:
Fourthly that they be not decreede as necessary and not to be changed: And
last of all that men be not so tied unto them, but that by occasion they may
be omitted, so that it be without offense and contempt.

Yet one thing I must admonish you of, that there is a difference to be made
betwixt those things which were wholly dedicated to false gods, and to be used
in the worshipping of them: and those things which were used in the false
worshipping of the true God: for the Papists herein differ from the Gentiles,
that they acknowledge and confess the true God, and believe the same articles
of faith that we do, but yet worship him not arighte, nor believe on him in all
points as the word of God prescribes: And therefore if things abused of the
Gentiles, and invented by them may be used of Christians, much more may things
inverted and abused by Papists. But of this matter I mind also to speak
something in the second part of this Admonition.

The tenth. Then as God gave utterance Johan 6.38. Johan. 12.49. 1 Cor. 11.23.
they preached the word only: Now they read homylyes, articles, Injunctions.
etc.

Here you quote in the margent the sixte of John verse. 38. where Christ says,
That he came down from heaven not to do his own will, but the will of his
father that sent him. Likewise the 12. of John verse. 49. where also he says
that he has not spoken so himself, but the father that sent him gave him
commandment what he should say and what he should speak. And the first to
the Corinthians 11. Chapter. verse. 23. where Saint Paul says that he
received of the Lord that, which he delivered unto them. No man denies but
that the word of God only ought to be preached, and that as god gives
vttera^ce, but do you mean that we may not study for our sermons, or that we
may speak nothing but the very text of Scripture, without amplifying or
expoundidg the same? When I know your meaning herein, you shall understand
more of my mind. In the mean time, this I am sure of, that the Homilies
appointed to be read in the Church, are learned, godly, agreeable to Gods
word, and more effectual to edification than a number of your sermons which
consiste in words only, and entreat of little else but of cap, surplesse etc.
Archbishop, Lord Bishop. etc. the end whereof is not edification, but
contention. Homilies readde in the Church have always bin commendable, and
usual even from the beginning, look Augustine, Chrysostom and others: and
why may not articles and Injunctions being collected to the setting forth of
true religion and good orders in the Church be read there also as in a most
meet place? but I perceive you are enemies to reading, because you love so
well to hear your selves talking, I will say no worse.

The thirtenth and fourtenth. Then 1. Timo. 3.1.
it was painful: now gainful. Philip. 4.11. 2 Cor. 6.4.8.10.
Then poor and ignominious: now rich and glorious. And therefore titles
livings and offices by Antichrist devised are given to them, as Metropolitan,
Archbishop, Lords grace, Lord Bishop, Suffragane, Deane, Archedeacon, Prelate
of the garter, Earl, Cou^tie Palatine, honor, high Commissioners, Justices of
peace and quorum etc. All which together with their offices as they are strange
and vnherd of in Christ's church, nay plainly Mat. 23.11.12. Luc 22.25. 1. Cor
4.14. 1. Petr. 5.2.3.
in Christ's word forbidden: So are they utterly with speed out of the same to
be removed.

It was then as it uses to be under the cross. And ii is now as it uses to
be when God does bless it with peace, quietness, and godly magistrates: And
yet surely even now it is more painful, than gaynefull, more ignominious
than rich and glorious: and that do those know that bear the heat of the
day. But it is the more paynefull and ignominious for you, who cease not with
railing and spiteful words in pulpits and at tables to deprave and backbite
your brethren, and to trouble the whole state with your factio^s and daily
invented new opinions: the persecution of the sword cease, but the
persecution of the tung is extreme hot, and we who gain so much and be so
glorious, are molested as well by you as by the Papist, and Atheist: And
therefore not very glorious.

You ad and say, That therefore titles, liuinges and offices, by Antichriste
devised are given to them, as Metropolitan, Archbishop, lords grace, lord
bishop, suffragane, Deane, Archdeacon, prelate of the garter, Earl, County
Palatine, Justice of peace and quorum etc. All which together with their
offices as they are strange and unheard of in Christ's church, nay plainly
in Gods word forbidden: So are they utterly with speed out of the same to be
removed.

Here you are in your ruff, but you show your ignorance, and contemptuous
stomach: you have given sentence that the names of Metropolitan, Archbishop,
etc. and their offices were devised by Antichrist. Likewise that they are
strange and unheard of in Christ's church: Also that they be plainly in gods
word forbidden: and last that they are utterly with speed to be removed. If
you can prove all these points, it is time the church were transformed, and
the whole kind of government of this Realm altered. But if you cannot prove
them, then is it high time that such insolency should be repressed and
perturbers of Churches and commonweals reformed. Well, I must do the best I
can, to improve all these points which I might do sufficiently, if I should
as barely deny them, as you have affirmed them: But I will not deal so
nakedly in so great a matter.

First therefore I prove that the names of Metropolitan and Archbishop. etc. be
not Antichristian names, that is, names invented by Antichrist, but most
ancient, yea that they were in the Church long before the Gospel was
publicly embraced by any Prince or in any kingdom. Polydore Vergile lib. 4.
de inuento. rerum cap. 12. says, that Clement in his book entitled
Compendiarium christiana religionis, testifies, that the Apostle Peter did in
every Province appointe one Archbishop, whom all other bishops of the same
province should obey: he says also, that the same Archbishop was called
Primas, Patriarcha, and Metropolitanus. Peter was not Antichryst, Ergo the name
of an Archebyshop is no Antichrystian name.

Volusianus Bishop of Carthage, who lived Anno domini, 865. In one of his
Epistles which he writ to Nicholas the first in the defense of the marriage of
Priests, says, that Dionysius Areopagita Saint Paul's scholar was by S. Paul
made Archbishop of Athens.

Erasmus in his argument of the epistle to Titus, says that Paul made Titus
Archbishop of Creta, but Antichryste was not in Paul's time, Ergo the name of
an Archbishop was not invented by Antichrist.

I omit Anacletus a godly bishop and Martyr, who lived Anno domini. 85. which
in his Epistle ^om. 1. conci. diverse times makes mention of Archbishops,
Patriarks, Primates, Metropolitans: and says, that S. James which was called
Iustus, was the first Archbishop of Jerusalem. I omit also Anicetus, who
lived An. domini 155 which like wise in his epistle makes mention of
Archbishops, because these epistles are not without just cause suspected, either
to be none of theirs, or else in diverse points corrupted. But that notable
and famous Council of Nice, must be, and is of all wise and learned men next
unto the Scriptures them selves, reverenced, esteemed, and embraced: that
Council celebrated Anno Domini. 330. (when as the Bishops of Rome were as
yet learned and godly men) does not only allow of the name, but also of the
office of Metropolitan, Archebishoppe, Archdeacon. etc.

In the sixth Canon of that Council it is thus written: This Council does
determine him to be no Bishop, which is made without the consent
Metropolitant Episcopi, of the Metropolitan.

In the.13. Can. mention is made of a Patriarch, and of an Archdeacon, diverse
times, and his office there in diverse points declared, as it is also in the
seventh Canon of the same Council. In the.25. Canon is named both Patriarch
and Archbishop, and declared what authority they had in their provinces, and
in admitting of Bishops: So is it likewise in the.26. and.27. Cannons of the
same Council.

Ambrose also, that old and learned father both allows the name and office
of an Archbishop. Lib. De dig. Sacerde. cap. 5.

Sozomenus likewise Lib. 2. of his Ecclesiastical history, Cap. 8. calls
Symeon Archbishop of Seleucia, and Basile the great Metropolitan of
Cappadocia. Lib. 3. Cap. 16.

Damasus calls Stephen an Archedeacon.

Hierome in his Epistle Ad Euagrium, has this name Archdeacon.

Sextus in his decrees says, that Laurence the martyr was an Archedeacon.

Sozomenus lib. 7. cap. 19. makes mention of an Archdeacon, reading the
Scriptures.

Socrates in the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical history speaks of one
Timothy an Archdeacon.

Augustine in his first book De moribus Ecclesiae Catholica, makes mention of
Deanes and their offices.

Hythertoo Antichriste had not invaded the Church of Rome. But what should I
trouble you with any mo authorities? Those that be learned may easyly
understand, that these names, Metropolitan, Archbishop, Archdeacon, Primate,
Patriarch, and such like, be most ancient and approved of the Eldest, best,
and worthiest councels, fathers, and writers. And forasmuch as the original
and beginning of these names (such is their antiquity) can not be found (so
far as I have read,) it is to be supposed that they have their original from
the Apostles them selves: For as I remember Saint Augustine has this rule
in his 118. Epistle Ad Ianua. Those things that be not expressed in the
scripture, and yet by tradition observed of the whole Church, come either
from the Apostles, or from general Councels, as the observing of Easter, the
celebrating of the day of the Ascension, and of the coming of the holy Ghost,
and such like: very unlearned therefore and ignorant be those, which so boldly
affirm, that these names (used in the purest time of the Church) be
Antichristian.

Whether that the name of Prelate of the garter, Earl, County Palatine,
Honor, high Commissioner, Justice of peace, and Quorum, (being necessary
offices in this Common weal, partly for the honor of the Prince and Realm,
but especially for the good government of all states and degrees of persons)
be Antichrystian, let those consider, to whom GOD has committed the
sword of gouernemente. Such insolent audacitie against states and lawful
regiment, is rather to be corrected with due punishment, than confuted by
argument.

Lords grace, lord Bishop, honor, etc. be names of reverence, teaching us to
acknowledge our duty toward our superiors, and their authority over us:
and it is much more to be reprehended, not to give honor to whom honor is
due, than to receive honor when it is due. You may and you please in very
ancient histories, and in great learned fathers see, as honorable and
reuerente titles given unto Bishops as these be. And surely it is not
Antichristian to be called by names and titles, not ambitiously sought for,
but orderly and lawfully given according to the condition and state of the
place wherein a man is: But it is Antichristian, that is, proud, presumptuous,
disdaynful, arrogant, and contemptuous, to refuse to give to every one that
name and title that by law, civility and duty of us is required, and
expresses our reverence, duty, and obedience.

You would speak as much of names of honor and reverence in other persons,
if you durst be so bold with them, as you think you may be with some.

Now it follows to prove that the offices signified by these names, are not
strange and unheard of in Christ's church, neither yet plainly in Gods word
forbidden, that they are not to be removed, but as most necessary to be
retained.

It is without all doubt, that both these names and offices have been in
Christ's Church long before Nicene Council, and that they have had in the
same, continuance even to this day, as partly it may be gathered by that
which I have spoken before, and most manyfestlye by all Hystories, and
learned writers from before that Council of Nice, to this instant hour, and
therefore they little considered what they writ, when they set it down, that
these names and offices were strange and unheard of, in the Church of Christ.

These men contemning ancient writers, never read them, and that is the cause
of such unlearned assertions.

Cyprianus Li. 1. Epis. 3. ad Corneliu^, speaking of ye office of an
Archbishop, says on this fort: Neque enim aliunde haereses abortae sunt, aut
nata sohismata, quam inde quod Sacerdoti dei non obtemperatur, nec onus in
Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus index vice Christi cogitatur: cui si
secundum magisteria diuina obtemporaret fraternitas vniuersa, nemo aduersus
Sacerdotum Collegium quicquam moueret. Neither have heresies or schisms risen
of any other occasion tha^ of that, that the priest of God is not obeyed,
neither one priest for the time in the Church, and one judge for the time in
stead of Christ, thought upon: to whom if the whole brotherhoode vvoulde be
obedient according to Gods teaching, no man vvoulde move any thing against the
College of Priests.

Cornelius being Bishop of Rome, and having excommunicated certain notorious
wicked men, and afterward being threatened and ill used at their hands, began
to faint, and to be weery of his office: Cyprian hearing thereof wrote
comfortably unto him, and willed him in any wise to proceed, showing further
what sects and schisms ensues in any province or diocese, whereas the
Bishops authority is despised: for in these words he speaks not of the
usurped authority of the Bishop of Rome over all Churches, but against the
insolency of some, which despising their Metropolitan or Archebyshop, did
with their factiousnesse trouble the Church. For he would have an Archebyshop
in every province, which should bear the chief rule over the rest of the
Clergy: and so do the godlyest and best learned expound Cyprian.

The same Cyprian writing to one Florentius Pupianus, speaking in his own
behalf, being Bishop of Carthage, says on this sort: Vnde schismata and
haereses obortae sunt and oriuntur nisi dum Episcopus qui vnus est, and
Ecclesiae praest, superba quorundam praesumptione contemnitur, and homo
dignatione dei honoratus, ab hominibus indignis iudicatur. From vvhe^ce have
heresies and schisms sprung heretofore, and vvherof spring they now, but that
the Bishop which is one, and governs the church, by the presumptuous
disdain of certain, is despised: and a man preferred by Gods allovvaunce, is
examined and judged by unworthy men? For it is the chief and principal office
of an Archbishop to keep unity in the Church, to compound conte^tions, to
redress heresies, schisms, factions, to see that Bishops and all other of the
Clergy, which be under him, do their duty. etc. And therefore Hierome
writing upon the first to Titus, says, that in the beginning a Bishop and a
Priest was all one, but after that there began to arise factions in religion,
and some said they held of Apollo, some of Paul, some of Cephas, and some of
Christ, it was decreed that one should be chosen to bear rule over the rest,
to whom the chief care of the Church should appertain, and by whom sects
and schisms should be cut off.

Here a man may reason thus: the distinction of degrees began in the Church,
when men began to say, I hold of Paul, I hold of Apollo. etc. But this was
in the Apostles time.1. Cor. 1. Therefore these distinctions of degrees began
in the Apostles time.

The same Hierome in his Epistle ad Euagrium, teaches, that the cause why one
was chosen among the bishops to rule over the rest, was in schismatis remedium
ne vnusquisque ad se trahens Christi Ecclesiam rumpere^, to meet with
schisms, lest every one according to his own fancy should tear in pieces
the Church of Christ. And says further, that in Alexandria, from S. Mark
unto Heracla and Dyonisius Bishops, the ministers used to elect one among
them selves, whom they placing in a higher degree called a Bishop, even as
an army should choose their Captain, or Deacons should choose one of them
selves, whom they knew to be paynefull, and call him an Archedeacon. Haec
Hierom.

In all these places Hierome does not maynteyne the authority of one man over
the whole Church, but thinks it necessary that in every Province there be
one to be chief over the rest for unity sake, and for rooting out of
contentions and sects. And therefore contra Luciferanos he says, that unless
this superiority were, there would be as many schisms in the Church, as
there be Priests.

Chrysostom writing upon the twentieth of Matthew, says: that the rebellious
nature of man caused these distinctions of degrees, that one should be an
Apostle, another a Bishop, another a Minister, another a lay man. And that
unless there were such distinctions of persons, there could be no discipline.

And upon the. 13. to the Romans he says, that because equality engenders
strife and contention, therefore superiority and degrees of persons were
appointed.

It is not to be denied but that there is an equality of all ministers of Gods
word, quoad ministerium, touching the ministry, for they have al like power
to preach the word, to minister the sacraments, that is to say, the word
preached, or the Sacraments ministered, is as effectual in one (in respect of
the ministry) as it is in another. But quoad ordinem and politiam, touching
order and government, there always has been and must be degrees and
superiority among them. For the Church of God is not a confused congregation,
but ruled and directed as well by discipline and policy in matters of
regiment, as by the word of God in matters of faith. And therefore well says
master Calvin in his Institutions Cap. 8. That the twelve Apostles had one
among them to govern the rest, it was no marvel: for nature requires it,
and the disposition of man vvil so have it, that in every company (although
they be all equal in power) yet that there be one as governor, by whom the
rest may be directed: there is no court without a Consul, no Senate without a
Praetor, no College without a President, no society without a Master. Haec
Calvin.

Paul was superior both to Timothy and Titus, as it may easily be gathered
out of his Epistles written unto them.

Titus had superiority over all the other pastors and Ministers which were in
Creta: for he had Potestatem constituendi oppidatim presbyteros. ad Tit. 1. The
which place master Calvin expounding, says on this sort. Discimus ex hoc
loco. etc. We learn of this place, (says he) that there was not such
equality among the ministers of the Church, but that one both in authority
and council did rule over an other.

Timothy bare rule over all the other Ministers of the Church of Ephesus: For
Paul says unto him. 1. Tim. 5. Aduersus Presbyterum accusationem. etc.
against a Minister receive no accusation, unless there be two or three
witnesses. In which words Paul makes him a Judge over the rest of the
Ministers: and Epiphanius Lib. 3. Tom. 1 contra heresim Aerij, proves Titus
superiority over the rest, by this self same place.

That this word Presbyter in this place of the Apostle signifies a Minister
of the word, both Ambrose, Calvin, and other learned writers declare.

Ignatius who was S. John his scholar, and lived in Christ's time, in his
epistle ad T^rallianos speaks thus of the authority of a Bishop over the
rest: Quid aliud est Episcopus quam quidam obtinens principatum, and potestatem
supra omnes? What is a Bishop but one having power and rule over all? And in
his epistle ad Smirnenses, he writes on this sort, Honora quidem Deum vt
authorem vniuersorum and Dominum: Episcopum autem, vt Sacordotum Principem,
imaginem Dei ferentem: Dei quide^ per principatum: Christi vero per
sacerdotium. Honor God as the author and Lord of al things, and a Bishop, as
the chief of Priests, bearing the Image of God: of God because of his
superiority: of Christ by reason of his preesthod. And a little after. Let lay
men be subject to Deacons, Deacons to Prestes, and prestes to Bishops, the
Bishop to Christ. And again: Let no man do any thing which perteyneth to the
Church, without the consent of the Bishop. And again: He that attempteth to
do any thing without the Bishop breaks peace and confounds good order. The
like saying he has in his epistle ad Magnesianos. These three epistles does
Eusebius make mention of Li. 3. ca. 35. and.36. and hiero. de viris illustribus.

Justinius Martyr one of the most aunciente writers of the Greeks, in his second
Apology ad Anthonium Pium, allows this superiority, and calls him that
bare rule over the other ministers (...). Cyrillus calls him (...).

Theodoretus li. 5. ca. 28. writes that Chrysostom being the Bishop of
Constantinople, did not only rule that Church, but the Churches also in
Thracia, in Asia and in Pontus.

Theodoretus Episcopus Ciri in an epistle that he writ to Leo, says of him
self that he had government over 800. Churches.

But what shall I need to use such proves in a matter so plain and evident to
all such as have read any thing of antiquity? The best learned men of our
days, and diligentest preferrers of the Gospel of Christ do with one consent
(one or two of the latest writers excepted) acknowledge and confess that this
distinction of degrees and superiority in the government of the Church, is a
thing most convenient and necessary.

Calvin in his institutions says on this sort That every province had among
their Bishops an Archbishop, and that the council of Nice did appointe
Patriarchs which should be in order and dignity above Archbishops, it was
for the preservation of discipline: Therefore for this cause especially were
those degrees appointed, that if any thing should happen in any particular
Church which could not there be decided, it might be removed to a
provincial Synod: If the greatness or difficulty of the cause required
greater consultation, then was there added Patriarchs together with the
synodes from whom there was no appeal but unto a general counsel: This
kind of government some called Hierarchiam, an improper name and not used in
the Scriptures: For the spirit of God will not have us to dream of dominion
and rule in the government of the Church: But if (omitting the name) we shall
consider the thing it self, we shall find that these old Bishops did not
frame any other kind of gouernmente in the Church, from that which the Lord
has prescribed in his word. Calvin here misliketh this name Hierarchia, but
he allows the names and authority of Patriarks and Archbishops and thinks
the government of the Church then used not to differ from that which God in
his word prescribes.

Hemingius in his Enchirid. shows, that these degrees in the Church be
necessary, and that discipline cannot be kept without them. And he adds
that their Church keeps this form nec mouetur (says he) anabaptist ar ^m ac
libertinorum effrenilibidine, qui ecclesiam Christi barbaricum quendam hominum
coetum, sine ordine fingunt, cum habeat nostra ecclesia non solum exemplum
Apostolicae and purioris ecclesiae, verum etiam mandatum spiritus sancti omnia
ordinate and decenter ad aedificationem faciendi. Neither is our Church moved
with the licentious liberty of Anabaptists and Libertines, which feign the
Church of Christ to be a barbarous confused society without order, seeing
that our Church has not only the example of the Apostolical and most pure
Church, but also the commandment of the spirit of God to do all things
orderly and decently to edify. Wherefore thus I conclude with the very words
of that worthy man (who has so well deserved of this Church of England)
master Fox, In the ecclesiastical estate we take not away the distinction
of ordinary degrees such as by the scripture be appointed or by the Primitive
Church allowed, as Patriarchs or Archbishops, Bishops, Ministers and
Deaco^s, for of these four we especially read as chief: In which four
degrees as we grant diversity of office so we admit in the same also
diversity of dignity: neither denyeng that which is due to each degree,
neither yet mainteining the ambition of any singular person. For as we give to
the minister place above the Deacon, to the Bishop above the Minister, to the
Archbishop above the Bishop, so we see no cause of inequality, why one
minister should be above another minister, one Bishop in his degree above
another Bishop to deal in his dioces: or one Archbishop above another
Archbishop: And this is to keep an order duly and truly in the Church,
according to the true nature and definition of order by the authority of
Augustine libro de ciui. Ordo est parium dispariumque rerum sua cuique loca
tribue^s dispositio. Hitherto master Fox.

Now let ye indifferent reader judge whether these offices be strange and
vnherd of in the church of Christ or no.

Concerning the offices of an high commissioner and Justice of peace how
necessarily they be committed to some of the best and wisest of the Clergy,
what vice by them is brideled, what inconvenience met with, what necessary
discipline used, those know that be wise and have experience in public
affairs and government. There is no word of God to prove why these offices
may not concur in one man. But it is the commisson that troubles these men,
as for peace they are at defiance with it.

To be short, they say that all these offices be plainly in Gods word
forbidden, and they allege, Mat. 23. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Pet. 5. The places
of Mathewe and Luke, be answered before: Christ beats down ambition and
pride, and desire of bearing rule, as he did before when he said, be ye not
called Rabbi, and call no man father, be not called doctors, he does not
condemn the names, but the ambition of the mind. In the 1. Cor. 4. it is thus
written. Let a man thus think of us as of the ministers of Christ. etc. The
ministers of the word in deed are not to be esteemed as Gods, but as the
ministers of god. Some among the Corinthians, gloried in their ministers, and
attributed to much unto them: hereof came these factio^s, I hold of Paul, I
of Apollo etc. This teaches your adhere^ts and disciples, not to attribute to
much to you, and such as you are, or any other minister of Gods word: It
makes nothing against the names or authorities either of Archbishop, Lord
Bishop, or any other that you have named, who be the ministers of Christ, and
ought so to be esteemed.

The place of S. Peter ca. 5. is this, Feed the flock of god etc. not as
though you were lords over the flock. etc. Peter here condemns hautinesse,
contempt and tyranny of pastors toward their flocks: he does not take away
lawful government: The pastor has rule and superiority over his flock, but
it must not be tyrannical.

These be but very sclender proofs that ye names and offices of Archebishops,
Lord Bishops, etc. be plainly forbidden by the word of God.

Surely you had thought that no man would ever have taken pains to examine
your margent. I am of Hemingius opinion in this point, that I think this your
assertion smells of plain Anabaptisme: and surely if you had once made an
equality, (such as you fancy) among the Clergy, it would not be long or you
attempted the same among the laytie, let the^ take heed Tu^c tua res agitur
etc.

The fouretenth. Then ministers were not so tied to any form of prayers
invented by man, but as the spirit Romans 8.26. 1. Timo. 1.2.
moved them, so they poured forth hartye supplications to the Lord. Now they
are bound of necessity to a Damasus the first inuenter of this stuff, well
furthered by Gregory the seventh.
prescripte order of service, and book of common prayer, in which a great
number of things contrary to gods word are contained, as baptism Math. 28.19.
1. Cor. 14.35. The first appointer hereof was Victor 1. Anno. 198.
by women, private 1. Cor. 11 18.
communio^s, jewish Act. 15.10.
purifiengs, observing Exodus 20.9.
of holidays etc. patched (if not altogether, yet the greatest piece) out of
the popes portuis.

To prove that ministers were not so tied to any form of prayer invented by
man, but that as the spirit moved them, etc. you quote, Romans 8. and the 1.
Timo. 1. In the eight to the Romans the words be these: Likewise also the
spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray, as we ought,
but the spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs which cannot be
expressed. This place speaks nothing against any prescripte form of prayer,
for then it should dissalowe the Lords prayer, but it teaches us that it is
the spirit of God that sturreth us up to pray, and makes us earnestly pour
out our supplications unto God. And this the spirit works as well by
prescripte prayers as by prayers suddenly invented. The words to Timo. Epist. 1
ca. 1. verse. 2. are far fetched, and nothing to the purpose: the words be
these, unto Timothy my natural son in the faith, grace* mercy and peace
from God our father, and from Christ Jesus our lord: What makes these words
against any prescripte form of prayers? peradventure you would have alleged
the first to Timo. 2. I exhort therefore that first of all supplications.
etc. which makes directly against you.

If you mean by prayers invented by man, such prayers as man inuenteth against
the word of God, as prayer for the dead, prayer unto saints, and such like,
then it is true that you say: But if you mean such prayers, as by godly men
be framed according to the holy scriptures, whether they be for matters
perteyning to the life to come, or to this life, then you show your
ignorance, for it is manifest that there has been always in the Church of
Christ, a prescripte form of public prayer, as it appears in Justinius
Martyr, Apolo. 2. pro christianis, and other ancient fathers: neither did ever
any learned or godly man, or reformed Church find fault herewith, or not
greatly commend the same, except only the sect of Anabaptists.

Damasus was a good Bishop, and therefore no good thing by him appointed to be
disalowed, but he did not first ordeyne a prescripte form of public prayers,
he only added something thereunto, as Gloria patri etc, to the end of every
psalm: And decreed that psalms should be song as well in the night time, as
in the day time in every Church, but they were song in the Church before, and
as I have said there was a prescript form of prayer in Justinius Martirs time,
who was long before Damasus.

Gregory added the Letanie onley. I muse what you mean to write so manifest
untruths.

You note not here (neither are your able) any prayer in the whole Communion
book, wherein there is any thing not agreeable to gods word. We may say as
Saint Augustine says in his 121. epistle written ad Probam viduam. Et siper
omnia precationum sanctaru^ verba discurras qua^tu^ existimo nihilmuenies, quod
no^ ista Dominica co^tineat, and co^cludat oration. Vnde liberu^ est alijs atque
alijs verbis, eadem tamen in orando dicere, sed non debet esse liberum alia
dicere. And if thou runnest thorough all the words of the holy prayers, I
suppose thou shalt find nothing which the Lords prayer does not contain
and comprehend: therefore we may in other words speak the same things in
our prayers, but we may not speak contrary things.

But you say A number of things contrary unto gods word are contained in this
book, as baptism by women, private communions, Jewish purifiengs, observing of
holidays etc. patched, if not altogether, yet the greatest piece out of the
Popes portuis.

Here is not one prayer in all the whole communion book found fault with, and
yet your quarrel is against a prescripte form of prayers invented by man.

You maruellously forget your self, and confusedly go from matter to matter,
without any consideration.

Digressing therefore from prayers contained in the communion book, you come
to other matters in ye same, against gods word, as you say, and first you
allege baptising by women.

I deny baptising by women to be expressed in that book, and when you have
proved it to be necessarilye gathered out of the same, then shall you hear my
judgment thereof.

Your places of scripture alleged against it, are not of sufficient force to
prove your purpose. Christ in the 28. of Mathewe said to his Disciples, go
and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the father. etc. Ergo
women may not baptize, I say this argument follows not, no more than this
does, Ergo pastors may not baptize, for it is manifest that an Apostle is
distinct from a pastor.

The second place you do allege is.1. Cor. 14. where Paul says, it is a
shame for women to speak in the congregation: Paul says not that it is a
shame for women to speak at home in private houses, for women may instruct
their families: yea and they may speak also in the congregation in time of
necessity, if there be none else there that can or will preach Christ, and
hereof we have examples.

If women do baptize, they baptize in private houses, not in the congregation.

Surely you are able to mar a good matter for lack of skillful handling.

You say in your margent that Victor. An. 198. did first appoint that women
might baptize. By this ye add more credit to the cause than you are aware of.
For Victor was a godly bishop and a martyr: and the Church at that time was in
great purity not being long after the Apostles time. But truly I can find no
such thing in all his decrees: only this he says, that such as be converted of
the Gentiles to the faith of Christ, in time of necessity, or at the point of
death, may be baptized at any time in any place, whether it be in the Sea or in
a river, or in a pond, or in a well, so that they make a confession of their
faith. He makes no mention at all of any baptising by women: and therefore you
have done your cause great injury.

The second thing you mislike is private communions. And you quote the 1. Cor.
11. In which chapter saint Paul reproves the profanation of the supper
among the Corinthians by banqueting and contempt of their brethren, and he
exhorts one of them to tarry for another: But how can you apply this to
your purpose?

I know not what you mean by private Communion: If you mean the receiving of
one alone, there is none such allowed in the book: If you mean because it is
ministered sometime upon occasion in private houses, I see not how you can call
it private in respect of the place, if the number of communicants be
sufficient. You must explicate your self, before I can tell what you mean.

There is nothing in the Communion book touching the Communion, contrary to
that place of S. Paul by you quoted, to my knowledge.

The Communion exhibited to sick persons is allowed both of Peter Martyr and
Bucer, as in the other treatise I have declared, and consonant to the custom
of Christ's Church, even from the Apostles time, as it is to be seen in old
writers.

The third is, the Jewish purifyings (as you term it) you cite for that
purpose Act. 15. where Peter speaking against certain of the Pharisees, which
believed and taught that it was needeful for the Gentiles which were converted,
to be circumcised, and to observe Moses law, says on this sort: Now therefore
why tempt ye God, to lay a yoke on the disciples necks. etc. how any thing
here contained, prohibiteth women after they be delivered from the great
danger and pains of child bearing, to give in the congregation thanks for
their deliverance, let the godly Reader judge. Surely this is no Iewishe
purifying, but christian giving of thanks, most consonant and agreeable to the
word of God. But hereof also something more is to be spoken in another place.

Fourthly, you mislike observing of holy days: And you allege Exodus 20. Six
days shalt thou labor and do all thy work.

To observe any day superstitiously, or to spend any day unprofitably, is flat
against, not this commandment only, but others also in the holy Scriptures.
And I would to God it were better looked unto. But to abstain any day from
bodily labor, that we may labor spiritually in hearing the word of God,
magnifying his name, and practicing the works of charity, is not, either
against this, or any other commandment. For I think the meaning of this
commandment is not so to tie men to bodily labor, that they may not intermit
the same to labor spiritually: For then how could we preachers and students
excuse our selves? how might the people lawfully come to our Sermons and
Lectures in any of the six days? But of this thing also occasion will be
ministered to speak more hereafter.

In the end you add (patched, if not altogether, yet the greatest piece out
of the Popes portuis.)

To this I answer briefly, it makes no matter of whom it was invented, in
what book it is contained, so that it be good and profitable, and consonant to
Gods word. Well says Ambrose, Omne verum a quocunque dicitur, a spiritu
sancto est. All truth, of vvhomsoeuer it is spoken, is of the holy ghost.

The fiftenth and sixtenth. Then 1. Pet. 5.2.
feeding the flock diligently, now teaching quarterly: then preaching 1. Tim.
4.2.
in season and out of season, now once in a month is thought sufficient, if
twice it is judged a work of supererogation.

These be but words of pleasure: God be thanked, there be ministers (and such
as you mislike of) which feed their flocks diligently, and preach in time and
out of time, according both to S. Peter's, and S. Paul's meaning.

But you must understand that he does not always feed the best, nor take
the greatest pains, which preaches most often, but he that preaches most
learnedly, most pithely, most orderly, most discretely, most to edifying.

It may be that ^e which preaches but once in the month, takes more pains
for his sermon, has more pithe and learning in his sermon, edifyeth more by
his sermon, than you do for all your sermons, in all your sermons, or by all
the sermons that you make in the whole year, be they never so many. For what
is it to preach every day, and to spend the time with words only, or with
bitter inuectiues against certain trifles, and against superiors? Such
sermons do not edify, but destroy, do not work in the hearts of the hearers
faith and charity, but either contempt of religion, or else contempt of
superiors, contempt of good orders, yea hatred, malice, indiscreet wrath,
colored with a pretense of zeal. Truly such sermons seldom or never work
any good effect: many women in London could on that sort occupy the time.
Wherefore I am fully persuaded that he comes nearer to the fulfylling of the
mind of the Apostle, which diligently studying, and laboring continually for
knowledge, does orderly, learnedly, and effectually preach once in the
month, than such as backbiting at other men's tables, running all the day
long up and down the streets, seldom or never studying, do negligently,
unorderly, verbally (if I may so term it) preach every day twice. And yet I
know the oftener a man does preach (the former circumstances being
considered) the better it is. But of every one it will be required according to
his talent: and not he that speaks most, but labors most to speak, not
he that preaches most often, but that preaches most paynefully, truly and
diligently, shall in that day be best accepted.

That learned and ancient father master Whithead has sundry times lamented
in my hearing (and I think there be other of his friends hat^ heard the same)
the loose, frivolous, and unprofitable preaching of diverse Ministers in London:
And I would to God it were better looked unto: then I think verily we should
have less contention and more religion.

The seuententh and eyghtenth. Then nothing taught but gods word, now princes
plesures, men's devises, popish ceremonies and Antichristian rites in public
pulpits defended. Then they Phili. 2.20.21.
sought them, now they seek theirs.

It had been well to have let us understand what those princes pleasures be,
what men's devises, what popish ceremonies, what Antichristian rites, for now
you have but slandered both the Prince, and the whole state of religion, in
this Church by public authority established: wherefore until you show some
particulers, this shall be my answer, that Spiritus Dei neque est mendax neque
mordax. The spirit of God is neither a liar nor a slaunderer.

It is but your pleasure thus generally to say, That then pastors sought their
flocks, now they seek theirs: For it is well known that there be pastors
which seek their flocks, and not theirs.

Hitherto (thanks be unto God) in all this discourse, there is not one piece of
false doctrine of any substance ascribed to this Church of England by these
libellers, and therefore it has (as God will) the first note of the true Church
of Christ, that is, purity of doctrine.

Admonition.
These and a great many other abuses are in the ministry remaining, which
unless they be removed, and the truth brought in, not only Gods justice
shall be poured forth, but also gods Church in this realm shall never be
builded. For if they which seem to be workmen, are no workmen in deed, but
in name, or else work not so diligently and in such order as the workmaister
commands, it is not only unlikely that the building shall go forward, but
altogether impossible that ever it shall be perfited. The way therefore to
avoid these inconveniences, and to refourme these deformities, is this: Your
wisdoms have to remove Aduousons, Patronages, Impropriations, and Bishops
authority, claiming to themselves thereby right to ordeyn ministers, and to
bring in that old and true election, which was accustomed to be Act 1.26.
and. 6.2.3.14.13.
made by the congregation. You must displace those ignorant and unable
ministers already placed, and in their rooms appoint such as both can and
will by Gods assistance 1. P^t. 5.2.
feed the flock. You must pluck down and utterly overthrow without hope of
restitution, the court of Faculties, from whence not only licenses to enjoy
many benefices are obtained, as Pluralities, Trialities, Totquots. etc. but all
things for the most part, as in the court of Rome are set on sale, licenses to
marye, to eat flesh in times prohibited, to lie from benefices and charges,
and a great number beside, of such like abominations. Appoint to every
congregation a learned and diligente preacher. Remove Homilies, articles,
injunctions, a prescript order of Service made out of the Mass book. Take
away the Lordshippe, the loytering, the pomp, the idleness, and livings of
Bishops, but yet employ them to such ends as they were in the old Church
appointed for. Let a lauful and a godly Seigniorie look that they preach, not
quarterly or monthly, but continually: not for filthy lucre sake, but of a
ready mind. So God shall be glorified, your consciences discharged, and the
flock of Christ (purchased Act. 20.28.
with his own blood) edified.

Answer.
What these great abuses by you hitherto alleged be, I trust you do now fully
understand: Surely except such factious libellers, such stirrers up of
schisms, such disturbers of the peace of the Church, such contemners of those
that be in authority, be not only removed, but repressed, God will not only of
his justice punish the magistrates of this realm for their carelessness in
this behalf, but also Gods gospel will therein be as much defaced with factio^s,
schisms, and heresies, as ever it was in the Popes time with superstition and
idolatry. For surely these men that would be compted such perfect buylders,
be but vndermyners and destroyers, and instruments of some greedy guts, and
lusty roysters, who to maynteyne their pride and ioylitie, seek for the spoil
of the Church, and in deed the utter overthrow both of learning and
Religion.

For take from Bishops their lands and their authority, let every parish
elect their own minister, remove Homilies, Articles, Injunctions, appoynte no
prescript order of service (that is to say) let there be no order prescribed to
any man, no law to direct him or control him, but let every minister do
what he list, speak what he list, alter what he list, and so often as him list:
to be short, let every minister be king and Pope in his own paryshe, and
exempted from all controlement of Bishop, Magistrate, and Prince, and you shall
have as many kinds of Relygion, as there is parishes: as many sects, as
ministers: and a Church miserably torn in pieces with mutabilitie and
diversity of opinions.

Do you not see what they shoot at? Would they not be free from all
Magistracy? Do they not most ambitiouslye desire that them selves, which
they condemn in others? that is, Lordeshippe and superiority. For who think
you should be chief in every Parrishe, and direct the rest? Surely even
the minister. The Pope never required greater authority over all Christendom,
tkan they seek to have over their parish. The Pope and his Clergy did never
more earnestly seek and desire to be exempted from the jurisdiction of Civil
Magistrates, than these men do both from Ecclesiastical and Civil.
Princes, nobles, and Magistrates were never brought into greater servitude and
bondage, than these men seek to lay upon them. Wherefore you that be in
authority, if you love the peace and prosperity of the Church of Christ, if
you desire the good success of the Gospel, if you will preserve the state of
this realm, if you think it necessary to have good Magistrates, to have good
laws and orders in a common wealth, if you esteem learning, and seek to
prefer it, if you hate anarchian, confusion, anabaptisme, if you allow of
your own condition, and like of a kingdom better than of a popular state:
Then provide betyme some speedy remedy for these and such like kind of men:
and if the religion you have established be good, if the orders and laws you
have made be convenient, let them not be written against, spoken against, nay
openly contemned and broken, without sharp and severe punishment: suffer not
such as execute them to be contemned, hated, discouraged, and oftentimes
frumped by some superiors: Either let your laws be mainteyned as laws, or
else deliver us from our duty in executing and obeying of them.

Touching the Court of Faculties I can not say much for I have no great
experience of it, and less knowledge in the law, notwithstanding because by
lawful authority it is allowed in this realm, I can not but reverently judge
of it, for in such matters I think it a point of modesty to suppose the
best, and to absteyne from condemnyng of that government, which is allowed
as convenient. If there be faults in the officers they may be corrected.

The places of Scripture quoted in this margent be answered before except that
of the.20. of the Acts, which proves nothing in controversy at this time.

Admonition.
Now to the second point which concerns ministration of sacraments. In
the old time the word was Math. 3.12.
preached, before they were ministered, now it is supposed to be sufficient if
it be read. Then they were ministered in public Marc. 1.5. 1 Cor. 11.18
assemblies, now in private houses. Then Mat. 28.19. 1. Cor. 4.1.
by ministers only, now by midwiues and deacons, equally. But because
entreating of both the sacraments together, we should deal confusedly, we will
therefore speak of them severally. And first for the Lords Supper, or holy
Communion.

Answer.
The second external note of the true Church of Christ is ministering of the
Sacraments sincerely: you would prove that this Church of England has not
the Sacraments sincerely ministered: First by three general reasons pertaining
to both the Sacraments: then by certain abuses which you find severally in
either of them.

The first general reason is this: In old time the word was preached before
the Sacraments were ministered: now it is supposed to be sufficient if it be
read.

To prove that the word was preached before the sacraments were ministered, you
allege ye third of Matthew verse, 12. Which has his fan in his hand, and
vvil make clean his flovver, and gather his wheat into his garner. but will
burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. I understand not how you can of
this place conclude, that there must be of necessity preaching and not reading
before the administration of the Sacraments. If you say, John preached unto
such as came unto his Baptism, and readde not unto them, therefore of
necessity there must be preaching, and not reading, I deny the argument, for
it is a common rule that we may not conclude a general doctrine of a singular
or particular example: and I am sure it is against all rule of Logic.

But how if it may be proved, that John did baptyse some without preaching
unto them? In that third chapter of Matthew, verses.5. and.6. we read that all
Jerusalem and all I^daea, and all the region round about Jordan, went out to be
baptized of him, and that they were baptized of him in Iordane, confessing
their sins, but we read not that he did immediately before preach unto them:
and verses.13.14.15. it is manifest, that he did baptize Christ without
preaching. This is but a slender proof you use thereby to condemn the
sincerity of our sacraments and administering of them in this Church.

There is no man I think which does not allow of preaching before the
administration of the Sacraments. But it is not therewith joined tanquam de
necessitate sacramenti, as of the necessity of the sacrament, neither is there
any thing here alleged, for preaching before the administration of the Lords
Supper. In deed we read not that Christ did preach immediately before the
distribution of the Sacrament of his body and blood to his disciples, only he
told them, that some of them should betray him, and that he had greatly
desired, to ^ate that passover with them.

This I write to show your blind and unlearned collections, not to disallow
preaching in the administration of Sacraments.

But I would gladly learn why you do so greatly myslyke of readyng the
Scriptures, I hope you be not Zwingfildians: Is not the word of God as
effectual when it is read, as when it is preached? or is not reading,
preaching?

Isidorus says, that reading brings great profit to the hearers.

Tertulian says when we come together to the reading of the holy Scriptures,
we feed our faith with those heavenly voices, we raise up our affiaunce,
we fasten our hope. And again he calls the reading of the Scriptures, the
feeding of our faith. But what need I speak any more of a matter so
manyfeste. You flatly join with the Papist in this: For in the confutation of
the Apology of the Church of England, master Harding calls reading of the
Scriptures to the people in the Church, a spiritual dumbness, and a thing
unprofitable. etc. That to read the scriptures in the church is no new thing,
but most ancient, and grounded upon Gods word, it is manifest by that
which is written in the fourth of Luke, where the Evangelist says, that
Christ on the Sabbath day going into the synagoge according to his accustomed
manner, risse up to read, and there was delivered unto him the book of the
Prophet Esaye, and as soon as he opened the Book, he found the place
where it was written, Spiritus Domini super me. etc. The Spirit of the Lord
upon me. etc. Likewise in the thirteenth of the Acts, we read that Paul and
other of his company being in the Synagoge on the Sabbath day, was sent unto
by the rulers of the Synagoge, Post lectronem legis and Propherarum, after the
readyng of the law and the Prophets, to know if they would make any
exhortation to the people.

Justinius Martyr Apolog. 2. pro Christianis, says, that in his time the
manner was on the Sabbath day when the people were gathered together to have
the Scriptures read in the public congregation, and in the time of public
Prayer for the space of one whole hour.

Origene writing upon Joshua, Homel. 15. says, that the Books of the old
Testamente were delivered by the Apostles to be read in the Churches. Cyprian
lib. 2. Epists. 5. says: The reader sounds out the high and heavenly
words: he reads out the Gospel of Christ. etc. Chrysostom upon the Acts
Hom. 19. The Minister and common Minister stands up, and cries with a loud
voice, saying: Keep silence, after that the reader begins the prophecy of
Esaias. Augustine speaking to the people says: Ye heard when the Gospel was
read, ye heard erevvhile when it was read if ye gave ear to the reading,
dearly beloved, we have heard in the lesson that has been read. But of
reading both scriptures and prayers I have spoken before and mind to speak
something hereafter: For my part I muse what you mean in this point so to
iumpe with the Papists.

The second general reason is this: Then Sacraments were ministered in
public assemblies, now in private houses.

The places of Scripture whereby you prove that Sacraments were then ministered
in public assemblies, be taken out of the first of S. Mark, and.1. Cor. 11.
which places of Scripture prove, that John did baptize openly, and that the
Lords Supper was ministered in the public congregation, but neither of them
both conclude that these Sacraments may not also be ministered upon any
occasion in private houses: For what sequel is there in this reason, all the
country of Iudaea, and they of Jerusalem, went out unto him, and were
baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins, Ergo Baptism
may not be ministered upon any occasion in private houses? you may as well
conclude, that none ought to be baptized, but in the river of Jordan, and none
but such as be able to confess their sins, and so you should seclude
children from Baptism, as the Anabaptists do.

Baptism was ministered in Cornelius house. Acts 10. The place is not of the
substance of the Sacraments.

To the.1. Corin. 11. it is answered before. Surely this Church of England
does not permit the sacraments to be ministered in private places, except there
be a congregation, and then not usually, but only in certain cases.

The third general reason is this: Then by ministers only: now by midwiues
and deacons equally.

That then the Sacraments were ministered only by ministers, you allege the
28. of Matthew, which place is answered before. Likewise.1. Cor. 4. Let a man
so think of us as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the mysteries
of God. Here is not one word for your purpose. Except you take mysteries for
sacraments, which if you do, you are much deceived: for by the word, mysteries,
here, he understands the word of God and Gospel of Christ, as all learned
writers do interpret it. We read in the eight of the Acts that Philip being
a Deacon did baptize: we read also that Moses wife did cirumcise. But where
does this Church of England allow any woman to baptize, or deacon to
celebrate the Lords supper? and if it did, the dignity of the Sacraments do
not depend upon the man, be he minister or not minister, be he good or evil.
Let every one take heed that they do not usurp that authority whereunto they
be not called.

Those be your general reasons, which in deed be no reasons, but bare words.
Your particular reasons whereby you seem to prove that neither of the
sacraments be sincerely ministered; be these that follow. And first concerning
the Lords supper you reason on this sort.

Admonition.
They had no introite, for Celestinus a Pope brought it in, about the
year.430. But we have borrowed a piece of one out of the Mass book.

Answer.
What you understand here by the introite, certaynlie I know not: The first
thing that we say at the Communion is the Lords prayer, which Celestinus did
not inuente, but Christ, Matthew. 6. nor first use in the celebration of the
Lords Supper, but the Apostles, as we read in good Chronicles: next unto
that is a very godly and necessary prayer, worthy to be said in the
celebration of such a mystery; and therefore no matter at all who, invented
it, or brought it in: And yet Celestinus was a godly Bishop, and the Church
of Rome at that time had the substance of the Sacraments according to Gods
word, neither was there any superstition mixed with them: notwithstanding I
know not any introite of Celestinus invention that we have in our order of the
Communion, for the introite that he appointed was one of the Psalms as
Volateranus, Gratianus, and Polydorus Virgilius do testify. And we have not
any Psalm in the celebration of the supper, if we had, it were not to be
reproved.

This I am sure of, that it is not evil because it is in the Mass book,
except it be repugnaunt to the word of God: For the Lords prayer, some of
the Psalms, the Gospels and Epistles, the Nicene creed, etc. be in the Mass
book, and yet good, so is there some other good prayers in it also.

Admonition.


Answer.
And what fault can you find in that? Is not the whole Scripture, and every
piece of it profi^able (...) edify? can the Scripture at any time in the open
c^^gregation be read out of season, being in a known tongue? but I think
your quarrel is at reading, not against the Epistle and the Gospel.

Always in the Church there has been read the scriptures in the celebration
of the mysteries, and I am sure the Gospel was not wont to be read from the
one end to the other at one time. Well, it is but your opinion without reason,
that the Epistle and Gospel ought not to be read at that time: for you bring no
proole, and I think the contrary. First because they be scripture, and tend
to edify: secondly, because it has been the manner of long time, even since
Alexanders time. Anno. 111.

The third. The Nicene creed was not read

The Nicene Creed, and every part of it is grounded upon the word of God,
it was collected by that famous Council of Nyce, to confound that dete^table
heresy of the Arrians, and therefore meet to be read in all Christian
congregations, neither ^an any mislike it, but Arrians and such like, of the
which sect you give just suspicions that you be fautours. This Creed in
this form was not framed in the Apostles time, because the heresy of Arrius
was not then hatched. And therefore no good reason to say, it was not read in
the Apostles time at the Communion, Ergo it ought not to be read now. But
this argument is intolerable, the Nicene Creed is read at the Communion,
therefore the Communion is not sincerely ministered. All these three reasons be
taken ab authoritate negatiu^, and therefore of no force, except we will also
grant these to be true, and such like, scilicet* Then they had no ^hristian
Princes, and therefore we may have no christian Princes. Then they had no
civil or politic laws, Ergo we ought to have none. Then the Church had no
external peace, but was under persecution, Ergo it should have no peace now.
Then Christians had propriety in nothing, but all things were common, Ergo no
man may have any thing of his owns, but common to other: we do not read
expressly, that children were then baptized, therefore they ought not to be
baptized now (for so do the Anabaptists reason) neither do we read that
women did then receive the Supper, therefore they ought not to do it now: with
infinite other as absurd as these.

The fourth. There was then accustomed to be an examination of the
communica^ts, which now is neglected.

How prove you that there was then any examination of communicants? If there
had been either commandment or example for it in scriptures, I am sure you
would not have left it vnquoted in the margent: S. Paul says 1. Cor. 11.
Probet homo scipfum. Let a man examine him self. etc. But be speaks of no
other examination: wherefore this reason of yours is altogether frivolous and
without reason.

And yet I do not disalowe the examination of communicants, so there be a
discrete respect had of the persons, places, and other circumstaunces, neither
it is neglected in this Church of England, but by learned and discrete
ministers, with bearning and discretion used. But note I pray you the force of
his argument: some ministers neglect to examine the communicants, Ergo the
Communion is not rightly and sincerely ministered: as though the examination of
the communicants were of the substance of the sacrament. If you would reason
after your accustomed manner, you should rather conclude thus, the Apostles
were not examined when they received the Communion neither is it expressed in
scriptures that they examined others, therefore there ought to be no such
examination: this is your usual manner of reasoning, but it is childish,
unless it were to conclude damnation or salvation.

The fifth. Then they ministered with common Act. 2.46. Act. 20.7.
and usual bread: now with wafer cakes brought in by Pope Alexander, being in
form fashion and substance like their God of the alter.

The place you allege Act. 2. (which is this) And they continued daily with
one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread at home, did eat their meat
together with gladness and singleness of heart, makes as much for your
purpose as it makes for the Papists half communion, for they allege it to
prove that the supper may be ministered with bread only: But learned
interpreters and especially Master Caluyne, deny this place to be mente of
the ministration of the supper: howsoever it is understood, it does not
necessarily prove that the sacrament was then ministered in common and usual
bread, for there is no mention made of the kind of bread. The place alleged
out of the twentieth of the Acts, speaks of bread, but not of any one
certain kind of bread: The truth is that it skills not what kind of bread is
used, leuened or unleavened so it be bread, although it were to be wished for
the avoiding of superstition, that common and usual bread were used, and also
that the form were altered, and the quantity increased. But these things are
not de substantia sacramenti, and therefore not sufficient to prove that the
supper is not sincerely ministered.

If any think better of one kind of bread than of another in the ministration
of the sacrament, it is their error, and derogateth nothing from the order of
administration. Master Calvin in his Institutions, cap. 19. sect. 72. touching
this matter writes on this sort: Caeterum in manu^ accipiant fideles necne:
inter se diuidant, an singuli quod sibi datum fuerit, edant: calicem in Diaconi
manu reponant, an proximo trada^t: panis sit fermentatus, an azymus: vinum
rubrum, an album: nihil refert: haec indifferentia sunt, and in ecclesia
liberate posita. But whether the faithful take it in their hands or no:
whether they divide it among them selves or every one eat that which is
given unto them: whether they give the cup to the deacon, or deliver it to him
that is next: whether the bread be leuened or unleavened: the wine red or
white, it makes no matter: These be indifferent things, and put in the liberty
of the Church. Master Bucer likewise in his censure upon the book of common
prayers is of the same judgment, his words be these: The third chapter is of
the substance, form, and breaking of bread, which all do well enough agree
with the institution of Christ, whom it is manifest to have used unleavened
bread, and easy to be broken, for he brake it and gave to his disciples pieces
of the bread broken: Touching the form and figure, whether it were round or
square, there is nothing declared of the Evangelists. And because this bread
is used only for a sign, and not for corporal norishmente, I see not, what
can be reprehended in this description of the bread which is in this book,
except some would peradventure have it thicker, that it may the more fully
represent the form of true bread.

Alexander lived Anno. 111. and was a good and godly Bishop: It is reported in
some writers that he appointed unleavened bread to be used in the Eucharist,
because that Christ himself used the same, according to the law written Exodus
12. Deute. 16. But that he brought in wafer cakes, or appointed any certain
form of bread, you cannot prove, neither does any credible author write it.

These words that you use (like the God of the alter) be slanderous and false,
we are as far from thinking the bread to be our God as you, and teach as
sound doctrine touching this sacrament: And therefore you show of what spirit
you be.

The sixth. They received it Mat. 26 20. Mar 14.18. Luc 22 14. John. 13.28
sitting: we kneeling, according to Honorius decree.

The places of Scripture that you quote in the marge^t to prove sitting at the
Communion, declare that Christ and his disciples sat at the table, but that
proves nothing. For you might as well have said, they received after supper,
we before dinner: they at night, we in ye morning: they after meat, we before
meat: they in a private house, we in ye open Church: they being al men and in
number.xii. we together with women, not strictly observing the number of twelve
or any other number above three or four.

This your argument touches them as well as it does us, which receive it
standing or walking. But to sit, stand, kneel, or walk, be not of the
substance of the sacrament: and therefore no impediments, why it may not be
sincerely ministered.

It behooves humble and meek spirits, in such indifferente matters, to
submit them selves to the order of the Church appointed by lawful
authority, and not to make schisms and contentions in the Church for the
satisfying of their own fancies.

Touching kneeling at the Communion, it forces not who did first appointe it
(although I can find no such decree made by Honorius) it is the meetest
manner of receiving this sacrament in mine opinion, being commonly used in
praying and gyuing of thanks, both which are annexed to this sacrament, and
are to be required in the Communicants, and therefore I think this to be a good
reason: the meetest gesture for praying and thanks gyuing is kneeling: but
those that receive the Eucharist, pray and give thanks, Ergo the metest gesture
for them is kneeling.

The only peril is adoration, which may as well be committed sitting or
standing: But wherefore then serves preaching? there is as much danger of
contempt the one way, as there is of adoration the other way. In such matters
Christian magistrates have authority to appointe what they think most
convenient, and the same must be observed of those that be pacifici, and not
contentiosi. But of sitting and kneeling at the Communion more is to be spoken
hereafter in the second part.

The seventh. Then it was delivered generally, and indefinitely, Take ye Mat.
26 26. Mar. 14.22 1. Co. 11.24
and eat ye: we perticulerly, and singulerly take thou and eat thou.

Here is a high matter in a low house: he that says take ye, and eat ye,
does he not also say in effect, take thou, and eat thou? Does not the plural
number include the singular? Christ Matthew. 6. says ad hunc igitur modum orate
vos, pray ye on this manner, May we not therefore say pray thou on this
manner, if we speak to one singular person? So speaking to all his Apostles he
says Ite in vniuer sum mundum, Go ye into all the world.

We use the plural number when we speak to many jointly, we use the singular
number when we speak to one severally: and forasmuch as every one that
receives this sacrament, has to apply unto him self the benefits of
Christ's death and passion, therefore it is convenient to be said to every one,
Take thou, eat thou: But this objection is so ridiculous, that it is more
worthy to be hissed at, than to be confuted.

The eight. They used no other words but such as Christ left: we borrowe from
Papists, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee. etc.

From whencesoeuer these words were borrowed they were well borrowed, for it is
a godly prayer, and an apt applycation of that sacrament, and puts the
communicants in mind of the effect of Christ's passion exhibited unto them by
that sacrament, and sealed with the same, if it be worthily received.

It makes no matter from whom we receive any thing so it be godly,
profitable, and consonant to the scriptures. But I pray you tell us what Pope
invented these words, The body of our Lord Jesus Christ. etc.

The ninth. They had no Gloria in excelsis in the ministry of the sacrament
then, for it was put Telesphorus in Anno. 130.
to afterward. We have now.

It is the common consent of ecclesiastical histories, that the Apostles did
celebrate the Lords supper with the Lords prayer, and yet we do not read that
Christ did so: you also teach that the supper ought not to be ministered
without a Sermon, and in the ministration thereof you use diverse prayers and
other orders which Christ used not: Can you spy a mote (if it be a mote as it
is not) in another man's eye, and can you not perceive a beam to be in your
own? There is nothing contained in Gloria in excelsis, but the same is taken
out of the scriptures, and to be used of all true Christians.

Telesphorus whom you note in the margent, to have added to the supper of the
Lord, Gloria in excelsis, in the year of the Lord 130. was a good Bishop, and
the Church of Rome as yet pure in doctrine and unspotted with heresy.

The tenth. They took it with conscience, we with custom.

This is but your presumptuous and arrogant judgment, who dare take upon you
to give this general sentence so generally upon this whole Church of England,
for you make no exception but set us ad oppositum to them.

If you say some take it without conscience. I think you say truly, and so did
some of them, as Judas. But if you say all or the most part, you go beyond
your commission, and make your selves judges of other men's consciences
contrary to the rule of Christ, Math. 7. Luke. 6. and of Paul. Romans 2.^.14.
1. Cor. 4. and of James the.4.

The eleventh. They shut me^ by reason of their 1 Corin. 5 11.
sins, from the Lords supper. We thrust the^ in their sin to the Lords
supper.

The place that you allege out of the fifte Chapter of the first to the
Corinthians, which is this, But now I have written unto you, that you company
not together: if any that is called a brother be a fornicator etc. does not
particulerly touch the secluding of men by reason of their sins from the
communion, but generally prohibiteth true Christians to have any familiarity
or friendship with any such notorious offender.

If you were not with malice blinded, you might easily understand, that by
the order and rules of this Church of England, all notorious and known
offenders, even such as S. Paul here speaks of, are secluded from the Lords
supper. But peradventure your meaning is, that no man should be compelled to
the Communion at any time, wherein you greatly gratify the Papists, and show
your self a good patron of theirs: when you show any reason why men may not
be compelled to come to the Communion, then you shall be answered: In the mean
time you are worthy of your fee.

The twelfth. They ministered the sacraments plainly, we pompeously, with
singing, piping, surplesse, and copewearing.

This is a very slender reason to prove that the sacrament of the Supper is not
sincerely ministered, because there is singing, piping, surplesse and cope: when
you show your reasons against that pomp which is now used in the celebration
of that sacrament, you shall hear what I have to say in the defense of the
same. I think that there is nothing used in the administration thereof, that
does in any respect contaminate it, or make it impure: As for piping, it is
not prescribed to be used at the Communion by any rule, that I know. Singing I
am sure you do not dissalowe being used in all reformed churches, and an art
allowed in scriptures, and used in praising of God by David. Of surplesse and
cope I have spoken before, and will speak more hereafter as occasion is
ministered.

The thirtenth. They simply as they 1. Cor. 11.23.
received it from the Lord. We, sinfully mixed with man's inventions and devises.

There is no such inventions or devises of man mixed with the Supper of the
Lord, as can make it sinful, being all perteyning to edifieng, and to good
and decent order, and nothing there appointed to be done, contrary or not
agreeable to the Scriptures. Calvin him self says in his Institutions. Li. 4.
ca. 10. That those things which be parts of decency, commended unto us by the
Apostle, though they be prescribed by man, yet are they gods traditions and not
man's, as kneeling at solemn prayer and such like. The supper it self in all
points of any momente is ministered now in this Church of England, even as
Christ delivered it, as the Apostles used it, and as the Primative Church
continued the same.

These be all the reasons you use to prove that the sacrament of the Supper is
not rightely and sincerely ministered, whereof some be impious, some
ridiculous, and all of them unworthy any confutation.

Admonition.
And as for baptism, it was enough with them, if they Act. 8.35.36.37. Act.
10.47.
had water, and the party to be baptized by faith, and the minister to preach
the word and minister the sacraments. Now, we must have Surplesses devised by
Pope Adrian, Interrogatories ministered to the infant, Godfathers and
Godmothers, brought in by Higinus, holy fonts invented by Pope Pius, crossing
and such like pieces of Popery, which the Church of God in the Apostles time
never knew (and therefore not to be used) nay (which we are sure of) were and
are man's diuises, brought in long after the purity of the primative church.

Answer.
The impurities you find in the administration of baptism be these,
surplesse, Interrogatories ministered to the infa^t, godfathers and godmothers,
holy fonts, crossing. Touching the surplesse and such like apparel I have
spoken before sufficiently: the first inue^tor of it (which you say to be Pope
Adrian) does make it neither better nor worse, and yet it was used long before
Adrians time, neither can you prove him to be the first inuenter thereof. It is
certain that such kind of vesture has been used in ye ministration of the
sacraments, long before any corruption of doctrine took place in the Church,
as it appears both by Hierome in his first book aduersus Pelags. where he
makes manifest mention of a white garment used in the administration of
sacrifice, by the Bishop, priest, and deacon. And also Chrysostom Hom. 6. to
the people of Antioche, who speaks of the like garment worn in the Church.
Those that answered the examiner, do but childishly cavil at these two places,
which in deed be plain of them selves and evident, and so is that of Hieromes
also upon the.44. of Ezechiell, The religion of God has one habit in the
ministration, and another in common use and life. Read the place
considerately, and it shall easily appear, that Hierome means as well of
Christian ministers, as of Jewish priests.

But of the use of this and other apparel prescribed in this Church to be
worn by ministers, I have spoken partly before, and am ready to speak more
as occasion shall be offered. In the mean time, the Surplesse is not of the
substance of baptism, neither required as necessary to the administration
thereof, but as comely and decent.

Interrogatories to be ministered to the infant, be not strange, neither lately
invented, but of great antiquity. For Dionysius Areopagita in his book
entitled de coelest. hierar. and seventh chapter, speaking of the baptising of
infants, and of their sureties or godfathers, and answering to certain profane
deriders (as he terms them) which said, that one was baptized for an other,
because ye godfather did promise and answer for the child, speaks thus in
the name of the godfather, Neque enim hoc ille ait, Ego pro puero
abrenunciationes facio, aut fidei Sacramenta profiteor, sed ita puer renuntiat
and profitetur, id est, spondeo puerum inducturu^ cum ad sacram intelligentia^
venerit, sedulis adhortationibus meis, vt abrenu^tiet contrarijs omnino
profiteaturque and peragat diuina quae pollicetur. Neither does he say this, I
renounce for the child, or profess the sacraments of faith, but in this sort
the child does renounce or profess, that is to say, I promise so to enstructe
the child, when he comes to the years of discretion, with daily
exhortations, that he shall renounce all contrary things, and profess and
perform those heavenly things which he does promise.

Augustine also in his Epistle written ad Bonifaciu^, answering this question,
why, seeing we dare promise nothing of the infants behauior and manners when he
comes to man's state, yet when he is brought to baptism, and the question is
asked of those that offer him to be baptized, whether the infant believe or no,
they answer that he does believe, says on this sort: Nisi sacramenta quandam
haberent similitudinem. etc. Except Sacraments had a certain similitude and
likeness of those things whereof they be sacraments, they were no sacraments at
all, and by reason of this same similitude oftentimes they are called by the
names of the things themselves: therefore as after a certain manner of speking the
sacrament of the body of christ is the body of christ, the sacrament of the
blood of christ is the blood of christ, so the sacrament of the faith, is
faith, neither is it any thing else to believe, than to have faith: and
therefore when answer is made that the infant does believe, not having as yet
faith in deed, it is answered that he does believe for the sacrament of faith,
and that he does convert himself unto God for the sacrament of conversion,
because the answer it self does perteine to the celebration of the sacrament.
And a little after he says: Itaque paruulu^, and si nondum fides illa quae in
credentiu^ voluntate consistit, iam tamen ipsius fidei sacramentu^, fidelem
facit. Nam sicut credere respondetur, ita etiam fidelis vocatur, non re^ ipsa
mente annuendo, sed ipsius rei sacramentu^ percipie^do. Therefore although that
faith which consists in the will of the believers, does not make the child
faithful, yet does the sacrament of that faith make him faithful: for even as
it is answered that he does believe, so is he also called faithful, not by
signifying the thing it self in his mind, but by receiving the sacrament of
the thing.

By these two authorities it is manifest that Interrogatories were ministered to
infants at the time of their baptism, and that they had sureties, which we
call godfathers that answered for them, and in their name.

It is also manifest by these authorities, that godfathers or sureties were
required at the baptising of Infants: which Tertullian also signifies in his
book de baptismo. But you your self confess godfathers to be of great
antiquity in the church of Christ, for you say that Higinus brought them in,
and Higinus was the nynth Bishop of Rome, and lived Anno. 141.

You may as well find fault with Pulpit and church, as with the fontes, and
the reason is all one. In the time of the Apostles they did not baptyse in
basins, as you do now, but in rivers and other common waters, neither was there
in the Apostles time any Churches for Christians, or pulpits to preach in, and
therefore you had best to pluck down Churches and pulpits, and to baptize in
common rivers and waters.

Touching crossing in baptism, I will only recite unto you the opinion of
master Bucer, which is this: Signum hoc non tam quod est vsus in Ecclesus
antiquissimi, quam quod est admodum simplex, and praesentis admonitionis crucis
Christi, adhiberi, nec indecens nec inutile existimo: si adhibeatur modo pure
intellectum, and religiose excipiatur, nulla nec superstitione adiuncta, nec
elementi seruitute, nec leuitate, aut vulgari consuetudine. I think it neither
uncomely nor unprofitable to use the sign of the cross, not only because the
use thereof is very ancient, but also because it has an express
signification of the passion of Christ: so that it be purely understood, and
religiously received without any superstition, or servitude of the element, or
leuitie, or common custom.

Admonition.
To redress these, your wisdoms have to remove (as before) ignorant
ministers, to take away private communions and baptismes, to enjoin deacons
and midwiues not to meddle in ministers matters, if they do, to see them
sharply punished. To join assistaunce of elders and other officers, that
seeing men will not examine them selves, they may be examined, and brought to
2. Cor. 11.28. 1. Pet. 3.15.
render a reason of their hope. That the statute against wafer cakes may more
prevail than an Iniunction. That people be appointed to receive the sacrament,
rather sitting, for avoiding of superstition, than kneeling, having in it the
outward show of evil, from 1. These. 5.22.
which we must abstain. That excommunication be restored to his old former
force. That papists nor other, neither constrainedly nor customably,
communicate in the mysteries of salvation. That both the sacrament of the
Lords Supper and Baptism also, may be ministered according to the aunciente
purity and simplicity. That the parties to be baptized, if they be of the
years of Mat 3.6.
discretion by themselves and in their own persons, or if they be infantes by
their parents (in whose room if upon necessary occasion they be absent, some
one of the congregation, knowing the good behavior and sound faith of the
parents,) may both make rehersall of their faith, and also if their faith be
sound, and agreeable to holy Scriptures, desire to be in the same baptized.
And finally, that nothing be done in this or any other thing, but that which
you have the express warrant of Gods word for.

Answer.
In deed it is to be wished, that ignorant ministers were removed, if there
were a sufficient number of such as be learned, to place in their rooms. As
for private Communions, I know none allowed in this Church.

Private baptismes are allowable by Gods word, and there is neither precepte,
nor example to the contrary in Scripture.

If Deacons or Midwyues meddle further than they ought to do, good reason it
is they should be punished, and that sharply.

Your Eldership is not for this time and state, as it is before declared, and
yet may men be compelled to render a reason of their faith if any be
doubted of: although your places quoted for that purpose prove no such
thing. For Paul the.1. to the Corinth. 11. use. 28. wills a man to examine
himself before he eat of that bread. etc. and not to be examined of any
other. Peter. 1. Epist. cha. 3 us. 15. wills every christian man to be ready
without fear in time of persecution, to render a reason or defense (for the
Greek is (...)) of his faith, and not at all times to every man, as master
Calvin him self notes upon that place.

Of the authority of statutes and Injunctions, it perteyneth not to my
faculty to determine, I leave that to such as list to contend with the
Prince for her authority in such cases. This only I say, that if it be
bread, whether it be wafer cake, or loaf bread, the matter is not great, as
it is before declared.

Of sitting and kneeling at the Communion, I have spoken before: kneeling is no
show of evil, but of an humble, reverent, and devout mind.

Of excommunication you have spoken nothing hitherto, and therefore it comes
in here out of place, we shall have afterward more occasion to speak of it.

Surely the Papists have to thank you, that you would not have them
constrained to come to the Communion: This one lesson of liberty has made
all the stubborn and stiffenecked Papists in England, great patrons and
fautours of your book: you might as well have said that you would have every
man freely profess what religion he list without controlemente, and so set
all at liberty, which is your seeking.

The Sacraments are ministered in as great purity and simplicity as ever they
were, since there was any Church established, neither are you able to prove the
contrary.

I muse what you mean to say on this sort: The parties to be baptized, if
they be of the years of discretion. etc. You know that in this Church of
England none tarry for Baptism so long, except it be in some secret
congregation of Anabaptists. The place alleged out of the third of Matthew,
tells how they that were baptized, confessed their sins, it speaks
nothing of any confession of faith.

It is well, that you admit some to answer for the Infant in the absence of
the parente, and why not in his presence too? what Scripture have you, that the
parente at the baptizyng of his child, should make a rehersall of his faith,
and desire that his child should be therein baptized: This I desire to know
for mine own learning, for I neither remember any such thing in Scripture,
neither yet in any ancient writer: I do herein but desire to be enstructed.

I know not what you mean, when you say, (That in the absence of the
parents some one of the congregation knowing the good behavior and sound
faith of the parents, may both make a rehersall of their faith: and also if
their faith be sound and agreeable to holy Scriptures, desire in the same to
be baptized.) What if the parents be of evil behavior? What if it be the
child of a drunkarde, or of an harlot? What if the parents be Papists? What
if they be heretics? what if they err in some point or other, in matters of
faith? shall not their children be baptized? herein you have a further meaning
than I can understand: And I fear, few do perceive the poison that lies
hid under these words: May not a wicked father have a good child? May
not a Papiste or heretic have a believing sons? Will you seclude for the
parents sake, (being himself baptized) his seed from baptism? Surely, your
fancies, nay your dangerous errors will burst out one day in more plain manner.

This reformation you seek for and desire, were rather a deformation, nay a
confusion: and whilst you will nothing to be done but that for the which
there is express warrant in Gods word: you your selves prescribe that which
is not to be found in all Gods word.

Admonition.
Let us come now to the third part, which concerns ecclesiastical
discipline: the officers that have to deal in this charge, are chiefly three,
Ministers, Preachers, or Pastors, of whom before. Seniors or elders and
Deacons. Concerning Seniors, not only their office, but their name also is out
of this english Church utterly removed. Their office was to Act. 14.4. 1. Cor.
12.28.
govern the Church with the rest of the ministers, to consult, to admonish,
to correct, and to order all things apperteyning to the state of the
congregation.

Answer.
What Scripture have you to prove that such Seniors as you mean, and Deacons
had any thing to do in Ecclesiastical discipline? I think the only
discipline that we have in the whole new Testament (except you will make
admonition and exhortation a part of it) is excommunication: and the execution
of that is only committed to the ministers of the word. Math. 16. John. 20.
Examples hereof we have.1. Cor. 5. 1. Tim. 1. and ad Titum. 3. Basilius Magnus
in his second Book De officijs, Cap. 27. testifyeth the same. Theodoretus
bishop of Laodicea, did by himself alone excommunicate both Apollinaries for
keeping company with that wicked Sophister Epiphanius, as Sozomenus writes
Lib. 6. cap. 25. So did Ambrose excommunicate Theodosius the Emperor and is
therefore in all stories greatly commended. I read in the fifth Chapter of the
first to the Corinthians, that the incestuous Corinthian was excommunicated
publicly in the presence of the whole congregation. But I read neither of
Senior nor Deacon called as officers to the same. Saint Paul himself says:
Ego quidem vt absens corpore, praesens spiritu, iam decreui tanquam praesens vt
is. etc. I truly as absent in the body, but present in spirit, have
determined as present, that he. etc. Which manifestly argues, that Ius
excommunicandi was in Paul and not in the rest: But all is Scripture that you
speak how far soever it is from the true meaning and sense of the Scripture.

To prove that the office of Seniors was to govern the Church with the rest
of the Ministers, to consult, to admonish, to correct and to order all things
apperteyning to the state of the congregation, you allege Acts 14. and the
first Corin. 12. In the.14. of the Acts it is written, that Paul and Barnabas
ordained elders at Antioche in every Church, but there is not one word spoken
of their office, and therefore that text serves not your purpose. You have
alleged this self same place twice before, to prove that no minister of the
word ought to be placed in any Congregation but by consent of the people,
and that the election of mynisters ought to be by the congregation: Now you
allege it to prove the office of your Seniors, can it both be meant of
Seniors, and of the ministers of the word, being as you say, distinct
offices? will you thus dally with the Scripture, and make it a nose of wax
(as the Papists term it) to wrest and writhe it which way you list. Here
you must needs confess either contradiction in your selves, or falsification.

In the.1. Cor. 12. Saint Paul says, that God has ordained in the Church,
first Apostles, then Prophets, thirdly teachers, then them that do miracles,
after that the gifts of teaching, helpers, governors, diversities of toungs:
here is not one word of the office of Seniors, neither yet of their names: For
this word, governors, teaches us, that Christ has ordained in his Church
some to bear rule and to govern, but whether one in every congregation or mo:
whether ministers of the word or other: whether magistrates or Seniors, it is
not here expressed: howsoever it is, it makes nothing for your purpose.

I know that in the primative Church they had in every Church certain
Seniors, to whom the government of the Congregation was committed, but that
was before there was any christian Prince or magistrate that openly professed
the Gospel, and before there was any any Church by public authority
established, or under civil government: both the names and offices of Seniors
was extinguished before Ambrose time, as he himself does testify, writing
upon the fifth of the first to Timo. I told you before that the diversity of
time and state of the Church requires diversity of government in the same.
It can not be governed in time of prosperity, as it is in time of persecution:
It may not be governed under a christian Prince, which does nourish and
maynteyne it, as it may be under a tyrant, when it is constrained to flee and
seek corners: It can not be governed in a whole Realm, as it may be in one
little City or town: it can not be governed when it is dispersed thorough
many places, as it may be when it is collected into some one narrow and
certain place: To be short, it can not be governed when it is full of
hypocrites, Papists, Atheists, and other wicked persons, as when it has very
few or none such: As commonly it has not in time of persecution, when the
gold is as it were by fire tried from the dross. He that according to this
diversity of the form, state and time of the Church doothe not allow a
diversity of gouernemente, does confound and not edifye. I pray you what
Seniors could you have in most parishes in England fit for that office?
But wise, not wilful men have to consider this: God has given the chief
government of his Church to the Christian Magistrate, who has to consider
what is most convenient: and we must therewith be content, so that nothing be
done against faith, and the commandment of God.

Admonition.
In stead of these Seniors in Romans 12.^.
every Church the Pope has brought in, and yet we maintein the lordship of one
man over sundry Churches, yea over many shires.

Answer.
You allege in the margent in these words, in the.12. to the To. (he that
exhorts, let him wait on exhortation, he that distributeth, let him do it
with simplicity, he that rules with diligence: he that shows mercy with
cheerfulness.) To prove that in stead of these Seniors in every Church the
Pope has brought in, and we yet maynteyne the Lordship of one man over many
Churches. etc, I know not how this gear hangs together, or to what purpose
you should allege that place: It neither proves, that in every Church there
was Elders, neither that in place of them the pope has brought in the
Lordship of one man over many Churches.

I have proved before in my answer to your thirteenth and fourteenth reason,
that this Lordshippe of one man (as you term it) but in deed lawful
jurisdiction) over sundry Churches, was not the invention of any Pope, but of
great antiquity in the Church of Christ, allowed by that famous Council of
Nice, and practiced since of most godly and learned fathers.

In the nynth Cannon Council. Anno. it is thus written, Per singulas regiones
Episcopos conuenit nosse Metropolitanum Episcopum solicitudinem totius
Prouinciae gerere, propter quod ad Metropolim omnes vndique qui negotia
videntur habere concurrant, vnde placuit eum and honor praecellere, and nihil
amplius praeter eum caeteros Episcopos agere, secundum antiquam a patribus
nostris regulam constitutam, nisi ea tantum quae ad suam Dioecesim pertinent.
etc. It behooves the Bishops in every country to know their Metropolitan
Bishop to have care over the whole Province: and therefore all such as have
any business must come to their Metropolitan City: wherefore it pleases
this Council, that he also excel in honor, and that the other Bishops
do nothing without him, according to the aunciente rule prescribed by our
forefathers) but those things only which perteyne to his own Dioces. etc.
This Council was about the year of our Lord. 345.

Admonition.
These Seniors then, because their charge was not over much, did execute their
office in their own persons, without substitutes. Our Lord Bishops have their
under officers, as suffraganes, Chauncelors, Archdeacons, Officials,
Commissaries, and such like.

Answer.
You barely affirm without any proof, that these Seniors then did execute
their offices in their own persons without substitutes: But your bare word is
not of sufficient credit, although I think you will make a great difference
betwixt Seniors and Bishops: For they whom you call Seniors, had no authority
to preach, or to minister the sacraments, as Bishops have.

That Bishops might have substitutes and had so, it is manifest in the.13.
Cannon Anc^rani concilij, which was about the year of our Lord three hundred
and eight, and before Nicene council, where we read on this sort: Vicarijs
Episcoporum (quos graeci coepiscopos vocant) non licet vel presbyteros vel
diac^nos ordinare, sed nec presbyteris Ciuitatis, sine Episcopi praecepto,
amplius aliquid ordinare, nec sine authoritate literarum ei^^ in vnaquaque
parochia aliquid agere. It is not lawful for Bishops substitutes (whom the
Gretians do call fellow Bishops, or coadiutors) to order either priests or
deacons, neither is it lawful to the priests of the City, without the Bishops
authority to command any thing else, or without the authority of his
letters to do any thing in any parish.

It is manifest hereby that Bishops then had Deputies: whether you will call
them Chauncellors, Commissaries. etc. the matter is not great. To contend for
the name when the thing is certain, is a note of a contentious person.

Admonition.
Touching Deacons though their names be remaining, yet is the office foully
perverted and turned vpside down, for their duty in the primative Church,
was to Romans 12.8.
gather the alms diligently, and to distribute it faithfully: also for the
sick and impotent persons to provide painfully, having ever a diligent care,
that the charity of godly men were not wasted upon loyterers ^. These. 3.10.
and idle vagabounds. Now it is the first step to the ministry, nay
rather, a mere order of priesthood.

Answer.
In the whole.xij. chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, there is not one
word to prove the office of a Deacon to consist in gathering alms, and
distributing the same, neither yet does he speak there of the office of a
Deacon, no more does he in the third Chapter of the second Epistle to the
Thessalo. Lord God what mean you thus to play with the scriptures? It is true
that in the primative Church the office of a Deacon was to collecte and
provide for the poor, but not only, for it was also their office to preach
and to baptize: for Stephen and Philippe being Deacons did preach the
Gospel, Act. 6.7.8. And Philip did baptyse the Eunuche, Act. 8. Justinius
Martyr, one of the most ancient writers, in his second Apology says, that
in the administration of the Supper, deacons did distribute the bread and the
wine to the people. The same does master Calvin affirm of deacons in his
Instit. ca. 19. It may well be compted the first step to the ministry, as
it has been from the Apostles time: and S. Paul joins them together. 1.
Tim. 3.

Admonition.
For they Pontifi. tit. The ordring of deacons.
may baptize in the presence of a Bishop or priest, or in their absence (if
necessity so require) minister the other sacrament, likewise read the holy
scriptures and homilies in the congregation, instruct the youth in the
Cathechisme, and also preach, if he be commanded by the Bishop.

Answer.
I know not what you mean by your Ponti. tit. in the margent of your book,
but if you mean the book entitled, the form and manner of making and
consecrating Bishops. etc. now allowed in this Church of England, then do you
untruly report it, for there is no mention of baptising in the presence of a
Bishop or Priest, neither yet of ministering the other sacrament in their
absence if necessity require: only the book says, that a deacon may baptize
or preach, if he be thereunto admitted by the Bishop, and that he may so do by
the word of God I have proved before. As for reading the holy scriptures, and
Homilies in the congregation, also for instructing the youth in the
Cathechisme, who doubts but that a deacon may do them?

Admonition.
Again in the old Church every Philip. 1.1. Ioh 13.27. Acts. 6.5. 1. Tim 3.8.
congregation had their Deacons.

Answer.
O how aptely you have alleged the Scriptures to prove that every congregation
had their deacons? In the first to the Philip. these be the words: Paul and
Timotheus. etc. to all the Saints which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and
Deacons. Paul and Timotheus salute the Bishops and Deacons which were at
Philippi. Therefore in those days every congregation had their Deacons: a
strange kind of reasoning: you might well have thus concluded, Ergo at
Philippi there was Deacons: But surely this argument is too much out of
square, there was Deacons at Philippi, therefore every congregation had their
Deacons.

In the.13. of S. John, verse.27. these be the words: And after the soppe,
Satan entered into him, then said Jesus unto him, that thou doste, do quickly.
After supper Satan entered into Judas, and Jesus said unto him, that thou
doste do quickly: Therefore every congregation had their Deacons. No marvel
though your margent be pestred with Scriptures, when you take liberty to make
ex quolibet quidlibet. Peradventure you mean that Judas was a Deacon (as he
was not, but an Apostle) because he carried the bag, and that some of the
Apostles thought that Christ had bid him give somewhat to the poor: belike
whosoever gives a penny to the poor at his masters commandment, is with you
a Deacon.

In the sixth of the Acts we learn that there were chosen seven Deacons, but
there is not one word to prove that every congregation had their Deacons.

In the third of the first to Timothy S. Paul shows what qualities and
conditions a Deacon ought to have, but not one word of deacons being in every
congregation. This is great audacitie, thus manifestly to wring the scriptures
without all color or show of reason.

Admonition.
Now they are tied to Cathedral Churches only, and what do they there? gather
the alms and distribute it to the poor? nay, that is the least piece, or
rather no part of their function. What then? to sing a Gospel when the Bishop
ministers the Communion. If this be not a perverting of this office and
charge, let every one judge.

Answer.
I am sure you are not offended, that there be Deacons in Cathedral Churches:
For if they ought to be in every congregation, they ought to be there also: and
yet I know no such order now in Cathedral Churches, that they be more bound
to Deacons in the respect of reading the Gospel, tha^ other Churches be: But
admit they were, it is no perverting of the office of a Deacon, being
incident to his office, as well to read the Scriptures in the congregation, and
to exhort, as to give alms, and distribute to the poor: For the state of the
Church is not now, as it was in the Apostles time, neither is that part of
the office of a Deacon, so necessary now as it was then, being laws and
orders otherwise to provide for the poor, than there either was then, or
could have been.

Admonition.
And yet least the reformers of our time should seem utterly to take out of
gods Church this necessary function, they appointe something to it concerning
the pore, and that is, to search for the sick, needy, and impotent people of
the parrish, and to intimate their estates names, and places where they dwell
to the Curate, that by his exhortation they may be relieved by the parrish, or
other convenient alms. And this you see is the nighest part of his office,
and yet you must understand it to be in such places where there is a Curate
and Deaco^: every parrishe cannot be at that cost to have both, nay, no parrish
so far as can be gathered, at this present has.

Answer.
And what fault can you find herewith, is not this greatly to be commended?
If every parrishs cannot be at the cost to have both Curate and Deacon, why do
you require them both in every parrish? Why do you not think well of such
laws as appoint collectours for the poor, which may as well provide for them
and better too, than could the Deacon, who must be sustained himself with that
which the poor should have.

Admonition.
Now then* if you will restore the Church to his ancient officers, this you
must do. In stead of an Archbishop or Lord Bishop, you must make 2 Co. 10.7.
Coloss. 1.1.
equality of ministers.

Answer.
I have proved before, that as well the name as office of an Archbishop is, both
most ancient, and also most necessary in the Church of Christ: and that this
equality of ministers which you require is both flatly against the scriptures,
and all aunciente authority of counsels and learned men, and the example of
all Churches even from Christ's time, as more plainly apereth by these words of
Master Bucer in his book de regno Christi. Iam ex perpetua ecclesiaru^
obseruatione, ab ipsis iam Apostolis videmus, visum and hoc esse spiritui
sancto, vt inter presbiteros, quibus ecclesiaru^ procuratio potissimum est
commissa, vn^^ ecclesiarum, and totius sacri ministerij curam gerat singularem:
eaque cura and solicitudine cunctis praeeat alijs. Qua de causa Episcopi nomen,
huiusmodi summis ecclesiarum c^ratoribus est peculiariter attributum. etc. Now
we see by the perpetual observation of the Churches, even from the Apostles
them selves, that it has pleased the holy ghost, that amongst the ministers to
whom the government of the Church especially is committed, one should have
the chief care both of the Churches and of the whole ministry, and that he
should go before all other in that care and diligence for the which cause the
name of a Bishop is peculiarly given to such chief governors of Churches.
etc. Furthermore I have declared that it engenders schisms, factio^s, and
contentions in the Church, and brings in a mere confusion, and is a branch
of Anabaptisme: And now I add that you desire this equality, not because you
would not rule (for it is manifest that you seek it most ambitiously in your
manner) but because you contemn and disdain to be ruled, and to be in
subjection: In deed your meaning is as I said before, to rule and not to be
ruled, to do what you list, in your several cures, without controlemente of
Prince, Bishop, or any other: And therefore pretending equality, most
disorderly you seek dominion: I speak that I know by experience in some of
you.

Your places quoted in the margent to prove that there ought to be an equality
of ministers, sound nothing that way. 2. Cor. 10. verse. 7. These be the words
of the Apos^le. Look ye on things after the appearaunce. If any trust in him
self that he is Christ's, let him consider this again of him self that as he
is Christ's, even so are we Christ's. How conclude you of these words your
equality? I promise you it passes my cunning to wring out of them any such
sense, rather the contrary may be gathered out of the words following, which
be these: For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority which the
Lord etc. I should have no shame. Master Calvin expounding these words says
on this sort, It was for modesty that he joined himself to their number,
whom he did far excel: and yet he would not be so modest but that he would
keep his authority safe: therefore he adds that he spoke less than of right
he might have done. For he was not of the common sort of ministers, but one
of the chief among the Apostles: And therefore he says, if I bost more I need
not be ashamed, for I have good cause. And a little after: Quamuis enim commune
sit omnibus verbi ministris idemque officium, sunt tamen honoris gradus.
Although the self same office be common to all the ministers of the word;
yet there is degrees of honor. Thus you see Calvin far otherwise to gather
of this place than you do.

The place in the first to the Coloss. verse. 1. is this: Paul an Apostle of
Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timotheus our brother. Surely your mind
was not of equality (I think) when you quoted these places to prove it: But
it is your usual manner without all discretion and judgment to dally and play
with the scriptures. For what sequel is there in this reason, Paul calls
Timothy brother, Ergo in all respects there must be equality? as though there
were not distinction of degrees even among brethren.

Admonition.
In stead of Chauncelors, Archdeacons, Officialles, Commissaries, Proctors,
Doctors, Summoners, Churchwardens and such like, you have to place in every
congregation a lawful and godly Seigniorie.

Answer.
That is, in stead of learned, wise, and discreet men, you must place to
govern the Church in every congregation, unlearned, ignoraunte, and men most
unapt to govern, for such of necessity you must have in most co^gregations:
But I pray you do thus much for me, first prove that there was in every
congregation such as you call seniors: When you have done that, then show me
that that office and kind of regiment ought to be perpetual, and not rather
to be altered according to the state and condition of the Church: Last of all,
that these seniors were lay men, as we call them, and not rather ministers of
the word, and Bishops. When you have satisfied my request in these three
points, then will I proceed further in this matter. In the mean time I do not
defend any Chaunceller, Archdeacon etc. which abuse their office, I wish such
reformed with all my heart. But wherein have Churchewardens offended you? I
perceive nothing that is now in the Church can please you.

Admonition.
The deaconship 1. Timo. 3.8.
must not be confounded with the ministry, nor the Collectours for the pore
may not usurp the Deacons office: but he that has an Romans 12.7. 1. Cor. 7.20.
office must look to his office, and every man must keep him self within the
bonds and limits of his own vocation.

Answer.
Neither do we confound them, and yet Paul in the place by you quoted in the
margente, speaks not one word of confounding, or not confounding these
offices So the poor be provided for it forces not, whether provision be made
by Deacons or by collectours, by the one it may be well done, by the other it
cannot be done in all places, as the state is now: But show any scripture to
prove that the poor must only be provided for by Deacons, else not.

Admonition.
And to these three jointly, that is, the ministers, seniors and Deacons, is
the whole regiment of the Church to be committed.

Answer.
This is only by you set down without proof, therefore I will hear your
reasons before I make you answer. In the mean time I pray you what
authority in these matters do you give to the civil magistrate, me think I
hear you whisper that the Prince has no authority in ecclesiastical
matters: I know it is a received opinion among some of you, and therein you
shake hands also with the Papists, and Anabaptists.

Admonition.
This regiment consists especially in ecclesiastical discipline, which is
an order left by God unto his Church, whereby men learn to frame their wills
and doings according to the law of God by Iam. 5.16. Mat. 18.15.16.17.
instructing and admonishing one another, yea and by correcting and puinshing
all wilful persons, and contemners of the same. Of this discipline there is
two kinds, one private, wherewith we will not deal because it is impertinent to
our purpose* another public, which although it has been long banished, yet if
it might now at the length be restored, would be very necessary and profitable
for the building up of Gods house. The final end of this discipline, is, the
reforming of the disordered, and to bring them to repentance, and to bridle
such as would offend. The chiefest part and last punishment of this
discipline is excommunication, by the consent of the Church determined, if the
offender be obstinate, which how miserably it has been by the Popes proctors,
and is by our Canonists abused, who sees not? In the primative Church it was
in 1. Corin 5 4.
many men's hands: now one alone exco^municateth. In those days it was the last
censure of the church and never went forth but for 1. Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14
notorious crimes: Now it is pronounced for every light trifle. Then
excommunication was greatly regarded and feared. Now because it is a money
matter, no whit at all esteemed. Then for 1. Timo. 1.20 1. Corin 5.
great sins severe punishment, and for small offenses little censures. Now
great sins either not at all punished, as Ie. 24.14.16 Nu. 15.34. etc.
blasphemy Deu. 23.19.20
usury, etc, or else slightly passed over with pricking in a bla^ket, or
pinning in a sheet, as Leui. 20.5. Deu. 22.22.
adultery, whoredom, drunkenness. etc.

Answer.
Where you speak truly and uprightly, there I join with you: In deed
excommunication which is the last and greatest punishmente in the Church,
because it is commonly used, and in every trifling matter, it is also commonly
neglected and contemned, I pray God it may be restored again to the first
purity: But that excommunication was then in many men's hands, the place by you
alleged out of the 1. Cor. 5. proves not, as I have before declared. And
although there be some defecte in the Church, touching this part of
discipline, yet is not the church void of al discipline, for besides diverse
profitable and godly laws made for the correction of diverse vices, there is a
Commission for causes ecclesiastical, which both has done and (being
accordingly used) will do singular much good in this common weal: But it
pleases not you one whit.

Admonition.
Again such as are no sins (as if a man co^form not himself to popish orders
and ceremonies if he come not at the whistle of him, who has by Gods word no
authority to call, we mean Chauncelors, Officials, Doctors, and all that rabble)
are grievously punished, not only by excommunication, suspension, deprivation,
and other (as they term it) spiritual coercion, but also by banishing,
imprisoning, reuiling, taunting, and what not?

Answer.
Here you are judge in your own cause, and therefore you make of a mite an
elephant. It is meet that such as contemn the good orders and laws of that
place where they dwell, such as make schisms, factions, and contentions in
the Church, such as can not or will not be subject and obedient to their
superiors, should be by discipline either reformed, or removed: You must
not look to live as you list, and be without check. Chauncelors, Officials,
Doctors, have no authority in respect of their offices, to banishe or to
imprison, and therefore here you nippe (as you think) some greater persons. You
make much of a little, too much lenity makes you so wanton, and so ready to
cast off the yoke of due obedience. How you are punished the world sees:
although you and your fautors can brute abroad, that you are persecuted and
cruelly dealt with, when as in very deed you have much more favor showed unto
you than you deserve. As for reuiling and tau^ting, it is usual to none so
much, as it is to the Papists and your selves.

Admonition.
Then the sentence was tempred according 1. Tim. 1.20
to the notoriousnesse of the fact. Now on the one side either hatred against
some persons carries men headlong into rash and cruel judgment: or else
favor, affection or money mitigateth the rigor of the same, and all this
comes to pass because the regiment left of Christ Math 18.7. 1. Co. 12.28
Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17 Act 15.2.4.6.22.23.
to his Church, is committed into one man's hands, whom alone it shall be more
easy for the wicked by bribing to pervert, than to overthrow the faith and
piety of a zealous and godly company, for such manner of men in deed Exodus
18.21 Deuteronomy. 1.13.
should the Seniors be.

Answer.
If in judgment either hatred, or favor, money, or affection, bear the
stroke, it is meet such Judges were either reformed or removed. And if you
know any such, you shall do very well in detecting of them, else we must think
that you have a slanderous tongue, and that you speak only of malice: I
suppose that you are not able to charge all Chauncelours, Archedeacons. etc.
And if these faults be not common to all, but peculier to some, then is it no
sufficient reason you use to condemn their offices and kind of government, no
more than you may condemn a kingdom, and the authority of a Prince over a
whole Realm, because diverse kings be tyrants, wicked, and govern ill, or any
other office or authority in the common wealth which is or may be by some
abused.

You say, all this comes to pass because the regiment left of Christ to his
Church, is committed unto one man's hands: and for the proof of this, you note
in the Margent the *18, of Matthew: the.xij. of the first to the Corinth.
the.12. to the Romans the.5. of the first to Timothy, the.15. of the Acts, which
places being examined, let the discrete reader judge how aptly they serve for
your purpose.

In the.18 of Matthew, Christ says on this sort: If thy brother trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault between him and thee alone, etc. In
the which place, it is by the consent of al interpreters manifest, that Christ
prescribes a rule of correcting private and secret sins, and not of such as
be open and known to others. For he would not have private and secret sins
blased abroad and publicly reprehended, before the party offending be in
this order first privately admonished: this makes nothing for your purpose, it
takes away authority of judging and condemning from private men, and not from
public magistrates.

In the.12. of the.1. to the Corinth. use.28. these be the words of the
Apostle: And God has ordained some in the church: as first Apostles, secondly
Prophets, thirdly teachers, then them that do miracles, after that the gift of
healing, helpers, governors, diversity of toungs. How can you gather of these
words, that all this comes to pass (that is, hatred, favor, corruption by
money, and affection in judgment) because the regymente left of Christ to
his Church is committed to one man's hands? In these words the Apostle
declares, that Christ has left in his Church governors, and thereof you
may well conclude, that in the Church there must be some which should have
authority over the rest. The Apostle does not here say that in every
particular congregation Christ has left many governors, no more than he says
that he has left many pastors for one flock: but in his Church he has
ordained governors.

The government of the whole universal Church, is not by Christ committed to
one bishop, or one Prince, nor the government of the whole world to one
Emperor, for no one man can discharge such a cure, and therefore he has
appointed in his Church diverse Bishops, diverse Princes, many Governors. But
one Prince may suffice to govern one kingdom, and one Archebyshoppe one
Province, as chief and principal over the rest, one Bishop one Dioces, one
Pastor one parish, neither does the Apostle speak any thing to the contrary.

In the.xij. to the Romans it is thus written: he that rules with diligence.
What makes this for your purpose, or how can you wring it to your assertion?

In the.5. of the.1. to Timothy. The Elders that rule well are worthy of
double honor. etc. Paul shows in these words that such are worthy their
stipende and reward, which rule well in the Church, and do their duties
diligently: But what is that to your assertion?

The places alleged out of the fiftenth of the Acts be of the like sort.
Wheresoever mention is made in the Scriptures, of governors or Elders, that
you allege to improve the government of one man, wherein you show a great
want of judgment. And yet there is no one person in this Realm (the Prince
only excepted) which has such absolute jurisdiction as you would make your
disciples believe. But your meaning is that Christ left the whole
government of his Church to the Pastor, and to some four or five of the
Parish besides, which you are not able to prove, and your places of Scripture
alleged signify no such matter. In deed as Ambrose says, writing upon
the.5. of the.1. to Timothy: The Sinagoge, and after, the Church had seniors,
without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church, but that was before his
time, and before there was any Christian Magistrates, or any Church
established: neither is there any authority in the whole Bible, that enforces
or prescribes that kind of government as necessary or conueniente for all
times: no more than there is to prove that in the Church there must be
always such as have power to work miracles, or that have the gift of healing
and such like: which offices notwithstanding are mentioned as well as
governors in the first to the Corinth. 12. Well says Musculus in his common
places, Tit. de magistratis. Si reuocas temporum illorum mores, primum
conditiones and statum quoque illorum reuoca, If thou vvilt use the manners of
that time, first call again the condition and state of that time: That is,
let us be without christian Magistrates as they were: let us be under tyrants
and persecutors, as they were. etc.

You say, it is more easy for the wicked by brybing to peruerte and corrupt
one man tha^ to pervert and overthrow ye faith and piety of a zealous and
godly company: And therefore better the government of the Church to be
committed to many, than to one. If this reason be good, the^ ye more there be
that rule, the better is the government, and so, popularis status erit optimus
reipublicae status, against all both divinity and Philosophy: For we see that
God himself in his common weal of Israel, did always allow the government
and superiority of one over the rest, both in the time of Judges, and after
in the time of the kings. And in the new Testament we may also see that kind
of government most allowed of.1. Peter.2. But I will not here reason with you
in this matter, and call that into question which has been by so many learned
men determined, and by the examples of all good commonweals confirmed. You
that would have all brought to such a popularitie, I pray you tell me in how
many parishes in England could you find such Pastors and such Seniors as
you say should be? In those places that be governed by many, do you not see
what contention there is? what enimitie? what factions? what parts taking?
what confusion? what little good order observed? what carelessness and
dissoluteness in all manner of behavior? I could make this manifest by
examples, if I were disposed.

In the.18. of Exodus, which (place you quote to prove that Seniors ought to be
zealous and godly) Iethro gives Moses counsel not to weary himself in
hearing all matters that be brought unto him, but rather to commit the hearing
and determining of smaller matters to others: And therefore verse.21. he says:
Provide thou among all the people, men of courage, fearing God, men dealyng
truly, hating covetousness, and appoint such over them to be rulers over
thousands, rulers over hundredes, rulers over fifties, and rulers over tennes.
etc. This makes nothing for Seniors: Moses here was chief, these were but his
under officers placed by himself. This place serves well for the government
of one Prince over one whole realm, and gives him good counsel what under
officers he ought to choose. To the same effect and purpose is that spoken and
written which you cite out of the first of Deuteron. use.13.

Admonition.
Then it was said tell Math. 18.17.
the Church: now it is spoken, complain to my Lords grace, Primate and
Metropolitan of all England, or to his inferioure, my Lord Bishop of the
Diocese, if not to him, show the Chancelloure or Official, or Commissarie,
or Doctoure.

Answer.
As it was said the^, so ought you and may you say now: In private offenses if
private admonitio^s will not serve, then must you declare them to the Church,
either by reprehending of them publicly, before the whole congregation (if
you be called thereunto) for that is one kind of telling the Church: or else
by complaining to such as have authority in the Church, for in that place of
Matthew (as all learned interpreters both old and new do determine) the Church
signifies such, as have authority in the Church: Therefore when you
complain to my Lords grace, Lord Bishop of the dioces, or their
Chauncelloures, Commissaries etc, you tell the Church, that is, such as be
appointed to be public Magistrates in the Church according to the very true
sense and interpretation of that place.

Admonition.
Again, whereas the excommunicate were never received till they had 2. Cor.
2.7.
publicly confessed their offense: Now for paying the fees of the Court they
shall by master Official, or Chauncelloure easyly be absolved in some private
place. Then the congregation, by the wickedness of the offendoure grieved, was
by public penance satisfied. Now absolution shall be pronounced, though
that be not accomplished. Then the party offending should in his own person,
hear the sentence of absolution pronounced. Now Bishops, Archdeacons,
Chauncellours, Officials, Commissaries, and such like, absolve one man for an
other. And this is that order of ecclesiastical discipline, which all godly
wish to be restored, to the end that every one by the same, may be kept
within the limittes of his 1. Cor. 7.20.
vocation, and a great number be brought to live in godly conversation.

Answer.
If Chauncellors, Co^missaries. etc. do as you here charge them, they do that
which by Gods law they can not justify. But I acknowledge my lack of
experience in such matters, and therefore I can say little in them. Let them
answer for themselves, they be of age sufficient.

Admonition.
Not that we mean to take away the authority of the civil Romans 13.
magistrate and chief governor, to whom we wish all blessedness, and for
the increase of whose godliness, we daily 1. Timo. 2.2.
pray: but that Christ being restored into his kingdom, to rule in the same
by the scepter of his word, and severe discipline: the prince may be better
obeyed, the realm more flourishe in godliness, and the Lord him self more
syncerely and purely according to his revealed will served than heretofore he
has been, or yet at this present is.

Answer.
I will not speak what I think, your former assertions agree not with this
protestation: Christ rules in his Church by the godly Magistrate, whom he
has placed over his Church, and to whom he has committed his Church
touching external policy and gouernemente, and whosoever therewith is not
content, or sets him self against it, plays the parts of Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, and be occasions why neither the Prince is obeyed as she ought to
be, nor God so truly served. etc.

Admonition.
Amend therefore these horrible abuses, and reform Gods Church, and the Psalm.
16.8.
Lord is on your right hand, you shall not be removed for ever. For he will
deliver and defend you from all your enemies, either at home or abroad, as he
did faithful Jacob, Genesis 35.5.
and good 2. Chro. 17.10.
Iehosaphat. Let these things alone, and God is a righteous judge he will one
day call you to your reckening.

Answer.
The greatest abuse that I know in this Church is, that you and such as you
are, be suffered to do as you do, and with your schisms to trouble the peace
of the church and to contemn those that be in authority: other abuses that be
in the same, I doubt not but that they shall by due order be reformed.

Admonition.
Is a reformation good for France? and can it be evil for England? Is
discipline meet for Scotland? and is it unprofitable for this realm? Surely
God has set these examples before your eyes, to encourage you to go
forewarde to a through and a speedy reformation. You may not do as heretofore
you have done, patche and piece, nay rather go backewarde, and never labor or
Hebr. 6.1.
contend to perfection. But altogether remove whole Antichrist both head,
body, and branch, and perfectely plant that purity of the word, that
simplicity of the Sacraments, and that severity of discipline which Christ
has commanded, and commended to his Church.

Answer.
Has there been no reformation in this Church of England since the Queens
majesty's reign? what say you to the abolishing of the usurped power of the
Bishop of Rome? what say you to the banishing of the Mass? Nay what say you
to the purity of doctrine, in all points perteining to salvation? is this no
reformation with you? O intolerable unthankfulness. England is not bound to
the example either of France or Scotland: I would they both were, (if it
pleased God) touching religion, in that state and condition, that England is. I
would Antichrist were as far from them removed. The Lord make us thankful
and continue this reformation we have, and grant peace to his Church, and
either convert the hearts of those that be enemies unto it, or remove them.

Admonition.
And here to end, we desire al to suppose that we have not attempted this
enterprise for vain glory, gain, preferment, or any other wordly respect.

Answer.
I would to God you were as free from vain glory, ambition, malice, and other
sinister affections, as you would seem to be: But no indifferente man reading
your book will so think of you, for besides ye opprobrious and unseemly terms
you use toward your superiors, your admonition smells altogether of
popularitie and vain glory.

Admonition.
Neither yet judging our selves, so exactly to have set out the state of a
Church reformed as that nothing more could be added, or a more perfect form
and order drawn: for that were great presumption, to arrogate so much unto
our selves, seeing that as we are but weak and simple souls, so God has
raised up men of profound judgment, and notable learning.

Answer.
And yet in the beginning of your book, you call it a true platform of a
Church reformed: and I dare say, you think it to be as perfect a form of a
Church, as all the best learned and godliest men in the world could frame: For
it is well known, that men of your disposition, think commonly as well of
themselves, as they do of any man else, and better too. But, we grant unto
you, that you are so far from setting down a perfect state of a Church
reformed, that you may rather be called confounders and deformers, than
buylders and reformers.

Admonition.
But, thereby to declare our good wills toward ye setting forth of Gods glory,
and the buylding up of his Church, accompting this as it were but an entrance
into further matter, hoping that our God, who has in us begone this good
work, will not only in time hereafter make us strong, and able to go forward
therein: but also move other upon whom he has bestowed greter measure of his
gifts and graces, to labor more thoroughly and fully in the same.

Answer.
God grant you may become buylders and not destroyers: I think in deed you
have but begone: I know there is other opinions among you, which be not yet
commonly known: and truly I doubt that you will never end, but from time to
time coin new devises to trouble the Church, until you have brought that
heavy plage of GOD upon us, which the like kind of men thorough their
schisms and heresies have brought upon all those places almost where any of
the Apostles preached, and where the Gospel was first planted: and commonly
before ruin and destruction, comes inward discord and domestical
dissension.

The Lord make us thankful for the purity of his Gospel, that we by his
mercy enjoy: The Lord root out schisms and factions from among us, and
either convert or confound the authors of them: The Lord of his singular
goodness continue our gracious Queen Elizabeth unto us, and give us faithful
and obediente hearts to his word, and to her Majesty. Amen.

AFter I had ended this confutation of the Admonition, there comes to my hand
a new edition of the same, wherein some things be added, some detracted, and
some altered, which I thought good here breefly to set down and to examine,
that it may be seen what these men have learned since they published their
first book.

Additions, detractions, and alterations in the first part of the Admonition.
In the preface to Archbishops, Bishops, Suffragans, Deanes. etc. they have
added University doctors and bachelors of divinity. It should seem that they
would have a confusion of degrees (which they call equality) as well in
Uniuersities, as in Parishes, and other their imagined congregations: mark
whether this gear tend not to the overthrow of Uniuersities, and of all good
learning.

In the margent, for the.15. of Mathewe. use. 23. they have quoted the.15. of
Matthew. use. 13. to prove that tyrannous Lordship can not stand with Christ's
kingdom, the words be these: But he answered and said: every plant which my
father has not planted, shall be rooted up, meaning, that such as be not by
free adoption and grace grafted in Jesus Christ, shall be rooted up. But this
proves not their proposition: I do not allow tyrannous Lordship, but I
disallow such unapt reasons.

In the same preface speaking of bishops. etc. they have added these words:
they were once of our mind, but since their consecration they be so
transubsta^tiated, that they are become such as you see. It may be that
consideration of the time, place, state, condition, and other circumstances
has altered some of them in some points, as wise, and not wilful men in such
matters by such circumstances be oftentimes altered: but that any one of them
were ever of your mind in most things uttered in those two treatises, I can
not be persuaded.

In the Admonition, the.1. lea^^.
For the.1. Acts. use. 12. is noted Acts. 2. use. 21. to prove that in the old
Church there was a trial had both of the ministers ability to instruct, and
of their godly conversation also. The text is this: And it shall be that
whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. Which is farther
from the purpose a great deal, than ye other place is.

There is also in the same leaf left out, king Edwards priests: which argues
with how little discretion, and less advise, the first admonition was penned.

Speaking of learning master Nowels Cathechisme, these words be added: and so
first they consecrate them, and make them ministers, and the^ they set the^ to
schole. This scoff is answered before, and might very well have been left out.
And a little after, where it was before, then election was made by the common
consent of the whole church: now, it is thus corrected, then election was made
by the elders, with the common consent of the whole church: which alters the
matter something, but yet is not proved by the text alleged out of the.1. of
the Acts, and by me answered before.

Fol. 2.
For Act. 14. use. 13. is quoted Act. 14. use. 23. which ouerfight I my self
have corrected in my answer to ye place.

There is also left out an albe, which before was said to be required by the
pontifical in ye ordring of ministers. As I said before, so I say again, that
in ye book of ordring mnisters, now used, and printed since. An. do. 1559.
there is nether required albe, surples, vestime^t, nor pastoral staff.

This line is also added, these are required by their pontifical, meaning
surplesse, vestiment. etc. which is untrue, as I have said before.

For the.1. Ti. 1. use. 14. now it is.1. Ti. 1. use. 19. but it is not to prove
any matter in controversy, only it is uncharitably and unjustly applied.

For.1. Sam. 9. use. 28. is placed.1. Sam. 9. use. 18. the self same place that
I have answered before.

Where before it was thus written: then ministers were not so tied to any form
of prayers invented by man: now these words invented by man be left out, and
there is added, as necessity of time required so they might pour. etc. I know
not their meaning, except they would neither have us bound to ye lords prayer,
nor any other.

It was before, Fol. 3.
remove Homilies, articles, injunctions, a prescript order: now it is that
prescript order. Whereby it should seem yt they have learned to allow of a
prescript order of prayers, but not of that prescript order which is in the
book of public prayers. This is no dallying, neither yet inconstancy.

For the.3. of Mat. use. 12. is placed.3. of Mat. use. 1. to prove that in the
old time, the word was preached before the sacraments were ministered: The
place now alleged is this: In those days John the Baptist came and preached
in the wilderness of Judea. This proves yt John preached, but it proves not,
that whensoever John did baptize, tha^ he did preach.

Oueragainst these words, the Nicene creed was not read in their communion, is
written in ye margent, note that we condemn not the doctrine contained therein.
If you condemn not the doctrine therein, what do you the^ condemn? or why
mislike you the communion, because that creed containing true doctrine is read
at ye celebratio^ thereof? It is well that you make this protestation if you
mean good faith.

Here is also added the.42. use. Act. 2. to prove yt the^ ye sacrament was
ministered with common and usual bread: which place I have answered before, in
answering to ye.46. use of that cha.

Whereas before it was thus, interrogatories ministered to the infant, godfathers
and godmothers brought in by Higinus: now godfathers and godmothers brought in
by Higinus is left out. It is happy that you are so sone persuaded to allow of
godfathers and godmothers: I perceive you took upon you to set down a
platform of a Church, before you had well considered of it.

Fol. 4.
For, some one of the congregation: is now, some of the congregation: whereby
they seem to allow mo godfathers than one, which they did not before.

For the.14. of the Acts. use. 4. is noted the.15. of the Acts use. 4. to prove
that the office of Seniors was to govern the Church with the rest of the
ministers: but without reason. For it is only there written, that at Jerusalem
there was Apostles and Elders, and that Paul and Barnabas declared unto them
what things God had done by them. I deny not the thing it self (whereof I have
sufficiently spoken before) but the argument.

These seniors then because their charge was not ouermuche, did execute their
office in their own persons: Now these words because their charge was not
ouermuche, be left out. Wherefore they have left them out I know not.

Fol. 5.
They have left out doctors three times in this leaf, which before they
recited with Chauncelors, Archedeacons, officials, commissaries, proctors. Be
like they have remembered that this word Doctor, is found in the new
Testament, and especially Doctor of law.

To prove equality of ministers, they have added Phil. 1. use. 1. 1. These.
1.1. The first place is this, Paul and Timotheus the servant of Jesus Christ
to all Saints in christ's Jesus that are at Philippi, with the Bishops and
Deacons. The second is this: Paul and Syluanus, and Timotheus unto the church
of the Thessalonians. etc. Truly, I know not how to conclude of those places an
equality of all ministers: I would to God you would set down your places, and
frame your arguments your selves.

Fol. 6.
They have forgotten to quote Heb. 6.1. and have left out the body and branch
of Antichrist, and for the same have put in the tail: But these are but
trifles, and very slender corrections.

An Answer to the second part of the Libell called An admonition to the
Parliament: and entitled A view of Popish abuses, yet remaining in the
English Church, for the which, godly ministers have refused to subscribe.
Admonition.
WHere as immediately after the last parliament, holden at Westmynster, begone
in Anno. 1570. and ended in Anno 1571. the ministers of gods holy word and
Sacraments, were called before her majesty's high Commisioners, and enforced
to subscribe unto the articles if they would keep their places and livings, and
some for refusing to subscribe, were unbrotherly and uncharitably entreated,
and from their offices and places removed: May it please therefore this
honorable and high Court of Parliament in consideration of the premises, to
take a view of such causes, as then did withholde and now does the foresaid
Ministers, from subscribing and consenting unto those foresaid articles, by
way of purgation to discharge them selves of all disobedience toward the
Church of God, and their sovereign, and by way of most humble entreatie, for
the removing away and utter abolishing of all such corruptions and abuses, as
withhelde them, through which this long time, brethren have been at unnatural
war and strife among them selves, to the hinderance of the Gospel, to the
joy of the wicked, and to the grief and dismay of all those that profess
Christ's religion and labor to attain Christian reformation.

Answer.
You complain much of unbrotherly and uncharitable entreating of you, of
removing you from your offices and places. Surely in this point I must compare
you to certain heretics that were in Augustines time, who most bitterly by
sundry means afflicting and molesting the true ministers of the Church, yet
for all that cried out, that they were extremely dealte with, and cruelly
persecuted by them: or else unto a shrewd and ungracious wife which beating her
husband, by her clamorous complaints, makes her neighbors believe, that her
husband beats her: or to him that is mentioned in Erasmus colloquies, that
did steal, and run away with the Priests purse, and yet cried always as he
ran, stay the thief, stay the thief, and thus crying escaped, and yet he
was the thief him self. You are as gently entreated as may be, no kind of
brotherly persuasion omitted toward you, most of you as yet keep your
livings, though some one or two be displaced, you are offered all kind of
friendlinesse if you could be content to conform your selves, yea but to be
quiet and hold your peace, you on the contrary side most unchristianly, and
most unbrotherly, both publicly and privately rail on those, that show this
humanity toward you, slander them by all means you can, and most untruly
report of them, seeking by all means their discredit. Again they as their
allegiance to the Prince and duty to laws requires, yea and as some of them
by oath are bound, do execute that discipline, which the Prince, the law, and
their oath requires: You contrary to al obedience, duty, and oath, openly
violate and break those laws, orders, and statutes, which you ought to obey,
and to the which some of you by oath is bound. If your doings proceed in deed
from a good conscience, then leave that living and place, which binds you to
those things that be against your conscience, for why should you strive with the
disquietnesse both of your selves and others, to keep that living which by laws
you cannot, except you offend against your conscience? or what honesty is
there, to swear to statutes and laws, and when you have so done contrary to
your oath to break the^, and yet still to remain under them, and enjoy that
place which requires obedience and subjection to them? For my part I think
it much better, by removing you from your livings to offend you, than by
suffering you to enjoy them, to offend the prince, the law, conscience and
God. And before God I speak it, if I were persuaded as you seem to be, I
would rather quietly forsake all the liuinges I have, than be an occasion of
strife and contention in the Church, and a cause of stumbling to the weak, and
rejoicing to ye wicked. I know, God would provide for me, if I did it bona
conscientia, yea surely, I would rather die, than be an author of schisms, a
disturber of the common peace and quietness of the Church and state. There is
no reformed Church that I can hear tell of, but it has a certain prescripte
and determinate order, as well touching ceremonies, and discipline, as doctrine,
to the which all those are constrained to give their consent, that will live
under the protection of it, and why then may not this Church of England have
so in like manner? Is it meet that every man should have his own fancy, or
live as him list? Truly I know not whereunto these your doings can tend, but
either to Anabaptisme, or to mere confusion. But now to the reasons that move
you, not to subscribe to those articles ministered unto you by her Majesty's
high Commissioners.

The first article.
First that the book commonly called the book of common prayers for the Church
of England, authorized by parliamente, and all and every contents therein, be
such as are not repugnant to the word of God.

Admonition.
Albeit, right honorable and dearly beloved, we have at all times borne with
that which we could not amend in this book, and have used the same in our
ministry, so far forth as we might, reuerencing those times, and those
persons, in which and by whom it was first authorized, being studious of
peace, and of the building up of Christ's Church, yet now being compelled by
subscription to allow the same, and to confess it not to be against the word
of God in any point, but tolerable: we must needs say as follows, that this
book is an imperfect book, culled and picked out of the popish dunghill the
mass book, full of all abominations, for some, and many of the contents
therein, be such as are against the word of God, as by his grace shall be proved
unto you. And by the way we cannot but much marvel at the crafty wiliness
of those men, whose parts it had been first to have proved each and every
co^tente therein, to be agreeable to the word of god, seeing that they force me^
by subscription to consent unto it, or else send them packing from their
callings.

Answer.
And what reason can you give, why you should not as well allow of it by
subscription, as you say that you have hitherto done by using of it in your
ministry? Will you speak on thing and do another? will you not subscribe to
that, which you publicly use and give your consent unto? If those persons by
whom this book was first authorized, were studious of peace and of bulding up
of Christ's Church, as you say they were, then you that seek to deface it, are
disturbers of peace and destroyers of ye Church of Christ. They were singular
learned men, zealous in Gods religion, blameless in life, and Martirs at their
end, for either all, or the most part of them have sealed this book with their
blood. But by the way this is to be noted that you confess your selves to have
allowed that (by using of it) which you say is against the word of God.

The imperfectness of this book (...) such things in the same as be culled
and picked out of that popish dunghill the mass book with the contents therein
that be against the word of God, shall apeare I am sure in your several
reasons, for it is not sufficient for you, barely to say so without wit,
learning or reason.

This you know right well, that in so saying you make the Papists leap for
joy, because they have gotten such companions to assault this book, whilst
they rest them, and lie as it were in sleep. O, that the wise men of this
Realm, (such I mean as be in authority) see not this Popish practice and
seek not with more earnestness to prevent it. Will ye suffer the Papists to
gather strength and to multiply, by tollerating such libellers under the
pretense of reformation, to discredit so much as lies in them, yea to
overthrow the whole state, and substance of religion in this Church? be not
secure, but watch, and remember the beginning and increase of the Anabaptists
of late in Germany, which I have described in my preface to this book.

You say, that you can not but much marvel at the craftye wylynesse of those
men, whose parts it had been first to have proved each, and every content
therein to be agreeable to Gods word. etc. Nay surely, but it were your
parts rather to prove, that there is some thing therein contrary or not
agreeable to Gods word. For such as be learned and know the manner of
reasoning say, that the Opponente must prove or improve, and not the
Aunswerer: They stand to the defense and mayntenaunce of the Book, you seek
to overthrow it, it is your parts therefore to justify your assertions, by
reasons and arguments. Now to your reasons.

Admonition.
The first is this.

They should first prove by the word of God, that a readyng Service going
before and with the administration of the Sacraments, is according to the word
of God, that private communion, private baptism, baptism ministered by women,
holydaies ascribed to saints, prescript services for them, kneeling at
Communion, wafer cakes for their bread when they minister it, surplesse and
cope to do it in, churching of women coming in vayles abusing the Psalm to
her, I have lifted up mine eyes unto the hills. Psalm. 120.
etc. and such other foolish things, are agreeable to the written word of the
almighty.

Answer.
I do not well understand your meaning: would you have us to prove, that to
read prayers before and with the administration of the sacraments, is
according to the word of god? In deed in the book of service, there is first
appointed to be read, some one or two profitable sentences, moving either to
prayer or to repentance, after follows a general confession, then the Lords
prayer, and certain Psalms, next certain Chapiters out of the old and new
testamente. etc. Last of all the administration of the Sacrament. If you ask
me of the sentences: they be Scripture. If of the Lords prayer, Psalms, and
chapiters: they be scripture also. If of the Sacrament of the supper? it is
according to Scripture. Math. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. If of the other
prayers annexed? they be likewise according to the scripture, for they be made
to God in Christ's name, for such things as we need or as we desire,
according to that saying of christ. Quicquid petieritis. etc. Whatsoever you
ask my father in my name, etc. And again, Petite and dabitur vobu. Ask and it
shall be given unto you. Math. 7. and. Jacob. 1. If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask it etc. and. 1. Ti. 2. with other infinite places besides.

If you would have us to prove, that to read prayers or scripture in the
Church is according to the word of God: (which you seem to deny) then we
say unto you, that if there were any piety in you, any religion, any learning,
you would make no such vain and godless doubts. Was there ever any from the
beginning of the world to this day (the Zwinfildians only excepted) that
mysliked reading of prayers, and Scriptures in the Church, but you? But
touching reading in the Church. I have spoken before in the former treatise,
and mind to speak something of it hereafter, as occcasion shall be ministered.

If you mean by private communion, the communion ministered to one alone: there
is no such allowed in the book of common prayers, but if you call it private,
because it is ministered sometime in private houses to sick persons: Then have
we the example of Christ, who ministered the supper in a private house, and
inner parlor, Marc. 14. Luc. 22. Math. 26. We have also the example of the
Apostles them selves who did minister the Supper in private houses, especially
if that place be understood of the supper, which is in the second of the
Acts, and before alleged of you to prove that common and usual bread ought
to be in the supper: Likewise of the primative Church, as appears in the
second Apology of Justinius Martyr, Tertul. de corona militis, and others.

If you mean by private baptism, baptism ministered in private houses and
families: you have thereof example in the Scriptures. Acts. 10. other private
baptism allowed in the church of England I know none.

Master Bucer in his censure upon the Communion book, speaking of the order
appointed in the same for private baptism, writes thus: In this constitution
all things are godly appointed, I would to God they were so observed, and
especially this, that the baptism of Infants be not deferred, for thereby is a
door opened unto the devil, to bring in a contempt of baptism, and so of
our whole redemption, and Communion of Christ, which through the sect of
Anabaptists, has too much prevailed with many.

For women to baptize we have no rule that I know in the whole Communion
book, but in scripture we have an example of Moses wife that did circumcise,
and circumcision is correspondent to baptism. But I know no general doctrine
can be grounded of a singular example, and therefore most of your arguments be
very feeble.

Holy days ascribed to Saints, wherein not the Saints, but God is honored,
and the people edified, by reading and hearing such stories and places of
scripture, as pertayne to the martyrdom, calling, and function of such
Saints, or any other thing mentioned of them in scripture, must needs be
according to Gods word. For to honor God, to worship him, to be edifyed by the
stories and examples of Saints out of the scripture, can not be but consonant
to the scripture. The proscript service for them is all taken out of Gods word,
and not one piece thereof, but it is most consonant unto the same: If there be
any that is repugnant, set it down, that we may understand it.

I told you before, that touching the days and times, and other ceremonies,
the Church has authority to determine what is most convenient, as it has
done from time to time. S. Augustine in his Epistle ad Ianua. in the place
before of me recited, says, that the passion of Christ, his resurrection, his
ascension, and the day of the coming of the holy ghost, (which we commonly
call Whitsontide) is celebrated, not by any commandment written, but by the
determination of the Church. And it is the judgment of all learned writers,
that the Church has authority in these things, so that nothing be done
against the word of God. But of this I have spoken partly before, and intend
to speak more largely thereof in the place following, where you again make
mention of it.

Of kneeling at the Communion, I have also spoken before, and declared my
judgment thereof. There is more scripture for it, than there is either for
standing, sitting, or walking: but in all these things (as I have declared) the
Church has authority to judge what is fittest.

Of wafer cakes, ministering in surplesse, or cope, and churching of women, I
have spoken before: wafer cakes be bread: surplesse and cope, by those that
have authority in the Church, are thought to perteine to comeliness and
decency. Churching of women, is to give thanks for their deliverance. Bread
to be used in the Communion, comeliness and decency, giving of thanks for
deliverance out of peril and danger, be agreeable to Gods word: therefore
all these things be agreeable to Gods word. The form of bread, whether it
ought to be cake bread, or loaf bread: every particular thing that
perteyneth to decency or comeliness: at what time, in what place, with what
words we ought to give thanks, is not particulerly written in scripture, no
more than it is, that you were baptized. And therefore (as I have proved
before) in such cases the Church has to determine and appoint an order.

That women should come in vayles, is not contained in the book, no more in
deed is the wafer cake, and therefore you might well have left these two out
of your reason, being thrust in without all reason.

The.121. Psalm (for I think your printer was ouerseene in that quotation) I
have lifted up mine eyes. etc. teaches, that all help comes from God, and
that the faithful ought only to look for help at his hands, and therefore a
most meet Psalm to be said at such time as we being delivered from any
peril, come to give thanks to God.

What mean you to add, and such other foolish things, what foolishness, I
beseech you, can you find in this so godly a Psalm? O where are your wits?
nay where is your reverence you ought to give to the holy scriptures?

Admonition.
But their craft is plain: wherein they deceive them selves, standing so much
upon this word repugnant, as though nothing were repugnant or against the word
of God, but that which is expressly forbidden by plain commandment, they
know well enough, and would confess, if either they were not blinded, or else
their hearts hardened, that in the circumstances, each content, wherewith we
justly find fault, and they to conte^tiously for the love of their livings
maynteine, smelling of their old popish priesthood, is against the word of
God.

Answer.
If they were disposed to be crafty, I think they might soon deceive you,
for any great circumspection or discretion that appears to be in you by this
book. You find great fault, that we stand so much upon this word repugnant,
as though nothing were repugnant, or against the word of God, but that which
is expressly forbidden by plain commandment, and herein (you say) we
deceive our selves. But you do not tell us how we are deceived, neither do you
let us understand, what you think this word repugnant, does signify. This
is but slender dealing, to find a fault, and not to correct it: you should
yet have told us your opinion of the signification of this word, seeing so
great a matter does depend upon it. True it is, that this word repugnant, or
against the word of God, is, to be contrary to that which in the word is
commanded or forbidden not only in manifest words, but also in sense and
understanding: except you understand this word repugnant on this sort, you
will bring in many points of dangerous doctrine. For we read in the Acts. 2.
and.4. that the Apostles had al things common, and yet Christians have not all
things common. Those that were then converted to the Gospel sold all they
had, and laid it at the Apostles feet. Act. 4. now it is far otherwise.
Then Christ ministered his supper at night, after supper, we in the morning
before dinner: he in a private house, we in the public Church: he to men
only, we to women also, with a great many of such apparent co^trarieties,
which be none in deed, because they be not against any thing commanded or
forbidden to be done, or not to be done, either in express words, or in true
sense. And therefore you are greatly deceived, when you think that we are
persuaded, that those things which you find fault with, be against the word
of God.

As for this your saying, (If either they were not blinded, or else their
hearts hardened) I pray God it be not most aptly spoken of your selves, but
I will not take upon me to judge those secrets that be only known to God and
your selves.

Admonition.
For besides that this prescripte form of service (as they call it) is full of
corruptions, it maynteyneth an unlawful ministry, unable to execute that
office.

By the word of God it is an office of preaching, they make it an office of
reading. Christ said Math. 26.19. Mar. 16.15.
go preach, they in mockery give them the Bible, and authority to preach,
and yet suffer them not, except that they have new licenses: So that they make
the chiefest part preaching, but an accessarie, that is, as a thing with out
which their office may and does consist. In the scriptures there is attributed
unto the ministers of God the knowledge of 1. Cor. 4.1.
heavenly mysteries, and therefore as the greatest token of their love, they are
enjoined to John. 21.16.17.
feed Gods lambs, and yet with these such are admitted and accepted, as only
are bare readers, that is, able to say service, and minister a sacrament. And
that this is not the feeding that Christ spoke of, the Scriptures are plain.
For reading ministers view these places. Mala. 2.7. Esaias. 56.10. Zach. 11.15.
Matthew. 15.14. 1. Tim 3.3.
Reading is not feeding, but it is as evil as playing upon a stage, and worse
too: for players yet learn their parts without book, and these a maynie of
them can scarcely read within book. These are empty feeders Mat. 6.22.
dark eyes Matthew. 9 38. Philip. 3.
ill workmen to hasten in the Lords harueste Luc. 14.17.
messangers that can not call. Matthew. 23.34.
Prophets that can not declare the will of the Lord, Matthew. 5.13.
unsavory salt, Matthew. 15.14.
blind guydes, Esaias 56.10.
sleepie watchemen, 1. Cor. 4.1. Luc. 16.1. etc.
vntrustye dispensers of Gods secrets, 2. Tim. 2.15.
evil deuiders of the word Titus. 1.9.
weak to withstand the adversary, 2. Ti. 3.15.16.
not able to confute: And to conclude, so far from making the man of God
perfect to all good works, that rather the quite contrary may be confirmed.

Answer.
Of the prescript form of service, and of such corruptions as hitherto you
have found in it, I have spoken before sufficiently, so have I also done of the
ministry, and of reading, so that I must refer you to the former treatise
for these matters, lest I should be too tedious, and offend as often, in diverse
times iterating the same thing, as you do.

This I must needs say, that you make here a childish digression far from
the purpose that you have taken in hand, for the communion book medleth not
with the ordering of ministers, although sometimes the Book of ordering
ministers be bound with the same: neither are these things that you here
speak of, there to be found. And therefore no cause why you should absteyn
from subscribing to that book. But now to your painted margent.

You say by the word of God the ministry is an office of preaching, and we
make it an office of reding, To prove it to be an office of preaching, you note
in your margente. Matthew. 26. But I think your meaning is the.28. and Mark.
16. Where Christ says to his Disciples, Go therefore and teach all nations.
etc. What if a man should say unto you, that this commission was given only
to the Apostles? For he says, Go into the whole world, where as you teach
now, that no man may come into the ministry, except he first have a flock,
and then must he keep him with his flock, and go no further. If this
doctrine be true, then can not this place serve your turn: For as the office
of Apostle is ceased by your doctrine, so is this commission also, except you
will have the one part to stand, that is, (Go and preach) and this to be
abrogated, In vniuersum mundum, into the whole world.

But where does the book make the ministry an office of reading only? or what
contrariety is there betwixt reading and preaching? nay what difference is
there betwixt them? if a man should write his sermon, and read it in the
book to his flock, does he not preach? Is there no Sermons but such as be
said without book? I think to preach the Gospel is to teach and instruct
the people in faith and good manners, be it by writing, reading, or speaking
without book: And I am sure the spirit of God does work as effectually by the
one of these ways, as it does by the other. Did not Sain^te Paul preach to
the Romans, when he writ to them? was not the reading of Deuteronomie to
the people a preaching? 2. Reg. 23. Will you so scornefullye and so
contemptuously speak of the Reading of Scripture, being a thing so fruitful
and necessary?

But to come to the Book, not of Common prayer mentioned in the Article, but
of ordering Deacons and Ministers, whereunto this does appertain, which you
find fault with: the saying of the Bishop to him that is to be made minister
is this:

Take thou authority to preach the word of God, and to minister the holy
Sacraments in the congregation, where thou shalt be so appointed. What fault
find you in these words? Does he give him authority to read or to preach?
I take upon me the defense of the book, not of every man's doings. But this you
say is spoken in mockery, because they may not preach, except they have new
licenses. Surely I think no man is admitted into the ministry, but he is
permitted to preach in his own cure without further license, except it be
upon some evil usage of himself afterward, either in life or doctrine. It
may be, that a man be admitted minister, and afterward fall into error, or
heresies, as did Judas, and Nicolaus the Deacon, it is meet that such should
be restrained from preaching, notwithstanding their former license. In all
reformed Churches, I am sure this order is observed.

That none ought publicly to preach without license in a Church
established, and having Christian magistrates, I have showed before.

In the Scriptures (you say) there is attributed unto the ministers of God, the
knowledge of the heavenly mysteries, and for proof hereof, you cite the.1.
Cor. 4. which is needelesse, for it is manyfeste. And yet all have not
knowledge of them alike: no there is great diversity among them touching
knowledge of these mysteries, and yet he that knows least, may be profitable
in the church, according to his talent.

You go on, and say, that therefore as the greatest token of their love, they
are enjoined to feed Gods lambs: and you allege the.21. of John, the words
of Christ to Peter: Feed my lambs. etc. all this is true, and feeding is not
only public preaching, but reading also of the Scriptures, and privately
exhorting, and that according to the gift and grace given of God to every man.

And yet you say, with these such are admitted and accepted, as only are bare
readers, that is only able to say Service, and to minister a Sacrament. I
say this is the fault of the man, not of the book, for the Book allows
none such. But what is this to your purpose? what kind of reason is this?
Some Bishops admit some unmeet ministers, therefore you will not subscribe to
the Communion book: or there be some ministers that can not preach, therefore
there is some thing in the Communion book repugnant to the word of God. It
appears you had but small regard to that which you took in hand to prove:
or that you can find little matter in the book of service to carpe at, when
you fall into such frivolous digressions.

For reading Ministers, you bid us view these places. Mala. 2.7. Esaias.
56.10. Zacha. 11.15. Math. 15.14. 1. Timoth. 3.3.

The Prophet Malachie in the second Chapter and seventh use says on this
sort: For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek
the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. In
which words the Prophet does signifye, that the Priests ought to be
learned in the law, and able to instruct, which no man denies: and if there
be any crepte into the ministry, which are not able so to do, it is to be
ascribed either to the negligence of the Bishop, and such as have to do
therein, or to the necessity of the time. But here is nothing spoken against
reading, for any thing that I can gather: and if any man should come unto me,
and demand of me any question touching the law of God, I think I should
better satisfy him, if I did read the words of the law unto him, than if I
should make a long tedious discourse of mine own, to little or no purpose. It
is the word it self that perceth and moves the conscience.

I speak not this against interpreting of the Scriptures, or preaching (for I
know they be both necessary) but against such as be enemies to the reading of
them.

The places in the.56. of Esaias, and in the eleventh of Zachary, tend to the
same purpose, they all speak against ignorant, foolish, slothful governors
and Pastors, there is nothing in them that condemns or disalloweth reading
of the Scriptures, or reading of prayers: No more is there in the fifteenth of
Matthew, nor 1. Timo. 3. read the places, and you shall soon see with how
little judgment they be quoted against such Ministers, as use to read the
Scriptures and prayers to the people. If you had said against dumb and
unlearned ministers, view these places, you had said some thing. For reading
ministers, that is, for reading the Scriptures publicly in the Church by
ministers, view you these places. 1. Tim. 4. Till I come, give attendance to
reading, to exhortation to doctrine. In the which words as Musculus says,
Exprimit ordinem ecclesiasticum, quo primum ex sacris scripturis aliquid
legebatur, deinde exhortatio and doctrina subijciebatur, He expresses the
Ecclesiastical order, wherein first there is some thing read out of the
Scriptures, then follows exhortation and doctrine. Luke. 4. Where we learn
that Christ being at Nazareth, as his custom was, went into the Synagoge on
the Sabbath day, and stood up to read. etc. Act. 15. it is thus written: For
Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, seeing he is
read in the Synagoges every Sabbath day. Where he also seems to call reading,
preaching.

According to these examples and places of ^cripture, the Church of Christ
even from the beginning has always used to have the Scripture publicly read
in the Church, as a thing most profitable, as it is before by me declared:
And yet you say, Reading is not feeding, but it is as evil as playing upon a
stage and worse to, for players yet learn their parts without book, and these
a mainy of them, can scarcely read within book.

That reading is feeding, Musculus gives these reasons: First, because it
makes the people expert and cunning in the scriptures, so that they can not be
so easily deceived with false teachers. And therefore Josephus lib. 2. contra
Appi. speaking of this commodity of having the scriptures read, says on this
sort: In vnaquaque septimana ad legem audienda^ co^ueniunt vniuersi. Nostroru^
quilibet de legibus interrogatus, facilius quam nomen suu^ recitat. Vniuersas
quippe mox a primo sensu discentes in animo velut inscriptas habemus. Every
week all the people come together to hear the law. Every one of us demanded
any question of the law can answer as readily as he can tell his own name.
For we, learning the law even from our youth, have it as it were written in our
memory. Secondely, the public Reading of the Scripture is good for such as
can not read them selves: to such likewise as can read, but yet have not the
books of the holy Scripture at home in their houses.

Thirdly, it makes the people better to understand the Sermons preached unto
them: because through the continual hearing of the Scriptures read, they be
acquainted with the words and phrases of the same.

Last of all, it may be, that some men be more edified by the simple reading of
the scriptures, than by sermons.

But both of reading the Scriptures, and the profitablenesse thereof, I have
spoken before in the former treatise. I can not but marvel what these men
mean, not only in spyte and malice to join with the Papists against the
Communion Book, but against the public reading of the Scriptures in the
Church also: Saying that Reading is no feeding, but it is as evil as playing
on a stage, and worse too: than the which no Papist could have spoken more
spitefully.

If there be any ministers that can scarsly read, I defend them not, neither
does the Book of common prayer allow of them: these be but Papisticall
cauillations against the purity of our service and Sacraments.

As for that which follows, These are empty feeders. etc. And the places of
scripture quoted in the margent, may be aptly spoken and alleged against
wicked, ignorant, and dumb Pastors, not against virtuous, godly, learned
preaching, or (as you term them) reading ministers. And therefore I leave them
to you, and to the Papists, better to be considered of.

Admonition.
By this book bare reading is 1. Cor. 3.5.
good tilling, and single service saying is excellent 1. Cor. 3.9.
building, and he is shepherde good enough, that can, as Popish Priests
could, out of their Portuis say fayrely their divine service. Nay some in
the fullness of their blasphemy have said it, that much preaching brings
the word of God into contempt, and that four preachers were enough for all
London, so far are they from thinking it necessary, and seeking that every
congregation should have a faithful pastor. Paul was not so wise as these
politic men, when he said, we Romans 10.14.
can not believe, except we hear, and we can not hear without a preacher.
etc. Seeing we may hear by reading, and so believe without a preacher:
foolishly he spoke when he said, he 1. Tim. 3.2
must be apt to teach, since every man of the basest sort of the people is
admitted to this function, of such as 2. Chr. 13.9
Jeroboam did sometimes make his priests. We will say no more in this matter,
but desire you to consider with us, what small profit and edification this
seely reading has brought to us this thirteen years paste (except perhaps
by some Circumcelion or new Apostle, we have had now and then a fleing
sermon) surely our sins are grown ripe, our ignorance is equal with the
ignorance Esai. 24.2.
of our leaders: we are lost Zach. 11.13.
they can not find us, we are sick, they can not heal us, we are hungry,
they can not find us, except they lead us by other men's lights, and heal us
by saying a prescript form of service, or else feed us with homilies, that
are to homely to be set in place of Gods scriptures. But dronken they are, and
show their own shame, that strive so eagerly to defend their doings, that
they will not only not acknowledge their imperfections, but will enforce men
to allow them.

Answer.
Here is much a do about bare reading and single service saying: by like you
lack matter to make out your Uolume, when you iterate one thing so often. I
tell you again, no honest, godly, or learned man ever hitherto did, or will
disalowe reading of the scriptures in the Church, or a prescript order of
common prayers. Show any learned man's judgment to the contrary, show the
example of any Christian Church of antiquity, or of any late reformed Church,
wherein there is not both reading of the Scriptures in the public
congregation, and a prescript order of common prayers: nay show any one
syllable in the Scriptures to the contrary. As for your places alleged out of
the. 1. Corinthians. 3. use. 5. and 1. Corin. 3. use. 9. The one to prove that by
the book bare reading is good tilling, the other that by the same book,
single service saying is excellent building. etc. they show your intolerable
audacitie (I will term it no worse) in abusing the Scriptures. In that place
to the Corinth. the Apostle says thus: Who is Paul then? who is Apollos? But
the ministers by whom ye believed, and as the Lord gave to every man. How can
you gather hereof, that by the Communion book bare reading is good tylling? or
how can you hereof conclude that (which I think you mean) that the sole and
only reading of the Scriptures is not tylling, or that the Scriptures may not
be read in the open congregation by the minister? What sequel call you this?
Paul and Apollos be the ministers by whom you believed, as the Lord gave to
every man: Therefore the reading of the scriptures edify not, or it is not
lawful for them to be red in the church by the minister. You come too soon
from the university to have any great skill in logike: but belyke because
there is mention made of tilling in the next verse of that chapter, therefore
you quote it in the margent, missing only the line: for this is your usual
manner, if you have but one word in a text which you use in your book, you
quote the place, as though it made for your purpose. This is neither plain nor
wise dealing.

In the ninth verse of that chapter these be the words: For we together are
Gods laborers, ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods buylding. How do you apply
these words? or how do they prove, that by the book of common prayers,
single service saying is excellent buylding, and that he is a shepherd good
enough that can (as a Popish Priest could) out of their portuis say fayrely
their divine service? nay how can you possibly collecte any thing out of this
text, against a prescripte order and form of prayers? If you be past shame
before man, yet remember that God will call you to a reckning, for thus
shamefully abusing his holy scriptures. But now I remember this word building,
is in this text, and that is enough for you.

If any have misliked often preaching, or have said that much preaching
brings the word of God into contempt, or that four preachers were enough
for all London, they are to be blamed (and that justly) and not the book, for
it wills no man to say so.

But if any has said, that some of those which use to preach often, by
their loose, negligent, verbal and unlearned sermons have brought the word of
God into contempt, or that four godly, learned, pithie, diligent, and discrete
preachers might do more good in London, than forty contentious, unlearned,
verbal, and rash preachers, they have said truly, and their saying might
well be justified. Howbeit take heed yt you slander no man, or unjustly seek
the discredit of any, whilst you seek to utter your malice against that godly
book. None that favors Gods word (as I think) denies that hearing the
word of God is the usual and ordinary means, whereby God uses to work faith
in us. And that therefore preachers be necessary. But the place of Saint Paul
Romans 10. by you alleged, derogateth nothing from the reading of the
Scriptures: And I think no learned man will deny, but that faith comes also
by hearing the scriptures read.

The examples of such as have been converted by reading of the scriptures, and
hearing of them read, be infinite. I know not whereunto this your bitterness
against reading of the scripture tends, except it be to confirm another
opinion of the Papists, touching the obscurity and darkness of the Scripture,
or diverse senses and understanding of the same. If you join with them in that
also, then I have to say unto you with S. Augustine, In hijs quae aperte in
scripturis posim sunt, inueniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem, moresque
viuendi. In those things that be plain and manifest in the scriptures are al
such things contained which pertayne to faith and good manners. And with
Hierome in Psalm. 86. Sicut scripserunt Apostoli, sic and ipse dominus: hoc
est per Euangelia sua locutus est, vt non pauci intelligerent, sed vt omnes.
Plato scripsit in scriptura, sed non scripsit populo sed paucis, vix enim
intelligunt tres homines. Isti vero, hoc est principes ecclesiae, and principes
Christino^ scripserunt paucis, sed vniuerso populo. As the Apostles writ so did
the Lord, that is, he spoke by his Gospels, not that a few, but that all might
understand. Plato writ, but he writ to few, not to the people, for scarce
three do understand him: these, that is, the Apostles writ not to few, but to
the whole people. But I think you doubt not of this matter.

If the reading of Scriptures edify not, what needed Chrysostom writing upon
the.3. to the Col. so earnestly exhort the people to get them Bybles, or at
the least the new Testament, to be as it were a continual master unto them to
instruct them*

What needed ye same Chrysostom Hom. 3. de Lazaro. with such vehement words,
have moved the people to read the scriptures, declaring not only the
commodity of them, but the easiness also to be understood? Is not this saying
both ancient and true, That when we read the Scriptures God talks with us:
When we pray, then we talk with God? In the one and thirty Chapter of
Deuteronomie, it is thus written, Thou shalt read this law before all
Israel, that they may hear it, that they may hear, and that they may
learn, and fear the Lord your GOD. But touching this matter I refer you to
that which I have spoken before in the former part of your admonition. And
also I beseech you take pains to peruse the.15. article of that notable Jewel
and worthy Bishop late of Salisburye wherein he of purpose entreats of this
matter against Master Harding. Foolishly he spoke (you say) when he said. etc.
No surely but you do folishly gather ye reding is unprofitable because Saint
Paul said that a Bishop must be apt to teach: for your argument is this in
effect: a Bishop must be apt to teach, therefore the scriptures need not to
be read to the people, which is a non sequitur.

Your place of the 2. Chronicles. 13. I have touched before, where it was
alleged to the same purpose: I have showed how unaptly you use it. For
Jeroboam was reproved for making such preests as were not of the tribe of
Leui, to the which tribe only the preesthood was then tied, now it forces not
of what stock or tribe he is that is admitted to the ministry, so that other
qualities required of a minister be in him.

You will say no more in this matter but desire us to consider with you, what
small profit and edification, this silly reading has brought to us these
thirtene years past. etc. And what can you tell how much it has profited? I
think very much: but the less because of your co^tentiousnesse: For by the
factio^s that you have stirred, many be brought into a doubt of religion, many
clean driven back: and no doubt the fruits of the Gospel would have much
more appeared, if you had not made this schism in the Church, a perpetual
companion, but yet a deadly enemy to the Gospel.

I know not what you mean by your Circumcelio^, or new Apostle: If you mean
such as preach in diverse places as they be called, or as they see occasion, I
see not with what honest zeal, or godly affection, you can call them in
derision Circumcelions or new Apostles. Some such have done more good with
their flying sermons (as you term them) than you have done with your railing
libels. But as I said in the beginning I will not answer words but matter,
although I am constrained to do otherwise, you are so full of words, and barren
of matter.

Admonition.
Homilies.
The second reason. In this book also it is appointed that after the creed if
there be no sermon, an homely must follow either already set out, or herafter
to be set out. This is scarce plain dealing, that they would have us to
consent unto that which we never saw, and which is to be set out hereafter,
we having had such cause already to distrust them by that which is already
set out, being corrupt and strange to maintain an unlearned and reading
ministry. And since it is plain that men's works ought to be kept in, and
nothing else but the voice of God and holy scriptures, in which only are
contained 2. Ti. 3.6.17 2. Pet. 1.20. Romans 1.16. 1. Co. 1.18. etc
al fullness and sufficiency to decide controversies, must sound in his
Church, for the very name Apocrypha testifies, that they ought rather to be
kept close, than to be uttered.

Answer.
Your second reason in few words is this: In the book of common prayer it
is appointed that after the creed if there be no sermon an Homily must
follow, either already set out or hereafter to be set out, but you know not
what will hereafter be set out, therefore you will not subscribe.

You have no cause to suspecte any thing touching religion set out by public
authority (for so is the book) or hereafter to be set out by common
authority. Hitherto you are not able to convince any homily set out by common
authority, of any error, and therefore you ought not to be suspicious of any
that is to come. If any Homily shall hereafter be set out, wherein you
mislike any thing, you need not to read it, the book does not appoint you
this or that Homily to read, but some one which you like best. But what need
you to be scrupulous in this matter? if you be disposed to preach, then need
you read no Homily at all; therefore this is no reason.

This assertion (that in the holy scriptures is contained al fullness to decide
controversies) if you mean controversies in matters of faith and in matters
touching salvation, is very true, but you have used little discretion in
quoting some places to prove the same.

I find no fault with you for citing the sixte verse of the 2. Timo. 3. for
the 16. verse, that is but a small oversight, and it may be in the Printer:
But how do you conclude this assertion of the words of Peter. 2. epist. ca.
1. verse. 20. which be these, so that ye first know that no prophecy of the
scripture is of any private motion: For this place only proves that the
scriptures be not of men but of the holy Ghost: it speaks nothing of the
sufficiency of the Scripture.

That place also. 1. Cor. 1. is not fitly applied to this purpose: there is
scripture sufficient directly to prove the sufficiency of scripture, so that
you should not have needed to give the adversary occasion to carpe at the
unaptness of these places for that purpose.

Homelies containing doctrine agreeable to the scriptures, be of the same
nature that sermons be: Wherefore if it be not lawful in the Church to read
homilies, neither is it lawful to preach Sermons: The reason is all one,
neither is there any difference, but that Homilies be read in the book,
Sermons said without the book.

Homilies are pithie, learned, and sound: sermons oftentimes be words without
matter, unlearned, erroneous: But of reading Homilies in the church I have
something spoken before, now it shall be sufficient only to set down Master
Bucers judgment of this matter in his notes upon the Communion book, which
is this. It is better that where there lacks to expound the scriptures unto
the people, there should be Godly and learned Homilies readde unto them,
rather than they should have no exhortation at all in the administration of
the supper. And a little after: there be too fevve Homilies, and too fevve
points of religion taught in them: when therefore the Lord shall bless this
kingdom with some excellent preachers, let them be commanded to make more
Homilies of the principal points of religion, which may be readde to the
people, by those pastors, that cannot make better themselves.

Admonition.
In this book days are ascribed unto saints, and kept holy with fastes on
their euens, and prescripte service appointed for them, which beside that,
they are of many superstitiously kept and observed, and also contrary to the
commandment Exodus 20.9 Exodus 23.12 Deuteronomy. 5.13 Esaias. 1.1013 14 Leuit 23.3 2.
Esdr. 1.13 Romans 14.6 Gala. 4.10.11
of God, Six days thou shall labor: and therefore we for the superstition
that is put in them, dare not subscribe to allow them.

Answer.
This is contained in your first reason and there answered. Your collection
hangs not together, for how follows this: these holidays be
superstitiously observed of some, therefore you may not allow them. Why should
other men's superstition hinder you from lawfully using a lawful thing? The
Saboth day is superstitiously used of some, so is the church, so is ye Creed,
and the Lords prayer, and many things else, and yet I hope you will subscribe
to them. You heap up a number of places in the margent to prove that which no
man doubts of, that is this portion of the commandment, Six days shall
thou labor etc. The meaning of which words is this, that seeing God has
permitted unto us six days to do our own works in, we ought the seventh day
wholly to serve him. This is no restraint for any man from serving of God any
day in the week else. For the Jews had diverse other feasts which they by
Gods appointmente observed, notwithstanding these words Six days. etc.

Every man has not bodily labor to do, but may serve God as well in these
six days, as in the seventh. And certainly he does not by any means break this
commandment, which abstayneth in any of these six days from bodily labor
to serve God. For this is the commandment. ( Remember that thou keep holy the
Saboth day) as for this ( Six days thou shall work) is no commandment,
but tends rather to the constitution of the Saboth, than to the prohibiting
of rest in any other day appointed to the service of God: And it is as much as
if he should say, six days thou may work, and so do some translate the
Hebrew word.

The place alleged out of the first of Esaias is far from the purpose, there is
not one word there spoken of any holy days dedicated to Saints, but only the
Lord signifies, that their sacrifices, and feast days were not acceptable
to him, because they were done in hypocrisy, and without faith, so that he
reproves modum not factu^, their manner of sacrifising, (that is) their
hipocriticall kind of worshipping him.

In the 2. Esdras. 1. in the place by you quoted, I see not one word that may
serve for your purpose, the words you quote be these, I have led you thorovve
the Sea, and have given you a sure way since the beginning, I gave you Moses
for a guide and Aaron for a priest.

In the 14. to the Romans the Apostle speaks nothing of our holydaies, but of
such as were observed among the Jews, and abrogated by the coming of Christ.
And yet in that place the Apostle exhorts, that we which be strong, should
not despise them that are weak, nor condemn them, though they use not the
christian liberty in days and meats.

That in the fourth to the Galath. Ye observe days, month^s, and times, and
years. etc. Saint Augustine ad Ianuarium, epistola. 119* expounds on this
sort, Eos inculpat, qui dicunt non proficiscar quia posterus dies est, aut quia
luna sic firtur, vel proficiscar vt prospera cedant, quia ita^se habet positio
syderum, non agam hoc mense commertium, quia illa stella mihi agit mensem, vel
agam quia suscepit mensem. I know there be other that do otherwise expound
that place (and that truly) even as they do also that in the 14. to the Romans of
certain Jewish feasts, as Sabboths, new moons, the feasts of Tabernacles, the
year of Jubilee and such like abrogated by the Gospel, and yet
superstitiously observed of some. But these places can by no means be
understood of the days observed by us and called by the names of Saints
days, for they were ordained since the writing of this epistle.

And that you may understand the difference betwixt the festival days
observed of the Papists, and the days allowed now in this Church, it is to
be considered: First, that their Saints days were appointed for the honoring
and worshipping of the Saints, by whose names they were called: ours be
ordained for the honoring of God, for public prayer, and edifieng the people
by reading the scriptures, and preaching: neither are they called by the name
of any Saint in any other respect, than that the scriptures which that day
are read in the Church, be concerning that Saint, and contain either his
calling, preaching, persecution, martyrdom, or such like.

2. The Papists in their Saints days prayed unto the Saints: we only
pray unto God in Christ's name.

3. They had all things done in a strange tongue, without any edifieng at
all: We have the prayers and the Scriptures readde in a tongue known, which
cannot be without great commodity to the hearers.

4. To be short: they in observing their days, think^ they merit thereby
something at Gods hands: we in observing our days, are taught far otherwise.

The Church even from the beginning, has observed such feasts, as it may
appear in good writers.

Jerome writing upon the fourth Chapter to the Galathians says on this
sort. If it be not lawful to observe days, months, times, and years, we
also fall into the like fault which observe the passion of Christ, the Saboth
day and the time of lent, the feasts of Easter, and of Penthecost, and other
times appointed to Martirs, according to the manner and custom of every
nation: to the which he that will answer simply, will say that our observing
of days is not the same with the Iewishe observing, for we do not celebrate
the feast of unleavened or sweet bread, but of the resurrection and death of
Christ, etc. and least the confused gathering together of the people, should
dyminishe the faith in Christ, therefore certain days are appointed that we
might all meet together in one place, not because those days be more holy,
but to the intent that in what day soever we meet, we may rejoice to see one
another. etc.

Augustine in like manner. li. 18. de ciuitate dei cap. 27. says that we honor
the memories of Martirs, as of holy men, and such as have striuen for the truth
eue^ to death. etc.

The same Augustine in his book contra Adamantum Manachi^i discip. cap. 16.
expounding the words of the Apostle, ye observe days, years, and times
writes thus. But one may think that he speaks of the Sabaothe: do not we
say that those times ought not to be observed, but the things rather that
are signified by them? for they did observe them seruilely not understanding
what they did signify and prefigurate, this is that that the Apostle reproves
in them, and in all those that serve the creature rather than the Creator, for
we also solemnly celebrate the Sabbath day and Easter, and all other festival
days of Christians: but because we understand whereunto they do appertain, we
observe not the times, but those things which are signified by the times. etc.

Other reformed Churches also have days ascribed to Saints as well as we, as
it may appear by these words of Bullinger, writing upon the.14. to the Romans In
the ancient writers, as Eusebius and Augustine, thou may find certain
memorials appointed to certain holy men, but after another manner, not much
differing from ours, which we as yet retain in our Church of Tigurie, for we
celebrate the Nativity of Christ, his circumcision, resurrection, and
ascension, the coming of the holy ghost, the feasts also of the virgin Mary,
John Baptist, Magdalene, Steven, and the other Apostles, yet not condemning
those which observe none, but only the Sabbath day. For perusing old
monuments, we find that this has always been left free to the churches, that
every one should follow that in these things, that should be best and most
convenient.

Calvin in like manner writing upon the fourth to the Galath. does not disalow
this kind of observing days: his words be these. When as holiness is
attributed to days, when as one day is discerned from another for religion
sake, when days are made a piece of divine worship, then days are wickedly
observed. etc. But when we have a difference of days, laying no burden of
necessity on men's consciences, we make no difference of days, as though one
were more holy than another, we put no religion in them, nor worshipping of
God, but only we observe them for order and concord sake, so that the
observing of days with us is free, and without all superstition. And again
upon the.2. to the Coloss. But some will say, that we as yet have some kind of
observing days: I answer that we observe them not, as though there were any
religion in them, or as though it were not then lawful to labor, but we have
a respect of policy and orders, not of days. And in his institutions upon
the fourth commandment: Neither do I so speak of the seventh day, that I
would bind the Church only unto it, for I do not condemn those Churches
which have other solemn days to meet in, so that they be void of
superstition, which shall be, if they be ordained only for the observing of
discipline and order.

Master Bucer in his Epistle to master Alasco, speking of holy days, says,
that in the Scriptures there is no express commandment of them: it is
gathered notwithstanding (says he) from the example of the old people that
they are profitable for us, to the increase of godliness, which thing also
experience proves.

To be short, Illiricus writing upon the fourth to the Gala. makes this
division of observing days and times.

The first is natural, as of so^mer, spring time* winter* etc.

The second is civil.

The third Ecclesiastical, as the sabbath day, and other

The fourth superstitious, when we put a necessity, worshipping, merit, or
righteousness in the observing of time: and this kind of observing days and
times is only forbidden in this place.

Thus you see by the judgments of all these learned men, that days ascribed to
saints, is no such matter, as ought to make men separate them selves from the
Church, and abstain from allowing by subscription so worthy and godly a book
as the book of common prayer is, much less to make a schism in the Church
for the same.

Touching fasting on the euens of such feasts, or rather absteyning from
flesh, you know it is not for religion, but for policy, and as I think, the
same is protested in that Act, where such kind of absteyning is established:
and therefore these be but slender quarrels picked to disalowe such a book.

Admonition.
The fourth reason. In this book we are enjoined to receive the Communion
kneeling, which beside that it has in it a 1. These 5.22 Exodus 12.11.
show of Papistrie, does not so well express the mystery of this holy
Supper. For as in the old Testamente, eating the Pascall Lamb standing,
signified a readiness to pass, even so in the receiving of it now sitting
Mat. 26.20. Mar. 14 18 Luc. 22 14. John. 13.28.
according to the example of Christ, we signify rest, that is, a full
fynishing thorough Christ Gala 4.10. Gal. 5.3.4.5 Hebr. in many places.
of all the ceremonial Law, and a perfect work of redemption wroughte, that
gives rest for ever. And so we avoid also the danger of Idolatry, which
was in times paste too common, and yet is in the hearts of many, who have not
as yet forgotten their breaden God, so slenderly have they ben instructed.
Against which we may set the commandment, Thou Exo. 20.5.
shalt not bow down to it, nor worship it.

Answer.
Surely this is a sore reason, the book of Common prayers requires kneeling
at the Communion, Ergo it is not to be allowed.

That kneeling is not to be used, you prove on this sort: Kneeling is a show
of papistrie, and does not so well express the mystery of the Lords supper:
therefore not to be used.

Of kneeling at the Communion I have spoken before, now therefore I will only
note in one word or two the slenderness of this argument.

You say, kneeling is a show of evil, and for proof thereof you allege. 1.
Thessa. 5. Absteyne from all appearance of evil. How follows this, the
Apostle wills us to abstain from all apparaunce of evil: Therefore kneeling
at the Communion is a show of evil. But your meaning is, that because the
Papists kneeled at the sacring of the Mass, (as they called it) therefore we
may not kneel at the receiving of the Communion: you may as well say, they
prayed to images and saints kneeling, therefore we may not pray kneeling.

There is no such peril in kneeling at the Communion as you surmise, for the
gospeller is better instructed than so grossly to err: And as for the learned
Papiste he is so far from worshipping, that he disdayneth that holy
Communion, iesteth at it, and either altogether absteyneth from coming unto
it, or else comes only for fear of punishment, or pro forma tantum, for
fashion sake: and the most ignorant and simplest Papist that is, knows that
the Communion is not the Mass, neither do they see it lifted up over the
Priests head, with such great solemnity as they did, when they took it to
be their God. No truly, the contempt of that mystery is more to be feared in
them, than worshipping: and to be short, if they be disposed to worship, they
will as well worship sitting, as kneeling. But they are far from such an
opinion of the bread and wine in the blessed Communion: for they make no
account at all of it.

You say, sitting is the most meetest gesture, because it signifies rest,
that is a full finishing through Christ of all the ceremonial law. etc. What?
are ye now, come to allegories and to significations? Surely this is a very
papisticall reason. Nay then we can give you a great deal better
significations of the Surplesse, of crossing, of the ring in marriage, and many
other ceremonies, than this is of sitting. I pray you in the whole Scripture,
where does sitting sygnifie a full finishing of the ceremonial law, and a
perfect work of redemption that gives rest for ever? If allegories please you
so well, let us have either standing, which signifies a readiness to pass
(used also in the eating of the Passover) or kneeling, which is the proper
gesture for prayer and thanks giving, and signifies the submission and
humbleness of the mind. But you say, Christ sat at his Supper, therefore we
must sit at the receiving of the Supper: You may as well say, Christ did
celebrate his Supper at night, after Supper to twelve, only men, and no women,
in a parlour, within a private house, the thursday at night before Easter,
therefore we ought to receive the Communion at night, after supper, being twelve
in number, and only men, in a parlor, within a private house, the Thursday at
night before Easter. But who sees not the non sequitur of this argument?

The places written in your margent to prove, that Christ did sit at Supper
be needless, and were used for the same purpose before, where I have also
spoken my opinion of kneeling.

If you cite the Gal. 4. and 5. and the Epistle to the Hebrews, in many places
to prove, that sitting signifies rest, that is, a full finishing of the
ceremonial law: you do but delude the readers, and abuse the Scriptures, for
there is no such matter to be found in them: If you allege them to prove
that Christ is the full finishing of the Ceremonial law, you take upon you
to prove that which no man de^teth of, and is very far from your purpose.

You note also the.20. of Exodus: Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship
them, to prove that we may not kneel at the Communion: but how fitly, every
child may judge: for what sequel is there in this argument? God in the second
commandment forbids worshipping of Images, therefore we may not receive the
Communion kneeling.

Admonition.
Half communion.
The fifth. As for the half communion, which is yet appointed like to the
commemoration of the Mass, we say little of it, saving that we may note,
how near the translatour bound him self to the massebooke, that would not
omit it. We speak not of the name of Priest, wherewith he defaceth the
minister of Christ, (because the priest that translated it, would perhaps
feign have the minister of Christ to be joined with him) seeing the office of
priesthood is ended christ being the last priest that ever was. To call us
therefore priests as touching our office, is either to call back again the old
priesthode of the law, which is to deny Christ to be comen, or else to
keep a memory of the Popish priesthod of abomination still amongst us. As for
the first, it is by* Hebr. 5.1.6. Hebr. 9.11.
Christ abolished, and for the second it is of Antichriste, and therefore we
have nothing to do with it. Such ought to have Eze. 44.10.12.13. Ierem. 23.
Hebr. 5 4.
no place in our Church, neither are they ministers of Christ, sent to preach
his Gospel, but priests of the Pope to sacrifice for the quick and the dead,
that is, to tread under their feet the blood of Christ. Such ought not to
have place amongst us, as the scriptures manifestly teach. Besides that we
never read in the new Testament, that this word Priest, as touching office,
is used in the good part.

Answer.
I know not what you mean by the half communion, I find no such word in the
Communion book: If you mean the communion in one kind, you speak untruly
and slanderously of the book, and of this whole Church: If you mean the
scriptures and prayers appoinpointed to be read when there is no communion,
then do you unjustly liken them to the co^memoration of the Mass, being most
fruteful scriptures, and godly prayers.

The name of Priest need not be so odious unto you as you would seem to make
it. I suppose it comes of this word Presbyter, and not of Sacerdos, and then
the matter is not great.

The Priest or priests that translated this book, be not so scornefully to be
taunted: I think some of them have ended their lives in the fire, and all of
them singular both in life, religion, and learning: Speak not so
contemptuously of so worthy men: utter not your hautie stomachs with so
spiteful words toward your superiors and betters, least you prove your
selves to be in the number of those, of whom Saint Paul speaks. 2. Tim.
3. use. 2.3.4.5. and Judas in his epistle use. 8. It is true that the presthod
of the old law is abolished, but the place of Scripture noted in your margent
proves it not. For Hebrews. 5. Paul does show why the high Priest was
ordained, and what were his offices: But he speaks nothing of the abolishing
of the Priesthood. I muse what you mean thus unnecessarily to paynte your
margent, and that with so little judgment and less discretion. The ninth to
the Hebrews is some thing to the purpose, but needless.

Touching popish Priests (as you call them) whether they ought to have any
place in our Church or no, I have spoken before, where I have also answered
your marginall notes concerning that matter.

You far ouershotte your self in my opinion, when you set it down, that you
never read in the new Testament this word Priest, touching office to be used
in good part. What say you to the fourth to the Hebrews? use. 14. Seeing then
that we have a great high priest which is entered into heaven Jesus Christ,
etc. And use. 15. For we have not a hye priest which can not be touched with
the feeling of our infirmities, but. etc. And chap. 5. use. 6. Thou art a
priest for ever. etc. And Apocalips. 5. 1. Peter. 2. But what should I trouble
you with a tedious heaping up of Scriptures? Show me one place in this Epistle,
yea in the whole new Testament where this word priest is taken in evil
part, touching office. Truly either you are far deceived, or else my
understanding fails me. I condemn that office and institution of
sacrificing for the quick and the dead with you, and I know it is condemned
in the scriptures manyfestely, and namely in the ninthe and tenthe to the
Hebrews.

Admonition.
Sixthly, in this book three or four are allowed for a fit number to receive
the Communion, and the Priest alone together with one more, or with the sick
man alone, may in time of necessity, that is, when there is any common plague,
or in time of other visitation, minister it to the sick man, and if he require
it, it may not be denied. This is not I am sure, like in effect to a private
Mass: that Scripture Mat. 26.27. Mar. 14.23
drink ye all of this, makes not against this, and private Communion, is not
against the Scriptures.

Answer.
How untruly these me^ charge ye church with private co^munions, I have showed
before. The place of scripture here alleged, to prove ye three or four be not
a sufficient number to communicate is this, drink ye all of this. Matthew. 26.
Mark. 14. Which may as well be applied to prove that ten, twenty, forty, is
no sufficient number: I know not what your meaning is, except you think no
number sufficient, unless all do communicate together, because Christ said,
Drink ye all. This text proves that all ought to be partakers of the Lords
cup, but it does not determine any certain number of communicantes. I know
there be some of the old fathers, as Basilius Magnus, which would not have
fewer communicants than twelve. But of the number of Communicantes there is
nothing determined in Scripture, neither is it material so that there be a
number, that it may be a communion.

Admonition.
The seventh. And as for private baptism, that will abide the touchstone. Mat.
28.19.
Go ye says Christ, and teach, baptizing them. etc. Now teaching is divorced
from communions and sacraments. They may go alone without doctrine. Women that
may 1. Cor. 14.34. 1. Tim. 2.11.
not speak in a congregation, may yet in time of necessity minister the
sacrament of Baptism, and that in a private house. And yet this is not to tie
necessity of salvation to the sacraments, nor to nousell men up in that
opinion. This is agreeable with the scriptures, and therefore when they bring the
baptized child they are received with this special commendation: I certify
you, that you have done well and according to due order. etc.

But now we speak in good ear^est, when they answer this, let the^ tell us how
this gear agrees with the scriptures, and whether it be not repugnant, or
against the word of God?

Answer.
Of private Baptism I have spoken before, here is nothing alleged against it,
but the. 28. of Math. Go ye and teach, baptizing them. etc. which text does
prove, that it was a portion of the Apostles office to baptize, but in what
place, at what time, how many at once, is not there prescribed, and therefore
private Baptism may abide this touchestone for any thing that I see to the
contrary.

You say untruly when you do affirm, that teaching in this Church is divorced
from communions and sacraments, but such forged slanderous speeches be usual
to you. Of this matter also I have spoken in the former part.

You say, women that may not speak in a congregation, may yet in time of
necessity minister the sacrament of Baptism, and that in a private house.
And to prove that women may not speak in a congregation you quote. 1. Co. 14.
1. Tim. 2. whereas you should rather have proved, that women may not in time of
necessity minister baptism, for that is the question, and not the other. But
hereof I have also spoken my opinion before. Women may speak in the
congregation, if necessary occasion do require, as master Calvin teaches
in his Institutions chap. 13. secti. 32.

And yet (you say) this is not to tie necessity of salvation to the
Sacraments: nor to nousell men up in that opinion, no surely, no more than it
is to teach, that children ought to be baptized, and not to tarry until such
time as they be able to answer for them selves. You should have proved this
to be repugnant to the Scriptures, because you say it is, and therefore you
refuse to subscribe. When you set down the Scriptures to the which it
repugneth, if it fall out so in deed, you shall have me a conformable
adversary: I will say with Saint Augustine, Errare possum, haereticus esse
nolo: and I would to God you could learn that lesson.

Admonition.
The eight. The public Baptism, that also is full of childishe and
superstitious toys. First in their prayer they say, that God by the Baptism
of his son Jesus Christ, did sanctifye the floude Iordane, and all other
waters, to the mystical washyng away of syn, attributing that to the sign
which is 1. John. 1.7. Act. 20.28. Romans 3.24.
proper to the work of God in the blood of Christ, as though virtue were in
water to wash away sins. Secondlye, they require a promise of the
Godfathers and godmothers, (as they term them) which is not in Rom 7.15.18
21. Romans 9.16.
their powers to perform. Thyrdely, they profane holy Baptism, in toying
foolishly, for that they ask questions of an infant, which can not aunsw^re,
and speak unto them, as was wont to be spoken unto men, and unto such as
being converted, answered for them selves, and were baptized. Which is but a
mockery Galath. 6.7.
of God, and therefore against the holy Scriptures. Fourthly, they do
superstitiously and wickedly institute a new Sacrament, which is proper to
Christ only, marking the child in the forehead with a Cross, in token that
hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ. We have made
mention before of that wicked divorce of the word and Sacraments. We say
nothing of those that are admitted to be witnesses, what ill choice there is
made of them, how convenient it were, seeing the children of the faithful only
are to be baptized, that the father should and might, if conveniently, offer
and present his child to be baptized, making an open confession of that
faith, wherein he would have his child baptized, and how this is used in well
ordered Churches.

Answer.
The superstitious toys you find in public Baptism be these.

First, that in our prayer we say, that God by the baptism of his son Jesus
Christ, did sanctify the flood Jordan and al other waters, to the mystical
washing away of sin.

The second is, that we require a promise of the godfathers and godmothers,
which is not in their powers to perform.

The third, that we ask questions of Infants, which can not answer and
speak. etc.

The fourth, that we mark the child in the forehead with a cross, making
thereby a new sacrament. etc.

The fifth, that we make an evil choice of those that are to be admitted
witnesses. etc.

By the first you say, that we attribute to the sign that which is proper to
the work of god in the blood of Christ, as though virtue were in water to
wash away sin.

You know very well that we teach far otherwise, and that it is a certain
and true doctrine of all such as do profess the Gospel, that the outward
signs of the sacrament, do not conteyne in them grace, neither yet that the
grace of God is of necessity tied unto them, but only that they be seals of
Gods promises, notes of Christianity, testimonies and effectual signs of the
grace of God, and of our redemption in Christ Jesus, by the which the spirit
of God does inuisibly work in us, not only the increase of faith, but
confirmation also.

You understand likewise, that this difference there is betwixt these external
elements, being selected to be sacramental signs (that is, betwixt water in
baptism, and common water, bread and wine in the Eucharist, and usual bread
and wine) that these now be sacraments, sanctified to an other use, to a
spiritual use, to the norishing of faith, and feeding of the soul, to be
instruments of the holy ghost, by the which as by instruments we be fed to
eternal life. Furthermore, you can not be ignorante, that whosoever contemns
these external signs, and refuses them, can not be a member of Christ,
neither yet saved.

Last of all you have learned, that there is such a similitude betwixt the
signs, and the thing signified, that they are not only in Scripture usually
called by the names of those things whereof they be Sacraments (as bread the
body of Christ, and water regeneration) but also that the contumely or
contempt done to the one, does redounde to the other, that is, the contempt of
the signs, is the contempt of the things signified, and therefore S. Paul
says. 1. Cor. 11. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
his own damnation. Non dijudicans corpus domini. And Christ, John. 3. Except a
man be borne of water and the spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

These things being considered, it is no superstitious toy, but a godly and
true saying, that Christ has sanctified all waters (used in baptising) to the
mystical washing away of sin, not ascribing, or attributing washing away of
sin to the external element, any otherwise, than instrumentally, or in any
other respect than for the similitude that Sacraments have with the things
whereof they be Sacraments: for we know that wicked men may receive these
external signs, and yet remain the members of Satan. It is certaynely true,
that the mistical washing away of sin is proper to the work of God in the
blood of Christ, and for that purpose you might have alleged much more playner
and directer places of scripture than most of these which you have noted in
your margent: but I think your meaning is not therefore to contemn the outward
signs and sacraments, as the heretics called Messalians did.

The second thing you mislike, is that we require a promise of the godfathers
and godmothers, which is not in their powers to perform: to this cauillation
I have answered before, and have declared, both out of Dionysius Areopagita,
and August. why they answer so in the infants name, and why they make that
promise, which I think they perform sufficiently, if they pretermit nothing
that lies in the^ to the performaunce thereof: and so says Dionisius, for
such promises are not made absolutely, but quantum in nobis est.

To prove that it is not in the godfathers to perform that which they
promise, you quote the saying of saint Paul to the Romans cap. 7. use. 15. I
allow no that which I do, for what I would that I do not, but what I hate
that I do. And use. 18. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh,
dwells no good thing, for to vvil is present with me, but I find no
means. etc. And. use. 21. I find then by the law, that when I would do
good, evil is present with me. In all these places the Apostle declares, that
infirmities remain, even in the faithful, by reason of the flesh, and that
they can not come to such perfection in this life, as they do desire. But how
do these places prove that godfathers are not able to perform that which
they promise for the Infant? truly these proofs are too far fetched for my
understanding. In the ninth to the Romans, the Apostle says: That it is not
in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. In
the which words he shows that ye cause of our election, is not in our selves,
but in ye mercy of god. But what is this to ye promise of godfathers made at
the baptizing of infants? if you would have a man to promise nothing, but that
which is in his power to perform, then must you simply condemn all promises
made by man: for there is nothing in his power to perform, no not moving of
his foot, not coming to dynner or supper. etc. Therefore as all other
promises be made with these secret conditions, if God will, so much as lies
in me, to the vttermoste of my power, if I live. etc. so is the promise in
baptism made by the godfathers likewise.

To the third superstitious toy (as you call it) that is, the questions
demanded of the Infant at the time of baptism, I have also answered out of
saint Augustine, in the first part: where it may also appear that this manner
of questioning was used in the baptising of infants long before Augustines
time, for Dionisius Areopagita makes mention of them in like manner.

To prove that this questioning with the infant, is a mocking of God, you quote
Galath. 6. use. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he reap. Paul in this place takes away excuses, which
worldlings use to make for not nourishing their Pastors, for no feigned excuse
will serve, because God is not mocked: But what is this to be questioning with
infants? how follows this? God is not mocked, Ergo he that questioneth with
infants, mocketh God. Truly you mock God, when you so dally with his
scriptures, and seek rather the glory of quoting of many places of scripture,
than the true applying of any one.

Concerning ye fourth toy, that is, crossing the child in the forehead, which
you call wicked and superstitious, I have before declared master Bucers
opinion: It may be left, and it has been used in the primative Church, and
may be so still, without either superstition or wickedness: neither does it
any more make a sacrament (because it is in token that hereafter he shall not be
ashamed to confess Christ crucified) than your sitting does at the Communion
in token of rest, that is, a full finishing through Christ of the ceremonial
law. etc. I think you know that every ceremony betokening some thing, is not
by and by a sacrament, and therefore here is as yet no wicked divorce of the
word and sacraments, except it be made by you.

Touching the last, which you rethorically say you will speak nothing of,
that is, the evil choice of witnesses, I think in part it is true, but you
speak that without the book, and therefore without my compass of defense.
For I mean not to take upon me the defense of any abuse within the book, (if
there be any) much less without the book.

But I know not whereto this tends that follows, that is, How convenient it
were, seeing that the children of the faithful only are to be baptized etc. Do
ye not comprehend those under the name of faithful which be baptized? For
else it passes man's understanding, to know who be faithful in deed, because
the unbelievers may make a confession of faith in words: And in this world it
cannot certainly by man be determined, who among Christians be faithful, who
be unfaithful. I pray you answer me this one question: If a child be
found, whose father and mother be unknown (as it has happened sometimes in
our remembrance) will you not baptize it, because the parents be not forth
coming to make a confession of their faith? or because the sound faith of the
parents is unknown? But hereof I have spoken in another place.

Admonition.
The ninth. As for matrimony that also has corruptions to many, it was wont
to be counted a sacrament, and therefore they use yet a sacramental sign, to
which they attribute the virtue of wedlock. I mean the wedding ring, which
they fowlly abuse, and dallye withal, in taking it up and laying it down: In
putting it on, they abuse the name of the Trinity, they make the new married
man according to the Popish form, to make an idol of his wife, saying, with
this ring I thee wed, with my body I thee worship. etc. And because in popery
no holy action may be done without a mass, they enjoin the married persons
to receive the Communion, (as they do their bishops and priests when they are
made) etc. Other petty things out of the book we speak not of, Abuses
accidental.
as that women, contrary 1. Cor. 11.5.
to the rule of the Apostle, come, and are suffered to come bareheaded with
bagpipes and fiddlers before the^, to disturb the congregation, and that they
must come in at the great door of the church, else all is marred.

Answer.
The first thing you mislike in matrimony is the ring, which you call a
sacramental sign, and untruly say that we attribute the virtue of wedlock
thereunto: I know it is not material whether the ring be used or no, for it
is not of the substance of matrimony, neither yet a sacramental sign, no
more than sitting at Communion is, but only a ceremony, of the which, Master
Bucer (writing his judgment upon the first Communion book set out in the
time of King Edward) says on this sort: Subijeitur alius ritus, vt annulum.
etc. There is another rite and ceremony used, that the bridegroom should lay
upon the book the ring, or any other sign or token of vvedlocke, be it gold
or silver which he will give to his wife, and from thence the minister
taking it, does deliver it to the bridegroom, and he delivers the same to the
bride, with a prescript form of words contained in the book: this ceremony
is very profitable, if the people be made to understand what is thereby
signified: as that the ring and other things first laid upon the book, and
afterward by the minister given to the bridegroom to be delivered to the
bride, do signify that we ought to offer all that we have to God before we
use the^, and to acknovvledge that we do receive them at his hand, to be used
to his glory. The putting of the ring upon the fourth finger of the vvomans
left hand, to the which as it is said there comes a synevve or string
from the heart, does signify that the heart of the wife ought to be united to
her husband, and the roundnesse of the ring does signify, that the wife ought
to be joined to her husband with a perpetual band of love, as the ring it
self is without end. Hitherto Master Bucer.

The second thing you reprove is, because (say you) we make the married man
(according to the papisticall form) to make an Idol of his wife, saying, with
my body I thee worship etc. And yet S. Peter.1. epist. cap. 3. speaking to the
husbands says. Likewise ye husbands dwell with them as men of knowledge,
giving honor unto the woman. etc. S. Peter would have the man to give honor unto
his wife, and yet his meaning is not that a man should make an Idol of his wife.

Last of al you like not that the married persons should be enjoined to
receive the Communion. Truly I marvel what you mean, so wickedly to revile so
godly, and so holy a law. Well, I will only set down Master Bucers
judgment of this thing also in the book before of me recited: his words be
these, Est and illud admodum pie ordinatum, vt noui coninges vna quoque de
mensa Domini communicent, nam non nisi in Christo Domino debent christiani
inter se matrimonio iungi. That is also godly ordained, that the new married
folks should receive the Communion, for Christians ought not to be joined by
matrimony, but in Christ the Lord.

Other petty things (you say) out of the book, which you call in the margent
abuses accidental, as women to come bareheaded, bagpipes, fiddlers, coming in
at the great door. etc. you will not speak of: Truly neither will I speak of
them, because being out of that book and meare trifles, they are not within my
compass. But in the mean time, this is a sore reason: The ring is used in
matrimony, the man says to his wife, with my body I thee worship, the new
married persons receive the Communion together: therefore you will not
subscribe to the book of common prayers. But this argument cannot be
answered: women come to the Church bareheaded, with bagpipes and fiddlers, at
the great door of the Church, and these things be not in the book, therefore
you will not subscribe to the book.

Admonition.
The tenth. As for co^firmatio^, as they use it, by the Bishop alone to the^
that lack both discretion and faith, it is superstitious and not agreeable to
the word of God, but popish and peeuishe. We speak not of other toys used
in it, and how far it differs, and is degenerated from the first
institution, they themselves that are learned can witness.

Answer.
Confirmation as it is now used, is most profitable, without all manner of
superstition, most agreeable to the word of God, and in all points differing
from the Papisticall manner of confirming children. But arrogancy makes you
so peevish, that you can like nothing be it never so good.

Admonition.
The eleventh. They appointe a prescript kind of service to burye the dead:
and that which is the duty of every christian, they tie alone to the minister,
whereby prayer for the dead is mainteyned, and partly gathered out of some of
the prayers, where they pray that we with this our brother, and all other
departed in the true faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect consummation
and bliss, both in body and soul. We say nothing of the threefoulde peale,
because that it is rather licensed by iniunction, than commanded in the book,
nor of their strange mourning, by changing their garments, which if it be not
hipocriticall, yet it is superstitious and heathenishe, because it is used only
of custom: nor of burial sermons, which are put in place of trentalls,
whereout spring many abuses, and therefore in the best reformed Churches are
removed. As for the superstitions used both in country and City, for the place
of burial, which way they must lie, how they must be fetched to Church the
minister meeting them at church style with surplesse, with a company of greedy
Clarks, that a cross white or black must be set upon the dead corpse, that
bread must be given to the poor, and offerings in burial time used, and cakes
sent abroad to friends, because these are rather used of custom and
superstition than by the authority of the book. Small commandment will serve
for the accomplishing of such things. But great charge will hardly bring the
least good thing to pass, and therefore all is let alone, and the people as
blind and as ignorante, as ever they were. God be merciful unto us.

Answer.
It is true that we have a prescript kind of service to bury the dead, and that
we appointe that office to the minister, and what have you in the whole
scripture against this? or who ever has found fault with either of these two
things (I mean prescript service to bury the dead, and the minister to execute
that office) but you alone? or when was it ever heretofore reproved by any, but
even by your selves now of late?

You say, that thereby prayer for the dead is mainteyned as may partly be
gathered out of some of the prayers, where we pray, that we with this our
brother, and other departed in the true faith of thy holy name. etc. You know
full well what our doctrine is concerning prayer for the dead, and you ought not
thus boldly to utter a manifest untruth, for in so doing you do but bewray
your sinister affection. How prove you, that a prescript form of service for
burying the dead, and the minister only to burye them, does maintain prayer
for the dead? when you have showed your reason, you shall hear my answer.

In saying that these words gathered out of some of the prayers, that we with
this our brother etc. import prayer for ye dead, you do but quarrel: when we
say that we with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob may reign in thy kingdom, do we
pray for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or rather wish our selves to be where they
are?

In the like manner when we say, that we with this our brother, and all other
departed in the true faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect consummation
and bliss both in body and soul, we pray not for our brother and other that
be departed in the true faith, but we pray for our selves, that we may have our
perfect consummation and bliss as we are sure those shall have which dye in
the true faith.

Now wey this reason, there is a prescript form of burying the dead, and it is
made a portion of ye ministers office, therefore you will not subscribe to the
Communion book.

The threefold peale, mourning apparel, burial sermons, the place of burial,
which way they must lie, how they must be fetched to the Church, a cross
white or black set upon the dead corpse, bread given to the poor, offerings
in burial time used, cakes sent abroad to friends, you confess not to be
contained within the book, and so you ease me of some labor. But yet of
mourning apparel, and burial sermons, give me leave to speak a little. It is
no good reason to say, that because mourning apparel is only used of custom,
therefore it is superstitious and hethenish: many things be used of custom which
be neither superstitious nor heathenishe, as to receive ye Communion before
dinner, to celebrate the Lords day on the sunday, not on the saturday, to
preach in pulpits, and such like. Mourning apparel is of great antiquity, (as
you know) and I think it is no matter of religion, but of civility and order.
If any man put religion in it, then no doubt it is superstitious.

But wherein have funeral sermons offended you? or with what face of brass
dare you like^ them to trenfalls? What similitude is there betwixt a godly
sermon and the wicked mass? In what one point are they like? or how dare you
condemn such sermons, being then most necessary and most profitable? what? is
there a more fit time to entreat of the mortality of man, and shortness of
his days, of the vanity of this world, of the uncertainty of riches, of the
resurrection, of the judgment to come, of eternal life, and of everlasting
death, and of infinite other most necessary points, than that wherein we have a
present example before our eyes? When is there a more meet time to beat down
trentalls, sacrificing for the dead, prayers for the dead, purgatory, and such
like, than that wherein they were accustomed to be most used? surely there is as
much difference betwixt our funeral sermons, and the Papisticall masses and
trentalls, as there is betwixt cold and hot, black and white, light and
darkness, truth and lies, heaven and hell. But belike there is some other
private cause, that makes you to reiecte funeral sermons.

You say that in the best reformed Churches they are removed: I think you say
not truly, (and I am sure that Master Calvin does very well like and allow of
them, as appears in the form of common prayers used of the English Church
in Geneua, and by him allowed.) But if it be so, I tell you plainly, for my
part I like not that reformation, except there be weightier reasons than
either you use, or I can perceive. I am sure that in aunciente Churches of long
time they have been used, and the same you may see in the most ^uncient and
best learned fathers.

Touching the place of burial, I muse what you mean to mislike of it, seeing
there has always ben an appointed place for the same, even from Abraham to
this day.

Other things that you mention be but trifles, and some of them I think both
is, and may be used without superstition, or any kind of religious opinion:
But these be not in the book, and therefore no cause why you should disalowe of
the book for them.

Admonition.
The twelfth. Churching of women after child Psalm. 12.^^
I have lyfted up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help. The
sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the moon by night. They pray that al men
may be saved, and that they may be delivered from thundering and tempest when no
danger is nigh: that they sing, Benedictus, Nu^c dimittis and Magnificat, we
know not to what purpose, except some of the^ were ready to die, or except
they would celebrate the memory of the virgin, and John Baptist. etc. Thus they
profane the holy sripture.

Answer.
Of the churching of women, I have spoken before, and also of the.121. Psalm,
I have lyfted up mine eyes to the hills. etc.

For their lying in, I can say little, I am not skillful in women's matters,
neither is it in the book, no more is her white sheet, nor his veil: let the
women them selves answer these matters.

You say, we pray that all men may be saved, we do so in deed, and what can
you allege why we should not so do? Saint Paul.1. Timoth. 2. says, I
exhort therefore, that first of al supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men. etc. And adding the reason, he says, For
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our savior, who will that all
men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth. The Apostle
does here will us in plain words to pray for all men, even that they may be
saved, for thereunto tend the words following.

You mislike also that we should pray to be delivered from thundering and
tempest, when there is no danger nighe. You broche many strange opinions: may
not we pray to be delivered from perils and dangers, except they be present
and known to be at hand? where find you that? Christ teaches us to say in
our daily prayer, Libera nos a malo, deliver us from evil. What know we when
there is any danger of thundering and lightning? have we not examples of diverse
that have suddenly perished with the same? Is it not therefore necessary to pray
for deliverance from thunder and lightning, as well as from other dangers,
though they be not present? Well, men may see whereunto this gear tends, if
they be not blind. Benedictus also, Nuns dimittis, and Magnificat, be great
motes in your eyes, but you show no reason worthy to be answered: only in
derision you say, except some of them were ready to dye, or would celebrate the
memory of the Uirgin, or John Baptist. As though these Hymmes or Psalms were
not profitable for all men, as the rest of the holy Scripture is, but these
especially, because they conteyne the mystery of our salvation, and the praise
of God for the same. By this your reason we may not use any of the Psalms,
until we be in like case as David was, or other, when they were first made. But
I think now the time is come when those shall correct magnificat, qui
nesciunt quid significat. Truly this your doing is a mere profanation of
holy scriptures.

Admonition.
The thirtenth. In all their order of service 1. Co. 14.1^
there is no edification according to the rule of the Apostle, but confusion.
They toss the Psalms in most places like tennise balls, the people some
standing, some walking, some talking, some reading, some praying by themselves
attend not to the minister. He again posteth it over as fast as he can
gallop: for either he has two places to serve, or else there are some Games of
Sodom.
games to be played in the after noone, as lying for the Whetstone, heathenishe
dancing for the ring, a Bear or a Bull to be bayted, or else Jack an apes to
ride on horse back, or an Interlude to be playde, and if no place else can
be gotten, it must be done in the church. etc. Now the people sit, now they
stand up: when the old testament is read or the lessons, they make no
reverence, but when the Gospel comes, then they Standing at the Gospel came
from Anastatius the Pope in An. 404.
all stand up. For why, they think that to be of greatest authority, and are
ignorant that the scriptures came from one spirit. When Jesus is named then
off goes the cappe, and down goes the knees, with such a scraping on the
ground, that they can not hear a good while after, so that the word is
hindered, but when any other names of God are mentioned, they make no courtesy
at all, as though the names of God were not equal, or as though all reverence
ought to be given to the sillables. We speak not of ringing, when Mattens is
done, and Accidental abuses.
other abuses incident: because we shall be answered, that by the book they are
not maintained, only we desire to have a book to refourme it. As for Organes
and curious singing, though they be proper to popish dens, I mean to
Cathedral churches, yet some others also must have them. The Queens Chapel,
and these Churches must be paternes and presidents to the people of all
superstitions.

Answer.
This is a slanderous untruth. And the.1. Cor. 14. abused to confirm it.
Whatsoever S. Paul requires in that place, is used in that book of Service:
for first, the whole service is in a tongue known (as S. Paul there requires)
that the people may understand, and say, Amen. Then are the Scriptures read,
the Sacraments ministered according to Christ's own institution, those that be
godly disposed persons know what a manifest untruth this is that you here
utter. But mad men, women, and children, must have their words.

If by tossing of Psalms, you mean the singing of them alternatim, then do
you disallowe that which is both commendable, and of great antiquity, as it
appears in an Epistle that Basilius Magnus did write to the ministers in
Neocesaria, where he shows the self same order of singing Psalms to be then
used in the church, that we use at this day.

If by tossing of Psalms like tennyse balls, you mean the over hasty
reading or singing of them, it is in deed to be mislyked: but it is no part
of the book, and therefore no cause why you should absteyn from subscribing to
it.

Walking, talking, reading, private praying of the people in time of Common
prayers, serving of two cures, games played in the afternoon on the Sabbath
day: as lying for the whetstone. etc. be faults worthy of punishment, where
they be used, but they are not within the contents of the book, and they are
here recited out of place, and to no purpose.

This is very malicious and indiscreet dealing, to burden the common order with
such faults, which by the malice of men are grown in use, and are of all
good men mislyked. So you might have burdened Saint Paul and other preachers,
with the faults of the Churches of Corinth and Galathians, and the residue of
the Apostles, with the superstitions of the Jews converted in the primitive
Church, and all good rulers with such faults as corruption of time breeds.

Standing or sitting at this time or that time is indifferent, and therefore may
both be well used and abused also. Kneeling at the name of Jesus is of the like
nature, ringing when mat^ins is done (as you term it) curious singing,
organs* etc. All these be without the book, and therefore without discretion
alleged as a reason why you will not subscribe to the book.

Here it pleases you to call Cathedral Churches, Popish dens. As hap is,
your words ar no slander. But this brag I will make of Cathedral Churches, and
such as be now in them, I will offer unto you a doze in cathedral Churches in
England (which I my self do know) the worst whereof in learning shall encounter
with all Papists, Puritans, Anabaptists, and what other sects soever in England,
for the defense of religion now professed, either by word or writing. Without
arrogancy be it spoken, I think there was never time wherein these churches
were better furnished with wise, learned, and godly men, than they be at this
day. I speak not this bostingly, but to Gods glory, the honor of the Prince,
the comfort of the godly, and the shame of slandrous Papists, and disdainful
schismatiks. Your sla^drous speech of the Queens Majesty's chapel, which you
also say to be a pattern and president to the people of all superstitions, is
rather severely to be punished, than with words to be confuted.

Admonition.
The foureteenth. Their pontifical (which is annexed to the book of Common
prayer, and whereunto subscribing to the Articles, we must subscribe also)
whereby they consecrate Bishops, make ministers and Deacons, is nothing else but
a thing word for word, drawn out of the Popes pontifical, wherein he shows
himself to be Antichrist most lively. And Luc. 22.25 26 1. Pet. 5 3.4.5.
Matthew. 20.25.26. Mat. 23.8.11.12. Gal. 2.6. Hebr. 5.4. Luke. 16.25. Ezech.
34.4. 1 Cor. 1.24.
as the names of Archebishops, Archdeacons, lord Bishops, Chancelours. etc.
are drawn out of the Popes shop, together with their offices: So the
government which they use, by the life of the Pope, which is the Canon law,
is Antichristian and devilish, and contrary to the Scriptures. And as safely
may we by the warrante of Gods word subscribe to allow the dominion of the
Pope, universally to reign over the Church of God, as of an Archbishop over
an whole province, or a Lordbishop over a dioces, which conteyneth many shires
and parishes. For the dominion that they exercise, the Archbishop above them,
and they above the rest of their brethren, is unlawful, and expressly forbidden
by the word of God.

Answer.
Now that you have spitte out all your poison against the Communion book, and
poured down all your reasons, you come to the Pontifical as you term it,
that is the book containing the order and manner of making of ministers etc.
this book (you say) is word for word drawn out of the Popes pontifical
etc. Surely if those things which were good in the Popes pontifical, and
either contained in the scripture, or well used before in the ancient Church,
or well prescribed by general councels, be also in our Pontifical, our
pontifical is never the worse for having of them: for if the thing it self be
good and profitable, it forces not from whom it was taken, or of who^ it was
used, so that now it be rightly used. But it is most false and untrue, that the
book of ordring ministers and Deacons etc. now used, is word for word drawn
out of the Popes pontifical, being almost in no point correspo^dent to the
same, as you might have seen, if you had compared them together. But ignorance
and rashness, dryues you into many errors.

Both of the names, and also of the offices of Archebishops, Archedeacons,
Lorde-bishops* etc. I have spoken before sufficiently, and fully answered these
places quoted in this margent: saving the.2. to the Galathi. the.5. to the
Hebrews, Ezech. 34. 2. Cor. 1. for these places have been found out since and
thought meet now to be alleged, but how discretely by emmination it will
appear. The words of the Apostle to the Gala. 2. use. 6. be these. And of them
which seemed to be great I was not taught (what they were in time passed, it
makes no matter to me, God accepts no man's person) nevertheless they that
are the chief, did communicate nothing with me. The Apostle in these words
does declare, that he received not the gospel which he preached, of men, no
not of the Apostles, but of Jesus Christ, and that the Gospel preached by
him, ought to be no less credited, than the Gospel preached by them. So that
in those words he declares that the truth of the doctrine does not depend of
any man's person. He speaks nothing against superiority quoad ordinem,
concerning order, but does rather acknowledge it, for he says, they that are
the chief. etc. But it is true that master Calvin notes on this place: Hic
non est certame^ ambitionis, quia nequaquam de personis agitur. The contention
is not for ambition, for it is not understood of the persons. Now I pray you
consider this argument, Paul received the Gospel that he preached, not of
the Apostles, but of Christ, or the Gospel preached by Paul is equivalent with
the Gospel preached by other of the Apostles: therefore the names of
Archebishoppes, Archdeacons* etc. are drawn out of the Popes shop together
with their offices, or this, Paul says, that they that were the chief did
communicate nothing with him: Ergo, the names and offices of Archbishops be
taken out of the Popes shop.

The words in the.5. to the Herues.4. use, be these: And no man takes this
honor to himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron. The Apostle here
shows, that Christ was a laufull Priest, because he was thereunto called by
God as Aaron was. What is this to Archbishops. etc. This place teaches, that
no man ought to intrude himself to any function, except he be thereunto called
by God. But what makes this against any lawful function or authority? or
what conclusion call you this? Christ did not take unto him that office
whereunto he was not called, or no man must take upon him that whereunto he is
not called: Ergo Archebishops etc. and their offices came out of the Popes
shop. You should first prove that which ought to be your minor.

In the.16. of Luke use. 25. it is thus written, but Abraham said, son
remember that thou in thy life time receauedst thy pleasures, and likewise
Lazarus pains: now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented. The rich
glutton in his life received pleasure, and therefore was after in hell
tormented, Lazarus received pains, and after was comforted. Therefore
Archbishops. etc. and their offices come out of the Popes shop. These fellows
neither care for mayor, minor, nor conclusion, so they say some thing, and
vaynly paynt their margent with shamefully abusing the Scriptures.

The words of Ezech. chap. 34. use. 4. be these: The weak have ye not
strengthened, the sick have ye not healed, neither have you bound up the
broken. etc. In the which place the Prophet speaks against such Kings,
magistrates, and rulers, as despise the people of God, and use themselves
cruelly toward them: this does as well condemn kings and magistrates, as it
does Archbishoppes, although in deed it condemns no office or superiority,
but the abuse of the same, that is the man abusing the office, and not the
office it self.

In the.2. Cor. 1. use. 24. the Apostle speaks thus unto them. Not that we
have dominion over your faith, but we are helpers of your joy, for by faith
you stand. S. Paul here says, that he has no authority to alter true
religion, or to rule over their consciences: but how proves this, that
Archebishops. etc. came out of the Popes shop? Paul says that he had no power
over the consciences of the Corinthians: therefore Archebishops. etc. and their
offices were drawn out of the Popes shop. If you had been more studious when
you were a Sophister (if ever you were any) you would have learned better to
frame an Argument, and have had better judgment in the sequel of the same. If
you had not troubled your margent with these quotations, you had less uttered
your folly.

So much of the Cannon law as is contrary to the Scriptures, is
Antichristian and devilish: but there be diverse Canons in it, very good and
profitable, which may well be retained. Good laws may be borrowed even of
Turks, and heathenish idolaters: and why not of Papists also? I have told you
before, that the thing it self is to be considered, not the inuentor: if it be
good and profitable, it may be used, whosoever did invent it.

In that you say, That you may as safely by the warrant of Gods word
subscribe to allow the dominion of the Pope universally to reign over the
church of God, as of an Archbishop over an whole province. etc. You express
but your heat, I suppose you think not so: can the Pope as well govern the
whole Church as the Archbishop one province, and a lord Bishop one dioces? Is
one king as well able to govern the whole world, as he may be to govern one
kingdom? or because you can rule one parrishe well, can you therefore in like
manner well govern twenty parishes? Surely an Archbishop may well govern one
province, but the Pope can never well govern the whole church. And yet an
Archbishop has not the the charge of government over the whole province
generally, but only in certain cases exempted, and therefore may do it more
easily.

You borrowed these arguments from the very Papists who by the self same
reasons, go about to prove the Popes supremacy, for thus they argue:

Among the Israelites there was one high Priest, which had authority over the
rest, therefore there must be one high Priest (which is the Pope) over the whole
Church of Christ. Master Calvin in his Institutions chap. 8. does answer this
reason on this sort: Quod in vna natione fuit vtile, id in vniuersum orbem
extendere nulla ratio cogit: imo gentis vnius and totius orbis long diuersa
erit ratio. That which is profitable in one nation, can not by any reason be
extended to the whole world, for there is great difference betwixt the whole
world and one nation. And a little after, Perinde enim est ac si quis
contendat, totum mundum a praefecto vno debere regi: quia ager vnus non plur^
praefectos habeat. It is even as though a man should affirm, that the whole
world may be governed of one king, because one field or town has but one
ruler or master.

An other of their reasons is this: Peter was the chief among the Apostles,
therefore there ought to be one chief over the whole Church. The same master
Calvin in the book and chapter before rehearsed, makes this one answer to
that Argument: Vnus inter Apostolos summus fuit, nempe quia pauci erant
numero. Si vnus duodecim hominibus praefuit, an propterea sequetur, vnum debere
centum milibus hominum praefici? There was one chief among the Apostles,
because they were but few in number, but if one man rule over twelve, shall it
therefore follow that one may rule over a hundred thousand? And a little
after, Quod inter paucos valet, non protinus traehendum est ad vniuersum orbem
terrarum, ad quem regendum nemo vnus sufficit, That which is of force among
few, may not by and by be drawn to the whole world, the which no one man
can govern* Every hyue of Bees has one chief master Be, every company of
Cranes has one principal guide, must there be therefore but one Be, and one
Crane to direct all the Bees and the cranes that be in the whole world? you see
therefore how weak this reason is. The rest of this reason I have answered
before

Admonition.
The fifteenth. Again, in that they are honored with the Mat. 23.8. etc. Ioh.
13.15 16. John. 5.44. 2. Cor. 10.16.17.18.
titles of kings and great rulers, as Lord, Lords grace, Metropolitan,
primate of all England, Honor. etc. it is against the word of God. Moreover,
in that they have Luc. 9 60.61. Luke. 12.14. Romans 12.7. 1. Tim 6.11. 2. Tim.
2.3.4.
civil offices joined to the Ecclesiastical, it is against the word of God.
As for an Archbishop to be a Lord president, a Lord Bishop to be a County
Palatine, a prelate of the Garter, who has much to do at Saint Georges feast
when the Bible is carried before the Procession in the Crosses place, Bishops
prisons popish Eugenius the first bringer of them in.
a Justice of peace, or Justice of Quorum, an high Co^missioner. etc. And
therefore they have their prisones, as Clinkes, Gatehouses, Colehouses, towers
and Castles, which is also against the Scriptures. This is not to have keys
but swords, and plain tokens they are, that they exercise that which they would
so feign seem to want, I mean dominion over their brethren.

Answer.
All this is without the book, and therefore I need not to answer it, no more
than you need to absteyn from subscribing to the book for things not
contained in the book.

But I mean a little to examine your places of scripture, to see if you have
any better luck in applying of them, than hitherto you have had in others.

To prove that it is against the word of God, to honor Bishops with titles of
great rulers, as Lord, Lords grace, Metropolitan, primate of all England,
honor. etc. (for I do not remember that we call them kings) you first quote
Math. 23. which place is very often by you iterated, and sufficiently by me
answered before.

In the.13. of John, which you use also for the same purpose, Christ, after he
had washed his disciples feet, took an occasion thereupon to exhort them to
humility, which virtue is very necessary in all degrees of men, as well in
rulers and Magistrates, as in inferiors. And therefore that place requires
humility in all, especially in the ministers of the word: but it disaloweth
superiority in none. When Christ adds and says, the servant is not greater
than his master. etc. he armeth them against persecutions, and wills them to
look for afflictions: for in the.15. chapter he adds to the same words, If
they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also. And to this are
Archbyshops and Lordbyshops as well subject as other men, examples whereof we
have of our own, as Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper. etc.

That in the.5. chapter of S. John is not spoken to the Apostles, but to the
whole company of Jews, in reproof of their vain glory, for so is that place
to be understood, else it were altogether unlawful for any man to receive
honor, yea even for Princes them selves.

To the like purpose tend the words of the Apostle 2. Cor. 10. use. 16.17.18.

Surely both the names of Archbyshops, Lordebyshops, etc. and their offices,
may as well stand with these places of the scripture, as the names and offices
of kings, nobles, and any other persons in estimation or dignity. In deed the
mother of all heresies and sects, that is, vain glory and arrogancy, in all
these places is utterly condemned.

But I pray you does Christ condemn superiority in all those whom he
exhorts to humility? is not humility as well required in Princes and great
rulers, as it is in meaner persons? yes surely, and a great deal more.
Wherefore Christ in suppressing ambition, pride, and arrogancy, and exhorting
to humility, does not condemn superiority, neither yet titles of reverence,
but requires humbleness of spirit, and lowliness of mind in all degrees of
persons, especially in superiors, who^ this virtue does most adorn: the
mightiest and noblest Prince in the world may come nearer this admonition of
Christ, than the poorest slave. It is therefore the affection of the mind that
Christ here condemns: not superiority, not titles of honor and dignity: yea
he reproves in this place such hautie and proud stomakes as yours be, which
contemn and disdain those whom they ought both in words and deeds, both in
titles and subiections to reverence.

To prove that civil offices joined to the ecclesiastical, is against the
word of God, first you note Luke. 9. v. 60.61. where it is thus written. And
Jesus said unto him, let the dead bury their dead, but go thou and preach
the kingdom of God. Then another said, I will follovv thee Lord, but let me
first go bid the^ farevvel which are at my house. How conclude you any thing
of these places against civil offices in Ecclesiastical persons? Christ's
meaning in this place is, to teach us (I mean al Christians) that when he
calls us, we ought not to be hindered from following (and that forthwith) by
any excuse of doing duty toward our friends, or respect of worldly
commodity, or for fear of any pain or trouble, and this is spoken generally
to all Christians, and not alone to any one kind of men.

Secondly, for the same purpose you use Luke 12. use. 14. where Christ
speaking to him that said unto him, master bid my brother divide the
inheritance with me, answers on this sort, man, who made me a judge, or a
deuider over you? Christ came in deed to be judged, and not to judge, he came
to work the work of our redemption, not to decide controversies touching lands
and possessions. But will you therefore take from Christian men authority to
judge? for this example of Christ can no more be applied to Bishops, than it
may be to kings, because the doings of Christ is a pattern for all christians,
and yet christians may judge matters, and decide controversies amongst their
brethren. Look.1. Cor. 6. The Anabaptists use this text for one of their
reasons to condemn magistracy among Christians: and therefore a very learned
and late writer in his exposition of this place, writes thus: Hinc colligitur
quantopere insaniant, qui ex hoc loco magistratum inter Christianos damna^t,
nam Christus non argumentatur a re ipsa, tanquam profana sit, sed a vocatione
sua, quod missus sit in alium finem, tamet si res erat per se satis sancta and
pia. Hereof it may be gathered how greatly they dote, which condemn
magistrates amongst Christians by this place, for Christ does not reason of
the thing it self, as though it were profane, but of his own vocation,
because he was sent to another end, although the thing of it self is holy and
good.

In the third place you allege. Romans 12. use. 7. He that has an office, let
him wait on his office, or he that teaches on teaching. What is this to the
purpose? He that has an office must attend upon his office, and he that
teaches on teaching, therefore Bishops may not have civil offices? The office
of a Bishop is as well to govern by discipline, as by preaching: this is a
very simple argument.

Fourthly, you cite the.1. Timo. 6. use. 11. But thou, O man of God flee these
things, and follovv after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience and
meekness. Truly, I think you dote, or else dream, your applications of
scripture be so strange. What speaks Paul here against civil offices in
Ecclesiastical persons? be only wills them in the person of Timothy to
flee covetousness, and to follow righteousness. etc.

The last text here quoted is the second to Timoth. 2. use. 3.4. Thou
therefore suffer affliction as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, no man that
vvarreth entangleth him self with the affairs of this life, because he
vvoulde please him that has chosen him to be a soldier. This latter sentence
is general, and perteyneth to all men. The meaning is this, whosoever would be
a soldier under Christ, must leave all worldly things, and follow him. It
speaks nothing either of civil or ecclesiastical offices. For if you will
know what he there means by the affairs of this life, hear what master
Calvin says, writing upon that place: Per negotia vita intel^igit fam^liae
administrandae curam, and ordinarias occupationes. By the affairs of this life
he understands the care of governing his family, and other ordinary
business.

If you will learn how this place is to be applied, the same master Calvin
teaches you likewise in these words following: Nunc applicanda est comparatio
ad rem praesentem, quod quisquis vult sub Christo militare, debet relictis
omnibus mu^ditricis and auocamentis se illi totum suaque studia addicere. Now
this comparison is to be applied to the present purpose, that whosoever will
play the vvarrier under Christ, leaving all vvorldly matters and impediments,
must give him self wholy unto him. This therefore is general, and
perteyneth to all Christians, but chiefly and especially to the ministers of
the word, who may not occupy them selves in worldly business, as other men
do, that is, they must not be marchantes, husbandmen, crafts men, or hinder
their vocation with such like worldly affairs. As for such civil offices as
be committed to them, they be rather helps to their vocation, than
impedimentes: for the office of a Justice of peace, of an high Commissioner,
and such like, is to punish vice and iniquity, to see good order kept in the
common wealth, as well in matters touching religion, as other common and public
business. Wherefore as these offices be not mere civil, but partly
ecclesiastical and be for discipline and correction of sins: so in my
opinion they be most meet to be committed to some of the wisest and best of
the Clergy, to the end that such as by the word will not, by convenient
discipline may be compelled to do their duties. Neither are such offices to
be accounted worldly affairs, but rather heavenly and spiritual, for as much
as they serve to the mayntenance of religion and godliness, and to the
suppressing of sin and wickedness. If it be true that Augustine says:
Seruiunt Reges Christo, leges ferendo pro Christo. It is also true, Seruiunt
Episcopi Christo, leges exequendo pro Christo.

What say you to Elie and Samuel, were they not both Priests and Judges? what
office did the Prophet Helias execute, when he killed the false Prophets of
Baal. 1. Reg. 18. or Christ when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple? What office did Paul commit to Timothy, when he said, aduersu^
Presbyteru^. etc.

I would not have a minister to be a warrior, or a farmer, or a merchant, or
have any such like office, which consists in gain, or bodily labor only.
But why he may not have such an office as is profitable to increase
godliness, and punish ungodliness, I hear as yet no reason. As for the
office of an high Co^missioner, it is Ecclesiastical, for they have to do
only in causes Ecclesiastical.

It pleases you to say that it is against Gods word^ for Bishops to have
prisons, but your margent is very barren of proofs: for you have not quoted
one place of Scripture to prove it: only you say that Popish Eugenius did
first bring them in* which is a very slender argument to prove them to be
against the word of God. Did not Peter punish Ananias and Saphira very
straightly for their dissimulation? Surely far more grievously than if he had
put them in prison, and yet their offense was not against any ordinary law
made in the Church or common weal. But where read you that Eugenius did first
invent them?

Admonition.
The sixtenth. In that the Lord bishops, their suffraganes, Archdeacons,
Chauncelors, officials, proctors, doctors, summers, and such ravening rablers,
take upon the^, which is most horrible, the rule of Gods Church, spoiling the
pastor Math. 18.17.18. Acts. 11.30. Act 15.2.4 6. etc. To 12.7.8 Phil. 1.1 1.
Co. 12.28 1. The 5.12.13. 1. Ti. 4.14. 1. Tim. 5.17
of his lawful jurisdiction over his own flock, given by the word, thrusting
away most sacrilegiously that order which Christ has left to his Church, and
which the primative church has used, they show they hold the doctrine with us,
but in unrighteousness, with an outward show of godliness, but having denied
the power thereof, entering not in by John. 10.1.
christ, but by a Popish and unlawful vocation. We speak not Act. 6.3.4.
Act. 14.23 Act. 20.28 30. etc. Romans 12.6 7.8. 1. Cor. 9.16.17.
how they make ministers by them selves alone, and of their sole authority,
and that in secret places, of their election and probation, that it is of him,
to whom by no right it belongs. And that when they have made them, either
they may carry in their College, and lead the lives of loytring losels as long
as they live, or else gad abroad with the Bishops bulls, like to Circumce^ions,
to preach in other men's charges where they list, or else get benefices by
friendship or money, or flattery, where they can catch the^: or to conclude, if
al these fail, that they may go up and down like beggars, and fall to many
follies: or else (as many have done) set up bills at Paul's, or at the Royal
exchange, and in such public places, to see if they can hear of some good
masters, to entertayne them into service. Surely by the Cannon law, by which
the bishops reign and rule, they ought to keep those ministers which they
make, as long as they have no livings and places. We know three or four
bishops in this Realm, would have kept such houses, as never none did in
this land, if this rule had been observed. They clapped the^ out so fast by
hundreds, and they made them pay well for their orders: and surely to speak
truth, they were worthy, for the bishops (what odds soever there were of their
gifts) yet in their letters gave them all a like comme^dation. They put on
their surplesses, or else subscribed like honest men. Fie upon these stinking
abominations.

Answer.
In all these words there is not one thing touched, which is contained in the
Communion book, and therefore I might pass this part over with silence,
noting only your unorderly and indiscreet dealing, who going about to deface
the book of Common prayer, wander you know not whither, and spend your labor
in writing against such things as be not in that book once mentioned. But yet
something I must say to certain things by you in this part written, without
al modesty, discretion or reason.

And first you show your self greatly offended, that the pastor is spoiled of
his lawful jurisdiction over his stock, and therefore you burst out into these
words of heat, ravening rablers, horrible, sacrilegiously, and such like. It
had been well if you had told us, what that lawful jurisdiction of the pastor
over his stock given by the word, had been: for the places of scripture which
you quote for that purpose, do not plainly enough set out that matter. In the
18. of Mathewe, use. 17. after certain admonitions in private offenses. Christ
says, Dic ecclesiae, tell the Church. In which place (as I told you before)
the Church does signify such as have authority in the Church, or else
public reprehension in the open congregation by such as be called thereunto.
It gives not any pec^lier jurisdiction to the pastor, for any thing that I can
learn. And in the same cha 18. use, where christ says, What soever ye bind
on earth, shall be bound in heaven. etc. according to your judgment uttered
before, it is mente of the whole Church, and not of the pastor only. You have
before denied that one man can excommunicate, and therefore this place makes
nothing for your assertion.

In the.11. of the Acts, use. 30. mention is made how the Disciples which
were at Antiochia, did according to their ability, send succoure to their
brethren which dwelte in Judea, and that they sent it to the elders by the
hands of Barnabas and Saul. But what is this to the jurisdiction of the
pastor? This declares that the disciples of Antiochia trusted the elders
which were in Judea with the distribution of their alms.

The.15. of the Acts (in the places by you noted) shows how Paul and
Barnabas were sent to the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem, about
the deciding of a certain question moved by certain of the sect of the
Phariseys, touching circumcision. This declares the use of Councels, and
opens the next and readyest way to determine controversies, but it speaks
nothing of the jurisdiction of the pastor.

The.xii. to the Romans use. 7.8. has been sundry times by you alleged to no
purpose at all, even as it is now in like manner.

The Apostle there wills every man that has an office, to attend upon his
office. etc. But he speaks not of any peculiar jurisdiction of the pastor
over his flock.

In the first to the Phil. us. 1. Paul and Timothy salute the Bishops and
Deacons which be at Philippi. How gather you thereof any jurisdiction perteyning
to the pastor?

The.1. Cor. 12. use. 28. The Apostle says, that God has placed in his
Church first Apostles, secondely Prophets, thirdly teachers. etc. What is
this to your purpose? or what jurisdiction of Pastors do you gather hereof?
you may here learn, that there is in the church diverse degrees of persons.

1. Thessa. 5. Paul exhorts them to know and love such as labor among
them, he describes no peculiar kind of jurisdiction.

1. Timo. 4. use. 14. Saint Paul wills Timothy not to despise the gift
given unto him by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the company of
the eldership, and in the.1. Timo. 5. use. 17. he says: The elders that rule
well are worthy of double honor. etc. Which place comes the nearest to
your purpose, for here is mention made of ruling, and of ministers, but yet it
is not declared what kind of rule this was, except you will expound it by the
words following, specially they which labor in word and doctrine And this
kind of rule remains to the pastor still. Thus you see with how little
discretion and less learning, you heap up scriptures in your margent, only to
deceive the simple and ignorante, who are by you too much deluded, beleeuyng
what so ever you speak or write, without any further examination. If they
would mark these words of yours well, they might soon understand that you seek
as great jurisdiction over them, as any of those persons whom you have here
named. You say, they hold the doctrine with you, but in unrighteousness, with
an outward show of godliness but having denied the power thereof, entryng not
in by Christ, but by a Popish and unlawful vocation. This is but your vein of
railing, and your usual manner of extolling your selves, and condemning other:
But (as I said before) your words be no sclaunder, neither will I in words
contend with you, but therein give you the upper hand: only I must still let
you understand of your foolish applying of scriptures. For wherefore have you
here quoted the tenth of John. use. 1. Belike because Christ says there, That
he which does not enter in by the door into the sheepfolde, but climbeth up an
other way, is a thief and a robber, therefore all such as be placed in this
Church of England (your selves excepted) enter in by a popish and unlawful
vocation. You had gone orderly to work, if you had first proved, that we have
not come into the sheepfold by Christ. If you thus omit the proof of your
minor, you may conclude what you will, and quote scriptures at your pleasure.
But wise and learned men will lament your folly, and laughe at your
unskillfulness.

Of making of ministers I have spoken before, and answered the places. Acts.
6.14. and. 20. sufficiently. As for the other two places, To. 12. use. 6.7.8.
and.1. Cor. 9. use. 16.17. I muse why you note them, they nothing at all
perteyning to the making of ministers: they something touch their office, and
yet not that directly. But you must be borne with, least you should have
seemed to your disciples to have said nothing.

Some of those ministers (you say) may tarry in their College, and lead the
lives of loytering losels as long as they live. If you knew any such loytering
losels in any College, I trust you would make them known to other also: If
you know none such, then are you a slaunderer of Colleges, and such as be
in them: It were to be wished in my opinion, that there were many preachers in
Colleges, of greater continuance than I know any. Then should not young,
factious, unruly, and indiscreet persons, so greatly trouble with their
contentions and sects, both universities, and the whole realm also.

I know no Bishops that give out Bulls, but if such preachers as remain in
Colleges, or elsewhere (being thereunto licenced by the Bishop, or other that
have authority) do take pains to preach where they see occasion, they are
greatly to be commended, and I pray God increase the number of such
Circumcetio^s. But since this your opinion has been broched, it has not only
driven many from the ministry, but also caused diverse to loyter and cease
from preaching: And certainly if it be not in time provided for, that one
branch of your doctrine will spoil this Church of England, both of preachers
and preachings.

The rest that you write in this part, I hope is more slanderously of you
spoken than truly, notwithstanding I think there has been some ouersighte
in some men, which I trust is and will be amended: if not, then I wish that
Cannon of the law to be put in practice, that such as admit them, should also
provide for them.

When you say that the Bishops of this Realm, reign and rule by the Canon
law, you forgette your self, you know it is otherwise. Their chief
authority, they have by Gods law, the rest by the laws of the Realm and of
the Prince: but these words are but words of course with you.

Admonition.
The seventeenth. We should be too long to tell your honors of Cathedral
Churches, the dens aforsayd of al loytering lubbers, where master Deane,
master Vicedeane, master Canons, or master Prebendaries the greater, master
Petie canons or Canons the lesser, master Chauncelor of the Church, master
Treasorer, otherwise called Judas the purse bearer, the chief Chaunter, Singing
men special favorers of religion, squeaking Queristers, Organ players,
Gospellers, Pistellers, Pentioners, Readers, Vergers. etc. live in great
idleness, and have their abiding. If you would know whence all these came,
we can easyly answer you, that they came from the Pope, as out of the Trojan
horses belly, to the destruction of Gods kingdom. The Church of God never
knew them, neither does any reformed church in the world know them.

Answer.
Here you speak both without the book of Common prayers and scriptures also,
for neither are cathedral churches contained in that book, neither have you
any scripture to prove that which you so impudently affirm.

God be thanked, it is well known to those that be not with malice blinded,
that Cathedral Churches be furnished with godly, zealous, and learned men. And
that they be the chief and principal ornaments of this Realm, and next to
the universities, chiefest mainteyners of godliness, religion, and learning:
there be some desire the spoil of them, whose instruments you be: But I hope
both their mouths, and yours also shall be first stopped with earth. Master
Deane, master vicedeane, master Ca^nons etc. as much as they loyter, may think
themselves fit to be compared with such as you are in any respects. The rest
of your railing words I leave to the Authoure.

You say all these come from the Pope etc. It is not material from whence they
come, so they be good, profitable, and necessary for the mainteyning of
religion, lerning, wise and learned men: But I pray you from what Pope came
they? or in what time did the Pope invent them? I told you before that such
places and Colleges were in Augustines time, and that he both has the name of
master Deane, and allows of his office. If you had read any aunciente
learned authors (as your writings declare you have not) then should you find
that Collegiate Churches be of great antiquity, even since the year of our
Lord.235. But what can you speak against Cathedral Churches, which you may
not as well speak against the Colleges in the universities? They were not in
the Apostles time neither yet in the primative Church: must they therefore now
be dissolved? your meaning is belike to bring al to confusion and barbarism.

You say no reformed church in the world knows them, wherein I think you
speak more than you know. Can you name any reformed Church that has plucked
them down? Peradventure in diverse places where the Gospel is now preached,
they had never such rewards for learning. But what have we to do in such
cases with other reformed Churches? we have to consider what is most meet for
this Church, and state: and not to follow other, as though we were children: I
see no cause why other reformed Churches should not rather follow us, than we
them, seeing in no respect we be inferior to them. Well, to conclude, your
words be but vain, and your proofs none at all: And therefore I doubt not
but Cathedral churches shall be able to withstand both your opprobrious
speeches, and the greediness of all their adversaries, so long as it shall
please God to bless this land with so virtuous and learned a Queen, and so
wise and discreet counselors.

Admonition.
The eighteenth. And birds of the same fether, are covetous patrones of
benefices, persons, vicars readers, parish preests, stipendaries, and riding
chaplains, that under the authority of their masters, spoil their flocks of
the food of their souls, Philip 2.21.
such seek not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, Iud. 12.
clouds that are without rain, trees without fruit, Math. 23.27.
painted sepulchers full of dead bones, fatted in all abundance of iniquity,
and lean locusts, in all feeling. knowledge and sincerity.

Answer.
It is true that covetous patrones of benefices be a great plage to this
church, and one of the principal causes of rude and ignorante ministers: God
grant some speedy reformation in that point.

Neither can I excuse al persons, vicars. etc. But all this is spoken without
the book, and therefore not fi^ly of you alleged against the book.

Admonition.
The nineteenth. What should we speak of the Archbishops Court, since all men
know it, and your wisdom can not but see what it is. To prove that the
regiment of the Church should be spiritual read
As all other Courts are subject to this, by the Popes prerogative, yea, and
by statute of this Realm yet unrepealed, so is it the filthy quauemire, and
poisoned plashe of all the abominations that do infecte the whole Realm. Ephe.
1.23. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. 1. Timo. 1.2. Hebr. 10.30.
We speak not of licenses granted out of this Court, to marry in forbidden
times, as in lent, in aduente, in the gang week, when banners and belles,
with the priest in his surplesse, singing Gospells and making crosses, raungeth
about in many places, upon the ember days, and to forbidden persons, and in
exempte places. We make no mention of licenses, to eat white meat, and flesh
in Lent, and that with a safe conscience, for rich men that can buy them with
money, nor we say nothing how dearly men pay for them. As for dispensations
with beneficed boys, tollerations for non reside^ts, bulls to have two
benefices, to have three, to have more, and as many as they lift or can get,
these are so common, that all Godly and good men are compelled with grief of
heart, to cry out upon such abominations. We omit excommunication for
money, absolution for the same, and that by absoluing one man for another,
which how contrary it is to the scriptures, the complaints of many learned men
by propositions in open schools proposed, by writings in printed books set
out, and by preaching in open pulpits, have been sufficiently witnessed. To
conclude, this filthy Court has full power, together with the authority of
this petty Pope, Metropolitan and primate of all England, to dispense in all
causes wherein the Pope was wont to dispense, under which are contained more
cases and causes, than we are able to reckon. As for my Lords grace of York,
we deal not with him. We refer him to that learned Epistle which Beza wrote
unto him about these matters.

Answer.
I think this Court to be necessary for the state of this Church and Realm:
and if there be abuses in it, either in the law it self, or in the persons, I
wish it were reformed. But the whole order of the Court is not therefore to be
condemned, no more than it is of other Courts, which cannot be missed, and yet
have abuses in them. I confess my self to have little experience in such
matters, and therefore I will speak the less thereof.

As I do mislike that there should be any time forbidden to marry in, (for
that can have no good meaning) or any dispensations for boys to keep
benefices, or excommunications and absolutions for money, or one man to be
absolved for another, and if there be any other such like abuse: so do I
utterly condemn your unseemly and unchristian terms, as filthy quauemire,
poisoned plashe of all abominations, filthy Court, especially considering
whereof they be spoken, to whom, and by whom: they argue a scolding nature,
and a stomach boiling with contempt of laws, and superiors. Neither can I
suffer you to slander, not that Court, but this Church with manifest
untruths, as you do, when you say that banners, bells, and making of crosses,
be allowed to be used in the gang week, and that the Archebishops Court has
full power to dispense in all causes, wherein the Pope was wont to dispe^ce:
which both be most untrue. I think in dispensations, this Court goes no
further than the laws of the Realm do permit.

Agreeable to this spirit is your contemptuous speech, used to both the
Archbishops, men to be reverenced, not only in the respect of their years,
and authority, but of their singular wisdom, gravity, learning, and sound
religion also. Howbeit you reverence them, as you do all other that be in
authority, except some, whom you do but seek to use, to bring your intents
to pass, I will say no more.

I think you have abused master Beza with your false reports, which has
caused him to write otherwise than he would do, if he knew the whole state of
the controversy: So you have also abused other notable learned men, and caused
them to write according to your fancy, which since that time (being truly
informed) have by their letters (which are to be seen) both condemned your
contentiousnesse, and their own to much credulity. But our faith and Church,
dependes neither upon Master Beza, nor any other man, neither do they look
for any such prerogative. But still you are without the book.

You bid us in the margent (to prove that the regiment of the Church should be
spiritual) read Ephe. 1. verse. 23. 1. Thessa. 5. verse. 13.1. Timo. 5. verse.
2. Hebr. 10. verse. 30.

In the place to the Ephe. the Apostle says that God has appointed Christ to
be the head of the Church, which is his body, even the fullness of him, that
fills all in all things. Here we learn that Christ is ye head of the church
But how proves this that the government of the church is only spiritual? will
you hereby take away civil magistrates, and other governors that God has
placed in his Church? It is subtly done of you, to quote the places only, and
not to apply them, nor to conclude of them: For surely if you had laid down
the words, and applied the^ to your purpose, not wise and learned only, but
very children would have laughed you to scorn.

In the.1. These. 5. The Apostle beseeches them to love such for their
works sake, as labor among them, are over them in the Lord, and admonish
them. What argument call you this? S. Paul moves the Thessalonians to love
their pastors, Ergo the government of the Church is only spiritual.

In the first Timothy. 5. verse. 2. he wills Timothy to exhort the elder
women as mothers, the younger as sisters, whereupon you conclude thus: elder
women must be exhorted as mothers, the younger as sisters, with all pureness.
Ergo the government of the Church must be spiritual.

In the.10. Hebr. verse. 30. it is thus written For we know him that has said,
vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense says the Lord, And again:
the Lord shall judge his people.

Uengeaunce belongs to God and he shall judge his people, Ergo the
gouernemente of the Church must be spiritual.

I am ashamed of these reasons, and so will you be likewise, if you be not past
shame. If you mean that the government of the Church is spiritual, because
God by his spirit, gifts, and ministry of his word does govern it, you say
truly, although these places be unaptly alleged: but if you mean, that
therefore there need no civil magistrates, no civil and politic laws, no
external discipline, no outward ceremonies and orders, you are greatly
deceived, and join with the Anabaptists, whose error in that point is
sufficiently by diverse learned men confuted. And therefore I will not as yet
intermeddle therewith, until I understand further of your meaning.

Admonition.
The twentieth. And as for the Commissaries Court, that is but a petty little
stinking ditch, that flows out of that former great puddle, robbing Christ's
Church of lawful pastors, of watchful seniors and elders, and careful
Deacons, in this Court as in the other, 1 Cor. 5.4.
one alone does excommunicate, one alone sits in judgment, and when he
will can draw back the judgment which he has pronounced having called
upon the name of God, and that for money, which is called by changing of
pennaunce. In this Court for non payment of two pens, a man shall be
excommunicated if he appear not when he is sent for, if he do not as his
ordinary would from whom he had his Popish induction and institution, and to
whom he has sworn canonicam obedientiam, canonical obedience if he learn
not his catechism like a good boy without book, when it were more meet he
should be able to teach others. To conclude: if he be not obediente to all
these Lord Bishops officers, by and by he must be cut of by excommunication,
and as it is lightly granted and given forth, so if the money be paid, and
the Court discharged, it is as quickly called in again. This Court poulleth
parishes, scourges the poor hedge preests, ladeth Church wardens with
manifest periuries, punishes whordoms and adulteries with toyish censures,
remitteth without satisfying the congregation, and that in secret places,
gives out dispensations for unlawful marriages, and commits a thousand
such like abominations. God deliver all Christians out of this Antichristian
tyranny, where the Judges, advocates, and proctours, for the most part are
Papists, and as for the scribes and notaries as greedy as cormorants, and if
they al should perhaps see this writing, they would be as angry as waspes, and
sting like hornets, three of them would be enough to sting a man to death, for
why? they are high Commissioners.

All this we say springs out of this Pontifical, which we must allow by
subscription, setting down our hands, that it is not repugnant or against the
word of God. We mean this Antichristian hierarchy and popish ordering of
ministers, strange from the word of God, and the use of all well reformed
Churches in the world.

Answer.
To this I answer as before, I will neither iustifye that which is amiss, nor
co^demn that which I know not: only this I say, that this taunting spirit of
yours seeks rather diffamation than reformation, utters spytefulnesse of
stomach, rather than godly zeal* for what a deriding of authority, and
disdain toward the same is this? three of them would be inowe to sting a man
to death, for why, they are high Commissioners. What example have you of any
godly man, that used thus to deride and floute magistrates?

You say, all this springs out of that po^tifical, which you must allow by
subscription. etc. But it had been well, if you had told us, out of what part of
that pontifical they spring, and how they be thereof gathered.

Of this Antichristian hierarchy and Popish ordering of ministers (as it
pleases you to say) I have spoken before sufficiently, and proved it neither
to be Antichristian nor Popish, but profitable and convenient, and both
according to the word of God, and use of ancient godly and well ordered
Churches: especially where the reformation is general, and in a kingdom. For
you must not look to have the same government of one whole kingdom, and of
one little village or city. In such matters you must have consideration to
the time, place, persons, and other such circumstances: The lack of this
discretion makes you wander you know not whither.

Admonition.
The one and twentieth. We have almost let pass one thing, worthy the
remembrance, which is, that they take upon them blasphemously, having
neither promise nor commandment, to say to their new creatures, receive the
holy ghost. As though the holy Ghost were in their power to give without
warraunt, at their own pleasure.

Answer.
I have answered to this before, and you have in the former treatise set it
down in the same words.

Admonition.
And thus much be spoken as touching this book, against which to stand, is
a wonder to two sorts of men, the one ignorant, the other obstinate. The Lord
give those that be his, understanding in all things, that they may have
judgment: as for the other, whom the God of this world has blinded, 2. Tim.
2.7. 2. Corin. 4.4.
least they Math. 13.15.
should see and confess the truth, and so be saved, and that do in the full
growth of wickedness, maliciously resist the truth, God confound them, that
his peace may be upon Israel, and his saving health upon this nation. Amen.

Answer.
Nay surely it is a wonder to wise, learned, and godly men, to see this book
so paynfully penned, with such advise perused, and by so long practice
allowed, now to be defaced, as it were with frivolous, unlearned and unapt
reasons, and that by four sorts of men, Atheistes, Papists, Anabaptists, and
(as you would be compted) Puritanes. God of his infinite mercy, give you
charitable, quiet, and thankful minds, and either convert your hearts, or
root all such disturbers out of this Church, that we may with one heart and
mind serve our Lord God.

The second article.
That the manner and order appointed by public authority about the
administration of the sacraments, and common prayers, and that the apparel by
sufficient authority appointed for the ministers within the Church of
England, be not wicked nor against the word of God, but tolerable, and being
commanded for order and obedience sake, are to be used.

Admonition.
For the order of administration of sacraments and common prayer enough is
said before, all the service and administration is tied to a surplesse, in
Cathedral churches they must have a Cope, they receive the communion kneeling,
they use not for the most part common bread, Act. 2.46. Act. 20.7.
according to the word of God and the statute, but starch bread according to
the Iniunction. They commonly minister the sacraments without preaching the
word.

Answer.
And I have before sufficiently answered to all that is here objected.

Admonition.
And as for the apparel, Apparel.
though we have been long borne in hand, and yet are, that it is for order and
decency commanded, yet we know and have proved that there is neither order
nor comlynesse, nor obedience in using it. There is no order in it but
confusion, no comlynesse, but deformity: no obedience, but disobedience both
against God and the Prince. We marvel that they could espy in their last
Synod, that a graye Amyse, which is but a garment of dignity, should be a
garmente (as they say) defiled with superstition, and yet that copes, caps,
surplesses, tippets, and such like baggage, the preaching signs of Popish
priesthood, the Popes creatures, kept in the same form to this end, to bring
dignity and reverence to the ministers and sacraments, should be retained
still, and not abolished. But they are as the garments of the idol, to which we
should say, auaunt, and get thee hence. Esaias. 30.22.
They are as the garments of Balaamites, of popish priests, enemies to God
and all christians. ^. These. 5.22.
They serve not to edificatio^, they have the show of evil (seeing the popish
priesthod is evil) they work discord, they hinder the preaching of the gospel,
they keep the memory of Egypt still amongst us, and put us in mind of that
abomination whereunto they in times past have served, they bring ye ministry
into contempt, they offend the weak, they encorage the obstinate.

Answer.
To all this also I have answered before, I mean to all the reasons here
alleged, as for bare words, they prevail with none, but such as have respect
to the persons and not to the matter: And therefore I omit these words of
pleasure, which you use, when you say, that in this apparel there is no order,
but confusion: no comeliness, but deformity: no obedience, but disobedience,
both against God and the Prince.

It is not every private man's part to define what is order and comeliness in
external matters being indifferent, but it is proper to the^ only, to who^
God has committed the government of his Church: whose orders and laws (not
being against the word of God) whosoever does disobey, disobeyeth both God
and the Prince: as you do in disobeying the Princes laws in these matters.

It is well that you seem to justify the gray Amyse, because the Bishops have
disalowed of it in their Synod: Truly this is your conscience and religion,
to be always ad oppositum, and to disallowe that which law and authority
allows, and allow that which they disallowe. The next way (as I think) to
drive you unto conformity in apparel, were to make a straight law, that no
man should wear such kind of apparel, because you love to be contrary to
laws and good orders.

But you say, they are as the garments of the Idol, to the which we should
say, auaunt and get thee hence, they are as the garments of Balaamites, of
Popish priests, enemies to God and all Christians. Be it so: so were all
things in Hierico accursed, and an abomination to the Lord, neither was it
lawful for the Israelites to touch any thing thereof: and yet was the gold
and the silver, and the brazen and iron vessels, carried into the treasure
house of the Lord, and consecrated unto him. Joshua. 6.

Gedeon was commanded to take and sacrifice that Ox of his fathers to God,
which his father had fed, and brought up to be sacrificed to Baall, yea and
to burn that ox with the self same wood, that was consecrated and dedicated
to the Idol Baal. Iudic. 6.

Our forefathers took the temples dedicated wholly to ydols, yea to devils, and
most abhominably defiled with devilish and abominable service, and turned them
into holy Churches, where Christ should be worshipped.

To be short, no devil, no idol, no Pope can so defile the nature or form
(not being contrary to the scriptures) of any of Gods creatures, that the
liberty of a Christian man should be taken away in using, or not using of them.

And I say again with master Bucer, that for any thing to be a note of
Antichrist, is not in the nature of any creature in it self, (for to that end
nothing was made of God) but it hangs altogether of consenting to
Antichrists religion, and the professing thereof: The which consent and
profession being changed into the consent and profession of Christianity,
there can stick in the things them selves no note or mark of Antichrists
religion. The use of belles was a mark of Antichristianitie in our Churches,
when the people by them were called to Masses, and when they were roong
against tempests, now they are a token of Christianity, when the people by
them are gathered together to the Gospel of Christ, and other holy actions.
etc. You say also, that they do not edify. If you say that they do not
edify of them selves, you say truly: for only the holy ghost on this sort does
edify, by the ministry of the word: But if you say, they edify not at all,
that is, that they do not tend to edifying, as other ceremonies and things
used in the church (as pulpit, church, kneeling, singing, and such like) which
be appointed for order and decency, do: then speak you that which you are not
able by sound arguments to justify. Peter Martyr in his Epistle written to
master Hooper, thinks that they do edify after a sort, as other ceremonies
do. And so does master Bucer also in his Epistle written to master Alasco.

Furthermore, that they do edify, it is manifest, first, because they are by a
lawful Magistrate, by lawful authority, for order and decency appointed in
the Church, without any manner of superstition, or suspicion of the same.

Secondly, because we are by due proof and experience taught, that such as
have worns this apparel, and do wear it, by the ministry of the word, have
greatly edified, and do daily.

Thirdly, because also by experience we daily understand, that such as
consent in wearing this apparel, consent also in all other points of
doctrine, and keep the peace of the Church, which is one of the principal
causes of edifying: contrariwise, such as refuse the same apparel, not only
dissente and disagree among them selves, but fall into diverse and strange
opinions, without stay: and slander the Gospel with their contentiousnesse,
and tear in pieces the Church of Christ with their factions and schisms: and
be the cause why both the word of God, and christian magistrates be almost
generally contemned.

I here omit that which I might as justly bring for this kind of apparel, as
you do for sitting at the communion: I mean a fit and profitable
signification, whereof master Martyr speaks in the Epistle before mentioned on
this sort: I will not here say, that they which stand to the defense of this
matter, may pretend some honest and just signification of the apparel, and
that not dissenting from the word of God, which is this: the ministers of the
Church (as the prophet Malachie witnesses) be angels and Gods messengers: but
angels for the most part appeared, being clothed in white garments. I pray you
how shall we debar the Church of this liberty, that it can not signify some
good thing in setting forth their rytes and ceremonies, especially being so
done, that no manner of Gods honor is attributed unto them, and that they be in
sight comely, and in number few, and that Christian people be not with them
ouerburdened, and matters of greater importance be omitted.

You add and say, that they have the show of evil, (seeing the Popish
priesthood is evil.)

When they were a sign and token of the Popish priesthood, then were they
evil, even as the thing was which they signified: but now they be the tokens
and the signs of the ministers of the word of God, which are good, and
therefore also they be good: no man in this Church of England is so
ignorante, but that he knows this apparel not to be now the signs of a
Massing priest, but of a lawful minister: wherefore it is a show of good:
even as it is in the like manner in the Uniuersities a show and sign of
degrees in learning, and therefore a show of good, except you will also
condemn degrees of learning. Neither is if any strange matter, for the self
same thing in others respects, and at diverse times, to be the sign both of
good and evil. The belles were a sign of evil, when they were roong to call
to Mass, and to stay storms and tempests, the self same belles are now a
sign of good, when they be roong to sermons and other godly actions. The
Churches them selves were a sign of evil, when Idolatry was committed in
them, and false doctrine preached: now they be a sign of good, when God is
rightly worshipped in them: and his word truly preached. Many such examples I
could bring, but a reasonable man can gather of these sufficiently to confute
your error. Furthermore when we be willed to abstain from all show of evil,
it is meant of evil life, and evil doctrine, least we do any thing with a
scrupulous conscience.

They work discord, they hinder the preaching of the Gospel.

This is an argument a non causa ad causam, it is not the apparel that works
discord, or hinders the preaching of the Gospel, no, no more than it is the
word of God that engenders heresies, or wine that makes drunk, or the
sword that murdreth, or the law that works injury. etc. But it is the
sinister affection, the rebellious nature, the contentious mind of man. For
who began this contention, or when was it begone? Truly if the law for
apparel were utterly abrogated, yet would not your contention cease, nay, it
would burst out much more vehamently, and in far greater matters, as this
your admonition declares. And therefore I think rather, that the law for
apparel, will stay further contentions, especially if it be duly executed.

They keep the memory of Egypt still amongst us, and put us in mind of
that abomination whereunto they in times past have served. No truly, no more
than does the Church, the Pulpit, the belles. etc. but they teach us the true
use of Christian liberty: and that all things be clean to those that be
clean. Finally, that godly men may well use that which wicked have abused,
howsoever ungodly.

They bring the ministry into contempt. Only with you, and such as you (by
your continual crying out against them) have deluded: contemners of good
orders, laws, and statutes, are to be severely punished for their contempt.
Good laws, orders, and statutes are not to be altered or dissolved, because by
such as forget their duties, they are contemned.

They offend the weak, and encourage the obstinate. Those that be offended
with the^, think them selves most strong, and glory therein with condemning of
others. The obstinate be encouraged through the schisms, and contentions, that
you trouble the Church, and slander the Gospel with: which one day you will
understand, if in time you do not repent.

Admonition.
Therefore can no authority by the word of God, with any pretense of order and
disobedience command them, nor make them in any wise tolerable, but by
circumstances they are wicked, and against the word of God.

Answer.
Now you come to the point where you would have it, it is the mark you shoot
at, to spoil the magistrate of all authority in things indifferent,
especially in ecclesiastical matters: But you set it down only without
proof: wherefore I will thus briefly answer to your bare words, (until you
bring some proof) that this your assertion is both Anabaptisticall, and
Papisticall, and contrary also to the word of God, and all learning.

Admonition.
If this be not plain enough by that which is already set forth, we mind
by Gods grace to make it playner, and should do it better, if it were as
lawful for us (as for our adversaries) to publishe our minds in print, then
should appear what slender stuff they bring that are so impudent by open
writing to defend it. And if it might please her Majesty, by the advice of
you right Honorable, in this high Court of Parliamente, to hear us by writing
or otherwise, to defend our selves, then (such is the equity of our cause)
that we would trust to find favor in her majesty's sight: then those patched
Pamphlets, made by soden vpstarts, and new conuertes, should appear in their
colors, and truth have the victory, and God the glory: if this can not be
obtained, we will by Gods grace address our selves to defend his truth by
suffering, and willingly lay our heads to the block. And this shall be our
peace, to have quiet consciences with our God, whom we will abide for, with all
patience, until he make our full deliverance.

Answer.
And I will not spare my labor, from time to time, to utter my mind, and
conscience in these matters: protesting, that if by learning you can persuade
me, I will say again with Augustine, Errare possum, haereticus esse nolo. All
the rest of your stout and suspicious bragges, of your indecent, and unseemly
words, I let pass, and leave them to be considered as notes of your spirit,
and modesty. The Queens majesty may assure her self, that she has of
learned men a number sufficient, able by learning to maynteine both her
authority, and laws which her Majesty has hitherto used and made, for the
furtheraunce of the Gospel, and maynteining of good order and peace in the
Church. The Lord of his infinite goodness long preserve her, and give us
thankful hearts to God for her.

The third article.
That the articles of Religion which only concern the true Christian faith,
and the doctrine of the Sacraments, comprised in a book imprinted: Articles,
whereupon it was agreed by both Archbyshops. etc. and every of them conteyne
true, and godly Christian doctrine.

Admonition.
Doctrine.
For the Articles concerning the substance of doctrine, The right government
of the church ^an not be separated from the doctrine. 1. Tim. 1.2
using a godly interpretation in a point or two, which are either too sparely,
or else too* darkly set down, we were and are ready, according to duty to
subscribe unto them. We would to God that as they hold the substance together
with us, and we with them, so they would not deny the effect and virtue
thereof: then should not our words and works be deuorced, but Christ
should be suffered to reign, a true ministry according to the word
instituted, discipline exercised, Sacraments purely and sincerely ministered:
this is that we strive for, and about which we have suffered, 1. Pet. 3.17.
not as evil doers, but for resisting popery, and refusing to be stoong with
the tail of Antichristian infection, ready 1. Pet. 3.15
to render a reason of our faith, to the stopping of all our enemies mouths:
We therefore for the Church of Gods sake, which ought to be most dear unto
you, beseech you for our Sovereigns sake, upon whom we pray that all Gods
blessing may be poured abundantly, we pray you to consider of these abuses, to
reform Gods Church according to your duties and callings: that as with one
mouth we confess one Christ, so with one consent this reign of Antichriste,
may be turned out headlong from amongst us, and Christ our Lord may reign
by his word over us. So your seats shall be established and settled in great
assurance, you shall not need to fear your enemies, for God will turn away
his threatened plagues from us, which he in mercy do for his Christ's sake.
Amen.

Answer.
It is very well that you so like of the Articles, but yet it pleases you not
to subscribe unto them: You say because of a point or two which are either
too sparely, or else to darkly set down: but in deed your meaning is, to
subscribe to nothing which by authority you are required to do, and that
argues an arrogante mind, and a disposition that loves always to be
singular.

You note in the margent, that the right government of the Church can never
be separated from the doctrine: But by your own confession we have the
doctrine, Ergo of necessity we also have the right gouernemente. Here in few
words you have cast down whatsoever you seemed before to buyld: so do
commonly unskillful buylders.

I would to God that for so much as contrary to your former assertion, you
now confess that we have the verity of doctrine, you could be content to
say, down great heart, and submit your selves to the Queens Majesty, and
her laws, according to your duty: then no doubt Christ should without
resistance, reign in this Church, and the fruits of the Gospel would much
more appear.

You brag much of your suffering. You are little beholden to your
neighbors, when you are thus constrained to praise your selves. But I pray you
whether does he persecute, that modestely and soberly defends the truth, or
he that unlawfully reuengeth himself withrayling and backbyting? you love very
well to have the world know how greatly you be persecuted. And therefore if
one of you here in Cambridge be punished but twenty pens for his open
contempt of statutes, to the which he is sworn, in post have it is carried
into al quarters, and especially to London, where great complaynte is made of
this grievous persecution: when as you and your disciples cease not (as I
said) most falsely and slanderously to report of such, as executyng good
laws, discharge their conscience to GOD, and their duty toward the Prince.

We therefore exhort you, if there be any fear of God before your eyes, any
reverence toward the Prince, any desire of promoting the Gospel, any loving
affection toward the Church of Christ, to submit your selves according to
your duties, to godly orders, to leave of contentiousnesse, to join with us
in preaching of the word of God, and beating down the kingdom of Antichrist,
that this your division procure not Gods wrath to be poured upon us.

Additions, detractions, and alterations in this second part of the Admonition.
Folio 1.
THere is added portuis: For where before they said, that our book of Common
prayers was culled and picked out of that popish dunghill the Masseboke, now
upon better aduisement, they say that it was culled out of the portuis and
massebooke. It derogated nothing from the book of Common prayers because some
thing therein is in the portuis and massebook, no more tha^ it derogateth from
the Scriptures, that some portion of them, as the whole Psalms, and certain
other portions of the Epistles, Gospels, and other Scripture, be in the same:
neither are they allowed because they be in the portuis and massebooke, but
because they be either scripture, or most agreeable thereunto.

They also add in ye first reason, that the coming of women in vailes to be
churched, is not commanded by law, but yet the abuse to be great, by reason
that superstition is grown thereby in the hearts of many, and other are judged
that use it not. This is an argument of their former rashness, but not worthy
any answer, especially being confessed to be without the book.

For the.120. psalm, is now quoted the.121. psalm, which I have also corrected
before.

Folio. 2.
For the.26. of Mat. is noted the.28. And this also I corrected in answering
that place.

For the first to Timo. 3. use. 3. now they have quoted 1. Ti. 3. use. 6.
against reading ministers: where S. Paul would not have a minister to be a
young scholar: but he speaks nothing against reading.

Where it was before and minister a sacrament, now is added, according to their
appoyntmente, to what purpose I know not.

It was before, reading is not feeding, now it is thus amended, for bare
reading of the word, and single service saying, is bare feeding: whereby they
now confess, that reading is feeding, although it be (as they say) but bare
feeding. We were in good case if the platform of our Church depended upon
these men, which alter their judgments so suddenly: It is a true saying,
Conueniet nulli, qui secum disside^ ipse, How can he agree with other, that
does not agree with himself?

There is also added in the same lease these words: are not the people well
nodified think you, when the homily of sweeping the church is read unto them?
Surely such slouting terms are used of none but of nodies in deed, and such
as are more meet to be fools in plays, where they may jest, than to be
platformers of Churches, in whom wisdom, learning, gravity and godliness is
to be required: I know no Homily entitled of sweeping the Church, one there
is of repairing and keeping clean of churches: whether it edify or no, I
refer to the wise and discrete reader to judge, when he has perused it.

Fol. 3.
Before it was in the second reason, for the very name Apocrypha testifies
that they ought rather to be kept close tha^ to be uttered: Now it is, for the
very name Apocrypha testifies that they were read in secret, and not openly:
This is some correction of their former rashness. But of this matter that is,
of reading Homilies in the Church, I have spoken before.

I omit.2. Timothy. 3. verse.6. which is now verse.16. and.2. Peter. 1.
verse.20. which is now verse.19.20.21. For these be not matters of any great
importance, and they be quoted to prove a matter not doubted of among us.

In the former edition, and fourth reason, it is thus written: In this book
we are enjoined to receive the Communion kneeling, which beside that it has
in it a show of papistrie, does not so well express the mystery of this
holy supper. For as in the old Testament eating the Paschall Lamb standing,
signified a readiness to pass: even so in receiving it now sitting,
according to the example of Christ, we signify a rest, that is, a full
finishing thorough Christ, of all the ceremonial law, and a perfect work of
redemption wrought that gives rest for ever, and so we avoid also the danger
of Idolatry.

In the second Edition these words be thus altered: In this book we are
enjoined to receive the Communion kneeling, which beside that it has in it a
show of popish Idolatry, does not so well express a supper, neither agrees
it so well with the institution of Christ, as sitting does: not that we make
sitting a thing of necessity belonging unto the Sacrament, neither affirm we
that it may not be received otherwise, but that it is more near the
institution, and also a mean to avoid the danger of Idolatry. Here is the
signification of sitting (which they before made) clean dashed out, as a
thing unadvisedly before put in. It is also here granted that the Communion
may be received otherwise than sitting, with other circumstances, whereof they
have now better considered. Surely this is a great alteration upon such a
sodeine: And I would hardly have been persuaded that these men would so sone
have discredited themselves by their inconstancy. But peradventure the self
same had not the correction of the book which were the first penners of it,
and therefore how they will like of this correction, it may be doubted. But
although the words in the text be altered, yet ye quotations in the margent
remain still: Belike they are to be applied as it pleases ye platformers.

In the same leaf and fifth reason, to these words: Besides that we never
read in the new Testamente that this word Priest as touching office is used in
the good part: In the second editio^ is added, except it speak of the
Leuiticall priesthood or of the priesthood of Christ. Here as I think they
have forgotten that which Peter speaks to all Christians, in his 1. epistle
cap. 2. ver. 5. And ye as liuelye stones be made a spiritual house, and holy
preesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
And verse. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood. etc. And
Apoca. 1. And made us kings and priests unto God. etc. I willed them before
to show me one place in the whole new Testament where this word. Priest, as
touching the office, is taken in evil part: I may be deceived, but I desire
to learn.

Fol. 4.
All this is added in the seventh reason: But some will say that the baptism
of women is not commanded by law, if it be not, why do you suffer it, and
wherefore are the children so baptized accordingly? common experience teaches
that it is used almost in all places, and few speak against it: and this I am
sure of, that when it was put in the book, that was the meaning of the most
part, that were the^ present, and so it was to be understand, as common
practice without co^trolement does plainly declare. All these be but
conjectures. Diverse things he suffered and in many places used without
controlement, which notwithstanding by no law be commanded. What the meaning
was of those that penned the book, I know not, neither as I think do you. And
surely for common practice I can say little, but for mine own experience this
I dare affirm, that I have not known one child so baptized in places where I
have had to do, no not since ye beginning of the Queen's Majesty's reign. I
speak not of the thing it self, but only of your conjectures: I think if
the circumstances of ye book be well considered, it will appear yt the
meaning is, that private baptism is rather to be ministered by some minister
(which in ye time of necessity may soonest be come by) than by any woman. But
in this point I submit my judgment to such as better know the meaning of the
book (being penners thereof) than I do.

In the same leaf and nynth reason speaking of certain things used about
marriage, they add these words: With diverse other heathenishe toys, in
sundry cuntryes, as carrying of wheat sheafes on their heads, and casting of
corn, with a number of such like, whereby they make rather a maygame of
marriage, than a holy institution of God. These be but toys in deed, used I
know not where, not contained in any part of ye book of common prayers, and
therefore without my compass of defense. They lack matter when they stuff
their book with such vain and frivolous trifles.

Fol. 5.
In the 10. reason to these words, (as for confirmation: is added, which the
papists and our men say was in times past Apostolical, grounding their
opinion perhaps upon some dream of Hierome: And in the same place these
words be left out: We speak not of other toys used in it, and how far it
differs, and is degenerated from the first institution, they them selves that
are learned can witness: And in the place hereof this is inserted, as though
baptism were not already perfect, but needed confirmation, or as though the
Bishop could give the holy ghost. You your self in effect have confessed in
your first edition that confirmation of children is very ancient, and that it
has been well instituted, for there you say that now it differs and is
degenerat from the first institution: But upon better aduisement you have left
out these words in your second edition: as you have also left out these, with
other toys used in it, whereby you confess (contrary to your former
sentence) that the confirmation of children now used is without any toys.
Howsoever it pleases you to account Hieromes judgment (touching the
antiquitis of confirmation) a dream: yet his dream may be of as much credit
with wise men, as your bare denial of the same.

The words that you have added in the second place might well have been
spared: for you know that confirmation now used in this Church is not to make
baptism perfect, but partly to try how the Godfathers and Godmothers have
performed that which was enjoined them when the children were baptized: partly
that the children themselves (now being at the years of discretion, and
having learned what their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them in
baptism) may with their own mouth and with their own consent openly before
the Church ratify and confirm the same, and also promise that by the grace
of God they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to observe and keep
such things as they by their own mouth and confession have assented unto. And
this reason is alleged among other even in the book of Common prayers. And
that it is not to make baptism perfect, the book of common prayers it self
declares in these words: And that no man shall think any detriment shall come
to children by deferring of their confirmation, he shall know for truth that it
is certain by Gods word that children being baptized, have all things
necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.

You add, as though the Bishop could give the holy Ghost: the Bishop may use
the ceremony used by the Apostles, that is, imposition of hands, and may
safely say this godly prayer contained in the book: Defend O Lord this child
with thy heavenly grace that he may continue thine for ever, and daily
increase in thy holy spirit, more and more, until he come unto thy
everlasting kingdom. Amen. And other such godly prayers there contained. Of any
other kind of giving the holy ghost, there is no mention in that book, and
therefore these additions might very well have been left out of your libell. But
of the Bishops benedictio^ by laying on of his hands, hear Master Caluines
judgment in his Instit. cap. 19. secti. 4. Talem manuum impositionem quae
simpliciter loco benedictionis fiat, lando, et restitutam hodie in purum vsum
vilim. Such imposition of hands as is simply made in the stead of blessing,
I do commend, and vvish that it were restored at this day to the pure use.
There shall you also read the very self same for me and manner of confirmation
allowed, which is now used in this Church of England.

To the end of the eleventh reason, these words be added, and open our eyes
that we may see what that good and acceptable will of God is, and be more
earnest to provoke his glory: to the which I only answer Amen.

In the end of the twelfth, there is something left out which they have placed
in the 13. reason: but it is answered before.

Fol. 6.
There is nothing added or altered worth the noting: only in the fiftenth
reason, where they said before that we honored Bishops by the titles of
Kings: now they have recanted that, and condemned themselves of an untruth,
for they have left out that title.

In the end of that fifteenth article or reason, this is added: and which of
them have not preached against the Popes two swords: now whether they use them
not themselves? Touching the Popes two swords, we are of the same mind still,
for the Pope contrary to the word of God takes from Princes unto him self
that authority which is due unto them by the word of God, and would have
them to receive that authority from him which he has no power to give: the
Pope also requires the full authority of a civil magistrate, and exempteth
him self from all subjection, which is flat contrary to the word of God: our
Bishops in this Church do not challenge as of their own right any such civil
authority, but only according to their duty execute that, that by the Prince,
and laws of this Realm, for just considerations is laid upon them. Neither
do they meddle in all civil causes, or exercise all civil jurisdiction, but
such only as helps to discipline and to the good government of this church
and state: Wherefore we may safely preach against the Popes two swords, and
yet lawfully defend that jurisdiction and authority that any bishop has in
this Church, for any thing that I know.

Fol. 7.
Whereas before it was thus in the margent, and. 19. reason, to prove that the
regiment of the church should be spiritual read Ephesians. 1.23. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.1.
Ti. 5.2. Heb. 10.30. now it is thus altered: to prove that ye regiment of the
church should be spiritual, read Calvin in his commentaries upon these
places. Ephesians. 1.23. 1. These. 5. 13.1. Ti. 5.2. Heb. 10.30. Belike because the
scriptures themselves do not sufficiently prove your assertion, therefore you
would have us to leave them, and to reast upon Caluines interpretation, which
is nothing else but to prefer man's judgment before the word of god, or to give
master Calvin authority to conclude that which is not determined by the
scripture: If this be not your meaning, why fly you from those places
themselves to master Caluines interpretation upon them? But what if you now
abuse master Caluines commentaries upon these places, as you did before the
places themselves? In his commentaries upon Ephe. 1. use. 23. This is all that
he says touching this matter. Nam vtcunque Christus omnia perficiat, nutu,
virtuteque sua: tame^ specialiter loquitur hic Paulus, de spirituali ecclesiae
gubernatione. Quanquam nihil interea impedit quo minus de universally mundi
gubernatione accipias. For howsoever Christ makes perfect all things with his
beck, and by his power, yet Paul speaks here especially of the spiritual
government of the church. Although that in the mean time it is no hinderance,
why thou may not also understand it of the universal government of the
world. These words serve little for your purpose. There is no man that doubts
but that Christ does spiritually govern his Church, and reign in the hearts
of the faithful by his sprite: But your meaning is, that the government of
the Church is only spiritual, which you can no more gather of these words of
Calvin, than you may that the gouernemente of the whole world ought only to be
spiritual.

The same Calvin writing upon.1. Thessa. 5 verse. 12. for the which you have
noted the.13. says on this sort: Hoc additum videtur, ad notandum spirituale
regimen, tametsi enim Reges quoque and magistratus Dei ordinatione prosunt,
quia tamen ecclesiae gubernationem dominus peculiariter vult suam agnosci, ideo
nominatim praeesse in Domino dicuntur, qui Christi nomine and mandato ecclesiam
gubernant. This seems to be added to note the spiritual regiment. For
although kings also and Magistrates do govern by the ordinance of God, yet
because the Lord would have the gouernemente of the Church known peculierly
to be his, therefore namely they are said to rule in the Lord, which govern
the Church in the name of Christ and by his commandment. Hitherto Calvin
also affirms that which no man denies, that God does by the ministry of
his word, spiritually govern his Church: But this takes not away the civil
Magistrate, neither yet civil laws made by the Magistrate externally also to
govern the Church. In his Commentaries. 1. Ti. 5. verse. 2. he speaks not
one word of this matter for any thing that I can perceive. Upon the place to
the Hebrews, he only shows that God does govern his Church: the which I
think no man is so wicked as to deny. You must more plainly set it down
what your meaning in this matter is, before you can be fully answered. For to
prove that God does spiritually govern his Church, is needless, being
denied of none, either Papiste, or Protestant: but thereuppon to conclude that
the civil magistrate is secluded from the government of the Church, or that
there needs no external regiment, is dangerous, and sauoreth Anabaptisme.

In the same leaf and.19. reason these words be left out, ba^ners and
belles: which argues that they were before untruly said to be used in gang
week: But to lie, is a small matter with these men.

Fol. 8.
For Lords grace of York: there is, the Archbishop of York. The cause of
this alteration I know not.

In the margent over against the 21. reason, there is this note: It conteyneth
manifest blasphemy as may appear, E^^e. 1.17. meaning this saying of the
Bishop to those that are admitted ministers: Receive the holy Ghost: The place
in that Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians proves no such thing, these
be the words: I cease not to give thanks for you making mention of you in my
prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory, might
give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation thorough the knowledge
of him. What sequel is there in this argument? Saint Paul prayed that God
would give to the Ephesians the spirit of wisdom and revelation thorough the
knowledge of him: Ergo this saying of the Bishop, (Receive the holy Ghost) to
those that are admitted into the ministry, conteyneth manifest blasphemy.
Such is your usual manner of reasoning.

Fol. 9. and second article.
All this is added: Neither is the controversy betwixt them and us as they
would bear the world in hand: as for a cap, a tippet, or a surplesse, but
for greater matters concerning a true ministry and regiment of the Church
according to the word. Which things once established the other melte away of
them selves: and yet consider I pray you whether their own argument does not
choke themselves, for even the very name of triftes does plainly declare that
they ought not to be mainteyned in Christ's church: and what shall our Bishops
win by it? Forsooth that they be mainteyners of triftes and trifling Bishops,
consuming the greatest part of their time in those trifles, whereas they
should be better occupied. We strive for true religion and government of the
Church, and show you the right way to throw out Antichrist both head and
tail, and that we will not so much as communicate with the tail of the beast:
But they after they have thrust out Antichriste by the head, go about to pull
him in again by the tail, cunningly coulouring it, least any manne should
espy his foot steps, as Cacus did when he stole the oxen.

What other men have done, I know not, but for my part, I always suspected
and partly knew, that some of you had greater matters in hand, and of more
importance than cappe, tippet, and surplesse, which surely was one of the
first causes that moved me to be more earnest against you, than I was
accustomed: For I did understand that you were hatching opinions tending not
only to Anabaptisme, but to the overthrow of the Gospel, and disturbing the
quiet state of this Church: And yet who knows not that you have made the
cap, and Surplesse your pretense hitherto, until now of late when you see
almost all men condemn your folly.

You say, we choke our selves with our own argument, for even the very name
of trifles does plainly declare, that they ought not to be maynteyned in
Christ's Church. Surely of them selves they be but trifles, as all other
external ceremonies and indifferent things be: It is the circumstaunces that
makes them no trifles, but matters of weight: For things indifferent being
commanded thus or so to be used by the Magistrate (not as necessary to
salvation and justification, but as convenient and necessary for order and
decency) be not now trifles: And who soever without a lawful vrgente cause,
or in a case of necessity, does break ye law made of the^, shows himself
a disordered person, disobediente, a contemner of lawful authority, and a
wounder of his weak brothers conscience. And if any man shall say, that this
is to bring us again in bondage of the law, and to deprive us of our
liberty: I answer, no, for it is not a matter of Justification, but of order:
And to be under a law, is no taking away of Christian liberty, for the
Christian liberty is not a license to do what thou list, but to serve God in
newness of mind, and that for love, not for servile fear. Of them selves
therefore they us but trifles, but being commanded by the Magistrate to be
used, or not to be used, they are no trifles, no more than it was for women to
come into the Church bareheaded, or a man to pray, having his cappe on his
head, after that Saint Paul had made an order to the contrary. And therefore
these scoffs and stoutes (and what shall out Bishops win by it? forsooth
that they be maynteyners of trifles, and tri^ling Bishops, consuming the
greatest part of their time in these trifles, where as they should be better
occupied) might with more commendation of your modesty have been well
forborne. They see your doings tend not only to contention, but to confusion:
not only to disobedience toward the laws of the Prince, but also to
dangerous errors, yea to the overthrow of religion, and therefore they are
neither maynteyners of tryfles, nor trifling Bishops, but wise, discreet,
vigilant and learned fathers, which seek to maintain peace, preserve good
order, defend the authority of lawful laws, and in time suppress erroneous
doctrine. You rather spend the time in trifles, when you might be better
occupied, for you (omitting al other necessary points of doctrine, and
profitable exhortations to good life) stuff your sermons, and furnishe your
table talk with nothing else, but with bitter inuectiues against those rytes,
as though they were matters of damnation, and against those learned and
discreet ministers of the word, who (according to their duty, using of them)
seek in deed to beat down Antichriste, to plant necessary points of
religion in men's hearts, and to teach repentance with newness of life,
which your unfruitful, froward, and co^tentious dealing, rejoices the Papist,
discrediteth the sound and learned preacher, offends the godly, wou^deth the
weak, works contempt of Magistrates and superiors in the hearts of the
hearers, destroys that which other men build, and finally does good to none.
For what fruit can there come to ye hearers by inueying continually against
cappe, tippet, surplesse, ring in marriage, women's white kerchers, bagpypes,
funeral sermons, mourning apparel. etc. Bishops, Preachers, Magistrates,
Prince? These and such like, be only the common places, you entreat of.

When you say, that you strive for true Religion and gouernemente of the
Church. etc. You say* that you do that* which is to be wyshed you should
do: But your doings tend to the defacing of true Religion, and overthrow of
the right government of the Church, and although you be not the head of
Antichrist, yet are you his tail: For the tail of the beast, (as learned me^
say) be false prophets, hypocrites, such as stir up schisms and factions
among true Christians, and by pretense of zeal, by cloked and colored
means, seek to draw into the Church Antichrist backward, as Cacus did the
oxen into his den.

FOr as much as the Authors of the Admonition, for their better credit, have
set down in print, the Epistles of master Beza, and master Gualter: so I have
thought good to set down an Epistle of master Gualter, reuoking the same, upon
better information: also, an other, of master Bullinger, concerning the same
cause.

A Letter of master Gualter, written of late to the R. Reverend father in
Christ, the bishop of Ely.
S. ACCEPI (Reverend in Christo pater) litteras tuas, quibus ad eas respondes,
quas ego ante sexennium, anno nimirum. 1566. ad D. Parkhurstum amicum veterem
dedera^. Vt autem ego vehementia quadam in scribendo vsus fui, ita tu quoque
mea non minus grauiter diluis. Sed liberate tua adeo me non offendi scias, vt
potius summi beneficij loco ducam tuam illam admonitionem, sieve, correptionem
malis dicere. Na^ ex ea amari me abs te intelligo, quem ego prius, licet facie
ignotum, venerari solebam, propter pietatis ac eruditionis testimonium, quod
piae memoriae vir, Petrus Martyr, tibi saepius apud me tulit, et cuius
argumentum euidens nunc in tuis literis conspicio. Pietatis enim esse scio
causam publicam contra quosuis tueri, amoris autem indiciu^ est libera
admonitio, qua fratris ab alijs decepti error arguitur, vt rectius sentire
discat. Quod vtrumque cum tu non minus erudite, quam vere facias, tuam pietatem
merito exosculor, and spero offensionem istam quae inter nos exorta fuit,
amicitiae indissolubilis nobis causam fore. De tua enim humanitate mihi
polliceor, quod culpam hanc mihi facile condonatura sit, si quo tempore, and
quibus de causis, and ad quem ista scripserim, consideret. Fuit tempus illud
exulceratissimum, and diuersae in singulos fere dies ad nos literae
perferebantur, cum infoelix illa de vestibus controuersia apud vos ageretur.
Monuimus iunt aduersarios vestros, ne propter rem nullius momentilites mouerent
in ecclesia, and putabamus rem been esse sopitam. Sed ecce praeter omnem
expectationem, Geneua adueniunt Angli duo, qui a D. Beza, cuius aures
criminibus and calumnijs oppleuerant, litteras afferunt piae quaerimoniae
plenas, quibus v^ rebus Angliae afflictissimis opem ferremus rogabat, and vt
ego ad vos profectionem instituerem hortabatur. Accessit duorum istorum
relatio, qui eadem nobis narrabant, quae prius Geneue nin^ profuderant, idque
tanta cum confidentia, and pietatis simulatione, vt scripto quoque consignatos
exhiberent errores, and abusus multos, atque nimium superstitiosos, quosiam in
Anglia defendi dicebant, and ab Ecclesiae ministerio deijci cos omnes qui illis
consentire nollent. Addebant hoc ipsis acerbissimum accedere, quod plerique
Episcoporum se executores praeberent coru^, quae in A^la ab hominibus
superstitioni, and ambitioni deditis indies conderentur. Quis vero aliquos tam
impudentos esse suspicaretur, qui tanta cum fiducia auderent mentiri in causa
publica, cuius cognitio non poterat diu latere? Nos certe istorum narratio
vehementer perturbauit, and fateor me extempore epistolium illud effudisse, and
ad D. Parkhurstum, quocu^ mihi licere putabam liberius agere, propter vetere^
amicitia^, quae ante annos triginta quinque Oxonij, in^hoata postea domi meae,
quatuor annoru^ hospitio ita confirmatae fu^t, vt and illi in me ius esse
velim, and vicissim mihi de illo quiduis polliceatur. Nihil minus mihi in
mentem veniebat, quam vt meas literas ille latius spargere^. Nam ipsius potius
sententiam audire cupiebam, qui tamen de hac causa nihil vnquam scripsit. Quod
me non multum mouebat, eo quod non multum post D. Abelus, vir optimus and
amicus communis noster, de hac re ad nos scriberet, vosque omnes hac culpa
liberaret. Nihil ergo porro solicitus eram de meis illis literis, quas soli
Parkhursto meo scrip^eram, de cuius in me studio dubitare, neque possum, neque
debeo. At quia eas latius sparsas fuisse nunc demum inte^^igo, id certe mihi
vehementer dole^, and tuae amplitudini (mi pater reverend) me gratias ingentes
debere fateor, qui vel sero tandem de eo me feceris certiorem. Et quia te de
animi mei candore and affectu syncero non dubiture scribis, tuam humanitatem
rogo reuerenter, vt me apud alios etiam excuset, ad quorum manus mea illa
Epistola peruenit. Nobis certe ab eo tempore cum vanis istis rixatoribus nihil
res fuit, qui neque ad nos vnquam scripserunt, neque aliquid a nobis profectum
iacture poterunt. Nam non multo post euidentius apparuit quid molirentur,
quando in Palatinatu sub disciplinae ecclesiastica praetextu, cuius illi caput
and summam in excommunicatione constituunt, mutationis primi author^ fuerunt,
quae Ecclesias illas vehementer concussit. Rurfus ergo tuam amplitudinem rog^
reverend in Christo pater, ne de Gualtero, Anglici nominis studiosissimo,
aliquid finistrum suspiceris. Faxo enim, sic volente deo, vt publicum quoque
extet meae de vobis omnibus qui illic Christo seruitis existimationis
testimonium. Et sane nisi de nostro consensu mihi nihil non pollicerer, nunquam
certe filiu^ meum, qui mihi vnicus est ex Zuinglia mea, cuius defunctae memoria
mihi praetiosissima est, in Angliam misissem. Quem si tuae amplitudini a me
hucusque commendat^m esse miraris, non alia de causa id abs me neglectum
putabis, quam quod nullum ante hac inter nos fuit literarum commertium, me vero
puderet, tibi tanto viro and mihi non nisi ex nomine noto priuatam ob causam
aliquid negotij exhibere. Quae apud nos ferunter, ex domino Sando Londinensi
Episcopo rescire poteris, eadem hic repetere propter nuntij qui mihi praeter
expectationem obtigit festinationem, non licet. Christus Jesus tuam
amplitudinem seruet, suoque spiritu regat. Amen. Tiguri. 9. Iunij. Anno. 1572.

Amplitudinis tuae obseruantissimus. RODOLPHVS GVALTERVS.

The same in English.
S. I have received your letters (Reverend father in Christ) wherein you do
answer unto those, which I sent unto mine old friend, D. Parkhurst, above
six years since, even in the year. 1566. And as I used a certain kind of
vehemency, so do you also with no less gravity, put away my assertions.
But assure your self; that I am so far off from being offended with this
your liberty, that I rather esteem of that your admonition or reprehension
(if it please you so to term it) as of an especial and singular benefit. For
by it I perceive that I am beloved of you, whom before (although by face
unknown) I was wont to reverence, for the testimony of godliness and
learning, which Peter Martyr ( a man of godly memory) did oftentimes give of
you unto me, and vvherof I now see an evident proof in these your letters.
For I know, that to defend the common cause against any man, is a point of
piety: but a free admonition, vvherby the error of thy brother (being
deceived by other men) is reproved, to the intent that he might learn to
judge better, is as a token of love. Both the which, seeing that you have no
less learnedly, than truly performed, I have just cause to embrace your
holiness, trusting, that this displeasure which has arisen betvvixte us,
shall be a cause of perpetual amity. For thus much I dare presume of your
courtesy, that I shall easily obtain pardon for this offense, if you would
but consider at what time, upon what occasion, and unto whom I vvrote these
things. The time was most corrupt and troublesome, and diverse letters were
brought unto us every day, when that unhappy controversy about apparel was
broched amongst you. We then admonished your adversaries, that they should not
move any contention in the Church, for a matter of so small importance: and we
thought the matter had been vvelnigh buried. But behold, contrary to all men's
expectation, there comes two English men from Geneua, who brings from
master Beza, (whose ears they had before filled with crimes and forged
accusations) letters full of godly complaynts, vvherin he desired that we
would help the most afflicted state of England, and cou^celled me, to make a
journey unto you. Hereunto was adjoined the report of those two, who
declared unto us the same things, which before they had vttred at Geneua, and
that with so great confidence, and show of holiness, that they set down in
vvriting errors, and many superstitious abuses, which they said were now
defended in England, and that al those were put from the ministry of the
church, which would not consent thereunto. They said moreover, that this was
their greatest greese, that many of the Bishops shevved them selves to be the
executors of those things, which were daily coined of superstitious and
ambitious Courtiers. But who (I pray you) would suspecte, that any would so
boldly make a lie in a common cause, the knowledge vvherof could not long be
hid? surely their talk moved us very much, and I confess I vvrote that
Epistle upon a soden unto. D.P. with vvho^ I thought I might be bold, for the
old friendship, which being begone at Oxeforde, above.35. years ago, has
been so confirmed since, by his soiorning at my house the space of four years,
that both I am vvilling to be at his commandment, and again also may assure
my self of his good will, in any respect. Notvvithsta^ding, I thought nothing
less, than that he would publish my letters abroad, for I only desired to
hear his advise: who (for all that) never vvrote of this matter: which thing
moved me not much, because a singular honest man, and our common friend, D.A.
vvrote thereof unto us, and delivered you all from blame. Therefore I took no
care at all for those my letters, which I had vvritte^ only unto my P. of
whose good will, I neither can nor ought to doubt. But surely I am very sorry,
since I understand now, that they have been farther published: and I think my
self bound to give your honor great thanks (Reverend father) for that at the
length (though somevvhat late) you have advertised me thereof. And forsomuche as
you write, that you have no doubt of the simplicity of my mind, and sincere
affection, I humbly beseech your gentleness, to make my excuse unto others,
also to whose hands, that my Epistle has come. Verily since that time, we
have had nothing to do with those vain bravvlers, who neither have written
to us at any time, neither yet can brag of any thing that has come from us.
For not long after, it more plainly appeared what they vve^t about, when as
under the pretense of Ecclesiastical discipline (the head and chiefest point
vvherof they would have to consist in excommunication) they were the chief
authors of an alteration within the seigniorie of the county Palatine, which
maruellously troubled and disquieted those Churches. Wherefore once again
(Reverend father in Christ) I beseech your honor, that you would not
conceive any sinister opinion of Gualter, who bears a singular affection to
the English nation: for (God vvilling) I will set forth a public
testimony, how much I esteem of you al, which serve Christ in that place:
and certainly I would never have sent my son into England, whom only I
have of my wife Zvvinglia (the memory of whose death is most leefe and dear
to me) except I had thoroughly persuaded my self of our consent and agreement.
If you marvel that I have not hitherto written to your honor in his behalf,
you shall understand, that I have neglected it, for no other cause, tha^ this,
that before this time, there has been no intercourse of letters betwixt us,
and I should have been ashamed to trouble you, so worthy a man, and altogether
(except by name only) unto me unknown, for a private matter. You may
understand by D.S. Bishop of L. all our affairs in these quarters, which I
could not here repeat, for the have of the messanger, which happened to me
unlooked for. Christ Jesus preserve and guide your honor with his spirit.
Amen. From Tigure, the.9. of June. 1572.

Your Honors most ready at commandment, Rodolph Gualter.

Ex Epistola Hen. Bullingeri, ad Robertum Episcopum Winton. 12. Marcy. 1572.
IN primis, vero gratulamur vobis admirandam illam serenissimae Reginae vestrae
felicitatem in turbi^ componendis, in hostibus profligandis, in subditis in
officio retinendis, and in practicis nequiter a per duellibus contextis
sapienter and fortiter defendendis. Dominum oramus sedulo vt amplissima in ipsa
dona, non tam seruet quam amplificet, eamque ab omni malo protegat. Superat
haec virgo deo dilectu (omnium testimony) bonorum omnes quotquot nunc regnant
reges mares per orbem, sapientia, modestia, clementia, and tum etiam iustitia,
rerumque gerendarum dexteritate and admiranda felicitate, vnde sane pij omnes
per vniuersa regna sese consolantur, and in vera religione confirmant, quod
perspicue cernunt Christum Dominum cultrici suae adesse tam potenter, ipsamque
gloria and omnigenis virtutibus Heroicis, diuinisque anteferre prindipibus.
Dolet autem nobis non mediocriter, quod in propaganda veritate, inque
dilatandis Ecclesiae Christi pomerijs; tot vobis se obijciunt obstacula atque
remorae, ab illis quoque exortae, qui maxim Euangelici volunt videri. Verum
per initia reformationis Ecclesiae nostrae, eadem nos exercuit molestia. Erant
enim quibus nihil in reformando satis purum videbatur, vnde and ab Ecclesia
sese segregabant, and conuenticula peculiaria constituehant, quae mox
consequibantur schismata and sectae variae, quae iucnudum spectaculum
exhibebant hostibus nostris papistiois. Sed innotuit tandem ipsorum Hypocrisis
and ataxta, suaque sponte diffluxere. Liberabit hac molestia and vos haud dubie
clemens, and misericors Dominus. etc.

The same in English.
FIrst of all, we rejoice with you for the wonderful felicity of your most
gracious Queen, in quieting of troubles, in overthrowing of her enemies, in
keeping of her subjects in obedience, and for her wise and courageous sifting
out of the mischeeuously vvrapped practizes of traitors. And we do earnestly
pray unto God, that he will not only continue these so great graces in her, but
also increase them, and that he will defend her from all evil. This virgin
Prince, beloved of God, in the judgment of all good men, excels all the men
Princes that now reign in the world, in wisdom, in modesty, in mercy,
in justice, in dexterity, and marvelous happiness in all her affairs, so
that undoubtedly, the godly of al nations do comfort them selves, and are
confirmed in the true religion, for that they do evidently see Christ the
Lord so mightily to favor his servant, and to preserve her in glory, and all
manner virtue, before Heroical and divine Princes. But we are not a little
sorry, that in your spreading of the truth, and enlarging of the limittes of
Christ's church, so many stops and stays are cast against you, and they
springing from them that will seem most Evangelical. For in the beginning
of the reformation of our Church, the same grieves occupied us, for there
were some, unto whom in reforming, nothing might seem sufficiently pure, in
so much that they separated them selves from the church, and appointed
private conuenticles, the which, there did presently follovv schisms, and
diverse sects, and they were a pleasant spectacle to our enemies, the
Papists. But at the length their hypocrisy and disorder did appear, and they
vanished of their own accord. The merciful and gracious Lord shall deliver
you also, no doubt, from this trouble. etc.

A brief answer to certain Pamphlets spread abroad of late.
I HAVE of late received three little Pamphlets, the first as it were a preface
to the other two, the second entitled, An exhortation to the Bishops to deal
brotherly with their brethren: The third, An exhortation to the Bishops and
their clergy, to answer a little Book that came forth the last Parliament,
and to other brethren to judge of it by Gods word, until they see it
answered, and not be carried away with any respect of men.

The Preface consists of these points especially: first by diverse examples it
is there declared, that the wicked and ungodly of this world, could never away
with such as would reprove them for their manifest sins and ungodliness.

Secondly, that this is the cause why these two Treatises which were lately
written and imprinted in the last Parliament time. etc. were of so many
mysliked, and the authors thereof so cruelly entreated, and straightly
imprisoned. etc.

Thirdly, it rayleth on the Bishops and such as be in authority, comparing
them to false prophets and to Phariseys. etc.

Last of all, it concludes with threatenyng, that if they go forewarde in
their sins, their doings shall be with more bitterness of words and
playnenesse of speech thrown into their faces.

The first is needless: for who knows not, that from time to time it has been the manner of such as were desperately wicked, not to suffer their sins openly
to be reproved.

The second is false, uncharitable, and slanderous: for the cause why the
books be not esteemed (especially of the wise and learned) is the untrue
doctrine contained in them, maynteyned with untrue and unapt allegations of the
Scriptures, and interlaced with opprobrious terms and railing speeches,
tendyng to the disquietnesse of the Church, and overthrow of true religion.
The authors thereof to be imprisoned, not for telling any man of his sins, but
for writing Libels against this whole Church of England, against the book
of Common Prayers, against the ministry, against the Sacraments, finally
against the whole form and government of the Church, by the whole consent of
this realm established, and according to the rule of Gods word. And with what
face can you say, that they be imprisoned for telling men of their sins* where
ever read you or herd you that any of the Prophets or apostles told me^ of
their sins by li^els? Surely that kind of dealing is not for the Apostles of
Christ, but for the ministers of Satan.

The third comes of the same spirit that the second does, that is, of the
spirit of arrogancy, and malice: for it compares godly, wise, zealous and
learned Bishops, to idolatrous Priests, and ^o Phariseys: but in deed the
conditions and qualities of the Phariseys do most aptely agree with the
authors of these Libelles and their adherentes for the Phariseyes did all
that they did, to be seen of men, and sought the commendation of the common
people, as appears Matthew. 6. and.23. and so do they: The Phariseys when
they fasted, disfygured their faces: and these walkyng in the streates, hang
down their heads, look austerely, and in company sighe much, and seldom
or never laughe: the Phariseys strayned out a gnat, and, swallowed down a
Camel: And these men think it an heinous offense to wear a cap or a
surplesse, but in slaundring and backbiting their brethren, in railing on them
by Libelles, in contemning of superiors, and discrediting such as be in
authority: to be short, in disquieting the Church and state, they have no
conscience. The Phariseys separated themselves from the common sort of men, as
more holy, and contemned the poor Publicanes as sinners: And therefore some
learned interpreters think, that they be called Pharisaei, quasi segregati,
quod vitae sanctimonia a vielgi moribus and vita separati essent, no^ aliter
atque monachi, quos Chartusianos vocant, They be called Phariseis, as separated
and divided from the common sort in holiness of life, much like unto the
Monks, which be called Carthusians. And Josephus says, Lib. 1. ca. 2. de bello
Iudaico.
that they were called Phariseys, because they seemed to be more holy than
other, and more cunnyngly to expound the law. Also he says this to be one
property of theirs, that what so ever their own reason persuadeth them, Lib.
Antiquit. tom. 2. libr. 18. cap. 2. Tom. 2. lib. 17. cap. 3.
Id sequuntur pertinaciter, that they stubbornely follow Again he says,
that they be astutum hominum genus, arrogans, and interdum Regibus quoqu^
infestum. etc. A subtle kind of men, arrogante, and sometimes ennimies to
Kings and rulers: These men separate them selves also from the congregation,
and will communicate with us neither in prayers, hearing the word, nor
sacraments: they confemne and despise all those that be not of their sect,
as polluted, and not worthy to be saluted, or kept company with: and therefore
some of them meeting their old acquayntance, being godly Preachers, have not
only refused to salute them, but spitte in their faces, wishyng the plague of
God to light upon them, and saying that they were damned, and that God had
taken his spirit from them, and all this because they did wear a cap:
wherefore when they talk of Phariseys, they pluck themselves by the noses.
But, Lord, what a strange time is this, when such as they be, dare thus
boldly publishe libelles against their superiors, for maynteyning and executing
good and godly laws?

The conclusion of this Preface, is a stout, presumptuous and malaperte
threatening, in my opinion, not to be suffered, but how soever your pen and
tongue walks, yet I pray you hold your hands, or else. etc.

In this portion entitled An exhortation to the Bishops to deal brotherly
with their brethren: There is no great matter contained worthy of answering,
only the author does excuse himself, for taking upon him that exhortation,
and moves the Bishops to deal brotherly with the authors of the Admonition.
First, because they be their brethren: Secondly because they ought first to
have discovered unto the world by the word of God, how truly or falsely they
have written: Thirdly, because they do but disclose the disorders of our
Church of England, and humbly desire a reformation of the same, according to
the rule of Gods word. etc. Fourthly, that Papists lie abroad in their dioces
untouched, etc. Fifthly, that many leude light books, and balades fly abroad
printed, not only without reprehension, but Cum priuilegio.

Likewise in the same book the Author seems to justify the Admonition, and
to condemn the Lordship and authority of Bishops, ascribing thereunto the stay
and hinderance of their pretenced reformation: charging them after a sort with
mangling the Scriptures of God, and with snaring the godly with such laws,
as were purposely made for the wicked. These be the principal contents of
that book.

The first reason, that is, (that they be their brethren) might as well be
alleged for the impuritie of Anabaptists, Arrians, and such like, who pretend
the synceritie of Gods word, and would be counted brethren: Yea it might
as well be alleged for many other male fa^tours, who be also brethren, and yet
must not therefore escape unpunished for their offenses. Shall not ye Prince
and the magistrate execute laws upon such as break them, because they be
their brethren in Christ? beware of such doctrine, and let not affection in
private men's causes carry you headlong into public errors. But I think you
are in this point deceived, for how so ever we account them our brethren, yet
they account not us their brethren, neither will they acknowledge us so to be,
as some of the^, both in open speech and manifest signs have declared. And
therefore when the Bishops deal with them, they deal with such as disdain to
be called their brethren.

To their second reason I answer, that I think they have been talked with,
and herd what they have to say for them selves, but their hawtie minds and
good opinion conceived of them selves, will not suffer them to see their
errors: In this reason you allege nothing for them, but that which may also
be alleged for the Papists, or any other sect of heretics. But it is an old
saying, Turpe est doctori etc. How happens if that they them selves have
first defamed, not the Bishops only but also this whole Church of England
with public libelles, before they have used brotherly and private
conference? This is to spy a mote in another man's eye. etc.

How true the third reason is, may appear in my answer to their Admonition:
But how true so ever it were, yet their disordered disclosing, by unlawful
means, yt is, by libelling, deserves as much punishment as hitherto they
have had: for ye truth needs no such ungodly means of disclosing. If Papists
go abroad unpunished when by law they may be touched, surely it is a great
fault, and can not be excused, and I pray God it may be better looked to: But
this is no good and sufficient reason for the impunitie of other: Because some
Papists be not punished, shall therefore no disordered persons be punished? Or
because some in authority wink at some Papists, shall therefore no laws be
executed toward any offenders? Surely touching malice against the form and
state of this our Church, I see no great difference betwixt them and the
Papists, and I think verily they both conspire together. The same answer I
make to your fifte reason: shall no book be suppressed because some be not? It
is a fault (I confess) to suffer leude ballets and books touching manners:
But it were a greater fault to suffer books and libells disturbing the peace
of the Church, and defacing true religion.

Concerning the titles and offices of Bishops I have spoken sufficiently before.

In mangling and wresting of the scriptures none offend so much, as do the
Authors of the Admonition, who in that point are comparable to the Papists,
as may be seen by the learned and diligent reader.

If they, whom they term godly, do willingly offend against such laws as
were made for the wicked, they are to be punished according to the laws,
neither are they to be spared because they pretend godliness: For there is no
godliness in breaking of laws.

The third scroule called An exhortation to the Bishops and their clergy to
answer a little book etc, is satisfied (I trust) for I have (as it is there
required) answered the short and peuish pamphlet (as they term it) I have
disclosed their double and corrupt dealing, their wringing of the scriptures
to serve their turn, and have declared the true sense and meaning of them: I
have not bumbasted it with rethoricke, but in plain and simple manner uttered
my judgment according to the true meaning and sense of the scriptures:
Notwithstanding I have in sundry points declared the use of the Church of
Christ in times past, and do use the testimony of ancient counsels and
learned fathers, which these unlearned men unlearnedly contemn, a thing not
heard of in any age or Church, nor allowed of any learned man, but only of
certain heretics and especially Anabaptists. To be short I have not
answered the book by pieces, but wholly. How be it I must desire them to pardon
me for not making more speed with mine Answer: their frivolous quotations so
troubled me, and my other business, that I could no sooner make an end of it.
In all the rest of that deriding Pamphlet, there is nothing of any moment,
worth the answering. Therefore as they allege this portion of a sentence taken
out of Saint Augustine in his epistle ad Vincen. Si terrerentur and non
docerentur, improba quasi dominatio videretur, If they should be feared and not
taught, it might seem a wicked governance: so I conclude with the other
part of the same sentence: Si docerentur and non terrerentur, vetustate
consuetudinis obdurarentur, and ad capescenda^ via^ salutis pigrius mouere^tur:
If they should be taught and not feared, in time they would wax stubborn, and
be the hardlier moved to embrace the way of salvation.

A brief view of the second Admonition.
I Have also received a second Admonition to the Parliament, the Authoure
whereof undertakes to teach how to reform those things which the other
Admonition found fault with. I shall not need to make any long discourse of
it, neither will I: The answer to the first Admonition, is an answer to this
also.

Only I thought it good to note unto you that this book consists of these
points especially: First it justifies the authors of the first Admonition,
and seems to complain that they have not justice, because they appealing to
the highest Court of Parliament, their appeal would not be received. And
therefore they say the scripture is plain that it shall be easier for Sodom and
Gomorra in the day of judgment, than for such a Court: (meaning the Court of
Parliament) and they quote for that purpose in the margent the.10. of Math.
verse. 14.15. which is a shameful profanation of the scripture, and an
egregious slander to that honorable Court. The justness of the appeal, I
leave to the Justices, and skillful lawyers to be considered of, for it is not
within the compass of my faculty. Only I think that, that scroule can have
no defense of Parliament: first because it is a Libell: secondly because it was
published in printe before the Parliament was made privy unto it.

In this part these words of theirs would be well considered, there is no other
thing to be looked for, than some speedy vengeance to light upon the whole
land, provide as well as the politic Macheuills of England think they can
though God do his worst: It would be known whom they mean by these politic
Macheuills: For they envy all men of great authority, wit and policy.

The second part consists only of railing words and slanderous
accusatio^s, first against this whole church of England, for they say that we
are scarce come to the outward face of a church rightly reformed, and that
although some truth be taught by some preachers, yet no preacher may without
great danger of the laws utter all truth comprised in the book of god etc.
And a little after they ad and say, that the truth in a manner does but peep
out behind the screene: which speches as they be very untrue (for who knows
not that the Gospel is wholly, publicly, and freely preached in this church of
England) so they be slanderous, neither can the Papists speak any worse.

In this part also to prove that this is no true saying, in matters of policy
and government, it is not repugnant to the word of god, and therefore it may be
used: is alleged this saying of Christ. Math. 12. He that is not with me is
against me. But they have forgote^ ye words of christ, Mar. 9. qui non est
aduersus nos pro nobis est, He that is not against us is with us. Whereupon we
may much better conclude, that that which is not repugnant to the scripture, is
consona^t to the Scripture, than they can do the contrary of the former place.
Notwithstanding in both these places (as I think) Christ speaks rather of
men and persons, than of things themselves.

In the same part their speech of the Queens supremacy is very suspicious,
and it would be demanded of the^, what they think in deed of her majesty's
authority in ecclesiastical matters, for in this point they have hitherto
delte very subtly and closely: notwithstanding their meaning may easily be
perceived of such as diligently consider their books.

Likewise in this part they note certain contrarieties in this Church, as
betwixt the Communion book and Injunctions, touching wafers: the Communion
book and Aduertisementes concerning Church vestures: the Cannons and the
Po^tificall in not ordering of ministers sine titulo, and such like matters of
no importance: which justify rather this church, tha^ otherwise: for surely if
they had had weightier matters, they would no doubt have alleged them. But in
these same matters they are much deceived, for as I suppose in matters of
ornaments of the Church and of the ministers thereof, the Queens majesty
together with the Archbishop or the commissioners in causes ecclesiastical,
have authority by Act of parliament to alter and appointe such rytes and
ceremonies as shall from time to time be thought to them most conueniente. To
be short, in that point they say that in things of order one Church may
many times differ from another without offense, following the general rules of
scripture for order, as in appointing time and place for prayers etc. which is
a very true saying, and flat contrary to all that is said either in the first
admonition, or in this second: For if such things may be appointed in the
church, not being expressed in the word of God, but depending upon this
general rule, Let all things be done decently and in order. 1. Cor. 14. then
surely the magistrate has authority in such matters to appoint what shall be
thought unto them most convenient, so that it be not repugnant to ^o y^ word of
God: except you will make this the question, whether in such matters we
ought to be directed by the magistrates and governors of the Church, or by
every private pastoure in his several charge?

The third part of this book condemns the degrees of Doctors, Bachilers of
divinity, and Masters of art in the universities, and slanderously, untruly,
and opprobriously speaks of the universities and such as be in them:
presumptuously prescribing a manner of reformation for the same, when as I
think verily, they know not what Uniuersities mean. But here we may note yt
they seek to overthrow al learning and degrees of learning. The same part
also very slanderously and unchristianly rayleth on some bishops by name and
the rest of the clergy, charging them most un truly with sundry things: but
because it is done by way of libelling (a diuelishe kind of revenge)
therefore, I trust godly and wise men will esteem of it accordingly. Besides
slanderous reports and opprobrious words, there is nothing in this part
worthy the answering.

In the fourth part, the Authoure takes upon him to set down a plat form
of a Church, to prescribe the manner of electing ministers, of their
exercises, of their equality, of the government of the Church, etc. Which
surely being well considered, will appear not only a confused plateforme,
without any sound warrant of Gods word, but also a fantastical devise,
tending to the overthrow of learning, religion, yea the whole state and
government of the commonwealth.

But because I have before in the confutation of the first Admonition, spoken
sufficiently of al these matters, therefore I will only note one or two things
in this part, to let you understand that these platformers build not upon
that foundation that they would have others so strictly bound unto: For let
them tell me upon what scripture this is grounded: Let no one minister meddle
in any cure save his own, but as he is appointed by common consent of the
next conference or counsels provincial or national, or further if it may
fall out so general of all Churches reformed? Or this, That the ministers
must be equal, and that some must be governed by all, and not al by some? Or
that, the pastor or teacher in every congregation ought to be the principal of
the consistory of their congregation? Or that, Many parishes may be joined in
one, and have one pastor, and yet that it is unlawful for one pastor to have
many parishes? Or that, In the mean while, till preachers increase to furnishe
the places unfurnished, upon conference among the learned, some discrete man be
appointed to make some entiet prayer. etc. Or that it is evil so often to
repeat, Glory be to the father. etc. Lord have mercy upon us. etc. or the
Lords prayer? For the text which they allege for the same, Math. 6. is
wickedly wrested, and corruptly alleged: for the words of Christ be not (as
they translate them) When you pray (...) that is, many words without faith, and
the inward affection of the mind, is forbidden. Paul. 1. Thessa. 5. says,
Pray continually. And Christ, Math. 6. says, Pray on this manner, Our father.
etc. So that of necessity we must oftentimes repeat the Lords prayer, if we
will believe Christ and his Apostle Paul: But Lord what strange doctrine is
this, to call Glory be to the father. etc. Lord have mercy upon us. etc. Our
father. etc, popish? Surely these men (as I suppose) be not well in their
wits.

These and a number of other phansies they have in this book which they can
not ground upon any scrip^ures, but by wringing and wresting of them: and in
deed their seeeking is, to have all things framed according to their fancies,
that they may be accounted planters and platformers of Churches.

I omit this, that the Author boasts, that he and many others will set them
selves against us, as the professed enemies of the church of Christ: For the
matter is not great, neither shall the^ in that point deal any otherwise with
us, than (...) Anabaptists, Arrian^, and other Heretics have (...) with other
Churches.

This shall be sufficient for an answer to that book, because all other
matters of substance are by me answered before in the former confutation.

Articles collected out of the former Admonition, and untruly said (of the
fautors of that Admonition) to be falsified.
TO the end of the second Admonition there is joined A reprofe of certain
Articles, collected (as it is thought) by the bishops, (for so they say) out of
a little book entitled, An admonition to the Parliament. etc. But as I think,
it may rather be termed, a recantation, or (if you will) a reformation or
mitigation of certain articles in that first admonition rashly set down, and
without learning or discretion printed.

1. Fol. 3. li. 1. pa. 2. First, they hold and affirm, that we in England are
not yet come to the outward face of a Church agreeable to gods word. Here you
find fault that this word scarce is left out. In deed this word scarce was
written in the margent of diverse copies of the first admonition: whether it
were so in all, or no, I know not: no more do I whether any such collection (as
you pretend) was made. But what need you so much stick in words, when the
thing is manifest? For in effect they deny as much as that proposition
imports: they wholly condemn the ministry, the ceremonies, and the
government of this Church. They say the sacraments be full of corruptions: and
in their second Admonition, fol. 42. they say, that the sacraments are wickedly
mangled and profaned: they utterly condemn our order and manner of common
prayer: yea in effect our doctrine also, for in their second Admonition, fol.
7. they say, that although some truth be taught by some preachers, yet no
precher may with out danger of the laws, utter all truth comprised in the book
of God. What can be spoken more sle^derly of ye doctrine preached in this
church? A man may truly speak as much of the Romish church: for some truth is
taught by some Papists: yea some truth is taught by some Jew and Turk. When
therefore, you say, that in this Church neither the word is truly preached,
nor the Sacraments sincerely ministered, nor yet Ecclesiastical discipline
(which three in the first Admonition, Fol. 3. is said to be the outward
marks whereby a true christian Church is known) and also condemn our
ministry as Popish and unlawful, with the whole government of our Church
(as you do in plain terms) may it not be truly said, that you affirm us in
England as yet not to be come to the outward face of a Church agreeable to
Gods word? Furthermore, what does this word scarce, help the matter, does it
not import as much? It is a rule in Philosophy, quod vix fit, non fit, that
which is scar^e done is not done.

2 They will have the ministers to be called, allowed, and placed by the
people. You say, that this article is falsified: and yet their words in that
place of their admonition be these: Then election was made by the common
consent of the whole Church. And a little after: Then no minister placed in
any congregation, without the consent of the people. Wherefore the collection is
very true, and they belike ashamed of their doings: and therefore they have
corrected these assertions in their second edition of their first admonition,
on this sort: Then election was made by the elders, with the common consent of
the whole Church. Surely these men be past shame, else would they not deny
their own written assertions.

4. Lin. 9. They hold that a bishop at no hand has authority to ordeyne
ministers. This article you confess to be truly gathered: but now you make
this gloss (not alone) and yet in their Admonition it is in flat terms, that
the ordering of ministers does at no hand appertain to bishops.

6. Lin. 28. They will have the ministers at their own pleasure to preach
without license. This is true, by your own confession, for you will have no
other license, but your calling to the ministry, which must be (as you say)
by the congregation. Here you shut out both the Princes license and the Bishops.

7. Lin. 13 fol. 17. lin. 6. pa. 1. Whatsoever is set down in this article is
manyfestly affirmed in the Admonition, and your Answer to it is frivolous, and
nothing to the purpose. For in the first part of the Admonition, fol. 2. page
1. These be the words: In those days known by voice, learning, and doctrine:
now they must be discerned from other, by Popish and Antichristian apparel, as
cap, gown, tippet. etc. And in the second part speaking of the apparel
prescribed to ministers, they say on this sort: There is no order in it, but
confusion: no comlynesse, but deformity: no obedience, but disobedience both
against God and the Prince. Are you not then ashamed to say, that this article,
(they will have the minister discerned from others by no kind of apparel, and
the apparel appointed they term Antichristian, and the apparel appointed by
the Prince, disobedience against the Prince,) is falsified?

Fol. 4. lin. ^. page 2. They will have all Archebishops, Bishops, Archdecons.
etc. together with their offices, jurisdictions, Courts, and livings clean
taken away, and with speed removed. You say, that this is falsified in part,
because there is left out Lords grace, Justice of peace, and Quoru^. etc.
Surely the article is truly collected in every point, and plainly affirmed in
the.2. leaf of the first part of that Admonition. As for your giving words that
follow, they be but wynd: I warrant you the confutation will abide the light,
and the author will show his face, which you are ashamed to do.

9. Lin. 9. The article is truly collected: Look in the first part of that
Admonition fol. 2. page 2. and fol. 3. And in the second part of that Admo.
fol. 1. page 2. fol. 5. page 1.

17. Lin. 12. The collection is true: for their words be these: They simply
as they received it from the Lord, we sinfully mixed with man's inuentio^s and
devises. And therefore you untruly say, yt it is falsified.

19. Lin. 16. They will have no godfathers nor godmothers, You say, that this
article is also utterly falsified: what mean you so to forget your self? Is
it not thus written in the first part of the first Admonition, fol. 3. page 2.
and as for baptism it was enough with them if they had water, and the party
to be baptized, faith, and the minister to preach the word and minister the
sacraments. Now we must have surplesse devised by Pope Adrian, Interrogatories
ministered to the infant, godfathers and godmothers brought in by Higinus etc.
How say you? Are not godfathers and godmothrs here disallowed? Wherefore be
they else in this place recited? or why are they here ascribed to Pope Higinus?
Will you now allow any thing in the Church invented by the Pope ^ In deed in
the second edition of this first Admonition, these words godfathers and
godmothers brought in by Higinus, be clean left out, as I have before noted.
Wherefore either you have not read the diversity of their editions, or else you
are very impudent.

22. Fol. 8. in fine. I marvel why you say, that this collection is falsified?
Look, fol. vlt. page 2. of the first part of the Admonition.

Out of the second treatise called A view of Popish abuses remaining.
Fol. 10.10. pa. 1. lin. 33. Reading of service or homilies in the Church is
as evil as playing on a stage, and worse too. You say that this is falsified.
Lord God what mean you? In the second leaf of that book these be their
direct words, Reading is not feeding, but it is as evil as playing upon a
stage, and worse too. To the same effect they speak diverse times, and so do
the Authors of the second Admonition. Surely either they are ashamed of their
doings, or else you have not with diligence read their books.

Thus breefly to have answered to your unjust accusation of falsely collecting
certain articles out of the Book entitled An admonition. etc. shall be
sufficient. Other articles which you say be gathered out of the same book, and
confess to be true, I have omitted, because they be sufficiently answered by
me in the confutation: and your confirmation of them, is usual and childishe.

I would wish that such as be wise men and in authority, would diligently
consider that which you answer to the article, Fol. 14. (as you quote it)
touching the government of the Church, and the authority of Princes and
their laws: and likewise that which is written concerning the same matters in
the second Admonition: I will make them neither better nor worse, but wish the
magistrates well to mark your judgments and opinions in these matters, and to
foresee the worst. The Lord bless this realm of England with the continuance
of his Gospel, long life of the Queens majesty, and peace both foreyne and
domestical. Amen.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Humfrey Toy, dwelling in Paul's
Church yard at the sign of the Helmet. Anno. 1572.


