: Here follows diverse holy instrucyons and teachynges very necessary for the
health of man's soul, newly made and set forth by a late brother of Syon
Rychard whit forde.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.

The contents of this Book.
First a devout work of patience. A work of diverse impedimentes and lettes
of perfectyon. An instruction to au^ (...) eschew vices and follow good
manners. Of Detraction.
A preface.
GOOD devout reders: I made mine excuse as foloth and showed you the very
cause of the setting forth of my name. But now I am compelled not only to
setforth my name, but also to join thereunto these cata loge and wryttynge of
the contents (by nou^ber) of these volume. And that I do: charitably to give
you warnyng to search well / and suerly that none such other works, be put
among them: that might deceive you. For (of a certente) I found now but very
late: a work: joined and bound with my pore labors and under the co^tentes
of the same volume / and one of my works that was named in the same contents:
left out, in sted whereof: was put these other work ye was not mine. For the
title of mine, was, thus. A daily excercyse, and experience of death. An the
other work has no name of any auctour and all such works in this time be
ever to be suspected. For so the heretykes do use to send forth their poison,
among the people: covered with sugar. For they seem to be good, and devout
works: and be in very deed very stark hereses, as of late I saw a book, and
work of the archeheretyke Luter, translate into Englysh word for word, and I
said yt book was against the kyuges honor, because he had (by his noble
work) condemned him for an heretyke. Be you ware therefore of all such
fatherles books, that another have the name of the auctour, nor of the
translatour. Know what you read, and what you suffer your children to learn.
Specially (after my pore advise) meddle not with the works of nameles and
unknown auctours I have showed you why.

The preface unto the devout reders.
I Byseche you all good devout reders: take ever mine excuse (in setting forth
of mine name) for a very trothe, not otherwise to be done: then that none
other person should be supposed in blame, for my defaultes: if the work went
forth without any named auctour I wrote these work: many peers ago (as I said of
ye work of death) and by like occasion: have now send hit forth in prynte I
byseche our lord: you may take profete, and edification thereby (for that is my
mind and desire) And troth hit is: that in the redynge, and recount of any
virtue, pfet may be taken. And (for a suerte) this virtue of pacyence: is a
noble virtue and much necessary for every faithful Christian, Cipriauus de
Pacientia.
as shall plainly appear unto you, if hit may please you, to read hit over,
notwithstanding hit is better to have hit: then to read hit. Better to practice
hit: then to know hit. Better to work hit, then to wyshe hit. And yet by
redyng: hit may the better be known. And well known: the vetter be put in use,
excercyse and practice. And well used, and excercysed: the more may hit profet.
Read hit therefore I pray you and take with charity, and good will: that thereof
is offered, and thus ever fare you well in our lord god and most sweet savior
Jesus Christ, and of your charity, pray for the old wreche your assured
bedeman late of Syon Richard Whytforde.

Here follows the chapters of the first book called the book of patience.
THe definicion of patience in general. Fol. i. Of natural patience. Fol. i.
Of artificial patience and of the defynycyon, or determynacyon thereof. Folio.
iiii. Of the very true determynacyon, description and declaracyon of
meritorious patience. Fo. v. Of the image and byhauour of patience. Fo. v. Of
the co^modites, or fruits of patience, in general. Folio. vii. How patience
is profitable and necessary unto the true getting, and unto the lawful
keeping and increasynge of worldly goods. Fol. vii. That patience is
necessary for the due, and lawful keeping of such goods as be truly, and
lawfully gotten. Folio. viii. That patience is commodious and profitable unto
the good state of the body of man. Fol. x. How patience is commodious and
necessary, unto good fame and good name to be obtained holden and kept. Fol.
xi. Of the fourth co^modite fruit, and procete of pacyence. folio. xiii. That
patience is profitable, and necessary, unto the quietude and rest of man's
mind. fo. xiiii. Of the circumstances of patience. folio. xvii. How patience
is adquired gotten and learned. fo. xxii Of the example of worldly persons. fo
xxv. Of the example of gostly persons Fo. xxviii. Of the patience of our lord
and savior Jesus. Folio. xxxv. That our own meserye and multitude of our
sins should move us unto patience. fol. xl. A brefe recapitulacion and short
recounte of ye said co^modites of patience, by the respect and consideracion
of impacyence and of the merits and rewards of patience. folio xiii. Of the
merit, and of ye reward of patience. fo. xiv.
The chapters of the book or work of diverse, impedimentes and lettes of
perfectyon.:
OF the first impediment. Folio. xlix. Of the secu^de impediment or let of
spiritual profete, and increase. folio. li. Of the third impediment, or let of
spiritual profete, and good speed. folio. liii. Of the fourth impediment and
let of spiritual profete, and speed. folio. lv. Of the fyfte impediment or let
of spiritual pfete, and increase of perfection. folio. lvi. Of the syxte
impediment and let of spiritual pfete and good speed in the life of perfection.
fo. lvii. Of the seuynth impediment and let of spiritual profete and forward
speed of perfection. fo. lviii. A little lessen of four virtues, good and proof
table to be had of every person: but not to be called unto reme^brans but
rather to be forgotten. fo. lx. Of the secu^de point yt should rather be
forgoten: then remembered. Folio. lxii. Of the third point to be put clean away
and never to be called ne kept in reme^brans. folio. lxiii. Of the forth thing
to be forgotten, and to be put from our cogitacyon and reme^brans. fo. lxiiii.
The chapters of an instruction to auoyds and eschew vices and follow good
manners.:
Of yuell thoughts. Folio. lxvi. Of chastity. folio. lxvii. Of prayer. folio.
eodem Of superfluous fedynge. folio. eodem. Of aspecte or cast of the sight.
folio. eodem Of the cu^panye and presence of the contrary sexes. folio.
lxviii. Of labor occupacyon, and of the contrary, that is, ydelnes. folio
eodem. Of redynge. folio. lxix. Of humilite or mekenes. folio. eodem. Of the
constancy of mind. folio. lxx. Of patience in aduersite. folio. eodem. Of the
imitacion and following of good me^. fo. lxxi. Of peace and charity. folio
eodem. Of pity and compassion. folio. eodem. Of ye co^te^pt and dispising of
worldly praise. fo. lxxii. Of honest conuersacyon. folio. eodem. Of ye cu^panye
or felyshyp of good persons. fo. lxxiii. Of the custodye or keeping of the
ears or hearing. folio. eodem. Of the custody and keeping of ye mouth. fo.
lxxiiii. Of detraction or bachytynge. folio. lxxv. Of a lie or lyenge. folio.
lxxvi. Of swerynge. folio. eodem. Of promise, and vow to he rendered and kept.
fo. lxvii. That al things be open and known unto god. Folio. eodem. Of good
conscience. folio. lxxviii That all things should be attrybuted and applied
unto god. folio. eodem. That the virtues of man should be hid and kept clos.
folio. eodem. Of confession. folio. lxxix. Of premeditacyon. folio. lxxix. Of
sapience and wisdom. folio. eodem. Of doctrine or learning. folio. lxxx. To
take often, keep, that is taken. And to teach that lerued was. These. iii. do
the scoler make his master for to over pas. folio. eodem. Of curyosyte. folio.
lxxxi. Of obedyence. folio. eodem. Of prelacye. folio. lxxxii. Of contempt,
and despysynge of the world. Folio. lxxxiii. Of alms deed. folio. eodem. Of
Detraction. Chrisostomus homilia texcia. Folio. lxxxvi.
FINIS TABVLE.
The definicion of patience in general. Capi. primo.
THe definicion, or determinacion, of every thing that is entreated, and spoken
of: is first necessary to be known yt is to say: that you may know what is
meant by these term or word patience, and what thing it is, and that first in
general. The definicion of Patience, sem Lactan. Firmia number. Exemple.
Patience is a voluntary, and wylfull tolerance / and sufferance of all such
pains hurtes aduersi tes / and yules: as be put, or as do fortune, ar hap /
unto any parson. And this patience I call general: because it does extend, and
strech unto the body as well as unto the soul / or mind. As by exeample when a
parson may and will suffer hongre, thurst, cold, labors and such other
pains and inco^modites of the body, then is that parson called pacient of that
thing that he so does suffer. Vt de Catelina refert sal^ stius.
But this patience of it self: is no thing meritoriouse although the
co^plexiones, and disposicions of ye body: may help much or hyndre patience
and therefore the said inco^modites / wylfully borne / and suffered for a good
cause: may be meritorious, but not (as I said) of them self but of the grace
of our lord. And therefore a great learned man does make a forther definicion of
patience saying. another definition. Cicero. prime. rethorices.
Patience is a voluntarye, and wylful perpession and sufferance of those
things that be grievous and hard to be borne and suffered for any of these
cause yt is to say: For honesty. For ease, or pleasure or for avail, profet
or auan^tage. And yet these patience, is common unto man, and unto brute
bestes. For the bestes, althoght not for any honesty, yet for their ease
pleasure, and profet done sumtyme suffer inco^modites. And sumtymes for fear
or dread, But yt is not proprely patience because it is not wylful. And
therefore that you may know which is the very patience that I would here speak
of: we shall dyuyde this patience into patience natural, and patience
artificial that is to say such a patience as is gotyn and had by craft,
conyng, or labor, and diligence, and of grace.:::

Of natural patience. Capt^ii.
Natural patience: is a sufferance yt is in man, or best: by the disposicions
of the natural co^plexions of the body. For in every man, and best. be.iiij.
co^plexions that have their names of.iiij. principal humors that be in the body
yt is to say Colexe, Blood Phlegm, or flewme, and mela^coly so that of this
humor colere, is named, the coleryke, complexion, and of the blood the
co^plexcion Sangwyne. And of slewme: the flewmatyke. And of the humor
melaneoly: the complexion melanco like. And these.iiij. humors, and
co^plexions in in the body: have the same qualites and disposicions in
simititude: that be in the.iiij. elements, the Fire, the Air, ye water, and
the yerth. For as the fire is dry, and hot: so is color, and the coleryke
complexion. And as the air is hot, and moist: so is the blood / and the
sang wine complexion. And as the water is moist, and cold: so is the phlegm,
or flewme and ye complexion flewmatyke. And as the yerth is cold, and dry, so
is melancoly, and the complexion melancolyke. And therefore according unto yt
humor that has in the body most dominacyon, and rewle: that body is called of
yt complexion As where colere most reygneth: yt body is called coleryke of
complexion. And so in like manner of the the other. And because that these
co^plexions have a respect unto the bodies above and thereafter do naturally
move man or best according unto their disposicio^s: they may much help, or
hyndre patience, notwithstanding man may: by wysdom grace, and goodwyll rule,
and govern all bodyly and natural disposicyons. And also educacion, bryngyng
up and doctrine, and teaching: do bylde frame, and make manners in man or best,
contrary unto natural disposicions. For custum, and use: may alterate nature,
yet I say that (of them self) both man, and best do much, and co^munly,
follow natural mocions, and disposecions. And therefore sum men, and sum bestes
be naturally more disposed unto patience, or inpacience then su^ other be. For
sum parsones like unto the ore: be al disposed to patience, and if by chance
they be moved unto the contrary: yet be they sone, and shortly appeased sum
persons, be naturally disposed to love patience, and to live restfully: but
yet will they sone be moved for a light occasion. And yet forthwith when they
perceive them self: they will sone be appeased and if in that passion: they
said or did any thing amysse, they will mekely make amends. And these manner
of persons: Inregula. C^. 6.
does saint Augustyne prefer before the^ that will not so sone be wrogh and
yet when they be moved will not so lightly be appeased nor make amends. For
such a kind of persons there is in.ii. manners on of those persons that if they
be wroth will nener be appeased till they be revenged, or at the lie till
they so far have the vectory and maystry: yt they might be revenged. For unto
sum persons to have the power to revenge: Satis est potu isse vincere.
is sufficient and enough. But sum other will not so be content, ne ever be
appeased unto the time the have done as much vengau^ce as is possible for them
to do, and yet over yt, have they will to do more vengaunce if hit lie or were
in their power. As the lion and y^ ^gle.
And yet these persons be in.ii. mauers. For some of them will not lightly be
moved unto wrath, but keep long their patience, and suffer, great wrongs or
peynes but when they be ons fulvexed: they be (as is said) mercyles all venge
able. Theto there kind is of them: that will sone be moved of a light occasion
for a tryfle, and su^tyme will seek occasion, and make quarelles. And yet then
when they be angry: will they never as is said be appeased without extreme, and
most cruel vengaunce. And these persons be of the worst kind of impacie^ce.
For these in manner, have no patience at all. There is yet an other kind of
patience natural called A vnlpyne pacyence. That is to say such patience as
the fox has sum times, or the catte that will lie, or sit full still, and
patiently bide unto the time their pray be within danger and then suddenly
show what they be. This patience had the Jews unto our savior, and so have
many wyked parsons. But of all manner of paciences natural: patience that is
most excellent that is in ye lamb, and in the innocent parsons that never do
show any sign, or token of wrath, displeasure or reuengance. Yet is there an
other patience, which is always kept inwardly, and in effect, and yet outwardly
seems much contrary as it was in our savior: Math. 21. b. Marci. 11. c. Lu.
19. (...) Io. 2. (...)
When he did byet and drive out with a whyppe, or slayle the buyers, and sellers
in the temple and when he cast down the tables of them that made exchau^ges
and sold dowues there, wherein he seemed outward very impacient, and angrye,
and so he was in deed as the prophet, david bade and commanded saying. P^al. ^
Irascimini et nolite peccare Be you wrath (says he) or angry, and yet have
no will to sin. This manner of patience, may be naturally in man, or best, as
in the mothers, or pare^tes that do: with semyng anger, or hasty wrath: drive
or put a way their children from fire, or water, or other parylouse places,
and so will the bestes and bryddes do unto theyres, and yet do they naturally
love them. And so have they patience inward in effect, although hit seem
outward otherwise. All these manner of paciences have we showed unto you by
cause, you may know, that the disposicions of nature, which communely be
moved of the co^plexions: may help much, or hinder patience, but yet they can
not of the^ self: make the patience meritoriouse. For as the philosofour
says. Aristot.
For those thynnges that be in us of nature: we be not worthy any praise, or
yet disprayse / reward or pain, I say determinately of them self,
Notwithstanding, a man is bound by the commandment of God: to restrain all
natural disposicions, and inclynacious unto vice, and to force them forth by
violence, unto virtue. For the great merit stands in the great violence.
For the scripture says. Regnum coelorum vim patitur. etc. Math. 11. b.
The kingdom of heaven does suffer violence, and the violent parsons: do
rauysh, and win it. And saint Paul unto his disciple Timothe. No parson
shall win the crown: 2. Timo 2. a.
but yt does feght according unto the law of batell. And in the Apocalypse.
Who so ever has here yt victory, shall never be hurt with the secunde death,
Apoc. 2. c.
that is damp nation. And again, I will make him, that geteth or wynneth yt
victory a pyler, or post in yt church of Christ. 3. c.
Thus you may perceive that those parsons that have most patience by natural
dispocion: have lie merit thereby. And contrary those that have lie
patience but be all disposed of nature unto passions, may restraynyng those
natural passions by grace, and goodwyl: have most high merit. For the more
grievous the batell be: the more noble is the victory, and the merit, and
reward more large. And therefore we leave this natural patience sum what to
entreat of the patience artificial that is more merytorious.

Of artificial pacyence and of the definicion, or determinacion thereof.
Capitulo tercio.:
Artificial patience: we call that patience that (all natural disposicion
venquyshed by violence) and ouercu^men, is obtained, and gotten by doctrine,
labor, and use, with grace, and goodwyl. And this patience may be thus defined
or determined. Patience, is a volu^tarie or wylful, and continual sufferauns,
another definic^ on of patience.
of those things yt be grievous noyouse, or paynfull taken, and suffered: not
only (as the pagane said) for honesty / or profet / and avail but also for
virtue, and for the increas of merit, I say here that patience, is a
suffrau^ce, but every sufferau^ce, is not patience. For patience is a virtue,
and many parsons do suffer great pains without any virtue, but rather their
sufferaunce is much viciouse. Therefore that sufferaunce that makes patience:
must be voluntarye, so that the parsons do suffer: with their own goodwyll
and consent of mind. For if they be constrained, and compelled for any cause
contrary unto the will, it is a sufferaunce but not patience. Except we call
hit as the Frenchman does. Patience per force. The said sufferau^ce therefore
must be voluntarye, hit must also be continual. For else it is not meritorious
ne worthy reward. For many persons do incerprise and begin many things with
great pains, and greuouse sufferaunce for the time. But they sone give over,
they say they ca^ suffer no longer. That sufferance therefore is not patience
nor yet meritoriouse. Math. ^0. ^ and 24. b.
For the scripture says Qui perseuerauerit vsque in finem: hic saluus erit.
Who so ever does per sever and continue unto the end: that person shall have
the merit, and reward of salvation. The sufferau^ce also must be, of those
things that be grievous. For every man may lightly suffer, and here that thing
yt is not peyneful ne does grieve although sum persons (they say) can not
here wealth, but that is not because it is greuouse, but for defaulte of wisdom
and discrecion. But where is no grieve: is no sufferaunce, and therefore no
patience, but when the grieve or pain is borne, and suffered for a good cause,
with good will (as is said) and continually: then is yt sufferau^ce called
patience notwithstanding: those causes that the Pagan setforth, that is to
say honesty or profet: be not sufficient to render and declare our patience.
For many proud, and light minded persons, do suffer much for honest. The
common proverb is, yt hit is good to dyete, or stryke the proud persons For
they will suffer well for their honest without co^playnt, and keep al counsel,
but yt sufferau^ce is not patience, although to suffer for some honest: may be
a good degree of patience. And to suffer for profet alon: is not always
patience. For so (as we said by fore) the fox or other bestes: might have yt
patience. But because the patience, that we have purposed here to entreat: is
a noble virtue* and meritorious, apperteynynge only unto man: we shall
setforth, as we have gedred of diverse catholyke, and learned doctors a more
exact, and plain definicion of patience.:::

Of the verey true definicion, determinacion, descripcion and declaracion of
meritotiouse patience. Capi. iiij.: *:
Patience meritorious: is a might. power, Definicion. auctores
strength and virtue of the soul, whereby we may (with grace, and goodwyl)
repress, restreyne, rebate, and withdraw, all inordinate passions and
mouynges whereunto we be stered, provoked and moved, by any of our enemies, the
dyule, the world, or the flesh. And whereby we do gladly with even mind and
goodwyll: suffer continually, and here. For yt love of God, and salvation of
our souls: all aduersites troubles, pains, and yules that be done unto us, or
yt (by any means) chance fall, hap, or fortune unto us having therewith a
reuerre^de, Aug. de pacie^ci a Capi. 2.
dread lest we, by any contrary impacient and wyked will, should forgo and lose
any virtue or good things: whereby we might atteyne, and come unto better
things. This is our definicion, or descripcion of patience. And this patience
does saint Augustine call the great gift, and reward of God.

Of the image and byhauour of patience. Capi. v.: *:
Ciprianus de paciencia. And sait Cyprya nesayth (...) same.
Now here I was in mind to have set forth an image of this good lady and
excellent princes dame patience, that not only you might know, by the
definicion, what she is in substance: but also by onde yt knowledge of
understanding you should perceive by outward sens, and se the beauty manner,
and by hauour of her person. But I lack a paynter, and I can not paynte my
self. A great learned man called Prudencius, in a book that he made of the
co^flictes, batayles, feldes, or feghtes of vices and virtues: does setforth in
goodly verses the image and byhauiour of this lady dame patience. Showing how
that when the loathsome, and vgglye, wrythyn wyche, and pale faced scolde called
dame. Ire, or wrath: came forth against her in battle with a cruel cu^peny
and with wepynes and artilerie of dedly myschef: she dame patience I say stood
vpryght in the front of the battle with a countenance of grauite and sadness
and with out mouinge or sterynge, cast up her sight with a sobre sinylynge
cou^tenau^ce, without feere or dread holdly did behold all the fassion of the
fylde. And when that gresty ghost dame Ire, saw her of far of, she began to
swell and foam at the mouth, and with a fyrye inflamed face gre^nynge and
gnastynge rolled her eyes, casting her sight and her heda wrye, disdaynynge
that patience durst, wout harnes or wepyn, no thing appareled, unto war:
mete with her, in the field. And first she mocked her, and then rayled upon
her, and when she saw that no thing she was moved withal, but ever stood
still stablye in one countenauce, and behauour: she then (with a fell furious
stomach) made a shoute and cry upon her / and so let fly a darte streght
toward her heart, but dame patience had priuey harnes of precious stones: that
made all her shot to starte back / all void without noyans, and so she
stood still all quiet and restfull, no thing moved / but all strong and
mighty, ready to bide all the forther and furious assaytes of that barbarous
best, which therewith chafed, as a wode and mad brayneles body: Rysped out her
sword / and ran forth in a rage and swapped that loving lady, upon the
mydle of the head supposyng verily: to have clouyn her skull and to have dashed
out her brains, but the stroke light upon her pryuey skull, and range withal.
So hard that the edge of the sword, partly bended and pertly brake there with,
and yet the head was whole, and she no thing moved with the braynles brayde of
yt barbarous mo^stre, but smyled thereat which monstre (Ire I mean, or wrath)
when she saw / and perseyued that all her shot was lost, and all her
wepynes wasted, and all her ordinance spent / and she no thing spedde: she
rane unto the remedy / that best becu^med her malice, and myschefe, that was
to wreke all her wodenes upon her own self. And so she caght upon quikly a
piece of a brokyn spear, and thrast the spylde, fast into the yerth and rane
fyersly upon the point which persed through the mydle of her heart, and so she,
gre^nynge and gnastyng, gave up her sorry ghost, whom / the sobre / and mylde
maystres dame patience, byheldyng sadly, said unto the people present? here
you may se fryndes how, lightly, and easily (by our natural and accustomed
virtue, we have without bloodshed / or blemyshe, without hurt, or harm, and
without all peril or Ioperdy, ve^quished, and ouercomen this gryme and grysly
ghost, Ire / or wrath. For this is the manner of our battle, and our mean to
venquishe, onercome, and to tryumphe, that is to say: by sufferaunce only, to
quench sle, and destroy all the furious rages, malice / and myschef, of the
wrathful and yule persons. For the hasty man (says the proverb) wa^teth
never woe. The hasty passionate angry persons: be most enemies unto them self.
Their own fury does frete them to death, when this lovely lady had spoken
this lesson: she went forth with great glory, and her true faithful
seruandes followed her full joyfully, that by her means / and help: had
myghtyly also ouercu^men their enemies and fose. That is to say, holy Job, all
the holy appostles, martirs and saints. For this mighty lady does ever join,
and accu^peny her self with all manner of virtue. And no virtue can be perfect:
without patience. Thus now you may se, and behold the very image of paycience
after the said great clerk, but that he does set it forth, more expressl,
with much goodly eloquence. Now than let us go forth with our institute, and
purpose, which shall be to show unto you certain co^modites or profitable
fruits of patience, euerych to excede other in perfection.:::

Of the comodites, fruits of patience, In general the.vi. Chapter:
EVery thing is called commodious, frutfull, or profitable unto man: according
unto the necessites and needs of those things that do apper teyne unto the
wealth of man, as by example, man ca^ not live: without meat, and drink, and
clothes, wherefore: the goods of the world be commodious frutful, and
profitable unto man, if they be well used. And yet be those worldly goods in
the lowest degree of those things that do apperteyne unto man. For they do
only serve proprely unto the body. And therefore is y^ state of ye body: above
the wordly goods. And yet that state of the body (as we said) is preserved by
the said goods which worldly goods, I said be commodious proprely, unto yt
body alon, although they may (by accidence in case) be profitable unto the
soul. And unto bodily honor, or dignite fame and good name, for the which
paynimes or paganes did prefer, and in price, set before, and a boue the
body, because hit does remain, bide, and last longer then does the body
wherefore many of the^ called wise: have wylfully lost their life rather then
they would lose their honor, Aag. de Citutate dai. lib 10.4.
name or fame / as saint Augu, does show, in his book de Ciuitate dei? Yet
above all worldly honors: the soul of man does excede. These.iiij. that we
have named, appertenynge unto man do stand and keep an order, of dignite, and
degree among them self as you may perceive. For the goods of the world do
stand in the lowest degree. The body next which is preferred and more set by.
The fame, and name above both them. And the soul above all things under God:
our mind is now to show unto you: how patience, is commodious, frutfull,
profitable and necessary: unto all these.iiij. And first.

How patience is profitable and necessary unto to the true getynge, and unto
the lawful keeping and increascynge of worldly goods. The vii. Chapter. *:*
BEcause that worldly goods be not always well gotyn: ne always well retained,
and kept / ne yet well increased, or multiplied: we therefore put in these terms
truly and laufully. For although patience largely taken (as we showed before)
may be profitable to get hold and to increase goods falsely and unlawfully,
yet our patience: that we entreat: does never so. For when the servants of
our patience do put them self to labor, study / and to give diligence, to
get worldly goods, for the necessary living of them that they have in
charge: they do take patience with all that god sendes, and (as saint James
says) they do, Iac. (...)
with all patience, abide the time, and wedder that god provides and ever do
thank his goodness, where the impatient persons do murmr, and grudge against
god, and co^playye upon the wedder, and if any thing fortune contrary unto
their mind in their labors they more hinder them self, and destroy their
goods by their lack of patience. Vitas patrum
As we read in Vitas patrum of a person that would nedely go into wyldernes to
be alone (because he could not be pacient among his compeny) And he went
unto a well to feche water in an erthen pot for his necessite, and when he had
set down ye pot upon the gronde (while he covered ye fou^teyne) the pot fell
over, and (he sum what displeased) filled hit again, and yet hit fell again,
and so by the last (forgetynge all patience he brake the pot, in a fury, but
yet when he came unto him self: he returned unto his monastre. And I saw my
self a man that, in shutyng, among cumpeny, was so moved into passion
(because he myssed his mark, and purpose) that he brake hes bow all to
shyuers. Many such braydes have we seen of impacie^ce. And many persons
because they lacked patience in their labors, and in the beryng of ye rebukes
/ and intreates of their Masters or suffraymes, have common to beggry / or
fallen to theft, of such other unlawful lyuynges. The pacient persons: have
ever a fore sight what is necessary to be don according unto their charge,
and that will they do with diligence, and with good perseuerant patience: having
ever a good guard and warenes yt no goods be gotyn unlawfully or contrary
unto conscience. And this may suffice to show that patience is good and
profitable for the true obteynynge, and getynge of worldly goods, now for the
guard, and keeping and for the increace of those goods.

That patience is necessary for the due, and lawful keeping of such goods as
be truly, and lawfully gotten. The viii. Capiter.:
THis conclusion is sure and certain first, that no goods unlawfully gotyn:
may be lawfully kept. An other conclusion, that in time of the extreme need of
the neghbur: no person may keep: lawfully gotyn goods: from the due releue of
such nedy persons. Debt also must uedely be paid as the dayse appointed. For
if any persons being in debt, and having sufficient to pay (without the
great extreme hynderance of their state / and co^dicions of living I would,
for ye increase of their own goods by the gaynes of that det: keep hy^
unpaid they should do wrong, and that gaynes were unlawfully gotten, and like
wise of the reteyne and withholdynge of dettes for the mayntenau^ce of
vayneglorious astate. These points, and such other, secluded and put on
part, by due patience. (for suerly they be ever done for lack of patience to
depart with the goods, all such goods as be lawfully gotten: may be lawfully
retained and kept. But ever to be kept unto a good and lawful purpose and
intent and a good effect and end. And according unto the state and degree, or
condition of the persons. And so of the lawful increasce of the same without
usury, symony, fraud, gyle, desceyte or any such other unlawful means,
how this good lady our Maystres dame patience, does inserue and avail unto
this custody / and increasce: may appear unto you thus, if you consider how
the pacient persons done ever live among their neyghburs restfully, without
discord, or debate, ever ready rather to suffer wrong hurt, and loss: then
to be at debate or to strive with any person, so that evermore patience
induces concord. And concord does follow patience, as her sister, and most
by loved friend. And suerly by concord: Salust.
pacient, and peasfull living: small goods, a little stock: shall grow.
encreasce, and multiply. And by dyscorde, strife, and debate: great substance
of riches, is sone sparpuled, and brought (in short time) unto right noght, if
you will more clearly se and perseue this truth: set before you, vnpacience and
vnrestfulnes. For the philosopher says. Philo.
Qui been definit, contraria assignat. He that would well determyne and declare a
thing: will apoynt with hit a contrary thing. For contrary things joined and
set forth together: do euerych more euydently appear, and show each the better
for other. For if you set black, by white: the white color, shall seem the
whyter / and the black: the blacker. Set now before you.ii. such neghburs
as have been known, both in one town, both rich, and of good substance,
that for a tryfle, a thing (as I was credible informed) passed not the valor
of a grote or.vi.d. fell at strife / and went unto the law, so long, that
another of them was worth ye grote / or yet.i^.d. And but late two ma^er of
persons in diverse cuntreyse dwelling: and making suit at London at the law
for lands came hyder unto the pardone: and ared counsel: which persons not
withstanding did not follow the counsel, unto the time that they had spend
more then ye lands were worth after.xxuij. years purches, and yet, in the
end, were feign to follow the same counsel that first was given unto them.
Dame patience would here, have saved, kept, and increasced all those goods,
your Englysh proverb than is full true. Sufferaunce does ease, many other
means, there been as pride prodigalite, and unlawful pleasures: that done
lightly sparpoyle and destroy great goods and substance for lackh of due
patience. So that we may well conclude / that patience is profetable unto the
lawful getynge, keeping; increascyng: and also spendyng of the wordely goods,
which goods: (as we said) be the lie / and in the lowest place of those
co^modites that do apparteyne, and belong unto man. Then follows of the cors,
and body of man, which is more precious, then any worldly goods.:::

That patience is commodious and profitable unto the good state of ye body of
man. The.ix. Chapter.:*:
WE put the body of man in ye secunde place as much more worthy then ye
goods, and yet under the fame, and good name or honor: in dignite and degree,
although sum persons do set more by the sorry carcas, then other by their name,
or yet by the soul, unto the good state than of the body to be kept, or
recovered: our patience is much necessary, and profitable. For the pacient
person is ever sobre, provident and ware, both in words deeds, cou^tenau^ce,
and behavior. And the hasty man (says the common proverb) wants never
woe. The countenance of man in lokes or gestures: does many times, provoke unto
Ire, and has been occasion of bodily hurt / and harm, many persons by hasty
passions: have hurt them self. Ye, and some slain them self / for lack of
patience, many (for default of patience: have exceded in words, which have
been occasion, and cause of bodyly hurt, and bludshed, Eccli. 6. a.
where the pacient persons by soft and sweet, words have mytigate and swaged
Ire, and restrained hasty passions, and appeased the parties, Ibidem
let never therefore (says the wysema^) a proud hasty word pass thy mouth,
hasty passion and lack of patience have brought and cast many persons into
fevers, axes, varia^t sekenece / and diseases. And also kept them long therein,
and increasced the same. And sum, for lack of patience, do rail, and
blaspheme god. And many wylfully done bide, and continue in sekenes: because
they will not suffer to be lau^ced, Qui pri ceptame dici no^ seruat seip^m
intimit.
cut or otherwise cured. And su^ will not keep prescribed dyete, ne keep the
precepts and co^maundemeutes of their phisicions, surgions or leches, whereby
they been oftymes, causers of their own death. And some have had so great
malice / and hatered unto some persons: yt they had lever suffer great pains
in the body: then to be cured by yt / or those persons. Many and very many
varia^t and sundry inco^modites have comen unto the body of man, for lack of
patience, which the meke pacie^t persons do avoyde, and exscape. And if by
chance they be in peril, yet by patience they sone, and lightly recover, and
find remedy. Some for very anger: freate them self to death, and that is for
lack of patience. Thus you se and perceive that unto the good state of the
body: patience is commodious / and profetable.:::

How patience is commodious and necessary, unto good fame and good name to be
obtained holden and kept The.x. Chapter.:
GOod fame, or good name: does keep ye third place in order, as in dignite,
and degree: more worthy then other ye worldly goods, or yet the body of man.
For the fame does last, and bide after that the body is deed and roten. And
does (in manner) render, and present the ded person by record, and memory, as
yet and ever living in honor, or dishonor according unto the merits of the
person. Fame therefore is so precious: that (as I said before) some persons
have rather lost their lives, then they would lose their fame, and honor. The
cronicles and stories do continue and keep in mind the fame, and the noble
acts and deeds of arms of the pagans and hethyn men and be rehearsed for
examples. And so be the holy legendes or lives of the blessed saints: unto
their great glory, and honor in our lord, and unto our edification. All
Christians therefore should much cure and regard their fame. Timo. 5 Timo. 2.
Cor. 2. prope finem.
For saint Hierom says that our fame and good name: is a fragrant pleasant
odor / or smell unto Christ, as saint Paul writes unto the Corrinthes. And
in an other place he says that those be cruel persons that be negligent and
carelis of their fame. Fame than and good name: is a glorious thing and much
to be desired, and chyfely and derely to be kept, so hit be ryghtly gotten. For
the good fame of the ypocrite is not well gotten. Aug. de bond vi duitat^.
And good fame does follow vtuous deeds (whether the person will or not) as the
shado in the son: does follow the body. Let every person look well than how
they desire to have good name, and fame For if hit be desired for veyneglory,
and so outwardly (by feyned virtue) and not inwordely before god de^e^^^ed hit
is then a liar and shall (in the end) come unto the great shame and rebuke of
the person, Aug. co^ tra pela ^ium. Epist. 109.
let therefore: very, and unfeigned vtue: obteyn^ and wine the fame. And let the
love of honesty and the intent and mind, of ye edificacion of the neghbur:
reteyne and keep the same. The persons of good name, and fame: be had in great
love, and favor, in great honor, and reverence. And in great fear or dread.
The holy wydowe Noemy, and her doghter in law Ruth: Ruth. 1. d. e. and 2
^ester. 9 b. Iudit. 8. a. Ph.. (...). b 3. Regu^. 10. a. 2. Para. 9. a. Math.
12. d. Hiero. ad Pau linum.
were greatly beloved, and favored by their fame, and good name so were both
Hester, and Iudit. And saint Paul wylleth that the persons of good name, and
fame: should be promoted unto office rule, dignite / and honor: above other.
The fame of king Solomon: caused the Queen of Saba to come from far
cou^treyse unto him, whose virtue she said, exceded the fame. The fame of
Ti^us Liuius (as saint Hierome writes) caused many persons to come un to
Rome only to se that man. And so we read of many other persons that have made
great ^orneyse passed the seese and many large, ^ferre cou^treyse, in great
spens of their goods; Hiero ^bis^.
^^great labors of their bodies, and in great toperdy of their lives: only to
se them in presence: whose fame they herd of far, Iosue, David, Solomon /
and many other noble men: were had in great feere, and dread, only by their
fame. The co^mine proverb is in englysh it is a good thing / to have a good
name. For he that has an yule name (say they) is more then half hanged. For
no waysh ne craft: can purge cleanse, Hiero.
nor put a way the spots and fylth of an yule name or fame. For the name of
yule and wyked persons (says the wise man) shall putrifye and rote. Prouer
10. c. Eccli. (...). f. I^^do^. Pr^uer ^2. a. Ecclesi. 7. a. Encli. 37. d.
But the name of good persons shall endure last and bide for evermore. Trake
therefore great care, and diligense: for thy good name and fame, For better is
a good name: then great riches. And man other place he says: that a good
name is more wholesome unto the body: then precious oynteme^tes. And the fame of
the wise man: shall inheryte honor among the people, and shall live, and
last for evermore. But no man can be truly wise: with out patience. For every
vtu has need of patience. The great clerk Pudencius says in the place by
fore named. De bel^^^tur and vic^.
Inde quieta manet, Paciencia fortis ad omnes. Omnibus vna quies, vittutibus
associ^^. Nam vidua est vi^rus: quam non Paciencia firmat. That is to say.
Patience does ever remain / and bide quiet, restfull, strong, and mighty
agay^^t all enemies. And she alon: so quiet / and restfull: is associate, and
accu^penied with all virtues. For that virtue is a wydo we / all without
co^forde, and he^pe: that is not fyrmed stayde and made steadfast by patience.
Patience than is not only the wynner, and ^obteyner: but also the sure custos /
and keeper of all virtues, without whom all other vtues: do flow, vanysh, and
vttexly perysh. Patience is ye doghter of humilite, or mekenes. And in all
manner of virtues: ye doghter is of more perfection then ye mother by cause that
doghter does conteyne the mother, patience co^teyneth mekenes. For every
pacie^t person is meke, Sapie. 8. a.
patience than does vaynquish and overcome all malice, and yule. And does
atteyne strech forth from the first virtue of all virtues unto the last / and
does dispose and order all virtues swetely, gentelly in the best manner.
August. Cato.
For the most high honor of wordly persons is gotyn by patience that is
victory. And the most noble and most honorable kind of victory (after saint
Augustyne, and the wise cato, is gotten by patience. For cruelty / and
vengeance can never wyn such victory as does patience. For patience
vaynquisheth and subdueth her enemies without strokes, Prouer 16.
and without any Ioperdy of death wherefore, the victory of patience (says the
wise man) is more noble, ysidorus Solo. 2. Chriso. super Epi. ad Hebre.
and more honorable then is the conquest of realms or kingdoms. Patience than
in wrongs, and to suffer mekely when a person might resist, and does wylfully
sustain and bear: is ye most high glory, and praise of the pacient person,
and most disprayse / and condempnacion of the noyer and hurter. Cato.
Catho says, that among all the good manners of man patience is y^ greatest
virtue, and does ingendre and get most love, most favor and fryndeshyppe. And
a boue all other virtues: does purches and win most laud and praise. The
wise Solon, Salon.
was therefore called or named of the people of athens not only pacient: but
also self patience. Patience than does syngularly and chesty win good name,
good fame laud and praise. So that without patience: no person / in any
stories, or wryttynge, was ever praised or yet accounted for wise or virtuous.
For patience is called the custos and keeper of innocence, the perfection of
charity. And the preserver of all virtues for without patience al other virtues
do flow, perysh, and come to non effect. Sith than (to conclude) no praise of
good name or fame ca^ be just / and true, without virtue, and no virtue may
continue, and be preserved without patience, we may well say, hit must
necessaryly follow that patience is profitable to obtain, and wyn and to keep
good name, and fame, which (as we said) is more precious, then is other the
goods or ye body. For hit indureth / and lasts longer. For as the prophet
says. Paciencia pauperum non peribit in finem, that is. The patience of the
person that is pore in spirit for our lord: shall never perysh, but ever more
induce. Amen.:*:

Of the fourth co^modite fruit and profecte of patience. The xi. Chapter.:
THe soul of man is more excellent: then be the goods of the world, or yet
then is the body or the said fame and name. For the soul of man is the most
noble creature of ye morlde, except only Angel. And yet many man's soul
(although not in nature) but by grace and merit to be above angel. and so it
is in deed in our savior, and in his blessed mother, and may so be in many
other holy saints, if than we can show that this goodely lady patience, is
commodious, frutful, pfetable, and necessary unto the wealth of the soul: then
shall we acco^plesh our promysse and enterprise. First than we must co^sydre /
and wey: what things do apperteyne unto the wealth of the soul, most directly,
that is to say, shortly, faith, hope, and charity. For these do set the soul
in state of salvation, without which no man may be saved, but of these.iij.
charity is the chief. Mayor horum charitas, says saint Paul. And patience
(as we showed before) is the perfection of charity: 1. Cor. 13. D.
Ergo dame patience is necessary unto the salvation of the soul. Of hope the
apostle says. Spe enim salui facti sumus. By hope shall we be saved, To. 8.
but we hope for that thing yt we se not, that we perceive not, and therefore
by patience we bide, and tarry the due time. And the prophet says. Good
lord, Psalm. 7.
thou art my patience. And my hope from my youth hyderto, But se what very
patience spoke and said by the flame of charity in ye heart of the apostle who
(said he) shall depart us from the charity of Christ? Ro^. 8.
shall trouble or anguysh, shall persecucion* or yet honger* thurst or cold,
or any peril, or dent of sword depart us? nay certainly, but all things shall
we bear by pacieuce, rather then depart from the charity y^ is in christ
Jesus, without charity then we can not have patience. And yet patience (as I
said) does make that charity perfect. But without faith can be no charity,
nor hope. For no man can love ne hope that thing that he knows not, but all
the suerte of knowledge that we have in this life: is by faith alon. For no man
ever saw or has seen God in his natural substance, but because we believe
that is taught us by holy church: we hope, and trust upon the promises of
god, and then of these: does follow charity for these do cause us to love god
that made those promises unto his lovers. And so consequently: we suffer for
his sake. And thus tha^ does patience: perform all those virtues most
necessary unto ye health and salvation of our souls. But now, because that
our patience is sometime taken for the loss of worldly goods. Sometime for
the hurt and noyance of the body. Sometimes for the blottynge, steynynge, and
hynderance of fame. And su^tyme (byonde all these things) for the trouble of
the mind alon: we shall show you how commodious and profitable patience is
unto the quietude, and rest of the mind.

That patience is profitable, and necessary, unto the quietude and rest of
man's mind The.xii. Chap.:
THe loss of wordly goods: may fortune unto any person, without any hurt or
noyance of his body, or of the fame or good name or yet without any ioperdy of
soul, as when thieves, or soden fire do steyle and destroy the goods, and yet
when the persons having yt loss: have knowledge thereof, the mind is
(co^munely) troubled and gruged therewith. But there then has patience a place.
For then does the person, that is disciple unto patience: call unto mind: that
al manner of worldly goods: be not given unto us, as unto propriete as our own
goods but they be committed and delivered by our lord, as his goods, unto
our necessary use and administracion and ever upon a count. For without any
feyle: we shall render, and yield a count of every penny. And also y^ said
disciple knows well hit is but lent good, and that also: without any day
appointed or set, but ever at ye will of the owner, wherefore he will say mekely
and with due patience, Job. 1. b
with holy Job. Dominus dedit, dominus abstulit. etc. Our lord gave al and our
lord has take it as it pleases our lord: so be it, blessed be ever the name
of our lord. And likewise a person may be hurt, or grieved in his body,
although there be no loss ne hurt in the goods, nor yet in y^ fame and that
when the mind is quiet. But yet sone after: the mind will be vnrested
withal, and seek for remedy. And if no remedy can be had, then the disciple of
this good lady calls for his maystres and she full louengly is ready at hand,
and says. Remember (good child) what botches and skabbes / had holy Job, and
specially what pain thy savior Jesus suffered for the, and take me thy maystres
to be thy leche, or physician, and thou shalt be lightly and well cased. Yet
forther, the fame may be sore assailed and in great ioperdye, without any
loss of goods or greaf of the body, and without any blemysh of the soul. As
was in holy Susan, when she was in hard case and shamefully accused: but se
what her maystres, my lady dame patience did for her. For she never accused her
falls accusers, ne yet unto her dear fryndes, did she excuse her self: but
bydynge with her lady patience: she remytted and cu^mytted her holle cause unto
our lord and (with as few words, as might show yt she was not careless, nor
neglyge^t of fame) said unto our lord O eterne, and everlasting god: that
haste the perfect knowledge of all hid, Daniel. 13. e.
and pryuey things, and that know all things before their bygynnynge: Thou
know well (lord) that these men have borne falls wytnes against me and se
(good lord) I go to death, while I did none of all these things that they
have malyciously co^powned / and made (of their own hedes) against me. And
forthwith (by the mean of my lady patience) and of her mother mekenes: help
came, and she was delivered, and her fame and good name, not only preserved and
kept, but also (unto her eterne glory) multiplied and increased. Now yet go
forther unto the self mind: And you shall percey^^e that although in a person
the state of the goods; of the corpse, or body, of the fame, and good name, ye
and also of the self soul: be whole and sound / and stoude al vpryght: yet
may y^ mind be sore vexed and troubled, Aug. de pacien. cap.
as daily happeth in every te^tacion, of the gostly enymyes, the dyule the
world, and the flesh, and by many other occacions of their members, and
seruandes, 2. Reg. 16. b.
as was in david when he sled from his son absolon: a man called semet, a lym
of the dyule: rebuked him extremely, in so much, that his seruandes were
greatly moved therewith, so that one of them would have slain the wreche but
david turned unto my lady patience, and so was not only rested in his own
mind: but also (with his wise, and godly words) he appeased his said
seruandes. Thus appears that patience is good and profitable unto the quietude
and rest, of mind. For the mind is not only moved and troubled by
tentacions, and such outward occasions but also many times without known
occasion, when the persons within them self ben troubled and vexed, and can
not tell why, nor with whom and yet will they lum / and lowre, Tertulianus in
Apolo.
and look all of a ded fashon, and no thing can please for that time. The cause
whereof: may be an humor in ye body, and many times that unrest of mind
cu^meth of opinion or suspicion, Seneca ad Lucil epla 78.
which many times do much grieve and unrest the mind. For let a person put a
way opinion and suspicion (says seneke) and great outward trouble: shall
little, or nothing grieve. Aug. de pacien. La. 9.
For patience wylfully taken: does (by good deliberacion) avoid all such
trouble: and wynneth / and geteth thereby: great ease and rest of mind. For ye
person that has wylfull patience: Quinti lianus. La. 10.
has but little pain. And the impacient person (by cause he will not suffer)
does not avoid the pain and hurt that greueth him and that he dredeth, but
rather does he multiplye his pain by impacience, where the pacient person,
that has determinate will: rather to suffer: then to do any wrong, or puyl:
does mynushe, and make hes pain, Ouidius 8. M^tha. fa. 7.
or trouble much lighter and less by patience. And yet does also avoid / and
excape many wors or greater troubles and pains: wherinto he should (by
impacience) have siypped / and be drowned. The wise seneke therefore said unto
a frynde of his that was troubled and not pacient therewith. Vbi supra ad Lucil.
Make not (said he) thy matter wors, and thy trouble more grievous: by thy
quarelles, co^playntes, and impacience. And unto an other friend he said. Bear
and suffer, says he) with even mind, Ad Pau linum episco 6
and good will and take also and account (as gaynes of marchandes) al such
aduersites, and troubles as fortune does send, or as hap, and fall by
chance in this life: for the time shall come in a while, and very shortly:
Macto.
that felicite and joy, shall make an end of al myseryes and yuyls. And
macrobius says, who so ever (for the time) will dissimble and little care for
troubles, and vexacions: shall (in a short space after) have (by the beniftce
of pacienc^, great rest of mind, and ease and pleasure. Your common englysh
proverb does so affirm. valarius maxi. libro. 3.
Who so will suffer and be still: shall (sone after) have al their will. For the^
is fortune plainly vaynquished and over comen, when she fyndeth a pacient
person. Hit must nedely be true that our savior said unto his apostles and
disciples. virgilius eve. 5.
In paciencia vestra, possidebitis aias, vestras. In your paciece (says he)
shall you have possession of your hertes and minds, Lue. 21.
when a man is troubled, and vexed: the mind (as they say) is not at home,
the mind is not quiet ne at rest, and so has he not (for yt time) the
possession, of him self. But when so ever he does return perfectly unto
patience: the^ shall he (in that pacieace) have again the right possession of
his heart / and mind. There is great difference bytwixe the possessyon of the
mind, and losyng of the inynde? But though a man had (by trouble) in manor
lost his mind: yet he might (by patience) recouere that loss, and bring ye
sick / and feeble brain unto great strength, and hahylyte, where many persons
(by impacience) have lost their minds, their lerning, and high wits, and gone
stark mad and furious. For certe^ly one of the causes of furye, and mad
rages: is proud impacience, or impaciet pride. Patience then ever does render
the mind quiet, restfull sobre, wise / and constant, And so is patience
commodious profitable and necessary: unto the quietude / and rest of y^ mind
and cosequently unto the wealth of the soul, not yet that in the said text of
ye gospel: Christ said. In your patience: shall you have possession of your
minds or of your souls, he said not you shall in your patience have power,
and possession of your worldly goods or lands, nor of yor bodies, nor yet of
your name or fame, not wtstandyng yt unto all these patience is profetable, yet
shall you not have in your patience, any possession of these. For you may be
put from the possession of them all, and lose them and yet have full good, and
meritorious patience, and yet you know well yt for these things men do take
full great patience although they be of small price toward ye soul. For they
shall perysh, but the soul remeyneth for ever. So much the more therefore
should patience be taken for ye quietude of mind, and salvation of the soul.
August. sermon. 223. de te^pore.
Thus have we showed of.iiii. commodities of patience, now remains that we
show unto you of the merits, and small reward of patience. Not wtsta^ding you
must know that the patience that shall deserve reward: must be perfect and
have all due circu^staunces that bylongeth thereunto.

Of the circumstances of patience The.xiij. Chapter.
TO know well y^ due circumstances of pacte^ce hit shall be convenient yt you
know the causers and mouers, unto impacience, yt according thereunto your
patience may reaunswere. For by.iiij. manners is patience assailed and atempted.
That is to say of God, and of the dyuyle. Of man to man / and of man's own
sensualite. Scripture shows yt almighty god did prove the patience of
Abraham: when he commanded him to follow the will of his wife Sat and so to
put out his own son Hismael, and hes mother Agar unto wyldernes, to go forth
at a venture, Genes. 21. b.
they wist not whyder. A great prof of patience. And yet again when our lord
commanded him to offer his son Ysaake in sacrifice. A marvelous exercise of
patience, Ibid. 12.8.
a man to slay his own son, yet was Abraham every where most patiently
obedient. And likewise of holy Job. The second assayler of patience: is the
dyuyle, by tentacion. For he spares no person of any degree, ne any place, ^.
Pet.
or any time, but (as saint Peter says) he cumpaseth and roleth about and
seeks whom he may devour. You know well, he tented and assailed our sayour.
But with great patience he resisted and venquished him. The third assayler: is
man on of another. And this assail is so common, that hit needs non other
declaracion but only our daily expie^ce. The fourth assayler is man of him
self. For the sensualyte or concupiscence of every man, does some time
assail him, and tenteth to prove his patience. Iacobi. 1. b.
Vnus quis que (says saint James) Tentatur a concupiscencia sua abstractus
and illectus. Every man (says he) is tented and assailed drawn away, and
intyced from him self: by his own cu^cupiscence. These assaylers well
considered take heed now what circumstances and co^dicions our patience must
have / if hit be perfect. The first condition is, that it be true, and do
proceed / of love, and never be feyned but always to be as hit seems. Grego,
in Homelia, super C^ ^udr.
And that ever hit dwell / and bide still in the heart, inward: although hit
may seem outward to be contrary. Then must hit be showed universally, unto
every person, in every place. At al times. And in all things, but ever
according unto ye assaylers or assayls thereof. And of y^ cause or matter moved.
For some persons do seem very pacient, and do keep good patience, when they
have loss of their goods, hurt in their bodies, or hyn drau^ce of fame and
good name. And all will they patiently suffer: but not of al persons. For some
can bear their souerynes and superiors, but not their equalles, or inferiors.
And some can suffer / and bear their fryndes, but not their foose or enemies
and yet some can better bear their enemies: then any other persons, and few
men can bear all persons This circumstance of the person therefore: must be
co^sydred. For hit forsyth much, who or what the person is: that does
assail, and move the matter of impacience, and also the matter that is moved.
For when god is the assayler and mouer? what so ever the matter be, ye very
disciple of patience: may never grudge thereat, but though the matter were so
greuouse that he could not well bear hit: yet should he ever have good will to
bear hit and much more. And to be sorry yt he does not bear hit as he would,
and should. And ever to say with Job. Dominus dedit dn^s abstu^it. Sicut dn^o
placuit, ita factu^ est, si^ nomen domini benedictu^. That is. Our lord has
given us all, and our lord has taken hit a way, As it has pleased our
lord. So be it. Blessed be ever the name of god. We showed you before that the
matter of impacience may be ministered sometime by the assail of y^ dyuyle that
never rests to te^te / and assail man in all that he can: but when the
discipe of my lady patience does perceive that hit cu^meth of him: then must
he myghtly, and manfully resist and withsta^de, as did saint Katerine, saint
Marget, and diverse other, that made opyn battle with the dyule, and had noble
victory over him. I^. 4. v.
For (as saint James says) Resistite diabolo, et fugiet a vobis. Resist and
withsta^de you the dyuyle: and he will fle from you I said also thyrdly that
the matter of impacie^ce is ministered su^tymes of man unto man, and this is
common and daily in experience, here then must the disciple of patience
consydre the state of the person that does assail, and prove the patience.
For although patience should be had unto all persons: yet the manner / and
byhauiour of that patience is not always to be excerced and used after on form
and like manner. For unto the soueryns unto the parents, and unto Masters and
superiors: patience must be showed and had with due reverence, and honor, and
with words and countenan^ce according what soever the matter be. But of the
superior unto ye inferiors / may sometime seuerite, and ernest byhauiour be
showed outward so that ever charitable patience be had inward. How
correccion should be done of them that have charge: we showed you in your book
of householders. And how, equals: that is persons of like degree: should byhaue
them self, each unto other in patience: the apostle Paul techeth saying.
Honor inuicem preuenientes. That is euerych to prevent their co^peres in
honor, To. 12. c.
reverence, and good brotherly byhauiour. Unto our friends: our patience must
be showed, with fre^dly thanks, kind and loving words. And unto our foose
and enemies: math. 5. g. Luck. 6. d. e.
our savior does teach us in the gospel how we should behave our self,
sayng I bid you that you love your enimyes, do good unto them that do you
harm, and yuyle. Speak fair and bless them, that do speak, rughly, and that
do banne, and curs you. And this may serve and content you as unto the
circumstances apperteynyng unto the person now unto the circumstance of the
place. For sum person can well and ordrely fuffre / and bear all persons
according unto their astate and degree, but not in all places. For some that
bear the loss of such lands or goods as be in ye cu^tre far from them:
can not bear the loss of their inheritance, or of those goods that be at
home in their house, and sure possession, as we have in the book of kings of a
man that was called naboth Iezrahelita, that by no means would depart from
hes inheritance yt king achab, would have bought, 3. Regst. 12. a.
and because he said him nay: hit cost him his life, although by wrong which
wrong was after revenged by almighty god. Su^ persons can bear and suffer
rebuke of any person but not in the presence of people. And few persons will
have patience in all places. And therefore the disciple of patience must have
inwordly patience in all places, although the manner be outward erneste. As by
case, a wise man will bear a large rebuke of his wife or of his servants in
secret place, that in open place: may justly seem not to take hit with
patience. And likewise of the circumstance of time. For some that can bear both
the persons and the place: will not bear at all times. For when the brain is
troubled by surfete, Eccle. 3. A. and b.
or the mind suddenly assailed with unaccustomed and unused vexacions, dyseases,
or troubles: many persons do then forget patience. But the disciple of my lady
patience: will take good head unto the time. For although the wise man say,
there is a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time of silence, to speak little,
or no thing. And a time of speaking, to talk and commune, yet is there no time
of impacience, wherein my ladies disciple may contrary unto her discipline, be
inwardly moved at any time. Notwithstanding that the respect and great
weight of all these.iij. forsayde circumstances, that is to say, the person,
place, and time: does hang much upon the fourth circu^sta^ce that is to say
the matter, and cause ministered. For the matter and cause may be against god, and
his laws, or against the neighbor, kynne, or friends or against our own
person, now if the matter and cause be against god unto the injury and wrong of
him or his laws: to suffer then that wrong is no patience, but rather
iniquite, and wykednes. And if the matter be against the neighbor: then to
dissymble that wrong and as hit were no thing to meddle therewith he cate
therefore: is a negligence, and great unkindness, because yt every brother.
Chriso. super ^ath.
and faithful Christian has cure, and charge of other. Now must the
disciple of patience look well what the matter is. And unto whom hit does
apperteyne and belong, and thereafter must he order his patience. For in the
matter or cause that belongs unto his propre person: to suffer much wrong:
is laudable, and much to be praised, yet must you here remember, that on man:
may bear and use two persons, that is to say, a common person, and a private
person, every man is first in him self a syngular private person of soul and
body, on man. And when so ever any such private person is (by the eleccion or
suffrau^ce of god) called unto any common office, rowlme, dignite or degree, as
to be a king a soureyne, or a ruler and gouerner of any co^munalty, or cu^pany
or as their curate then bears that man two persons, and then if wrong or
rebuke, be done unto his own propre person, hit may be laud and praise, and
also meritorious to suffer, but if like things be done unto him / as the
common person, King, Mayre, Shyryf, Bishop Abbate, soureyne Curate / and al
such other: then may it not be suffered without the offense of that co^munaltye
/ whose person he bears, and so is it of the^ that in prechynge or in
ministracion of the sacraments: do bear the person of Christ, or of the church
And therefore the injury, and wrong done unto any such a public and common
person: must be corrected, John. ^. f.
reformed, or at the least excused. For of both do we read in scripture. For
our savior him self did excuse him unto the Jews when they said he had a
dyuyle within him, he said, nay, I have (said he) no dyuyle, but I honor my
father. And so may any private person excuse him self, when the injury or
wrong leyde unto his charge: does sown, or appear to be against the honor of
god, or unto the rebuke of any other persons / then hi^ self, Daniel ^^. c. f.
as we have of Susan, when she was fasly accused. And yt the injury of the
neighbor should be defended: we have in the book of Daniel, how he defended
the said Susan. But the iniurye of god: may never be ouerpassed, nor yet of
those public and common persons that do use his rowlme. Moses did revenge
and punysh the in iurye, Erodi. 32. f.
and offense of god in them that did ydolatrye: and caused them to be slain by
their own kynne and friends. Io. 2. ^.
And our savior did punish, and drive out of the temple, buyers, and sellers.
And how they were punyshed that vexed and despised, Nume. 16. d. Deuteronomy. 11. a.
Psalm. 105. b.
his prelates does appear, in Dathan and Abiron, and Chore, that by ye
vengau^ce of god, did synke into hell quycke, with their tabernacles / and all
their substance. And by mary also the sister of Moses, that for grudgyng
against Moses her brother and soueryne under God, was stryken suddenly with a
plage of leper, Nume. 12. C.
and so remained unto the time that by the prayer of her brother: she was cuxed
and healed by miracle. The same thing is setforth in the fourth book of
kings, how those saldiours that (with despecte) came to assail, and vex the
prophet of god Helias: Ca. pri.
were al destroyed by ve^gau^ce of god. Many such examples, be showed in
scripture. The injury also of al common persons: is in manner the injury of
both god and man, which therefore may not be suffered unpunished yet may not any
correccion be done by impacie^ce with Ire of stomach to revenge and wreke the
self wrong, but rather by the zele of equite, and justice, as by the exeample
of our savior, when (as is said) he drove the buyers and sellers out of the
temple, and of Moses when he brake the tables, and commanded the correccion,
and manslaughter that I spoke of before, both they seemed to be angry, wroth,
Joan. 2.
and impacient yet were they not so in deed. But they showed and taught how
correccion must be done duly and justly. So that patience be ever kept
withinforth in the heart, mind and co^cience. And yet withoutforth to be done
with seuerite and ernest manner, in contenaunce, words, deeds, and byhauiour,
as best may co^duce, and profet unto ye wealth of the sinners and trespasers
according unto the qualyte and quantite of the sin and offense for the
salvation of their souls, and the reformacion of their manners. And where the
sinners and offenders may be reformed, and appeased, or made better, by
patience, 23. q. 4 Tolera dum.
there, will the meke, and true disciple of my lady patience, use her, and take
bear and fuffe wroge and despecte, or rebuke of the noughty and yuel persons.
For suerly, that person was never perfect disciple of patience ne yet of any
other vtue: yt (in such case) would not gladly suffer, Grego. 2. Moral. et in
Homel. sua^ Cuz audiretis.
and bear ye wyked person. For though in deed many persons be very froward
and much importune yet there then to suffer (says Seneke) is most glorious
victory, and most high praise. Thus have we showed you, of the circumstances of
patience, unto whom, where, when, wherein, and in what manner: patience is to be
kept and used. Seneca de Cleme^tia. lib. pri.
And so is patience, having all due circu^stauce: much profetable unto ye
soul, both in that hit does remove, and put away therfrom, all that should be
noyans and hurtful thereunto, and makes the body subdued, Aug. de pacien.
and obedient (as seneke says) unto the soul. And also wynneth most merit
and finally has most high reward of the which merit, and reward we should
now speak, Ad Lucil. cp^m 78.
but that I think least to show you / first how this patience that so does
merit / and obtain reward: may be adquired and gotyne, and ons gotyne: how
hit may be preserved and kept / or (at the least) recovered.

How patience is adquired gotyne and learned. The: xiiij. Chapter.:*:
TThose persons that do desire and would feign have a reward or a gift: must by
some means deserve hit before they have hit. And that deseruynge is by labor,
or diligence / and that labor or diligence can not be done: till hit be learned
and gotyne, and yet every labor or diligence does not deserve like reward.
All these things be opyn bnto your sight and knowledge as well in arts
mecanicall, and handy crafts: as in speculatyue sciences. And when the
science, conynge or craft is learned and gotyne, yet without deserving ca^ no
reward be had. Siquis non vult laborare no^ manducet. He that will not labor:
Paul, 2. These. 4. c.
shall have no fode, he getes another meat nor drink: yt no thing will do
therefore, saint Paul again. No person shall be be crowned, but that lawfully
does stryne. This term strive in Englysh does syngnyfye and betokyn diverse
things, as in words or deeds. But specially in common camps, 2. Tim. 2. a.
where been certain rewards or gifts set forth, and appointed for the stryuers
of every game, as where is a general shutynge there is a standarde of silver,
for the arowe, and flight their silver tokens, and diverse persons do there
strive, which may shute fortheste and so win the best game, and likewise of
other games and camps, as of wrasklyng, runnyng for the glayue. Iustynge for
the dyama^de and such other, euerych a propre reward according unto their
merit, and deseruyng, but he that will not strive, ne put him self forth to
do what he ca^: he shall have no game at al, he getes no reward. So in like
manner of patience, he yt will not learn / and get patience and then use and
exercise patience, according unto the law of the game, that is to say:
after ye form and manner before showed: he can not have the garlonde, and
reward of patience. First then take heed how patience is learned, and gotyn.
Every art or craft that is learned does first byholde the end, that is,
why, wherefore, and unto what purpose, a person does learn this craft or that,
more then an other craft. Suerly ye reward is the cause and end, to have a
living as they say. Tece. in Tus^.
And (as Cicero says) men cu^munly do set their children unto that craft
that best is rewarded, as in some time, and in some regions (says he)
mynstrels, Definicion of Exercise.
and peynters, were most set by, but every man lerneth that unto him or unto
his friends seems best to bring him unto that reward, and state of living
that he most desires, how than every craft is learned: we showed you in
your draught of death, Definicion of Experience.
that is to say by experience, and experience, by exercise. Exercise, is an
act, deed / and an use of workyng, or laboryng. Then does a person exercise
patience: when he does put hit unto use in workynge thereof, or laboring
therein. Experience (after Aristotle) is a knowledge, Primo Methaphisic^.
and proof of that thing that is found out, and gotyne by exercise. And by
many experime^tes or experie^ces: (says he) art or craft is gotyne, And yet
must the lerner, have some manner of teacher, or some introduccion / and
bringing in unto that craft that he would learn. For although, that many
persons, by natural wit, with diligent study, with the help of such
experiences and lernynges as they had before in other arts: may learn some
arts or crafts by the^ self (as did saint Augustyne and diverse other) yet
were they not utterly without a teacher. For that natural wit, and ye
experience of those other things that before they had excercised, did help
them unto that art or craft that they seemed to can, without any teacher. The
definicio^. of Practyse.
Experience with practice: is called also a masters. Practyse, is the oftyne
workyng, and using, of that art, or craft that was learned and gotyne by
exercise / and experience. And yet unto all these who so ever shall learn,
get, and can any art or craft: must have due, and convenient matter, wherein,
to work and excercife / and to have experience, and to practyse. And yet
before all other: hit his necessary, and convenient that every person that
would learn, should know what the sience, art or craft is: that he desires.
And that is called the definicion / and declaracyon of that thing. As if a
person would be a glouer, and learn the craft of glouerye: he must know what
is glouery, what is meant by that term / and word, glouerye, as thus. Glouerye
is an art or craft to shape, and duly to frame an instrument or garment for
a man's hand, called a glove. And gramer is a science or conynge to speak write
or understand every sentence ryghtly according unto congruite. Now I pray
you se how we have hyderto kept this order, in all our intracty of patience.
First we setforth ye definicion, in diverse manners. Then (after the due praise
of patience) does follow of the co^modites of patience, as the cause why and
wherefore patience should be learned and practysed. The matter (I said) of every
craft or conyng must be had, as lether unto the glouer, or cordiner. Cloth unto
the Tayliour, or Draper. And the.viii. parts of reason: unto gramer. The
matter, of patience: is trouble, vexacion, hurt, harm, gref, and loss, and
these or any of them to be in wordly goods, 2. Moralium.
in the body, in the name or fame, and in the soul. Which we have su^what
touched before. Saint Gregory says, that who so ever will be Abel: 11.
Moralium.
must be excercised with Cayne. That is to mean that who would be in the state
of Abel all pacient: must be excercised with the trouble or the malice of
Cayne. And in an other place. The virtue of patience (says he) is never
proved in prosperity, but in the contrary yt is aduersite. For as gold and
silver be tried and fined in the fire, so be the disciples of patience tried
and taught in trouble, and aduersite. Aduersite than trouble and noyance is the
matter wherein patience is learned and gotyne. For if a person would believe that
he had patience, without trouble, and without great exercise therein: certainly
that patience were but a peynted patience. There is much difference between a
fire made of wode, cols, or such other co^bustible matter that will sone or
lightly brenne. And a fire peynted upon a wall. And certainly so is hit of those
forsayde paciences. For as peynted fire can not bren you, so patience without
trouble can not prove you Trouble than is the matter. Now as unto the doctors,
instructours / and teachers of patience: there be many. For every thing that
does give a man occasion unto patience maybe taken as a teacher thereof.
Instruction than / and teaching is required. For although patience, as other
vtues may be had by infusion, yt is by the gift and se^dynge of god without any
help of other creatures yet because this mean, is not common: but of
synguler prirogatyue: we will not speak thereof. For S. Paul knew well yt faith
might be had by infusion, yet said he. To. 10.
How may y^ people believe, and have faith without heryng, and teaching as
though he said, hit ca^ not co^munely otherwise be had, and so say I of
patience. And yet also, although some arts or crafts may be learned (as I
said) by self study and diligence yet is not that common another. Than is
teaching the comune way. But her unto some person might say, that saint
Augustyne calls patience a gift of god, certainly: so hit is: I do not deney.
And so be other vtues, although not by infusion. Patience is so his gift,
because that (of his own fre will and gracious goodness) he does freely offer
hit unto man, and then will he that man shall work with him, by good will and
consent, and likewise in all virtues before they be had, and yet when they be
had: they can not be kept without him. For he does always follow and work with
man, as well to end as to begin, if man do y^ is in him, yet must we have
instruction, and teaching, which stands in precepts, commandments, or
reules, and in examples, or in both. So have we of patience, we have some
preceptours, masters, and teachers by precepts by exeamples, and some by
both. The great master almyghtye god in holy scripture does (by the wise
man) teach us the way and mean unto patience, this is the precept and
commandment, saying. Fili accedens ad seruitutem dei, stain insticia, Act. 2.
a
et in timore, et prepara aiam tuam ad ten tationem. etc. That is to mean.
Son, or child if thou wylt accede, approach, and draw nere, unto the
bondage, and thrall service of god (which: in deed: is most high liberte, and
fredome) thou must standefast and styffly, in justice, and ryghtwysnes and in
dread. And thou must also prepare, and make ready thine, heart and mind, unto
tentacion. Thrast down thy herie, and hold hit under. And take patience, and
suffer. And inclyne, lay to thine ear and herynge, and so receive, and take
the words of understanding. Suffer thou, and bear the sufferynges of god,
after his will, And be thou joined coupled and knyt unto our lord, and suffer:
that by the last, thy life may grow and increas. What so ever is applied, and
put unto the: take hit, and in sorrow: suffer / and bear. And in thy vile and
little reputacion: have thou patience. For gold, and also silver: is proved,
and tried in the fire. And so be the acceptable persons, in the chymney or
fournes of humilite, and mekenes, that is patience, if you dread, and fear our
lord: then sustain, and bear his merciful troubles. For the fournes does
prove the potters veselles, and so does the reptacion and assail of troubles,
prove the just persons: Hyderto ye said wise man. Saint Paul a good master
and teacher of patience: said, No. 5. ^.
yt he rejoiced and was glad in troubles. For we know well (says he) yt
trouble works patience, and patience works probacion, and probacion works
hope. And hope in god: does never co^founde ne deceive any person, if you will
learn patience (than) you must love trouble and never fle nor avoid the
cu^peny of vnrestful and troublous persons. The holy prophet David said Cum his
qui oderunt pacem: eram pacifieus. Psalm. 119.
I was (says he) peaceful and restfull, and a maker of peace: with them that
hated peace. And when I spoke feyre unto the^: they (without cause) impugned
and contraried my saying, and so thwarted with me. Iacobi 1. ^.
Blessed is that person says saint James that suffers temptacion and
trouble. For when he therein is proved: he shall receive the crown and garlonde
of life. And before that, he says. Think you and judge, or suppose (mine
own brethren) that all joy and pleasure is, when you fall in to variant and
diverse tentacio^s and troubles, knowing for certente, that the probacion and
proof of your faith: does work patience and patience shall have the work of
perfeccion, yt so you may be perfect, and whole unto god, in no thing
feyntynge feylynge, ne lacking. Thus have we showed you of one master and
teacher of patience, which by certain precepts and rules of holy scripture
does teach the disciples and lerners of patience: to love troubles and to be
excercised in troubles and by no means to fle nor avoid any wrongs. Now
shall we setforth some doctors that do teach patience by exeample, and those be
in two manners, that is to say worldly persons, and gostly persons.

Of the exeample of worldly persons. The.xv. Chapiture.:*:
WE may take exeample to learn patience at the worldly folks, and that as well
of the that be yuel, and dampnable persons: as of them that be good and vtuous.
The ambycious sinners to atteyne, and win wordly honors, and dignites: by
right or wrong: do take and suffer gladly loss of their goods, Ioperdy and
hurt of their bodies, little carynge for their name and fame, and less for the
wealth of their souls, which thing we have, not only of the stories of the
getyles, Salu^^.
as of carelyne, in Saluste / and of the syege of Troy in Vergil, but also in
holy scripture, as in the books of kings. Vergil.
In the Machabies and in many other places, although we name none of the
cronicles of christians. Augu^^. sermu^e. 223. c. de tpere. et de paciencia. 3.
et. 4. Cap.
Thieves also and robers, unclean livers, and sawldiours: do take marvelous
patience in all troubles, and Ioperdyes: for to obtain that they unlawfully
covet, and desire. And so do many full good virtuous persons as the marchantes,
shypmen, pore housba^des artificers and laborers. And all worldly persons:
which (by good reason) may move, and make the gostly persons abashed and a
shamed, when they se and perseue these manner of lyueres take such patience in
so great pains, and all for to have and get those things that be uncertain
unto the^, but only that they hope, and trust to obtain them. And yet when
they have the full possession of them at desire, and pleasure they be in as
great vncerte^te how long to keep and inioye the^, or whether they shall
sooner be taken from their goods by death, or their goods from them by chance
Read the gospel Luck.xii. C. But unto the true pacient persons: Luc. 12.
their gaynes be ever sure, so that when they have ons the reward fynall, of
their patience: they shall be sure never to depart therfrom, ne ever shall h^ be
less in any part, but rather more. And co^tracie is it of those things for
the which the worldly persons do suffer. For when they have gotyne, and have in
possession yt thynge^ they labored fore, and desired yet: beside yt (as we
said) that they be unsure of y^ keeping thereof: they may be sure it may and
shall be mynushed, and made less daily. Alas how is it the that the gostly
persons be not provoked by their exeamples (to suffer, and bear more gladly
troubles, and pains for God, and gostly gaynes? I fear me, Luck. 16. ^.
hit be as our savior said of worldly wisdom / or wit. Saying. The
chylderne of this world be more prudent, and wise, or wytty of provision, in
their kind: then be ye chylderne of light and grace. So I think, that ye
worldly persons do more fervently desire those things that they suffer for:
August. sermo^e. 223. c. de ^^pore.
then do ye gostly persons. For. S. Augustyne says, that the violent fervor
of desires: does cause in man, the tolerance and suffera^ce of troubles,
labors and pains. For no man does gladly suffer, and bear that thing that
does put him to loss, or unto hurt, pain, and grefe: but for the love and
desire of that thing that unto him is a delectacion and pleasure. Aug. de
pacie^tia Capi. 5.
And therefore, the more vehement and huge, the more ardent and flamynge / that
the said delectacion, co^cupiscience, and pleasure is in man: so much is he,
thereby re^dred, and made more pacie^t to, suffer and bear all manner of sorous
pains, and greues, for that thing y^ he so coueteth, desires and loves. That
desire (than) and love: is the cause of patience, and suffrance, as well in
gostly as in worldly persons. The love of y^ world: in worldly persons. And in
gostly persons the: love of god, which two loves: as they be in them self
diverse: so have they diverse begynnynges, and sprynges. For the love of the
world has beginning and spring in the frail and corrupt fre will of man,
procedynge of the false flaterynge, voluptuous beawtye and semynge pleasure of
worldly things. And is fastened, pyght and grounded to remain, and consume in
the heart and mind, by lewd use, and unlawful custom, which custom (after
sait Ysodore) so byndeth the person. Ysodo.
Vt vix remoueri posset, That skant (says he) or vu^eth, it may ever be
removed, But the godly, and gostly love, is not so engendered ne bread in man,
but rather is diffused, shed and powered down upon us, and so synketh into our
hertes, of the holy ghost and spirit, ^o. 5. a.
that (as saint Paul says) is given unto us. And therefore the patience of
the gostly persons: is of that spirit, that so did send and mynistre the
said love, and not of the self persons, though they be never so just and
gostly. For (as we said before) it is a gift of god, that no person (of him
self) may obtain or come by. Notwithsta^dinge every man (as oftymes we say)
has of god that grace freely given of his own bounty and goodness: that he
may dispose his will, heart and mind to leyne unto that grace, and to follow
the mocion thereof. So than is the patience of gostly persons: 1. Cor. ^. Aug.
de pacie^ti^
grounded and has beginning and rote of charity (which as ye Apostle says)
does sustain, suffer and bear all things to be borne and suffered. According
therefore unto the quantite of love and desire in both, the gostly and worldly
persons, is the quantite of pains and troubles, for ye thing that is beloved,
and desired, is more strongly and gladly suffered, and more mekely and myldly
borne and taken. Yet is there much difference between these paciences. For the
worldly patience engendered of worldly love of those things that be
transitorye, and that sone pass and be gone: Ioc. 3. ^
is not from above (as saint James says) of sapience. 2. Io. 2.
And saint John^ commanded his disciples therefore that they should not will
ne desire to love the world, nor those things that be there in. The worldly
patience (than) is al worldly, and the gostly patience heavenly. The one bestly
and carnal. The other gostly and spiritual. The one / sinful, and dyuelyshe.
And the other good, and goodly. Unto the ton patience: man may attain and rech
by him self, by his own will But unto the the other not so. And why. The cause
is that the co^cupiscens, desire, and love whereby the worldly persons do so
styffly and obstinately bear and suffer pains and sorous: is of the world and
all sinful, and man (of him self) may fall into sin, though he can not by
him self arise again unto the state of grace, as by exea^ple, a man ca^ not
clymbe unto a steple top without streyres or some other-helpe, but when he is
at the highest place thereof: he may of his own will without help fall down But
unto the gostly patience: man may not so attain, and come, of him felfe, be
cause the seruou^ love, and desire whereby the gostly persons done so strongly,
and meruelousely, suffer so wonderful pains: is of god, and god is a spirit
impossible that may not suffer ne have any pain. A man therefore can not love
that thing impassible: with out he be holpyn and inflamed with that godly fire
that is the holy ghost, and so then may he love god, and by that love he may
suffer, and gladly bear: insufferable and vnbereable pains for god. For (as we
said before) charity bears and suffers al things. Psalm. (...) 3. d.
From the which charity saint Paul said no thing should depart him. Another
trouble, nor anguyshe, another hongre, thyrst, nor cold no peryle nor ioperdy,
ne persecucion nor vengau^ce no dent of sword nor dread of death. For hit is
written that we be mortified and put to death every day / in all our life time
for the (good lord) but in all these do we venquyshe and overcome al for him
and by him that has perfectly loved, us. For I am certene (says he) that
another death ne life, nor angels, another pryncipates nor virtues, another
things instant or present, nor things to come. No strength nor power, another
heyght ne depthe, nor any other creature: may depart us from the charity, and
love of god, which is in Christ Jesus, our lord and master. Now you se what
might and strength love has, and how inwordly persons hit causes them to
take great labors and suffer much, and so to learn patience / and yet is hit
in deed: no patience, nor worthy the name of patience, although hit be a
suffraunce, and so does seem only patience. For (as we have showed before) the
cause of the suffrau^ce does make patience, and not the self suffraunce, yet
may we christians take exeample at their suffrau^ce that be worldly: to learn
and win true faithful and meritorious patience. And much may we be abashed
and a shamed of our dulnes and unkindness, when we se or here how they suffer
and bear for ye vain love of their lewd desires, and how little pain we take
and suffer for god, to win very patience. Now let us tha^ ^urne our face
from this manner of patience, because we perceive hit is not true patience,
although the exeample might move us and so teach us / and let us follow ye
exeamples of better masters and more sure learning.::

Of the exeamples of gostly persons. The.xvi. Chapter.:*:
Saint James says we may take example of the yuel labor, I^. 5. (...).
pain and patience of yuel persons, but much more of ye holy prophets, whom
now we bless and praise, for their pains and suffrynges, you have hard
(says he) what Job suffered, and what end our lord made: you have seen and
perceived. Now than, if we shall take the doctrine and lerdynge of our
patience / before defined, To. 2. ^.
and destribed, at and by exeample, We may well begin at the exeample of
our Lord god that (as saint Paul says) does (by great patience) tarry,
bide, and look for our ^o^uersion from sinful life unto good life. Aug. de
pacie^tia Cap^^.
But here must you beware that you think not ne believe, patience to be in god
as hit is in us. For w^ can never have patience without pain, without
suffrynge of loss, hurt or grefe, which manner of passions be never in god,
but when god does mynystre Justice, and so does punysh the sin of man: then
we say that god is angry and displeased, and yet in deed there is no
perturbacion of yt passion of Ire in him. And again when he does use vnt^ us
his mercy, grace, benignite and goodness: then say we that god loves us, and
is pleased with us, and yet be there non such mutacions nor chaungynges of
affec^yons, or passions in god. And yet may we say that god without any
passion: is most hyghly paciente. And that he has not only most parfecte
patience: but also that he is the self essenciall patience, and the founteyne,
well spryng, and beginning of all good patience. And therefore they err and
think much a mysse: Aug. de pacie^^^s et eypr^ anus. aug. (...) supr^. Cap. 5.
that do say they may have patience of their own self by the liberty of
their fre will. For David said, good lord god, thou art my patience. That
god has patience, and that much and marvelous, above that any tongue can
speak, or any heart may think appears openly from the beginning of the
world. In that specially: that he so pacie^tly, and mercifully suffered and
bare, the great unkindness (and yet forther) the great rebellious obstinacy,
and disobedience, of our first pare^tes Adame, and Eve. And also of their first
son Cayne in fleyng of his brother Abel. And ever (sithe that time hitherto)
has borne and suffered, and yet does, bear (unto the great contumely and
dyspyte of his mayeste, and honor) the ydolatrye of Caynes post ryte ysshue
and ofsprynge, Cyprianus vbi supra.
and of al infideles that set up their falls gods and their ydoles of yerth
metalles, of ston, and wode, in their profane temples that is to say, such
temples as were never consecrate ne hallowed, but (contrary unto all good
religion) wyched and cursed, he suffers them to do unto them sacrifice and
sacrilege. And yet god does not only suffer, and most patiently bear them in
all these and many other abhominacions: but also does give his gyfies equally
as well unto the^ as unto his chosen children. The son, the moon, and y^
sterres the elements all manner of wedders, all manner of fruits and fode, in
like unto the good, and badde or yuel persons. And although hit be in his
power, and also just unto their deseruynge, to take vengaunce and wreke upon
them, and utterly to destroy them, yet notwithstanding yt he is daily assailed
and provoked by their many, and continual offenses and malycious hardness of
heart, yet (I say) does he, by great patience, differ his justice, and does
tarry, bide and look whether they will change / and amend their life. ^^^cvi.
18.
For he says. Nolo mortem mo rientis. I have no will that the sinner should
dye in his sin but rather that he should be converted and turned from the
death of sin, and that he should live. M^la^h. 3. Iohel. 2.
Return (says he) and come again unto me. And by hes prophet. Iohel
Return you sinners, and come home (says he) unto your lord god. For he is
merciful pytuous and pacient, and has great compassion upon the myserie of
man, ready ever to restrain, and withdraw his sentence, and judgment against
the malice done and showed unto him. 4. Isbr^ Ca. 180 prope sine^^^
Here now does appear that we may take exeample at our lord god to learn
patience. For (as we have in a reuelacion of our holy mother saint Bryget)
patience does enter, and synke into the heart and mind of man, by the
exeample of our lord god and of his holy saints. Sithe god (than) is both
our lord and our father (as christ says in the gospel) we ough to love,
that he loves. For that thing that he loves: is to be (of right) beloved.
And that thing, that he loves his goodness, and mageste, does commend and
praise, and setforth for exea^ple to be followed. And every seruante is bound
to follow his lord, and master and hit becomes the child: to follow the
father. And so did the old fathers of the old testament: follow god in
patience as their lord, and father. Adame had great patience with Cayne when
he had slain his dear beloved son Abel, and he had no mo sons then but him
alon, whereby Adame had great occasion: to fle him again as just and due
vengeance, for his treaspas, and so did Cayne suppose, and fear he would have
done. Ge. 3 c,
For he said unto our lord god, when he had cursed him for his wicked deed,
lo (said he) now do thou cast me from the face of the yerth, and I must be
hyd from thy face, and I will be a vagabunde, and a tenegate in the yerth, and
therefore every person that fyndeth me: shall have will to fle me, but our lord
was more pacie^t and would not suffer that: but rather let him bide: yt all the
world might learn patience, and so did Adam and Eve, and their daughters. For
so patiently they bare and suffered yt vengeable deed, yt none of them did so
much as challenge or rebuke him therefore. For they know well he was so indurate
and styfe with despere: yt he should rather be wors by their words, then better.
Patience then was best. And Abel also was an exeample of patience, and a figure
of Christ, sithe he would not resyste, Ty^anus de paci^^^^.
ne withstand, nor strive with his brother, but like a lamb mekely and
pacie^tly suffered him to do what he would: The patience of Noye, was notable,
that without murmr or grudge, suffered so mekely y^ punyshme^t of our lord,
and also the mock and dishonor of his own son Cham. ^c. 6. ^.
And Abraham when he was commanded to, fle and offer his son, was (without
resystence, with all patience of devotion most redely obediente. And Ysaake
his son, Ibide^. Been. 22. b. e. Ibide^. 27. g. Be. 32.
with like patience and devotion was as ready to be offered. Jacob showed great
patience when he flede out of his country from his father and mother, for dread
of his brother Esau. And yet more pacient when he mekely appointed to appease
him, his enimye, with large presents and gifts. Ibede^. 37. c.
And what may be said of Joseph, yt not only did bear and suffered the great
and innatural unkindness of his brethren patiently: but also forgane them, and
fed and comforted them most charitable. Moses was despised, and suffered
many rebukes and great troubles of the most unkind people of Israel, Exo. 32.
and nere at the point to be stoned unto death of them. And he most mylde and
pacie^t: prayed full hertely for them David suffered great persecution of Saul,
1. Re. 2^ Ibide^. ^4.
and yet when he had him in his danger: he favored and spared him, and also
when he was ded: he mourned and bywayled him, 2. Re. 1.
and reue^ged his death, if we should here recount Samuel, Helias, Helizeus,
Esaias, Hyeremy, and all the holy prophets, how they by suffraunce wanne the
crown of patience: hit should be to long a work. Yet one great cha^pion and
syngular exea^ple of patience shall I set forth before you that is holy Job.
Look upon him well: and you may learn good patience. We showed you before (if
you remember) that all the assayles and troubles, and tentacions of patience do
fall and come unto man, other by the loss of wordly goods or of possessions,
or of the loss of fryndes, or else for the hurt of the body, or else for the
blotynge and steynyuge of fame and good name, or else for the grieve of mind or
peril of the soul. And in all these co^munely man is troubled and tented, by
man, notwithstaudynge that sometime, god (as I said) may, and does prove the
patience of his servants, and so does the dyuyle by his license, and
suffraunce, also. And this assail is most extreme and grievous, because of the
powere subtilite, and malice of the enemy, that always does as much as he is
suffered of god, which is euede^ti his deed unto Job. For first he assailed, and
examyned him in his worldly goods, and yt not after the common manner of
fortune, to lose a part: but he took all, Job. 1. ^. d.
and that substance was not small, for he was a lord of goods and very rich.
And yet went he more nere him. For where he was more rich, and greater lord
in yt he was a father of many fair / and both goodly and godly chylderne: he
took them all, not one by one, as sekenes, and common plages do: but all in
one instant, by a soden and ve^geable manner of death. And yet forther, when he
was lest without all worldly help, and co^forde, except his wife alon (that
unto her housbande was as every wife is one body, one flesh, and as an other
self he and so should have been unto him a syngular help and conforde) the
dyuyl armed her against him, I^r^ez.
as before he had done Eve against Adam / and when he had lost all the world,
and yet beyond all: the dyuyl had stryken him with sekenes most miserable, not
with the ston, or colyke, or with fevers / and common plages: but so (with
boytches and sores) bewrapped him that from the sole of the foot unto the
crown of ye head: Job. 2.^
was no place hole, nor yet without extreme and most grievous pain, ache, and
woa, and that contynually, day and night every hour and minute without any
remyssion, ease or rest, and so clearly and utterly forsakyn of all creatures:
having no place to bide in: but the muckehepe, or dongehyll, whereupon
setting, and with a shell scrapynge the skabbes, and wryngynge and a voydynge
the stynkynge matter out of his sorofull sores: she (I say) his wife, so armed
and taught (as I said) of the dyuyle: far passed her master. For when he
had (from most high, prosperity) brought him suddenly to be another lord of
goods nor servants, nor yet father of any chylderne, and in body without
health unto most cruel tourme^tes and misery: she yet (beyond al this)
assailed him with the most unnatural and must vnheltheably wound of
unkindness, which most incurable perceth the heart. For instead of loving
and fre^dly comfortable words: she assailed him with vpbraydes and rebukes, and
(over all) with poisoned and more then dyuylyshe counsel, whereby, he should
not only have lost for ever, his most noble and most glorious and godly fame,
and good name, of Justice, Job. ^.^
which he had above all men upon yerth (god him self to mytnes that said of
him, yt no man upon yerth was like unto him, simple, plain, without gyle or
deceyte, and so dredful to offe^de our lord) but he should also have dampened
his own soul, which was all the infors and labor of the dyuyle. For when
she had said that all his hope and holiness was vain and lost: she counseled,
him to blaspheme god, and then to fle or kill him self, to be rydde and
delivered of his sekenes, and myserie. But now mark well (for your learning)
what he answered unto all these assayles, and troubles. First when all his
goods, and children were gone: he suddenly changed him self and his array,
and fell down prostrate upon the yerth and worshyped our lord and said. God
gave all, and god has taken hit away, as hit has pleased our lord: so has
hit come to pass, blessed be the name of god. And unto his wife he said. ^ob.
2.8
Thou spekest now, like unto one of the fols that be faythles. Sithe we have
taken of the hand, and power of god all our goods: why should we not
sustain, bear, and suffer the yuels, and greues. In all these things (says
the scripture) did Job, no thing sin nor offend, in his lyppes nor words.
Lo in all these conflictes and assayles, Job was nothing broken ne bowed, but
among all his anguyshes pressures, assayles, blessed god, whereby his lady and
maystres dame patience had in him the victory and triumph. De pacientia.
homilia. 4.
For (as saint John^ Chrisostomus says) Job had build his house yt was his
soul upon the fast and stable rock and ston of patience and not upon the
gravel of impacience. Math. 7.
Our lord in the gospel says that the wise man does build his house upon a
ston, and the fool, upon the grauel, and when the wind, leyte, thonder, and
storms come: the one stands and by death all bruntes, and the other falls
to ruin, and is destroyde. So (says he) if a person would passeforth unto
ever lastyng peace: let him seek for patience by suffryng and beryng of
trouble, and build his house that is to fire and appoint his soul heart / and
mind to bide what so ever come, be hit aduersite, be hit prosperity, and
another seek the one nor the other. For another of the^ can hurt him that is so
appointed but rather both, may profette him. And contrary, that person that
does build upon grauel, that is: that sets his mind to follow vain and
voluptuous pleasure: is hurt by them both. For he is as sone overthrown with
prosperity, as with aduersite. Exeample of both, Example.
if fine gold fall in to the water: take it up again / and hit will keep
both his color, and fynes. And cast hit forthwith into the fire: and hit
shall nothing be the wors, but rather the more feyre, and more fine, and yet
be fire and water contrary. And so is it of the just person, appointed (as I
said) both in wealth and woo. But take cley, and cast hit into the water: and
hit will part sone in sondre. And if hit be put in to the fire: it will ware
hard and out of kind, and likewise of gresse, put it in water and it will sone
wyder, and rote, and cast it into the fire: and hit will be shortly brent or
burned up. And so is hit of the neglygent careless person without appointment.
For it is not the nature of tentacions and assayles: that causes the house, to
stand nor fall, but the appoyntement and disposicion of the mind. For the
houses spoken of in the gospel: were all one, both were houses, both fully
edyfyed, and builded, both of one and like edificacion, the assail of the
weders were the same, here rain, and there rain, here flodes: and there
flodes / here thonder, and leyte and there the same, here wyndes and storms
and there in like manner. And yet the one house stands fast / and ye other,
falls down, and why? because the fou^dacion, and ground was not all one It
is not than the nature of the te^tacions, assayles or troubles, but the folly of
the buylder: that causes the ruin, and destruction. Job therefore pyght his
fundacion suerly upon the rock, so that the furious rage of the most
malicious, and angry dyuyle, nor yet any of his wyles or crafts could move
him. Take good head than (you desiples of patience) and look well upon Job,
where and how he sytteth in his golden throne, garnyshed and ser with the
most glorious apparel of perles, and precious stones in his robe of purpure
decked with diamou^des. For so I assure you, was that mucke hepe or dongstyll
where he sat among the extrementes and fylthy auoydance of bestes, in the
robe and most rich array of his holy and glorious body, purpured with his
precious blood, and marvelous matter decked with the diamondes of boytches,
Thriso. homilia 5. a.
byles and scabbes. For (as they said clerk saint Ihon^ says) that donghyll
was more noble, and worshypfull then any kings throne and that array: more
rich. For yet unto this day (says he) great multitude of people of all
manner of degrees and nations do go in pylgramage, Nonate how much then
relykes were in
from far cou^treyse over many sees: unto the country of Arabye, to se and
look upon that donghyll and when they le it: they kneled down with great
worshype and kyssed the holy ground where his blood was shed, which is more
precious and rich: then any gold and those boytches and scabbes: more dear,
honele* M. years ago and more.
and desyrable / then any ge^mes or precious stones, and more be these
profitable unto every Christian: then all worldly goods, and riches. For if
(in case) a man had lost a substance of goods or had a child ded or a wound
in his body: what profette or comfort should they sight or look of a kings
throne, and his apparel full of ge^mes, perrye and precious stones: do unto
him? suerly non at al, or very little nor yet unto any other person: but only
a te^porall delectacion, and pleasure, sone passed. But let him (in most high
disco^forte) look upon Job, and he shall se a noble man and very rich (for so
was Job) spoiled and all his goods lost in an hour. And if his son and
heir were ded and he without yshue: let him look upon Job, and se him
accu^penyed with.vii. sons, and thrye daughters and all married notable
persons of synguler virtue. And a very great household and all suddenly slain.
And yet his noble corpse and body, of tender educacion brought up, like a
gentelman, and never seek nor sore, before yt time, and now suddenly stryken,
not with one sore or twain but (as I said) from the sole of his fore unto the
crown of his head, all full of most paynfull sores. Let the sorofull person
(I say) look hereupon and he shall suerly be eased and releued more the^ by
the sight of all ye royalte of this world. Now good Christians you that would
learn patience: look upon this throne, and chere, yt is the donghyll, and se
Job sytte there among those fylthy matters And ymagyne him to be an image of al
gold set (as I said) and decked with diamondes and ge^mes of all kinds of
precious stones and more rychely garnyshed then I can tell you. For I can find
non so fine matter upon yerth: that might be compared unto that blody body. So
much was ye nature of that defourmed flesh much more worship full and
honorable: then any yerthly matter most precious. And those boytches, and
byles: more bright then the son beams. For those do give light but only unto
our bodyly sight, and eyes, and these do illumyne and give light unto the eyes
and sight of our souls. And also they made ye dyuyle blind and put out his
sight, and also put him (like a cowarde) unto flight. So says of him saint
James Resyst the dyuyle, and he will fle from you and saint Paul, Iacobi 4. b.
Ephe. 4. f.
give no place unto the dyuyle. So did he from Job, when he had so vexed him,
in his goods and friends in his body, and (as much as lay in him) in his fame,
and soul. And when he herd his aunsweres and saw his patience: he flypped
and stale away, and never more appeared. Now again (you disciples of
patience) learn at this doctor and sure scolemayster the discipline, and
exhortacion of the reason, mean, and way of patience, and how much: trouble
and tentacion is profetable thereunto, and how much pouerte is a boue riches:
and sekenes above health. And (to conclude) aduersite above and more profetable
then prosperity. For when Job was rich, in health, and in prosperity: then the
dyuyle had somewhat to do with him, he complained to god upon him, and he fought
with him hand to hand, as you have herd a more marvelous battle then ever
you herd of, among the gentiles or ever read of in any cronicles or stories.
But when he had made him pore and seek, and cast him in all aduersite, then he
durst not ons hysse any more: but venquyshed and overcome: he ran away a pase
like a these with much confusion, and great shame learn you now this lesson,
and follow the wholesome exeample of this valiant and most victorious champion,
which notwithstanding: was but a figure of the most excellent and chief
champion, ye prince of patience, and the very self essenciall patience.

Of the patience of our Lord and savior Jesus. The.xvii. Chap.::
OVre savior Jesus said in y^ gospel, that the child does nothing, but yt
he saw hes father do. Io. 5. d.
And every child does follow ye father, we showed you before somewhat of the
patience of the father of heaven. Now shall we show you of the patience of our
Lord, and great master Jesus Christ, his essencial son, and our father, and
savior. For he did follow his father. And he would we should also follow him,
and so with him to be the chylder also of his father. And suerly hit is no small
praise for a man upon yerth to be like unto god in heaven. Nor yet no smalll
felicite and joy For a person to have that thing in virtue, that may be
compared or lykened unto ye laud and praise of god. And because therefore yt we
should be like unto him by following of his patience: he said unto his
disciples and by the^ unto us. Estote perfecti: sicut et pater vester perfectus
est. Mathe. 5. ^ fine.
Be you (says he) perfect: as your father is perfect. So said he, the
chylder of god should be perfect, and so he showed and taught that those that
by the celestial and heavenly natiuite, and regeneracion: were repared: should
be made fully perfect: if the patience of god the father: did remain, and
dwell in them and if the similityde, and lykenes of god were manifest, openly
showed, and did shine in their works. He taught his disciples, if they were
stryken upon the one cheke: to turn the other. Our savior than did not only
teach us patience by words and precepts: Mathe. 5. f. Luck. 6. c.
but also he expressed and setforth patience in his works which works, and
how he so did: is not lost labor to recou^te, although I know well you have
them before you, in many books. But the lover (as you know) will be glad to
hear, and speak oftymes of that thing that he much loves. And I presuppose
that you be the lovers of Christ, and therefore can never here ne speak to
much of his acts. Praise you than and wey first: how excellent patience hit
was. for him that was the son of god, and he the same essenciall god, equal
unto his father and in all things of like majesty: to come down from the
throne of the trinite, unto this vale of myserye / although he another lost ne
left any part of perfection thereby. And nothing to abhor dedygne or
disdain the womb of the virgyne, and there to take our vile nature, and in
the same nature to suffer and bear all the myseryes and pains of man, that
becu^meth him to bear, and that were sufficient for man's redemption and to
show him to be a natural man. Mag^st^^ s^nt^^r^. 3. lib^^. Capt. 15.
And for because (as he said him self) he did descend, and came down to do
and fulfill the will of his father among other marvelous works of his vtues
(whereby he expressed and setforth euyde^t tokyns of his divine, and godly
mayeste) he also kept (by the tenor and order of suffraunce) his fathers
patience. John. 6. d.
For forthwith after that blessed incercacion: all his other acts and deeds:
were accumpenyed and gatnyshed all with patience, he suffered in his most
glorious birth, great inco^modites. A kings son and he a king him self:
borne in a coyshe, in bitter cold and in sted of a kings cradle: he was leyde
in a chrayche wrapped in hay between two bestes, he shed his precious blood as
other sinful chylderne paynfully circu^cysed. For he that never did, nor ever
might do any sin: would suffer, and bear the sin of other persons. And
setting aside or layng on part (for the time) his inmortalite, he suffered him
self to be made mortal and dedly, that innocent and gyltles in him self: he
might be slain and deye for the gylty man. And yet in all his deep pouerte he
took the due honor of kings when he was showed unto them by miracle of the
sterre to be the king and maker of the world. And yet sone after when he had
been presented in ye temple he suffered him self and his dear mother and
supposed forther, to be dryue^ to flight out of hes own natyue country, unto a
strounge land. And not long after his return: he went mekely with his
parents unto Jerusalem at the times statuted and ordined to do sacrifice. And
although a child of.xii. years: yet as an ancient man in wisdom and lernyng,
he taught the doctors in disputyng: the mystryes of their laws. And for the
conforte of his soroful mother myssyng him thrye days: he descended and came
down from Jerusalem with her, and her housbande hes supposed father: unto
nazareth. And was subject, and obedient unto them as a child (although god)
unto his parents, he also lord unto S. John^ baptiste, did not dedygne ne
disdeyne to be of hes servant baptized, and washed in the lauacre, and fou^te
of regeneracion among sinners, notwithstanding that he came to give remyssion
and for gyuenes of sins forthwith after hes baptyme: he went into wyldernes
among bestes, and there alon without any cu^peny of man: fasted from all manner
of bodily fode.xl. days and forty nyghres co^tynually, be cause ye other
persons should thereby be fully fed and made spiritually fat. He then
began to be hongry, and to feel the pain of honger: because that those that
were famyshed for great defaulte of the word of grace: should be full fed
with celestial and heavenly bred. And yet before that he took any bodyly
fedynge: he suffered the tentacion and subtell assail of the dyuell, and waged
with him open battle, hand for hand, and victoriousely venquyshed and
overcame him, and put him to flight. And so gave us both exeample, and also
strength: so to do in every te^tacion, He than began to do miracles, and to
show exeample of all perfection, and to take bodyly labors, to go about the
country, in hete, and cold in cawme and stormy weders, by water and by land,
in honger and thirst. Faynte and weary, to preche and teach the word and
kingdom of god. And among his disciples not as a lord over his bond
servants by worldly pompouse power: but ever being, gentil, mylde, and meke:
he entreated them in all and withal brotherly charity and love how great
patience he expressed in berynge and sufferynge of the Iwes: no tongue can tell,
he showed unto the^: unspeakable kyndnes and they reanswered him ever with most
unnatural unkindness, he was borne of their nation in their country. Math.
15.^1
And (as he said him self) he came pryncipally for that people. And there he
byganne first to do miracles, and to preach with all diligence to bring them
unto the right faith, and unto the true under standing of their own law. And
they would not receive him, nor give credence unto him, he feed them by
miracles: and the sone forgate him, and never thanked him therefore. He cured
their seek people by his godly virtue. And they said hit was by the power of
the dyuyl, when so ever they took occasion at any of his words, or works, he
ever charitably satisfied them by auctoryte and good reason, when they proudly
spoke unto him: he mekely reaunswered when they with raylynge words, rebuked
him: he with soft and soubre manner: spoke unto them. And ever was he most
diligente to win and gether them unto god: that were most rebellious and
obstinate. And when they pursued him: he avoided and gave place, till his time,
was cu^ that he him self had appointed for his death. And then how cruelly
they behaved the^ self toward him, the order of his passion does show,
evidently. In every article wereof is plainly set forth, both their extreme
malycious crudelyte and bitter malice. And his most high charitable patience.
To recounte here and rehers unto you the said passion: needs not, you have
hit in so many works and books, setforth by order of diverse ancient auctours.
In this, on thing you may note his patience meruelouse wonderful and perfect,
that he did not only bear, and suffer his enemies, so mekely and constantly in
all his life: but also did pray for the^ so charitably, and weeping so hertely
upon the cross, at his death. O marvelous and must un declareable exeample of
patience, he taught his disciples this patience before in precepte by words,
as the gospel does wytnes in many places. Math. 5. g,
In Math, he said unto his disciples I bydde you (says he) love your
enymyes. Do you good unto them that hate you and pray you for your persuers
and harmeres. And for them yt shamefully and falsely do rebuke you that you may
be the chylder of your heavenly father, and so (in conclusion) to be perfect in
patience as he is. And when our savior (going to death) had washed the fete
of his disciples and also (for ye great exeample of patience) the fete (among
the^) of his enymye and falls traytoure Judas: he said unto them: Se said he,
and take heed, know you what I have done unto you. Io. 3.^.
You call me master and lord, and you say well. For in deed so I am if than
I your master and lord: have wayshed your fete: you must also (of duete)
eueryche wash the fete of other. For I have given you exeample, yt as I have
done unto you: so should you also do, in like manner. Note you, devout
disciples, what he did unto them and what exeample he gave. In that observance
of washing he gave the exea^ple of profounde mekenes, and in the berynge and
suffrynge of the traitor Judas he gave exea^ple of must perfect patience, For
he knew well before that he would betray him, and yet notwithstanding he
promoted him unto the must high degree of his church ye order appostolyke. And
not only washed him with his other byloued friends: Augu. temo. 4. contra dona.
Epist. 163. pagina. 478. d. et temo 8. In psalm. 10. In do. co^fido.
but also feed him among the^ with his own holy sacred body, and precious
blood. Remember you now, how marvelous patience hit is to know a domestical
/ and household enemy: and never to detect ne by wrey him, and yet when he
came unto the deed: would not deny to kiss the treatour. Thus you perceive
how he bare and suffered, that his unreasonable, and insensible creatours might
not bear. For the son, the moon and the stars, and the four elements: did
not bear ne suffer his death patiently, but openly showed them self to be
confounded troubled and discontent therewith. The son and the moon and the
stars (because they would not se, and behold yt cruel deed of the Iues) did
hyde and withdraw their beams and light. So that the night did close, and
shyt up the day and, all remained in darkness. The yerth quaked the stones
brake, graves opened, and ded corses did arise, and all to complain (in their
manner) upon the innocent death of their maker. And he him self, in all this
wrongful entreat: nothing said, ne spoke there unto nothing was he moved.
Nor yet (in all these pains and passion) showed he any sparcle or the least
token of his majesty to be known, but perseuerantly, and continually; he
suffered all unto the last end, because that my lady patience s^^^de in him
tryumphe, and be showed and know a^l all / and perfect. And yet after all
this: se and by hold a patience, above patience, that is that he did, and yet
does, receue unto grace them that slew him, and that they may be co^serued,
and kept therein. He sets open the gates, and sacraments of his holy
church unto all persons that will return and come whom unto him. For the
most unkind, aduersares, the most fell blasphemers and raylers and the most
cruel and hateful enemies of his holy name, if they will repent and do
penance: knowlegyng their defaulte, and trespass: he does not only receive unto
grace, and forgive wholly, and fully all their sins, but also he does give
them inestimable and vnthynkeable reward that is, 2. Cor. 1. e.
here in this life a confortable quietude and rest of conscience. For saint
Paul says. Our glory praise, and conforte, is the testimony and wytnes of
our conscience, and this is no small gift nor little to be estymed or weyed,
but yet that follows is more and greater gift that is the reward of the
kingdom of heaven in joy and blys everlasting. Oh good Jesus, what may be more
patiently, more benignely and gently, or what may be more louyngly and
mercifully, spoken ymagyned, or thought. Those that shed the blood of
Christ: were quyckened, and made lively, by the same blood of Christ. Such
and so great and marvelous is the patience of Christ. And else, if hit had not
been so great: we should have lacked and myssed in the church of Christ many
great doctors and teachers, and examplers of patience As saint Paul saint
Cypryane, and diverse many other, if we than do dwell, and bide in Christ,
(most dear brethren and deuote scolers of patience) if we have clothed (as
saint Paul says) and put Christ upon us, To. 5. d.
as our lyuery that is, if we will faithfully were his lyuery clothing, and
bear his connysaunce and bage of arms, if we take him for the way / and mean
of our health, and salvation: let us (then) that do follow his wholesome steps:
go, 1. Io. 2.
and passeforth after his Exeamples, for saint John^ says, who so says he
dwells in Christ: must walk and go forth, after such form and manner as he
walked and went. And saint Petre said unto his disciples, 2. Pe. 2.
Christ did suffer, and take pain and passion for all leuynge and gyuynge,
exeample unto all you faithful people, that you should follow his steps. For
he did never sin nor trespass, another in deed nor word. Note this point well
(good deuote reders) that sith our savior Christ never offended in the least
thing, and yet suffered most, and that most wyllyngly also without any gruge:
his exeample of patience: must need be unto us excellent and occacion (of good
reason) for us to take patience and gladly to suffer / that we have well
deserved for our sins and offenses.:::

That our own myserie and multitude of our sins should move us unto
patience. The.xviij. Chap.:::
IF we consider how much we (of justice) be bound, and how much (of good
reason) we have deserved to suffer: we may the rather be moved unto patience
First than that we of justice, and right: should suffer all pains, and
sorrows patiently: let us remember the sentence of our lord god, which
sentence (anon in the bygynnynge of the world, and of man kind) he gave upon
our parents and forefathers Adam and Eve, because yt they myndeles and
forgetful of his commandment: wylfully brake his law, whereby all their
posterite, issue, and ofsprynge: be borne, and bound unto pressures,
co^flictacions, pains troubles and labors: all the time of these life. For
thus our lord said unto Adam. Genes. 3. ^, d.
Because thou waste obediente unto the voice, and counsel of thy wife. And so
have eaten of that tree, whereof I commanded the, thou should not eat:
cursed be the yerth in thy work. Thou shall in great labors eat thereof, all
the days of thy life. And hit shall bring forth unto the, thorns and breres or
bremles. And the herbs of the field: shall be thy fode. And in the swette of
thy face: shalt thou eat thy bread unto the time thou return and turn
again into yerth, whereof thou came / and was made. For thou art duste of the
yerth, and into duste shalt thou return. This is the se^te^ce of god, unto
y^ which: all we be bound, unto the time that death depart us from this
world. For by this said sentence, all we must nedely remain, and bide in
sorrow, mourning, pain, trouble, and labors, all the days of our life. And
so eat our bread in the swette of our face, and in continual myserie. In
tokyn whereof: every man when he is first borne, and received into the
hospital and ynnes of this world (for we have here no dwelling place) he
begins his life with teres and weeping. Hebre. 13. c.
And although he be yet ignorant, and no thing knows of this world, ne any
thing else ca^ he do (in that first natiuite and birth) but weep, yet by the
providence, and disposicion of nature: he lamenteth and mourns. And thus the
rude and untaught or unlearned soul, and life of man: forth with in the first
beginning: does (by his weeping, and mourning) testify and wytneseth the
anxietes / anguyshes labors, storines, and turmoyles of this world wherinto
he enters and cu^meth. For certainly, as long as we live in this world: we
must nedely sweet and labor and suffer many greues: And yet in all our
pains: shall we never have better solas and conforte then of patience. Al this
now have we showed unto you: that you should evidently perceive, and se: how
by ye justice and ryghtwysnes of god: we be bounden to suffer and take pains,
and moved by our own misery to learn patience, yet have we a forther occasion
to suffer, and to learn patience: of our own deseruyng. For that I spoke of
before: was just and due unto us, not of our own deseruynge: but on ye sin
of Adam, called sin original. But and if we look well upon our self, and
duly consider: how (after our birth) we were washed, and cleansed from that
sin in the blood of Christ, by the holy sacrament of baptyme, and yet how
much pain we have sith yt time deserved by our own actual sins, we have
occasion of good reason to suffer mekely and so to learn patience. A well
learned man said. Qui sua metitur pondera: far potest. He that does mesure
well his burdens and weight of sins: Marciales cocus.
may the more easly suffer and bear the pains due thereunto. Reason shows
that he should justly be punyshed: that has deserved so to be. Grego. 5. moral
But who is he that never did amysse, ne ever deserved pain, show us which is
he: and we shall laud, and praise him. The prohpete says. Psalm.
Peccauimus cum patribus nostris, unjust egimus, iniquitatem fecimus. We have
(says he) done sin, as our fathers did, and we have done unjustly, and
wroght iniquite, and wykednes. 3. Read 8. e and. 2. Pari. 6. f. g. 2. Io. d
And Salomom says there is no man that may not sin. And saint John^ says.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our self / and truth is not in us. All
than be sinners, wherefore every man (of good reason) should bear and suffer any
temporal pain or trouble for his sin according unto his merit, and
deseruynge, and that with a meke, and penitent heart, 9 Moralium.
and with a good will and glad mind (as saint Gregorye says) because he may
thereby, avoid, 9 Moralium.
and escape pains and troubles eterne and everlasting which (as he says)
shall be force without patience. And a let ned Poet. Duidius
Leuiter exmerito quicquid paciare fere^dum est. What so ever (says he) thou
doste suffer, by thy deseruynge: should be lightly borne. And ye wise Seneke.
Seneca
Quod merito pateris: pacienter far memento. Cu^que reus tibi sit, ipsum (te
iudice) da^pna. Remember friend (says he) to bear patiently, that thine own
merit, and deseruynge thou do suffer. And sight (in thine own conscienie)
thou art gyltye, make thy self thine own judge, and co^dempne thy self, what
hurt, or wrong can be done unto any man, or said: that he has not by some
manner of means deserved I ca^ find none. Peradventure, you would say, that
if a true man were called these, or accused and suffered death for that thing he
did not stele: that were then (you said) a wrong, which he had not deserved.
And in like manner, if a vyrgyne were accused and falsely condemned of
fornicacion and uncleanness, as the holy wife Susan was, unto this I said. By
some means he had not deserved. For I herd of a man that was judged to be
hanged for stelyng of a best which he never touched ne ever saw. Danie. 13. d.
e.
And when he came unto the place of execucion, the galouse, he said unto the
people. Lo (said he) I never stale this best. And yet have I deserved this
death, not for ye bullock: but for ye mattocke. For he had before stolen a
pore man's mattocke. And though a man stale never any such goods, yet has he
oftymes stolen, and withdrawn from god his duete. And likewise of the most
pure and clear vyrgyne that although without any touch of man, or any
delyberat consent unto the sin of uncleanness has kept her bodily vyrginite:
yet has she per adventure done fornicacion (as ye prophet Hieremy says)
with many wanton lovers. Hiere, 3. a.
For as oftyne as, by any other sin, she has offended our lord: so oftyne
has she done spiritual fornicacion, if than she were accused of uncleanness
though never so falsely: yet were not that accusacion utterly undeserved. So
than be we fawty in all that can be done unto us. And no thing ca^ be said, ne
laid unto our charge: but yt we have (by some manner or means) deserved that
and more also which thing: if we do well consider, and weye: may (of good
reason) move and give us occasion, and also may in duce, led and teach us to
suffer, and so (as diligent disciples) to learn, and to approyche unto
patience. Thus we conclude that our own myserie and wrechednes: may be an
occasion of patience. Now shall we make you a breue recounte of the said
co^modites of patience, by the effects of impacie^ce and so make an end with
the merits and reward of patience.:::*::::

A breue recapitulacion and short recounte of the said co^modites of
patience, by the respect and co^sideracion of impacie^ce and of the merits
and rewards of patience. The.xix. Chapter.
BEcause (good devout christians) that you may (the more redyly have in
mind: the said co^modites, and benefits of patience: I have here setforth a
co^pendious and short recounte of them. And that the goodness and profet of
patience may the more bryghtly appear, and the more evidently be perceived, and
known: let us consider the hurtes harms and the yuel inco^modites of
impacience. For (as we said before) contraries leyde to gether (as black, and
white) do each show the better for other. As patience than, is a gracious
gift of god: So is impacie^ce: a work of the dyuyl. And as the persons: that
have god dwelling and bydyng within them: be pacient. So those persons: whose
minds and hertes, ye dyuyl has in possession: be always impacient and
unrestful. The dyuyl him self could not suffer yt god made man after his
own image. And therefore by impacience he first peryshed, and lost him self.
And Adam by the impacience of the appul forboden, did break the commandment,
and so fell into death, because that he lost and left patience, that should
have been the keeper of the grace before received of god. And impacience caused
Cayne to inuye ye sacrifice of his brother Abel. Esau by impacience: sold his
honor, and enheritance for a mess of potage. And impacience caused the
children of Israel, the chief chosen people of god, to be unto him most
unkind, and after their marvelous delyuerau^ce out of Egypt: when Moses was a
while abse^t, and with god for their wealth: they made a calfe their god, and
ever they were impacient and rebellious against the goodness of god, and slew
his prophets, and his just and true servants. And never did they leave their
impacie^ce: unto the time they came unto the cross, and precious blood of
Christ, what thing else suppose you but only impacience, does cause these
heretykes (after the exeample of the Iues, to rebel and rage against Christ's
says. And (against his peace and charity) to move so many odious, and hateful
divisions discencions and debates in the church of Christ, Suerly no thing but
impacience alon. And to make (as they say) short tale. All yt patience does
edefye and bring unto glory, profet and good, impacie^ce does destroy, and
bring to ruin and to naught. Now (good devout reders) the yuel inco^modites,
and hurtes of impacience: and the good and profetable co^modites of patience
well co^sydered peysed and weyde, let us than (not as truandes: but as diligent
scolers) keep the scole of patience, by the which patience we do here dwell
and bide in Christ, and by whom we may come with him unto the presence of his
father, that by him also is our father almighty god. For patience is very
plentuouse, and largely spread, and not closed nor shyt up in any strayte
corner, nor yet lymyted nor appoint unto any short or narowe terms or spaces.
For the virtue, and power of patience: is open and streched forth in length,
and breadth. And although the largess, bounty, and profet of patience cu^meth
out of the fountain, and spring of this one name patience: yet does hit (by
many veins ryuers and beckes: flow, and run abroad, so that non of all our
acts or deeds can or may profecte and go forward to be worthy the laud
praise, and name of virtue: except hit take perfection of patience. For
patience is the virtue: that does commend and betake us unto our lord, and
there does preserve, and keep us. Patience does co^presse, and hold down the
violence and swellynge puff of the proud heart, and brings hit low down
obedient unto Maystres mekenes. And patience does tempre and swage Ire, and
wrath stops the mouth, and brydleth the tongue from brallyng words:
governs ye mind under due discipline, and good manners, and so makes, and
keeps qui etude, peace, and rest. She it is that quensheth and cures the
perilous poison of Envy, and malice and restrayneth the raylynge rages of
detraction difamacion, bacbytynge, and sclaundrynge. And she does open the
cofres, and emptieth the bags of the rich: and releueth the pore. She
teaches fasting and moderate fedynge. She auoydeth ydlenes, and puts her
disciples to labors and continual occupacions. And she also it is that
rebateth and quenches the fury, and the fylthy mocions of the flesh. And
does defend and save in the virgins: their blessed integrite and clennes. And
in the wydowes: their deuote chastity, Eccle. 25. a.
in the married persons, she teaches the^ that thing that god says (by the
wise man) does please his spirit, that is: the man and his wife consenting,
Hebre. 13. a.
and well agreyng to gether. And (as saint Paul teaches the Hebrews) to keep
the sacrament of matrimony, in all things honorable. And ye bed of wedlock:
inmaculate, and vndefuoled that is to mean: that the act of matrimony be
ever without the offense of god. Sith than we se, and perceive: that patience
is so necessary, and commodious unto all manner of states, and degrees: in this
world: yet then is it most necessary unto us that be relygious persons. Sith
we have made solen vow, to stand continually every day, and hour in the
front of the battle against all three enemies, and never to fle, nor to avoid,
nor to take any days, or truce with the^: but ever styfly to stand, fyersly to
fight with out feyntynge, as old excercised and approved warriors, it is than
but a small thing for us to suffer, and bear the amission, and loss of
worldly goods or possessions or yet kyn or friends which we have utterly
forsakyn already with all the pleasures of them, and bound our self unto
wylfull pouerte. Nor yet is it any great thing for us to suffer sekenes and
disease, honger thurst, and cold, waychynge and bodyly labors. Sith we have
promised to subdue our flesh unto ye spyrite, and the body unto the soul. And
have professed the purite, and clennes of chastity. We must abide and bear
more, and greater pain, prysonme^t, flocks feathers, chenes, flayles, fire, yt
rackyng, the sword and all kinds and manner of tourme^tes, ye and also the
loss of life: when just cause requires / and that also that (as we said) is
above all bodyly noyance: must we bear contumely, rebuke falls accusacion,
detraction batbytynge, sclandryng. And the persecucion steynynge blottynge
defoulynge, teryng: re^tynge, raggynge, and sleynge of our name, and fame. And
yet as though all these troubles were of little regard, we must abide and
steadfastly stand against that power: which: no power upon yerthe (of hit
self) may resyst and withstand, that is to bear and manly to withstand the
assayles and tentacions of the great enemy the dyuyl. And yet (by the power of
god, and by the help of my lady patience) we may resyste all his power, and if
we so do: he will shortly fle as a cowarde ve^quyshed, and we shall gloriously
triumph with our maystres patience. But yet there is a perilous danger to be
well waited and looked unto. For when all the dyuyls in hell can not speed to
overcome some person: yet shall annother person his own neighbor and semynge
friend a lymme of the dyuyl falsely deceive him, let him therefore: that stands
(says saint Paul) look well, and take good head that he fall not. ^. Cor.
^0. c.
Patience then inclynynge and lenyng (by love) unto the holy ghost and cleuynge
fast unto the divine, and heavenly help of god, shall (be his castle, and
defense) to fight strongly and gloriously to stand against the works and
mocions of the flesh and of the body. And so to come unto the merit of
patience. Of the which merit: we promised somewhat to speak.:*:

Of the merit, and of the reward of patience. The.xx. Chapter.:::
This word merit: is as much to say in common English as a deserve, or a
deseruynge, called also an yernynge as by exeample, if a person be hired to
labor for a penny a day, and if his labor be truly done: then has he yerned
and deserned.i. d. that is a penye. And yt is called his wages, or hyre, and
called su^tyme merit, August. de mori bus ^cclis. to. primo. p^. 531. v Cap.
25.
how be hit that merit, and deseruynge does precede, and go before the wages
or hyre for a man must deserve his hyre justly, and truly before yt he may
justly, and ryghtwys^y received hit. So that merit, and deseruynge, than goes
before: And reward follows, and cu^meth after. And that reward, or gift or
hyre: must be (or right) according unto the merit, and deseruynge. For if a
man do his duete well: he does merit and deserve to be well rewarded, and if
he do yuel: he deserves to have his reward, according. But here must you
know, and understand that no man can ne may merit or deserve to have any
reward of almighty god as due unto him worthyly by justice and right for any
labor or deed that he can do. For a man ye is a bond man unto a lord: can
deserve another hyre nor reward of his lord, as an hired servant may do,
because that all that he can do is his duete. So is it of man unto god. (...).
17. c
For (as our savior said) we may justly say when we have done all that was
commanded us: yet be we but unprofitable servants, and have deserved no
reward. For we have done but only our duete, whereunto: we were bound. Yet
must you consider, that if a lord did move or require his bondsman to do a
thing for his pleasure, and would promise him a reward for his labor although
hit were his duete to do hit without any reward at the commandment of his
lord: yet now (when he has fulfilled his lords request) he has deserved
that reward, not because of his labor or diligence (for thereunto was he
bond) but because of the promise of his lord, which of co^gruence is bound
to give that he wylfully of his liberalite promised. So is it of man toward
god. For man is more then bond unto god, and therefore can not (of him self,
deserve any reward of god, as worthy to have that reward of right and as
deserved: but only by the grace of god, which does precede, and go before
merit. For all merit cu^meth of grace. But when almighty god (of his own
liberal goodness) has promised, to give any certain reward for a certain
work or deed: then is he bound of co^gruite, and co^uenie^ce: to give that he
promised as deserved of him that does the work, as when our savior said,
Example.
who so ever: does confess me, and knowledge my faith before the people of
this world: I will in like manner, confess him, Math. 10. d.
before my father yt is in heaven And yet notwithstanding: it is not in the
power of any person to knowledge that faith: but only by grace. So every
where: grace does precede and go before merit. But (as I have oftymes said)
god does freely offer and give that grace, unto all manner of persons: that they
may by that grace: dispose them self, and their fre will to receive / and
follow that grace, and so to axe: and have, to seek, and find. And to knock,
and have the gates open. And in like manner, finally, to merit and deserve. But
(in my mind) the merit of patience passes all other. For if any thing had
been of more merit then patience: the father of heaven would have given hit
unto his dear beloved son our savior Jesus, which came into this world, not
only to redeem man: but also to merit for man, and not for him self, that
man might have, and merit / and deserve to have, the most high reward, the
kingdom of heaven, by the merits of Christ's patience. Gre^^. hom^li^. 15.
Martyrdom is of excelllent merit and patience is a kind and manner of
martyrdom. For saint Gregory says, that those persons that do strive with
them self to venquysh and overcome their passions and so to keep patience: be
martirs Among virtues: is a difference, of degree, for as mekenes: is rote and
founteyne of virtues: so is discrecion the maystres. Patience: keeper, and
preserver, and perseverance the perfourmer, of virtues, without mekenes no
virtue can be had. And with out discrecion every virtue turns into vice. And
without patience: Grego. supra Ezech.
all virtues be sparpuled and do peryshe and sone be lost. And without
perseuera^ce: no virtue may come unto effect. Mankind by impacience:
Tiprianus de paciencia.
lost paradyse (as we said before) and (suerly) without patience: he ca^ never
come there again. For man by merit and deseruynge, lost that place: by merit
(than) and deseruynge must he (of good reason) win hit again. Aug. in
sermo. ad lyp.
And sith to suffer pacie^tly, yuel: is ever of more merit: the^ to do good:
patience is the next and best mean to merit, and deserve yt return unto
the possession of paradyse. Happy then and gracious be those persons that have
here in this life, trouble and punyshme^t for their sins. And far more
happy, and more gracious be those that wylfully suffryng: do obtain perfect
patience, for they ca^ not feyle of that most pleasant place, with much more
abundance of felicite, and Joy: then ever Adam had in his paradyse. And yet
above the possession of the place, shall they have a special token. For some
virtues have special tokyns, In speculo sp^iali^ et in vi tas patrum.
as virginite, martyrdom, doctrine, and such other. I read but late of a
religious father that taught one of his disciples which took great pain to
learn, and had in custom to bide by his souerayn when he went to rest: unto
the time he commanded him to go also to rest. And so by chance his sovereign
fell suddenly on sleep, and the scoler would not depart without license, and he
durst not waken his master and so he remained and tarried there all night in
great pain of cold, and wayche, and on the morrow when his master a waked
and saw him: he merueled, and bade him go to rest, after whose departing:
his master was rauyshed in spirit, and he saw heaven open, and our savior
Jesus making of a goodly garlo^de, of meruilous beauty, and riches. And he axed
sayng, for whom (good lord said he) is that garlonde. And he answered, hit
is (said he) for thy disciple that now departed, in reward for the patience
he took this night with the. Many such examples has the devout father
Johannes climacus in his book intytled. De triginta gradibus Scale celestes,
that is of.xxx. steps or staves of the heavenly ladder. which book: our
reverend father confessor master John Fewterer, late deperted (whom Jesus
pardon) began to translate out of latin in to English and I have made an end
thereof. Now I pray you (good devout reders) labor for this garlonde call hit
(if you will) a crown (for in Vitas patrum, be.vii. crowns setforth) and
labor then, and study for the crown. But here: I se (by your countenance, and
devout behauyour) what you say to me. Sir (say you) here you do lade us with
an heuye burden, an entreprise of marvelous difficultye and hardness. For we
se well and do evidently perceive: that this lady dame, patience is very goodly
and good, lovely and pleasant and also much profitable unto all manner of
persons. And all we do covet and desire patience, all do, love patience. And
every man prayseth patience. But Alas, alas. We be so frail, and inco^stant
that we can not atteyne: that we so ferue^tly desire, we do not hold, and keep
fast, that we so syngularly love, we do not diligently exercise, Obiec^io.
and put in experience / and practice: yt we so hyghly and so excelle^tly do
praise. For who (sir I pray you) is always pacient? and specially among us
worldly persons, that daily have so many occasions of displeasure, or yet among
you religious, Answe.
that call your self spiritual persons, we fear but a few Iwys. Yet good
devout disciples: despere you nothing. For the common proverb says. Labor
improbus omnia vincit. Inportune labor: does ve^quysh, and overcome all
things. Appoint your self with herty / and full purpose: to follow and
fervently to labor in the scole of patience. And call for grace, dispose your
self to receive it, Psalm.
and you shall suerly have it. Spera in deo, et ipse faciet. Trust in god
(says the prophet) and he will perform, your desire. Begin first to be
meke, Psalm. 4. and ephe. 4. f.
and mylde, sobre and of few words and so go forth in your scole. And another
judge you, nor think yt every hasty mocion or displeasure: does break
patience. For the prophet says: Irascimini, et nolite peccare, be you wroth,
and yet be not in will to sin, you may se before, that in case: you may be
moved and yet keep patience. Remember also yt you be another angel, nor stone,
but a lump of flesh of the frail Adam yt may lyghly fall, your common
proverb says. It is no shame to fall, but y^ shame is to lie thereby. Holy
saint Paul, yt never did dedly sin after his co^uercion: cried out, upon y^
flesh, sayng. O unhappy man yt I am, who shall deliver, ^o. 7. d
and rydde me, of this dedly body, we may (after him) serve god in our minds,
Ibide,
although y^ flesh be frail Patience therefore (good christians) is not so
lightly lost, for she will never forsake you: except you wylfully first
forsake her, and despice her with delyberacion. For co^te^pt may lose patience,
and yt is perilous. For y^ wise man says. Ve hiis, qui perdu^t sustine^ciam.
Eccli. 2. c.
Woo and pain be unto the^ yt do lose patience. God does dissimble with the
fraylte of those persons yt be dredful to offe^de him. Give crede^ce unto god,
Eccli. 2. b.
and he will recover the, and refourme y^ when y^ swaruest or doste err. Every
man is co^munely named, after yt vtue, or vice yt he most uses in daily
co^uersacion As when a man (for y^ most part) does show mekenes: then is he
called a meke man, and when he so shows pride: he is called proud. And in
like wise yt person yt does suffer much, and is seldon moved: is called a
pacie^t person. And the hasty person, is called impaci^t. Use you than, as
diligent scolers, to suffer pacie^tly, for y^ great part of yor life, and if
(by chance) you be moved, and (in that passion) say or do amysse: call your
self quycly home, and be both sorry and ashamed or abashed of your self, cry
god mercy, and make amends to satisfy y^ party, et no^ occidat sol
superiracu^dia^ vestra^, let not y^ son go down upon your wrath or displeasure
says saint Paul, and the^ dar I well say, yt both your good name, and fame of
patience: shall be co^serued, and yt you of god shall be reputed as pacie^t. And
according unto y^ merit and deseruyng of patience: to have your hyre, wages
and reward, which reward shall be double or treble. For in this life if you in all persecucions, passions, aduersites troubles: turn and apply your heart,
mind, and thought unto y^ examples before showed and specially unto y^ example
of our savior Jesus: you shall not only have patience: Phil. 2.
but also you shall be glad and joyful to suffer for his sake as he did for you
and so shall you be re^dred and made q^^ete, and restful in your mind, and
conscience. And for your good example in y^ edifieng of your neighbor: you
shall with our savior be exalted, and have good name and fame above other. And
when you depart out of these world your maystres lady patience will accu^peny
you, and co^uey, and led you unto your long desired home, and there present
you unto y^ patron yt se^de you yt patience, where she will remain and dwell
with you, and never depart from you in y^ presence and everlasting fru^cion of y^
self esse^cial patience our lord god, and most sweet savior Jesus Christ yt
lives and reyneth with god y^ father and with y^ holy ghost, one and self same god
with the^, world without end whider of his merciful goodness he bring us all.
Amen. Pray of your charity for a late brother of Syon R. Whitforde.

FINIS.
: A work of diverse impedimentes and lettes of perfection.::
But late I se^de forth a little work of the life of perfectyon named the pype,
or tun of the same life. And here now one of my brethren brought unto me a
treatise or little draght in latin of an uncertain auctor which he found by
chance: of certain impedimentes, or lettes of the spiritual profit,
profitynge, good speed, and going forward in the journey to obtayn and come
unto the same life which tracte or draght I thought should frame well unto the
same work. And therefore I put hit into Englysh, and added thereunto many
things that I thought conueuient for the same.:::

Of the first impediment.
THe first impediment, and let to profit, and to go forth in the life of
perfection: is the de fault, want, or lack of fervent desire...thereunto. For
although every man would feign have that life and dwell therein: August. homi.
1. homiliaru^. 50.
yet there be but very few that do profit, and go forward there in, ye cause
is, they lack fervor and loving desire, and therefore they do not take the
pains labors and dangers, that do apperteyne and belong thereunto. For if
they did they should give study and diligence every day, somewhat to amend.
But when the desire is not fervent ne hot, or skante a little warm, but
rather cold, and flat: then do the persons little or no thing amend, but as
they did yesterdaye: so they do to day, and as they do this day: so will they
do to morrow, and so do they keep on state and go no thing forward, for lack
(I say) of fervent desire. Quest.
But here you would paradue^ture are, why is hit, or what is in cause, yt a man
has not fervent desire. Two things may be in cause. Answe.
One is, presu^pcion of perfeccion. For many persons do stand well in their
own favor and think, or judge them self very holy and perfete ynoghe. Their
perfection does so suffice the^: that they seek, no forther, whereof Seneke
says, we will therefore, Seneca
be no better, because we suppose and think our self very good already, and ye
best. An other cause is: presumption of wit, wisdom, or connyng, which does
inflate: and flow up a person into pride, and cause him to repute him self
somewhat worth where in deed he is (of him self) no thing worth at al. The
wysema^ says. Do not ex toll, Eccli. 6. a.
enhauns, ne lift up thy self, in ye cogitacion and thought of thy mind,
lest (by thine own folly) thou have a fall. August.
And saint Augustyne says, if thou would come unto a forther state of
perfection then thou haste: thou must be displeased and discontent with the
state, and case thou art in. Ergo he that would profete, and go forward: must
have, a fervent desire thereunto. For (as saint Bernarde says) that person
(for a suerte) is not good: Berna^
that would be no better. For when so ever y^ bygynnest to will or think that
thou would be no better: even then begynnest thou to leave, or cease to be
good. Berna^
For (as he says in an other place) the good and just person: does never
think ne judge that he has comprehended, and gotyn perfection, he never
says: he has enough. For evermore: he hongreth; and thursteth justice. So
that if he might always live: he would always contend, and give diligence, to
be more just, and to profete, and go forth ever from good unto better. They be
therefore blessed (says our savior) that do hongre, Math. 5. a.
and thurst justice, for they shall be saturate, full fed, and sufficed. This
is (than) the first impediment or let of spiritual profete, Quest.
and good speed that you speak of: I would feign learn, how I might obtain,
and win the fervor of yt desire. Certe^ly I shall shortly show my pore mind
therm. First than, when you perceive that our lord of special grace has
given you that mind and will that you would feign profete, Answe.
and go forth in a good state: you may not look shortly unto the most high
perfections, such as holy saints have obtained, and used, as to have all their
thoughts, and mind upon god, and godly things, and little or nothing to
set by any thing that is under god but so (by love) to be joined unto god
that you should with him be one spirit, as the hot red brennynge yren, is
with the fire. Marie magdalene: when she sought our savior in the sepulcre:
was no thing content with the sight, speech, and comfort of angels, nor yet
with the presence and cu^pany of our blessed lady, no thing might satisfye,
and content her, but only Christ him self. These I say, and such other: be
high points of perfection wherein certain persons of special vocacion and
calling were excercised, after great labors taken in the mortificacion of
the^ self, if therefore you should at the first beginning: step forth
shortly, and clymbe up quickly unto such high points boted and spurred or (as
Moses would have done) hosed and shodde: you were more like to fall, then to
go forward. Begin you therefore at the lowest step, of the steyre, that is
to keep (although rudely, sembly, and bluntly) the precepts, and
commandments of god. For that is the lowest step, or degree of perfeccion,
for under that is non. And yet may no man come unto that first step: except
he be void of mortal sin. The first point than unto these purpose, that is
to obtain the fervor of desire: is to keep the conscience clean, I mean not
so that we never sin. For we be another stocks ne stones / nor yet angels.
But I mean, that you should appoynte with your self stedfastlye, and
obstinately never wyllyngly to offe^de our lord by any notable, or grievous
offense. But if (by chance) you should do contrary unto yt holy purpose: you
would shortly seek y^ next remedy, that is first to make cu^pu^ctio^ in your
heart with purpose, and full mind to be confessed, at due, or convenient time.
Then approyche unto the said first step, that is to have a diligent eye,
guard, and awhyte, unto the laws: commandments, statutes, and ordinances of
god and holy church. And then, the next stepppe (after mine opinion) is to
appoint your self upon a certain excercyse of lawful occupacyon: for every
hour of the day, according unto the state, and condition of your person, as
if you be relygious: then (with most high diligence) perform ever / the
duetyes of the religion, for that undone: no thing can be pleasant unto god,
whatsoever you do. For every hour of the residue: appoint (as I said) some
certain occupacion (obedience ever kept, and preferred) as study, redyng,
wryttynge, bodily labors, and ever let prayer be one, and acco^peyny every
occupacion. And do not much care although your mind change often from one
occupacyon unto another, so ever, yt the exchaung be from good unto good, and
never unto yuel, for if all be good: no man can tell, which unto you is best,
or better, all though among the self things may be due comparison. This
poyntement doubtless (if hit be continued) shall increas the favor. So yt hit
be ever done for god alon, as in fynall effect, and not for any worldly or
bodily auantage or pleasure, notwithstanding yet, that if it were so done for
such auantage: yet hit may be lawful, and good to a void yuel, although not
unto ye other purpose of seruour I put the example here of religious persons:
notwithstanding: I know well that among seculare persons, be many given and
wholly applied unto godly conuersacyon. They may therefore eueryche according
(as I said) unto their state, and condition so use the^ self. Upon this does
follow the secu^de impediment and let unto them that do not make steadfastly the
said appoyntement.:::.

Of the secu^de impediment or let of spiritual profete, and increas.:*:::
THe secunde impediment and let of the said profection spiritual: is the
division of the heart, and mind given, and applied unto many or diverse things
that be not godly, but rather frail and vain tryfles, wordly, or bodyly
pleasures, and passions although (as I said) not synful whereof is written i^
scripture. Gene. 49. a.
Etfufus est sicut aqua, non crescas. Thou art powered out, and shed as water,
and therefore thou may not increas / nor grow ne go forward. The natural
disposicion of water (when hit is shed, or powered out) is to flow, and run
abroad here and there, and so to be dispersed, and divided in sondre, so is it
of that mind that is dispersed and divided into many occupacions: hit can not
profete ne go forth in the said fetuour. The old proverb says. Pluribus
inte^tus, minor est ad singula sensus. Versus
The sens and wit of man given and applied unto many things: is less
valiant unto the synguler things: that is, unto any one thing by hit self.
How be it you must understand that although the mind be occupied
successyuely with many things and al spiritual then is all but one thing in
effect for all is for one end, that is god, otherwise is hit in vicious
things. For as some colors do gether and comfort the sight, and some
sparspoyle and hurt the sight: So do al spiritual things gether and knyt the
heart, and mind unto one god. And contrary the vicious things do sparspoyle
all at vncertente and make the mind ever inco^stant. So than if you would
profete and speed in this purpose: you must gether your heart and mind into
one, that is our lord, and most sweet savior Jesus Christ. Prouer 23. c.
So says he by the wyseman. Fili prebe mihi cor tuum. Son, or child (says
he) give me thine heart. And in the same book before, Prouer 4. d.
keep thine heart with all custody, and guard, for of hit does thy life proceed
and begin. And again, put me upon thine heart as a seal fast prynted,
Canticor^ 8. b
yt is that thou have thine heart, and mind ever upon me, and put me as a
prynted seal upon thine arm, that all thy works be done for me and in me.
And recede than (says he) and depart thy self, from all vain perturbacions
and troubles. For there be some persons of that disposicion, that they will medel
with every thing, and all things: that be done, or said contrary unto their
mind or affection: will they reprove though they be never so good, and now
murmur and grudge, now chyde, and bral: now strive, and threte, now boste
brag and crake, and if they be discontent or displeased: they will keep hit
well in mind, and wait for a time to be revenged: full of suspection, and
temerarious judgment full of co^playntes Cruel in the punyshme^t of all
defaultes, except their own, and those will they utterly excuse / and never se
them, ne grant unto any, be they never so evident, never will they forgive,
and yet will they boldly are forgyuenes of god. These, and many other like
co^dicions and byhauiours: do trouble the mind, inquiete, and vnreste the
heart, tear the flesh, and waste the blood, dull the wit, and corrupt the
phantasye / bring in scrupulosite, and many doubts bryede yuel thoughts, and
nurysh wors. And they do let, and destroy all the swetnes, and fervor of
devotion, and draw the persons unto the peril of despere, if you will therefore
speed in this purpose you must gether in your heart, and fyxe your mind wholly
and fully in our lord god, and most sweet savior Jesus Christ, that does
desire (as ye wise man says) and has pleasure to be, and bide with you. My
delectacion delight and pleasure (lays he) is to be, Prouer 8. d.
and bide with the chylder of men. And again. Se (says he) I stand at ye
door, and knock or call, Apoca. 5. d.
if any man will here my voice, and opyne his door or gate unto me: I will
enter into his house, and I will sowpe with him, and he with me, our lord does
call every person by the infucion of grace, and he that will dispose his will
and heart thereunto: may (by true faith) receive hit. And by the works of faith
wroght in charity: he may sowpe with Christ, and Christ with him, Ibid^.
that is (as there follows) who so ever (by the said works) does venquysh,
and overcome his enemies: I will give (says Christ) him that gift, that he
shall sytte, and rest for ever, with me in my throne and chere as I did
venquysh, and overcome, and so do sytte and rest with my father, in his throne
/ and chere of eterne and everlasting blys. Amen

Of the third impediment, or let of spiritual profete, and good speed:::
THe third impediment, and let of the said profete, and speed, is the lack
or want of discrecyon and wisdom. For discrecion: is the mother of al virtues,
and where she is abse^t: the persons do rather dekey then profete and go
forward, the gostly enemy is bysye about them that lack descrecion: mouynge
the^ to interpryse, and take upon them greater labors then their disposicion,
and nature may bear. And so do many persons fall into the dekey of bodyly
strength, and into great sekenes, and diseases, and some into the dekye and
want of wit, and were fantastical melancoly, and some stark mad, or
folyshe. And so another do they profete unto god, nor yet unto them self, ne
their neighbor, but rather be (oftymes) cu^brous and unrestful. And in
seeking of remedy, recover, and health: some do wexe more dissolute, or delicate
the^ ever they were before. Cassianus.
Master John Cassiane in the collacion of the fathers writes. How certain of
the said fathers fell in argument and disputacion what manner of virtue should
most suerly, and sonest (auoydyng the deceytes of the enemy) led and bring a
person unto perfection. For the determinacion whereof: they went unto saint
Antonie, he to be judge, and there some of them said that the most ready way,
and mean unto perfection, does stand in the continual use of fasting wache,
and prayer. For by these excercyses, the body should best be extenuate, and
mortified. And so be subdued and made obedient unto the spirit. Some other
said, that perfection stands most in pouerte for therein Christ was borne,
and led all hes life therein, and said. Blessed be the pore, for the kingdom
of heaven is theyrs. An other sort said, that very perfection stands in the
exhibicion, and workynge of the works of mercy, because that Christ said that
in the last judgment: those works only shall be recounted and rewarded. Math.
25.
Unto the which fathers, reasonynge every man for his own opinion: saint
Antonie answered saying all these that you rehers good brethren be very good /
and high perfections. But to put the most high perfection in any of these: can
not be in any wise, because of the chaunses that we se daily fall in the
persons that do excercyse these virtues without that chief virtue, yt is mother,
nurs, lady maystres guard, keeper and perfourmer of all virtues, that is to
say: discrecion, of the which saint Bernarde writes saying, that discrecion
puts form, and order unto all virtues. For put away discrecyon, and then
shall any virtue: be vice. But if you would are how you should obtain, and get
discrecion: the said Master John^ Cassian does answer, that discrecion is
gotyn only by mekenes, as the wise man says, where mekenes is: Prouer 11. a.
there is wisdom, and discrecion. The first point than of discrecion is to axe
counsel, and ye secu^de point, is to follow the same. The wise man says.
Son, without counsel, do no thing, and after, Eccli. 32. d.
shall thou never forthynke thy deed. The third point of discrecion: is to be
plain, and to show the very substance of thy heart thought, and mind unto the
person, or persons according unto their state and degree, of whom you will axe
counsel. Sir (say you) who is that? I say (in all spiritual things (as in
this matter of spiritual profete and speed, or increas of virtue) axe you
counsel of spiritual persons, such as you believe, or verily suppose: be wise
learned, and virtuous, and specially: of your own spiritual father that has
the cure and charge of your soul, and by his advise then go unto other
persons. And ever in all things doubt full: rather follow that counsel: then
your own wit, learning, or reason, prompt ever and ready to do (without
stoppage, or doubt) what so ever they command, and determyne, and leave
utterly (unto your power) all things, that they prohibit, and forbede. For
certainly, no man is sufficient for him self. The ordinance therefore of god, is
that one shall help an other. Act. 9. a.
Our lord did send Paul unto Ananie, sayng arise, and go into the City, and
there shalt thou be taught what thou shalt do. And doubtless, the counsel of
a simple devout person of small lernyng, and little wisdom: may sometime help
and be much valiant unto the persons of great learning, and wisdom. * Note
well that all the points of discrecion before named: do spryng of humilite,
and mekenes. For the proud persons do co^munely dysdeyne to axe any counsel.
And though hit be freely given unto the^: yet will they not follow hit, ne do
thereafter. And to show plainly their deeds, and thoughts: they be abashed /
and ashamed, pride will not suffer the^ thereunto. Thus you may perceive yt the
sanctite, holiness, and perfection of living stands not in out ward bodyly
excercyse as in wache and fasting. For so: the dyuyl might be holy. For he
never eats, ne drynketh ne slepeth, not with sta^dige those excercyses, do
(doubtless) much co^duce avail, and dispose man unto the virtues of perfection,
that is to say, unto humilite, and obedience, unto charity, and kyndnes unto
sufferance, and patience, unto liberalite, and wylfull pouerte, unto sadness /
and sobriety unto labor and diligence. And unto chastity and clennes, which
thing yet, can they never do: without discrecion. Discrecion than does
triu^phe and excel as lady, and maystres, and does dispose all things: with
pleasure, and swetnes, love there fore, and use discrecion I pray you.

Of the fourth impediment and let of spiritual profete, and speed.:*::*
THe fourth impediment, and let of ye spiritual profete, speed, and increas,
unto the perfection and holiness of living: is verbosite, clateryng / and
talking, the use, and custu^ of many words or much speech. Job says, Job.
11 a
that a person full of words can not be justified, and saint Gregory shows
why. Grego.
For a person (says he) given unto much speech, or talk: can not keep the
right way and troth of justice. And the prophet David. Vir linguosus, non
dirigetur in terra. Psalm. 139.
A person full of tongue, and of many words: can not be well ordered in this
life. And the wyseman. In much speech: Prouer 10. c. Ibide^. 18. d.
sin lacks not. And again. Death, and life (says he) is in the hand,
and power of the tongue. To speak few words: is (in any person) a sign of
wisdom, and sadness. For (as the wyseman says) Stultus si tacuerit: sapiens
reputabitur. A fool, Ibide^. 16. d. Esaye. 37. d.
if he keep silence, and speak not: shall be reputed and supposed or taken for
wise: The prophet Esaias. In silence and good hope: is great strength, let every
man therefore (says saint James) be hasty swyft quycke, and ready to here or
harken. But slothful, Ia. 10. c.
and loath to speak, and to be angry or wroth. That person (says he) that does
not offend in word: is a perfect person. Ia. 3. d.
All religious persons therefore, that should labor, infors, and give diligence
unto perfection: have in high commandment (by their statutes, and ordenances)
to keep silence from all speech, in certain times and certain places. The
reason is, because that talking and co^municacion does spe^de much time
frutles, distract the mind dull the devotion, and takes away the inward
consolacion and comfort of the spirit. Saint James again therefore says, Ia.
1. d.
if a pson would suppose, and think him self religious: not refreynyng his
tongue, but deceyuynge his own heart: his religion is vain. An old proverb
says. Nam nunquam tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum. Hit never noyed, ne
hurt to keep silence, but often has hit hurt me to speak. A notable lesson
was taught unto an old father called Arsenius an abbate. Fuge race, quiesce,
or a, ieiuna, stude, labora. If you will atteyne and come unto perfection: keep
well these.vij. points, fie, and avoid cu^peny, keep silence, live restfully,
pray, fast, study, and labor. Of this notable virtue of silence: have we
spoken, and written at large: in our said book of the pipe let this now
suffice I pray you.

Of the fyfte impediment or let of spiritual profete, and increas of
perfection.::: *:: *
THe fyfte impediment and let of spiritual profete, good speed and increas of
perfection: is inco^stance vnsted fastnes chaungeablenes. How be hit you must
here remember what we said before that to change the exercise of life, or
living from good unto good, and all to the intent of the end before purposed:
is not inco^stance. For in co^stance is a vice that cu^meth proprely of a
double heart. So says the Apostle James. Ia. 1. (...).
Vir dublex aio inconstans est in oibus viis suis, that man that has a double
mind and heart: is inco^stant in all his ways or works, what means that to
have a double mind and heart. That is to serve two masters, now god, now
the world, now the flesh, yet take heed. For lawful occupacions bodily
labors, and recreacion or due fedynge: for necessite, or to be the more apt
unto the service of god, and unto spiritual exercise: be always well allowed,
and be not service but rather the dominacion, and lordshyp, of ye world and ye
flesh. But when a person does often change ye form or state of living for
very pleasure of the world, or of the flesh, as now to be religious, now
seculer, now of this, now of ye relygion, and so to tra^sfourme, and change
him self, as the poets do feyne of one proteus, that could (at his pleasure)
transfourme and change him self in to what form or fashon he would. So the
persons that often do flytte, and change: can not profete nespede. The Englysh
proverb is, that the rollynge stone: gendreth no moss. And saint Bernarde
says if a person should purpose to go unto a certain place: Bernar
if he keep one streght way: he may come (at the length) unto the end of his
journey, but if he take now one, and now an other way: he can never come unto
his purposed end. For error has never end / but always begins new.
Marcus merulus libro. 1. Cap. 13.
And as a devout learned man says. The often shystynge, and change of the
inconstant person: is compared, and lykened unto a read that moves, and
waggeth with every wynd But saint John^ baptiste (says our savior) was no
read. Lu. 7. d.
A read also: is frail and brycle, and bears no fruit. Holowe withinforth,
and full of knottes. So is the wauerynge person, brokyn sone or bruised with
every tentacion, void of virtue, and good manner, and full of knottes,
cu^brous, and froward, now he has anappetite, and desire unto this thing,
now unto yt, now this thing pleases: now displeases / and what now
displeased, anon again shall please. And if he begin any good work: he will
before hit cu^ unto end: leave of: and go unto some other, and so brings no
thing unto perfection, and he ca^ another sit, ne stand ne lie long ne bide
long in any place he is so light so variant, so chaungeable, so flyttyng, and
so much co^trarious unto him self: yt another in words nor deeds, is he the
same person this day / that he was yesterdaye, no nor yet scant bydeth he one
hour in one mind, but rather (as they say in proverb) he changes, ix.
times in a drinking while. Such a person therefore may not profete ne go
forward, but rather is like to dekey and go bacwarde. Inco^stance ergo, and
unstableness: is a great impediment, and let unto this purpose of speed.::::
*:

Of the.vi. impediment and let of spiritual profete and good speed, in the
life of perfection.: *:
THe.vi. impediment and let of spiritual profete, and good speed / in this
purpose: is the negligence, and little care, or head that is given, or takyn to
avoid venial sins. For all though they be not (of them self) dampnable: yet
be they great hyndrans and let, unto the profete, and for ward speed, unto
virtue, and good manners. For (as they say in the world) he that sets naught
by small gaynes: ne cares much for little loss: shall never be rich: so he
that gives not dilligent head and warnes unto small sins: may the sooner fall
into greater. So says the wyseman. Eccle. 19. ^.
Qui sperni^ minima: paulatim decidet. He yt despises ye small: shall by
little, and little: fall down, and dekey, and saint Gregory. Who so ever is
negligent, In postolaribus.
and warles to bywele, and avoid small sins: shall doubtless (although not
suddenly, but by little and little) fall from the state of justice, and ryghtwyse
living. Here peradventure, some person would axe by question: Questi.
how venial sins might draw a person from the state of justice: Answer
sithe they do not quench ne take away grace Whereunto may be answered, that
the passage, and forward speed unto Justice, and unto the state of perfection:
stands most in the fervor of charity, and (as is said before) in the
fervent desire of the said state. But sure hit is, that venial sins
(specially) in use: do mynyshe much that fervor (as a little cold water does
the hot seething matter) although not quench hit clean: ergo the venial
sins, do let the forward speed of the said profete, and passage spiritual.
But any dedly sin: does not only let, but also clearly quench not only the
fervor of charity, but also the self charity, and so does take away the life
of the soul, and spiritually sie the person. And thus I say, Crimial sinue
those persons yt do not obsteyne, and diligently have them self in guard, and
awayte of or from venial sins: do wexe dull, and cold, and every day more
dry then other, and all baren of devotion. Therefore hit is not sufficient for
that person yt would go forward in virtue, to avoid, and keep him self from
Criminal sins, that is to say all such sins as be worthy upon correction
by the law, whether they be dedly or venial: but also he must care for the
least, and most privy sins venial. Notwithstanding hit is very hard for
any person to avoid all venial sins. For as saint Augustyne says. There
be some sins without which our daily life, and co^uersacion can not lightly
pass. I^. 3. a.
And saint James says, that we all do offe^d^ in many things, and the
wyseman. Prouet 29. b.
The just person (says he) does fall.vii. times in the day. And in an other
place. There is no man: yt does not sin. And again, 3. reg. 8. Prouet 2. b.
who is he: that may say: my heart is clean, and I am pure, and clean from
sin, as though he said, no man may so say, wherefore although we may not
endure long in this life without some ventall offenses: yet should no man be
careless of them: but rather infors and give diligence to avoid al, and never
by presu^cion wyllyngly, and knowyngly: to committee or do the lie sin. For
saint Hierom says that the mind, and soul that is dedicate, Hicro^
and hallowed unto Christ: should ever be ware, and intend, and purpose to
avoid and fle as well the swall as the great sins. For although the venial
sins do not suppose and thrast down the soul into hell: yet when they be
multiplied: they do wey heavy, and greatly grieve. August
And saint Augustyne says: that small sins be grievous, and heavy: as gravel
stones be. And saint Gregory, Greg^.
if you have ouercomen great sins: beware (says he) thou be not cu^bred, and
overthrown in the grauelles. Thus may you perceive: that venial sins be an
impediment, and much do let and hinder this said spiritual profete and
forward speed of the life of perfection, and should therefore: of all them that
do inte^de thereunto: be avoided with diligence A very good remedy (as seems
unto me) to be void of venial sins: is first to statute and suppose in
mind: never by presumcion, and knowledge to do any sin, and then if hit come
so to pass, that by chance you do venial sin: as soon as you perceive hit:
to make a co^pu^ction with a knock upon your breast, or to look up toward the
heaven or to make any other sign or tokyn to satisfye privily your own
conscience, that you forsake hit, and would you had not so done, and when you
come unto confession: to make confession of al in general / and of those
inspeciall yt be present in reme^brans, and thus an end of the.vi. let.

Of the.vij. impediment, and let of spiritual profete and forward speed of
perfeccyon.:*:
THe.vii. impediment or let of this profete, and passage forth in the life of
perfection: is a love inordinate, and folysh favor that many persons have unto
their propre body. Feryng to hurt the body or to hinder the health and state
thereof, and so they fall into a pusillaminite, yt is to say a cowardnes of
heart, that they dare not enterprise ne auenter upon any streytnes of living,
they will not put the tender flesh unto pain. And that cowardnes is compared
unto the winter time which will not suffer the herbs of the ground to
florysh, and bring forth fruit. So in like manner their cowardnes, and folysh
fear does let them to bring forth the flowers / and fruit of virtue, and does
(in manner) make them slothful and loathe to labor, Prouer 8. b.
and ever to excuse them self: as the wise man says. Pigi^^ deiicit timor.
Fear or dread does sone overthrow the sluggyshe or slow person. And again.
Ibide^. 26. c.
The slugge says. A lion is in my way, and a lioness in the walk. So do
these cowardes excuse their sloth, and sluggyshnes. For in all hard or sharp
labors: they put more fear, and ioperdy. And more hardenes and diffultye then
there is in deed, and so grows a batell between conscience, and that tender,
and feerful cowarnes, Vbi supra. 10. ^
when (as the said wyseman says) the slugge turns in his bed, as the door
does in the hear, or hynges. For concience moves him to rise when he waketh /
and sluggyshnes causes him to walowe, I^ra. Ibide^.
and turn over in his bed. For he is afraid of cold, And so shortly to say
with the wyseman: now the slugge, Prouer 1^. a.
will, and now he will not, and so he never runs back and loses virtue.
Where the labor waxes rich, and his soul increases in virtue, and
perfection, we may now (of these auctorites) gether this conclusion of troth
that our propre flesh, and bodies: should not, be inordinately beloved ne over
much charyshed, but rather to be had in a discrete hatered. And that for diverse
causes, one is because that (saint Paul says) the body is enemy unto the
soul, and the flesh: does move co^cupiscens, Ga. 5. c.
and unlawful desire against the spirit. For they be ever adversaries, and
enemies each unto other, and yet must they nedely dwell to gether in this life
time, wherefore the secunde cause is that the body is a great grefe unto ye
soul. And ye corrupt, and frail flesh does much vex, and trouble the
spirit. Gapi. 9.
So says the scripture. Corpus quod corrumpitur: aggrauat animam. The body,
that is corrupt and does waste does grieve the soul. For the good soul would
(many times) arise, and waych and pray, and labor, but the body is grieved there
with, and so does much let and hinder, wherefore a great learned man says.
Cicero in tuse.
Multu^ refert, in quo corpore: anima bona sit posita. It forces much (says
he) into what body: a good soul be put. The third cause why ye flysh should be
had in discrete hatred is the synguler love that the flesh has unto hit self
whereof (as from the rote) does spryng all vice, and causes the sin of the
whole world ever to multiplye, as the holy apostle Paul did se / and perceive
by the spirit of god saying unto his disciple Timothe. Timo. 3
Know thou (says he) that in the last dayse toward the end of the world,
perilous, and troubles times shall come. And such me^ shall be then: that will
love the^ self, proud, covetous, hight minded, blasphemers of god, and his
saints, not obedient unto their parents and their elders, and betters,
unkind, cursed, and shrewde, without affection or love. without peace
quarelers all unrestful rebukers checkers and chalengers incontinent of their
bodies, wild ragers, and raylers, without benignite, or ge^telnes, without
pity, and mercy, traitors, deceyuours, froward, and falls braggers, and
bosters. And the lovers rather of their own voluptuous pleasures: then of god.
And yet will they have a countenance, and behavior of faithful religion: but
the virtue, and troth thereof: will they (as ypocrites) deney, fle you (says he)
and avoid all such persons. Ga. 5. e.
This said self love of the body: does also bryed nurysh, and bring in, the
vices of ye flesh, glotony, sloth, and lechery, as the same apostle says, and
noumbreth, thus Fornicacion uncleanness, bold vnbashfulnes, and shameless,
avarice which is ye bondage of ydoles, stryfte and debate comparison and wrath,
sects and opinions. Inuie, and malice, homicide, and ma^slaghter diverse,
festes and fedynge. Drunkenes, and such other, which (says he) I tell you, as
I have told you before: who so uses or does; shall never come unto the
kingdom of god, let us therefore (says he) cast away, and forsake ye works
of darkness and arm or cloth our self: To. 13. e.
with the armor / or harnes of light. And let us walk honestly as in the day
time, or thus. So that we may in the day time: walk honestly. Not in festes
and fedynge, not in drunkenes, and surfetes. Not in sluggyshnes and uncleanness.
Not in contencions, stryfte / and debates, not yet in malice, or inuie, but let
Jesus Christ, be our garment, clothing, and array that is, that his virtues and
examples do appear in us, and in all our works. And not to cure ne charysh the
flesh, in unlawful desires and pleasures. For all these things: do let the
spiritual profete and speed full passage in the life of perfection. The poison
christian religion. For they do not suffer the influxion, and moyster of
gods grace, towater / and seasone the bared drught, or drines of our hard
hertes, what meruel is hit than, though we workynge these wreched vices: be
made partcles of al divine consolacion and godly comfort. August.
For saint Augustyne says. Thou shalt never taste the swetnes, and pleasure
of divine consolacion and godly comfort: if thou spotte, and defowle thine
heart and soul, with carnal delectacion, and fleshly pleasure. From the
which delectacion: he save, keep and by his grace deliver us: that derely
bought us out lord god, and most sweet savior Jesus Christ. Ame^.

A little lesson of.iiij. virtues, good, and profetable to be had of every
person: but not to be called un to reme^brans but rather to be forgoten.::
THe serpent (says holy scripture) was more wyly, G^. 3. a.
and deceytfull: then all the other bestes of the yerth by whom is meant the
great gostly enemy ye dyuyl, that in the serpent deceived our first parents.
The properte of the serpent is, yt where so ever his* head may enter: all the
body may lightly follow. The head of this serpent: is the pryncypall
suggestion, and mouynge unto sin, which mouynge received into deleciacion:
may lightly bring a person unto confent. inregula. Ca. 4
And although not unto the consent of actual sin: yet may it cause the
destruction of virtue: For saint Augustyne says, al other sins do work,
and labor to bring the person unto the act and deed of sin, but pride by
vayneglory: does subtelly lie in wait upon the good works, and virtues: that
they may peryshe, and not come unto effect. So than, bounty and goodness,
sauntite, holiness, and virtue: should be in every good faithful chrystiane,
but to call the^ wylfully unto remembrance, and look or consider the^ to be in
him self: is great ioperdy, except in certain causes of scrupulosite, or
mocions of despere / or such other necessite, else I say: yt were better to
forgete them. For the remembrans of them: may lightly bring a person to
rejoice and take pleasure in them, and so to fall into vaygneglory and
spiritual pride: which unto almighty god, and all his angeles, and saints:
is much odious, and hateful, whereof saint Gregory, says, Grego.
he that in reme^bryng his own good work or deed: does rejoice therein, may
lightly: in alowans, and reysing up of him self: fall full low: in the sight
of him that is auctor of all humilite, and mekenes. And well and worthily may
he be called a mad fool: ye vaynly bosteth him self of other men's goods
or riches which he had borrowed. But (as saint Paul says) what thing haste
thou man, that thou have not received in pressed, and borrowed goods as though he
said no thing. And sith than thou so have taken, and borrowed hit, why do
thou rejoice, bost, and crake thereof, as though thou had not so taken, and
borrowed hit. And saint Gregory again, Grego.
he ye shows out borded goods as his own: does feght with god with his own
rewards and gifts. Dessende therefore (says saint Augustyne) and come down
low: yt thou may asce^de and clymbe suerly up, make thy self vile, meke,
and low: that you may be exalted and promoted, lest peradventure, if thou
exalte thy self: thou be plucked down: against thy will: For so says our
savior in the gospel. Qui se exaltat, humiliabitur. Who so ever: does exalte,
et enhauns, or set up him self: shall be brought down, and made vile, and
low. By these auctorites, and many mo: does, appear, that to call unto
reme^brans / our good deeds; or virtues, is not profetable, but rather
perilous. Notwithstanding: for such causes as I showed before in extreme
disconforte, it may be lawful and good as we have of the holy father Job, Job.
31.
in the.xxxi. Chapter throughout. And specially at the hour, or in the
Ioperdy of death as is evident in the book of kings of the good king
Ezechias. 4. Regu^ 20. a.
So may we do at such times / or in such necessites, that is to say to call
wylfully unto mind, and reme^brans our good deeds and works, or the pains
that we have suffered, for the love of god to quench vi^e, and to kendle, and
increas virtue. And therefore I would advise all them that shall fortune to be
present with any persons drawing unto death, to put them in reme^brans, of all
such, and that they never think (at that time, upon any fy^^e ^^off^ns that
ever they did, but to committee all those, with steadfast faith / and pure hope:
unto the passion and death of our savior: and unto his mercy. Amen.

Of the secu^de point that should rather be forgotyn: then remembered.:::
Like as we should not call unto mind, or remembrance our good deeds: So
should we clearly forgete all yuel and wrongs done unto us / of any person for
any cause. And if by chauns any such come unto mind: put them quycly away
with violence. So was commanded in the old law. Seek not vengauns, nor to
wreke thy self, Leuiti. 19. d.
nor keep in thy mind: the injury, or wrong of thy neighbor. But here, some
persons will say. Sir I can find well in mine heart to forgive the wrong: but
I can not forgete hit. And although I do not seek, or mind any mean of
ve^gauns: yet my heart does some time arise, and I then murmr and go out of
cu^peny, ^er^er supra cautie^.
and will another salute, ne be saluted of the parties, and if (by chauns) I can
not avoid: then I check, or vpbrayde the person of the wrong. This
forgyuenes can not discharge the conscience before god. And yet be they in wors
case, that make outward a fair face, as though all were clearly forgyuen, and
yet inward they bear rancore and grugge, and would be glad that god, or some
other persons: should take vengauns, or do some hurt unto the parties, This is
in deed a very hatered, and who so keeps hit in heart: be homicides, and
manslers. Qui odit fratrem suum, 1. Io. 3. c
homicida est. Who so ever (says the scripture) hates his brother: is a
mansleer That heart or mind, that lightly forgeteth ye benifetes of his frynde:
and that holds and keeps well in mind, the hurt and iniurye of his foo, or
enemy: is well assimuled and lykened unto a colender, or streyner, that
puts ont the best, and reteyneth, and keeps the worst. A very faithful
christian therefore: should clearly, and fully forgive, and utterly forgette
(with all his heart) al iniures, wrongs, and hurtes done in any wise unto his
goods, or body. Taking ever example of our savior, and his holy folowers.
For he prayde his father upon the cross: to forgive his foose and cruel
crucifiers. And saint Stephan in like manner. And saint Bernarde says, that
god does lyberally, Gernar
and freely forgive, all penitentes: al injuries and wrongs, so that another he
will (by damp nacyon take vengeance: nor yet co^founde or make them abashed by
vpbrayde, nor impute ne lay any thing unto their charge by less love, or
favor, so that they only have perfete will to do no more. And if we do in like
manner, each unto other, we shall fullfyll the great, and last commandment
that our savior gave unto his disciples, saying Hoc mando vo bis. etc. Io. 15.
c.
This one thing I command you (said he) that you love to gether, that you
fauore, each other. For in that shall every man know (says he) yt you be my
disciples: if you love each other. Thus shall we than have perfete, and
unfeigned charity in our hertes: if we forgete, and never keep in mind, or
remembrance: injuries, wrongs, hurtes hyndrances, and al displeasures done
unto us.:::: *:

Of the third point to be put clean a way, and never to be called ne kept in
remembrance.: *:
THe third to be forgoten, is the dilectacion of sins past which is very
perilous. For although the record, and remembrans of sins past may be good,
and profitable unto some persons: yet is that record never good, Augu^.
but rather yuel, except there follow forthwith: some manner of repentance,
sorrow, and displeasure for the offense of god in the sins, or by those
sins. But to have delectacion in that record or remembrans: is never good,
but always naught. For as saint Hugh De sancto victory says: Huge.
when so ever our lord god (by his holy sarrame^tes, or by co^tricion) does
louse the penitent from his sins and forgyueth his transgressions, and
offenses: he does therewith also bind him unto perpetual detestation, and
hatred of them that is, that when the said sins come unto remembrans by any
means: that the person be abashed of them with hatred, and sorry that he so
did, with purpose, and mind never to commit any such again, and thus that
record may be good, and profetable as I said unto some persons. For their be
some manner of persons: that (after mine opinion) should never call wylfully
their sins unto mind, nor yet when they come uncalled: keep them in
remembrance. For some persons be carnal, very frail and sone set one fire, in
flamed, or at the least sore assailed with a little reme^brans, and so intending
by recount of their sins: to make a mendes: suddenly they fall unto forther
danger. Let these manner of persons therefore beware, and never call those
sins unto mind that were confessed. And if (by chance) they come to
remembrance: let them cast them quicly a way with fear, horror, detestacion,
and indignacion as they would cast an edder, or a snake from their hand, or a
venemus tode that suddenly should fall in their lap, and with reuere^de dread,
return unto our lord god, and most sweet savior Jesus as the rediest remedy
against all such mocions, or tentacions. An other sort of persons there be:
that be scrupulouse inco^scie^ce and thereby do think that the confession made
ons or twys^ of their sins, is not sufficient: but if again they go newely
unto confession as often as their sins come unto mind. And I say these
persons do much cu^ber them self, and be thereby, wauerynge in the faith,
because they do not believe and fully trust that their sins were forgyuen in
the foremade confessions. For that among other is necessary unto the
penitentes that they believe, and fully trust: yt in every confession duly
made: all their sins be fully forgyuen, so that they need never any mo
co^fessions except they be newely committed, and done again. How be hit no
man may do ouermuche penance, for the rede^pcion of the pain, although the
least penance received of the gostly father: be sufficient for the forgyuenes
of the sin. And therefore they do not amysse that oftymes be confessed of the
same sin or sins: to the intent to be the more abashed, or ashamed of them,
and to take, and do more penance for them, having ever (notwithstanding) full
faith, and trust that they were all forgyuen before. And so his there a third
manner of persons: that should never call unto mind / their sins ons
confessed, that is to say timorous persons and feerfull of conscience, and that
(as the prophet says.) Psalm.
Trepidauerunt timore, vbi non erat timor. That do often, and greatly feere,
and dread: where is no just cause of feere at all. And that thereby be apt, and
disposed to fall into despere. These persons (I say) should not suffer the image
and remembrance of their sins to bide ne tarry in their mind in any wise.
For they shall never thereby have comfort, but ever stand in ioperdy / and
peryle, let them therefore make (with full faith and trust) this conclusion, that
is, that none of al those sins / be now their sins. For they have forsaken
them, and do now forsake, and so will do for evermore, never to meddle with
them ne any other. And to say troth those have no being, they be not For they
be distroyed and wasted, as wax in the fire: by the holy sacrament of penance.
Let them then care no thing for them, but let them pass without record, or
remembrance, and byware of them to come, and put ever their whole trust in our
lord, for doutles such persons can not lightly fall into any mortal offense,
because they be so affrayde of them that be past. And although our lord suffer
them sometime to be excercised with fears: 1. Cor. ^0. ^.
yet (doubtless) he will make, cu^ tentacione prouentum, that is, a provision,
and ordinance for that tentacion. Thus have we showed you, that although the
recounte, and remembrance of sins past: may be good unto some persons: yet
not unto all, but the delectacion of them can never be good and therefore never
to be called ne kept in remembrans.: *:::: *:

Of the fourth thing to be forgotyn and to be put from our cogitacion and
remebrans.::
Hit is a good thing, and an high syngules grace: to think much upon god, and
often to recounte, and remember his bowntie goodness, and benifites, but to call
unto mind and remembrance / and in mind to be occupied with the profundite,
depth, and with the mysteries, and secrets of god or to reason with the
articles of the faith: is ever perilous. For every faithful Christian should
receive with reverence and devotion, and steadfastly believe what is taught by
the auctorite of god, his holy scripture, and catholyke church without sekyng
or serchyng of any forther reason. Eccl. 3 c
The wise man says. Seek not (says he) those things that be above the
capacite of thy wit nor search those things that be more strong then thy
brain may bear. But what so ever our lord has commanded the: those
things: think thou ever, and have them ever in remembrance, and in many of
his works be not curious. For hit is not necessary for the, to se with thine
eyes or outward sight nor to perceive by thy reason those things that be
hid from the. Hit is not good therefore: that man should roll and tumble in his
thought, and mind the high mysteries of the faith, as (by example) to ymagyne,
or study: how good is.iii. and one. How a virgyn might conceive, and bear a
child, and yet ever remain a virgyn. How Christ a very natural man: may
be contained in so small a rowine as y^ host is, and in that form of bread,
al these and such other points of the faith: should not be kept in memory or
remembrance, but without any discuss / or trial of curiouse reasonynge, to be
reuerendly received in true, clear, and whole faith. To. 12. ^
So does the apostle Paul counsel the Romans, I say (says he) by that
grace that is given unto me / and I speak unto all that be among you: that non
of you favor, or take upon him to understand / more then is necessary, and
behooves him to understand and sauer, but that you all sauer, and understand,
unto sobrenes and due mean, according unto that mesure of faith, and grace,
that our lord has given you, let the^ therefore: that have subtel wits, and
be disposed to seek and search out the reason, and causes of all things, leave
of and utterly forsake the search of al, or any of the mysteries of the faith,
or of the ordinans of god and holy church. And (if they do my counsel) let the^
occupy that wit, and mind upon the contemplacion of the acts of our
salvation, that is to say, the whole life of our savior Jesus. And avoiding
all syn, they shall be sure to be therein well and virtuously occupied. For
suerly there is nothing that shall so sone, and lightly chase away the gostly
enemy and gether virtue: In ser^noe. 22. super canc. g.
as the remembrance of the passion of Jesus Christ. So says saint Bernarde.
Thy passion lord (says he) is the vttermoste refuge, and surcour, and the
most syngular, and sure remedy. For when wit and wisdom fails, and
justice does not suffice, and when the merits of sanctite, and good life:
will not reche, ne avail yet does the record of thy passion, help / and
succor in all cases. 2. Cor. 5.
For the apostle says we be not ^^fficie^t of our selef, as of our self: unto
any good deed / or good thought, but all our suffiencie is of god, who is ever
blessed world without end. Amen

Of your charity pray for the old wrech of Syon Rychardr Whytforde. *
Unto the devout reders.
HEre be many good and profetable lesso^s ascribed unto saint Isodor which
may be rather called and taken for notes gadred, then for any work digested
and ordered, if you read the^ and note them well (you shall I doubt not) be
edified thereby. A devout brother of ours instantly requirynge: forsed me to
stranslate the matter, which I have done, more after the sens and meaning of the
auctour: then after the letter, and somewhere I have added unto the auctour,
rather than mynushed any thing. Ascribe, and take all unto the best I byseche
you, good devout Christian reders whom our lord god, and most sweet savior
Jesus, save keep, and increace in his grace and mercy evermore. Amen. Your
assured bedeman the old wreched brother of Syon Rycherd Whytforde.

: An instructyon to avoid and eschew vices and follow good manners, ascribed
unto saint Isodor and translate into English by a late brother of Syon
Richard Whytforde. *
MAn know thy self / know what you art, know whens thou came, how and
whetof thou wast begotyn how thou wast nury shed in thy mothers womb, how
thou wast borne, know unto what end and purposethou wast create, and made, and
frame, and order thy self unto the same. As thy maker has institute, and
taught the: so go forth by due obedience.:::

Of yuel thoughts.
First have thy self in a good awayte of thy thoughts, daily discuss, and
try thy heart / examyne daily thy conscience, keep well thy mind from vain
and yuell thoughts. Let never fylthy or unclean cogytacion crepe into thy
soul. If you be assailed and tempted with an yuel thought: give no place
thereunto, when the serpent appears first: kill him, trede upon his hedde, and
crush hit in pieces. Put away the yuel thought at the first enter, at the first
mocion and beginning, and then shall hit nothing noye. For better is to
avoid sin: then to make amends therefore. The mendes is best made: where,
and when the sin first spryngeth, and begymieth. Be ware at the beginning,
and thou shall lightly avoid and excape all dangers and periles of the soul,
and conscience.

Of chastity.
Never than be thou polluted or defoled with any uncleanness. Let never thy mind
be occupied nor thy soul be spotted with any fylthy pleasures of the bydy. Let
no lechery prevail in the, ne have resting place in thy heart or mind.
Chastity, does join man unto god. Chastity does draw, convey, and carye man
unto heaven. Unto the chaste person, is heaven promised. And if yet thou feel the
grievous vexacion and troubles, of the body, if thou be touched with the stynge
and prycke of the flesh, if thou be assailed with the suggestion, and tentacion
of the fylthy lust or stynkyng pleasure of uncleanness, if by any mind thoughts
or remembrance of fornicacion: thou feel or perceive any tytillacions or
rysynge of ye frail flesh and bestly body: the^ run streght way, in all ha^t
unto the next remedy. Cast forthwith before the face, and sight of thy soul:
the memory and remembrance of death. Put before thy face, ye passage of thy
soul from thy body, look upon thy last end, behold, and se the terrible, and
most dredeful day of judgment. Think what tourme^tes and pains be ordened
for sin, the perpetual and everlasting fire of hell, with other innumerable
horrible / and abominable punyshme^t unspeakable. And yet the most suer, and
spedefull remedy against al manner of tentacions is the remembrance of the
acres of our salvation specially the bitter passion / and paynfull, and
shameful death of our lord Jesus, prayer helps much.: *:

Of Prayer.
Pray therefore contenually, cease not to pray our lord day, and night, pray
with tears and weep, mourn and by wayle the sin of ye world Let prayer be
your armor harnes, and defense. For prayer is a principal virtue, and violence
against the assayles of al tentacions. For the dyuyl is ve^quished, and
ouercomen by prayer, and prayer does prevail against all yuels. And
obteyneth / and geteth grace, so that fasting go therewith.

Of superfluous fedynge.
SVperfluous fedynge, bybbynge and bollyng: be the instruments of lechery, as
by fuel fore cast unto the fire: the heat more increaceth. Matter co^bustible,
and that will lightly bren, makes the flame more fervent so does the pomprynge
of the body, move, and stir the blood, and does engender vain and unclean
thoughts.

Of aspecte or cast of the fight.
ONe of the first, and principal grynnes, sun res or lymeroddes of uncleanness:
is the eye or sight. The chief concupiscence that frail persons have each unto
other: is by lokynge and cast of the sight. For thereby is the mind, sone and
lightly netted, 2. Re. 11. Psalm. 118.
caught, and taken. David to wytnes, and he prayed afterward unto our lord
sayng. Au^rte oculos meos ne videant vanitatem. Turn and pluck away (good
lord) mine eyes, and sight / that I byholde not or se, any vanite, withdraw
therefore your sight, hold back your eyes from all light and wanton lokes.
Never fyxe or fasten your sight upon the favor beauty or countenance of the
contrary sex that is, man upon the woman, or contrary. the woman upon the
man. Remember the gospel. who so ever looks upon afrayle person of the
contrary sex: with the consent of concupiscence: has even then: Math. 5. d.
done fornicacion in his heart and mind. If you will than be safe and in suerty
from vice of fornicacion and uncleanness: avoid / and put away all occasions
thereof take away the matter and cause: and the offense is sone avoided. Aristo.
The philosopher says. Remota causa, remouetur et effectus. Remove, and put
away the cause, and the effect is forthwith removed. Be therefore discrete and
ware as well of your look and sight: as of your touching and other byhauiour of
the body.

Of the cu^peny and presence of the contrary sexes.::
There is no thing more perilous for the frail persons: then the presence,
cu^pany, and famuliarite of the contrary sex. For when they be disioyned and
in sondre departed: seldom have they any intent or purpose of sin, hard to
lie or dwell longe^ by a serpent without some hurt. Bide nere the face of a
continual fire: and (though thou were iron) thou shalt be dissolved, and
wasted who so ever is very nere unto perile, and ioperdy: cannot belong in
iuerte to be safe therfrom. Eccli. ^ d
The wyseman says Qui amat piculum in illo pecibit. Who so loves perile:
shall therein perysh. The frail light person: is ever in perile: byding in
familier presence of a like frail person, specially of the contrary sex. The
most ready, and most suer remedy / than: is to fle and to avoid presence. For
often has hit chanced and cu^men to pass: that familiarite in accustomed
presence, has, venquyshed, ouercomen and brought unto effect, that unclean
act of ye flesh: which the voluptuous desire and appetite thereof could never
bring about.

Of labor occupacion, and of the contrary, that is, ydelnes.:*:
THe ydel persons be sonest, and most lightly venquished, and ouercomen with
the fool sin of the body. For the fylthy appetite of the flesh does most
grievously bren and stir those persons that be found ydel. Ydelnes does not
only hinder all virtues: but also (as the wyseman says) does teach much
malice and nuryshe many vices. Eccli. 33. d.
The fury of the flesh does avoid and give place unto labor, and al sins
be driven away or rebated by occupacion. Do therefore always su^ good work or
labors, that thine enemies may find the occupied for then dare they not
assail the. For they can not lightly venquyshne overcome the persons well
occupied. Beware therefore of ydelues. Love not, but rather hate, and abhor
ydelnes, drive not forth thy life in ydelnes. The tylth or ryllynge of lands
with labor / and diligence: will not only destroy wedes, in baren grounds:
but also bring forth good fruit. Exercise thy body with labors, and
occupacions: and hit will distroy vice and engender, and bring forth virtue.
Seek therefore / and find out with care and diligence some, profitable
occupacion, where unto the intent of thy mind may be applied, and give thou thy
self thereunto.:

Of redynge.
LEction, and redynge, or herynge of good holy books and auctorysed works: is
a good occupacion. Study and lerning, and also techyng is a good occupacion,
meditacion of holy scripture: is a holy ocupacion. Apply thy self thereunto,
and use thy self therein. For the occupacion of redynge and meditacion: shall
teache the what to fle, and avoid, and whyther thou should intend and pass.
By redynge: and learning: thy wit, and understanding shall increase. And
much may thou profet thereby if thou work and do thereafter. Prayer also / is
a synguler good occupacion, use the^ interchan^geable, now from one unto
another, and so with out werynes thou shalt go forth with great ease pleasure,
and profete in all them, that is to say, in bodyly labors, in redyng in
meditacio^, in prayer and contemplacion.:::

Of humilite or mekenes.
If you than will effectuoufly profete, in the premises: you must be meke.
Found than, and groo^de your self in mekenes. Think your self the lowest
and most unworthy of al your cu^peny / and thereafter byhaue your self. In what
rowme, state or condition so ever you be: yet by mekenes of heart: make your
self, and account your self for the least or worst. Do not prepone or set
forth your self before any other. Do not repute, thynk not ne reken your
self supiriour, and above any person. Let not your mind arise to inhauns
your self, never bost your self. Do not extol and set up your self by
any light byhauiour. Sprede not a broad the wings of pride. For the more de
specte, and vile that you be in your own sight: the more shall you be glorious
and prayseable in the sight of god, Let therefore your lokes and countenance be
ever bashful. Be you (with the publicane) affrayde, and ashamed (for the
multitude of your sins) to look up toward the heaven. Look down unto the
ground, bear a low sail, in your countenance and in all your byhauiour. And
if you be in honor, dignite high rowme or degree: let the co^sideracion of your
sins: repress / and rebate your pride. Let none honor of this world extol
nor lift you upward above your self, but take heed what thy wyseman says.
Eccli. 3. c.
Quo mayor es, humiliate in ominibus, et cora^ deo inuinies graciam. The more
great, and high thou art in dignite: the more do thou meken thy self: and so
shall you before god, find grace. If the high states should meken and make them
self low: what abomina nation is hit to se them that came from the carte, to
clymbe, and inhaunce them self. Luck. 14. c. and. 18. e.
Our savior says in the gospel. He that does exalte: and set up him self:
shall be brought down, and be vile and of no reputacion, and contrary: he yt
does humble humilite and make him self low vile, and naught: shall be
exalted, and taken up unto honor and dignite, Than let them yt be disciples
unto Christ: learn, and love mekenes, and myldenes, at him or of him.

Of the constancy of mind.
THe very true meke person: is ever constant / and never variable. In time of
sekenes or disease: he never murmureth ne grudgeth, but ever he thanketh out
lord. If prosperity rain, and the world do laugh or smyle upon him: he does
not regard or set thereby, ne any thing is he at tolled or lift up
therewith. If aduersite hap or fall unto him: he is no thing deiecte
ouercaste, ne any thing disco^forted or broken thereby. But ever is he
constant, one and the same man / as well in wealth as in woe, he keeps in both, a
due mean In the one: due temperance: in the other due patience. For in both,
is he proved, and by another joy, nor sorrow is changed in mind. For he
knows well, that the state of man is ever accide^t and may sone be changed.
And ever he casts and wayteth in mind byforehande what may fall / and so is
hit more light to bear, what so ever hit be.

Of patience in aduersite.
This said constancy: does bring in patience. And does order the person in
all things / rather to suffer, and bear: then to do any hurt or displeasure,
or yet to give any occasion therun to. The nature of approved mekenes: is to
bring forth patience, as the mother does the child. Be you therefore: meke,
mylde, soft, sober, and co^stante: and then shall you be sure of patience. For
nothing then may grieve you. Look upon our lord / and savior Jesus, he had
much wrong, and you can have none. For you have deserved all that can be
said or done unto you. And he never deserved any pain, yet did he suffer
most patiently: not only most co^tumelious, most sharp and shameful words:
but also most grievous, and most cruel tourmentes, and (at the last) most
paynful death. And in all: he never said nor did any thing to withstand.
Follow you him, if you be wronged, rebuked, chydde, and with most obprobious
raylynge, and ragynge words assailed, never give you any word of answer,
except you will say, Mea culpa, I cry god mercy, else: say nothing / learn
to keep silence. For so (doubtless) shall you most suerly save your self, keep
your conscience most clean, best appease your own heart, and mind Sonest
venquysh your assaylers, and most hyghly please our lord, unto your own
profete and most high merit. For no virtue may win more merit, more laud
and praise of god, and man: then patience.:::

Of the imitacion and following of good men.
FOr the opteynynge, and keeping of patience, and also of all other virtues:
the imitacion / and following of good and holy persons, is a nere / and redye
way, or mean. In all your deeds (than) and works, in all your co^uersacion,
and form of living: follow you ever the good: and virtuous persons. Take
example ever of the best, and keep you cu^pany with them, and ever avoid the
contrary. For as the prophet says: Cu^ sancto sanctus eris etc. With the
good, and holy persons: Psalm. 17.
you shall be good and virtuous, and with the peruers and yuel persons, you
shall be, as they be: For the examples of our fore goers: be unto us docume^tes,
lessons / and fourmes of lyuyuge.

Of Peace and charity.
PEace / and charity may keep you in good life, where so ever you be, love
peace therefore, and desire love and charity. Psalm. 33.
Seek peace (says the prophet) and pursue and violently or fyerfly follow
peace. Study and apply to love, and favor every man, and to excede in love
(that is) to love: more then thou art beloved. Provoke enery man unto peace
ye: your enemies. Show unto all manner of persons a loving countenance. And
gentell byhauyour. Speak feyre and curtesly and deal kyndly, and favorably
with all persons. Never do wrong / ne hurt or yuel unto any person, rather
suffer hate, al stryfte, and debate. Never contend ne thwart, ne compare with
any man. Eccli. 6. a.
Hold never styffly thine own opinion. A sweet word (says the wise man)
does multiplye, increace, and get fre^des, and does mitigate and swage foose.
Our savior byquethed peace unto his disciples when he would deye. Math. 5. a.
And he / pronounced them blessed that were peaceful, and makers of peace.

Of Pity and compassion.
IF you perceive any person vnpeacefull or unrestful: have pity, and
compassion upon him and think that if you were in like case, and like passion:
you should (peradventure) be forther out of the way then he is, never rejoice
nor be glade of any man's hurt, no nor of your enemies hurt lest like chance
fall unto you and that god displeased: turn hes wrath from hi^, unto you. For
who so ioyeth in his enemies fallmay lightly fall him self into like, or wors
case. Be never hard hearted but rather as sorry for the misery of your
neighbor, as of your own, have pite and co^passyon upon all persons, Math. 5.
a.
according unto their need. Beati misericordes (says our savior) Blessed be
the persons merciful and pituous, your Englysh proverb says, he that has
no mercy: of mercy shall mysse and he shall have mercy, that merciful is. The
mercyful and pitious persons do best prove the^ self to keep that high
precepte and co^mau^demente. In the which saint Paul says: all the law
hangs and the prophets. Roma. 13. c.
That is: love thy neighbor as thy self.:::

Of the contempt and dispisynge of worldly praise.
But in all your mercy, pity, and compassion: beware ever of the appetite or
desire of worldly praise. For else you shall have (as christ says) that praise
only, for your reward. Math. 6. a.
Despise you therefore all the vain praise of ye people. Study rather to be
good, then so to be called or noted. Be more glad to be worthy praise: then to
here hit, or have hit. Do not you require or covet, that any person should
extol and set up your name, ne care you though you be rebuked or little set by.
Let not the vain favor or flatery deceive and bring you unto vayneglorye nor
yet the rebuke, ouercast you to be sorry. For if you will despice, and set
naught by all worldly praise: then shall no rebuke grieve you, ne any praise:
please you, hit is a great folly for you to suppose and think your self good:
because you be so called or named. In all your neighbors well sayng of you:
look you well upon your own conscience. Be you judged rather by your own, then
by any other man's judgment. And never wey nor measure your self by any other
man's tongue or sayng, but by your own mind and conscience. No man can better
know what you be: then your self. If you be naught: what avails hit you to
be praised, and called good.

Of honest conversation.
Let your conversation be honest and good: and then shall you be praised
whether you will or no. For laud and praise does follow virtue, as the shado in
the son, does follow ye body. Fle you ever and avoid simulation, and ypocry^y,
Feyne not in any wise, but rather be better the you seem The proverb says,
feigned sanctite: is dowbte iniquite. Show therefore your self, i habit array,
and all byhauiour: according unto your profession, state / and condition. For
the religious persons have their manner in their pase, going, standing,
inclinacio^s prostracions, genuflections, ye guard of their sight, and silence,
for the time place / and persons all according unto their statutes and
ordinances. The states of the world: have manners and byhauiours of other
grauite: then have the common people. The citezyns have also other manners /
then have the rude people of the cu^tre vplandysh. The life: may be suffered to
have some time more dissolute manner, light byhauiour, wa^tan words or
gestures: then should become the clergy. The women have their manners by them
self according unto their degrees, and condition. Let eueryche, therefore
behave him self according unto his calling: so that he make not of him self
a staring stock to be showed with a sign, as a wonder. He shall least offend
that follows the most common good manner / of his sort or felyshyppe. And the
most newfa^gle: does give most occasion. The most godly conversation shall best
please god.:::

Of the cu^penye or felyshyppe of good persons.: *:
THe co^uersacion co^munely of every person: is much after the manner / and
fashon of the company wherein he is nuryshed and brought up. Se neke says.
Educacio et doctrina: efficunt mores. Se^^^.
The edicacion, ye is the nuryshynge or bringing up of a person / and the
doctrine and teathynge that the person has: do make the manners. Take you good
head therefore, and warenes unto whom you put your child, or fre^des to be
taught or brought up. Ye, and also with whom you cu^pany your self. Avoid
the yuel persons. Beware of the wicked, Fle far from the unfaithful. Liars,
detractours, or bachyters, swerers, cursers, or ba^ners: hate you as poison.
Draw not nere unto wantan, and unclean lyuers. For who so touches pyche:
Eccli. 13. a.
may sone be spotted or defouled therewith. Draw ever unto the best, and unto
the most virtuous / and best manered pe^rsons, and so shall you have good
manners, and with the rude: you shall be rude: with the wise: you shall be wise.
Psalm. 17.
And (as is said) with the holy: you shall be holy. And with the innocent, and
hurtles person: shall you be innocent, and hurtles. And with the elect and
chosen person of god, you shall be elect and chosen. And with the peruers and
froward person: you shall be perverted and turned from god. And shorttly to
conclude with the old blunt proverb. Est et semper erit: similis, simulem
sibi querit. This is to say.

Hit has been ever, Versus
and ever shall be
That the like will seek, with the like to be.
In man and beast, Versus.
In herb; and tree
Where they be bredde: like shall they be.
Of the custody or keeping of the ears or hearing.: *:
ALl the learning and manners, of man: be received into the soul: by the.v.
wits, heryng, seeing, smelling, tastynge, and touching. And although among
philosophers: the sight is accounted for the principal of all the five wits:
yet (in mine opinion) the wit of herynge should be taken for the chief wit
among Christians, because that the appostel Paul says. Fides ex auditu. To.
10. d
We receive, and have our faith, by the wit of herynge, and also all the
lernyng that we have in words and speaking: we have by that wit of herynge.
For that person that never herd: can never speak u^ understand. How be hit
that by the wit of sight or seeing: a person may work and learn to work, and
to understand by signs what is meant, though he never herd, and smell, and
taste, that is to say, the wit of smelling and tastynge: do sexue for the
judgment of the fode of man, and beast. And the wit of touching is general
unto all and unto every member / and every part of the natural body of man or
beast / that is in natural state. Sith (than) that, by these five gates of the
body: we receive naturally, all things that be good, and profetable, and also
that be yuel or noyous, unto both the soul, and body: we had need to keep well
these gates, and specially the gate of herynge, whereby (as is said) we receive
our faith, without which (as the same apostel says) hit is impossible, Hebre.
11. a.
or impossible to please god / we must have I say of this gate, most suer
guard and most diligent custody. Lest in sted of right faith: we receive error
and heresies, unto our utter destruction. Close therefore, and shyt up your
ears and herynge from all yuel. Eccli. 28. d.
Sepi aures tuas spinis. Says the wise man, hedge up thine ears with thorns.
Blasphemyng oaths: be to be shyt out of your soul, by the thorny hedge of
sharp rebukes or of correction / or at the least by the avoiding of presence.
And like wise. Of detraction and bacbytynge. For hit is no less sin to here,
then to speak detraction, words of rybaldy and of uncle nes: be ever contrary
unto Christian honest. For saint Paul says. 1. Cor. 15. e.
Corruinpunt bonos mores colloquia mala. Yuel co^municacion and mysordred
words, do corrupt, infecte and destroy good manners. Fylthy words: do sone
move ye mind, and that thing yt is gladly hard: is lightly brought unto
effect in deed. Keep well (than) this wit of hereynge from all yuel. And
open your ears unto the word of god only and to them that in his name speak
godly words. Your sight also, that is your wit of syeyng: must have due
custodye / and guard. For else may death lightly enter by that wyndo. The
basiliske: does sie with a sight. Remember therefore what the prophet says.
Auerte oeulos meos ne videant vanitatem. ^sal. (...).
Turn away (good lord) mine eyes and sight, that they se no vanite / keep
your sight: and so shall you keep your soul. The delectacion of pleasant
odours and sweet smelles, and the taste of delicates, be oftymes (bysyde their
other yuels) occasion of superfluite, and the mysuse of touching is the most
perilous enemy of chastity. Of these. in. wits is litel here spoken, because
they be bysyde the auctour.

Of the custody, and keeping of the mouth.:
I Have made promys (says the prophet) that I will look well unto all my
ways, ^sal. 3^. ^.
so that I do not offend in my tongue. And therefore have I put and ordened a
custody, and guard for my mouth and I have been as doume and spechles, and have
kept silence, (...).
from those things that were good and lawful to speak. Nam (says the wise
Catho) Nu^quam tacuisse nocet: nocet esse locutum. For hit never hurt man
(says he) to keep silence and no thing to say, but to speak: has noyed
and hurt many persons. Have therefore (good christians) a good awayte of your
mouth. Look well what goth in, and what cu^meth forth of your mouth. For by
that goth in: your body is fed and nuryshed, and your life continued, good
dyete much avails unto the health and long life of ye body. And the due
temperance, and good disposicion of the body helps much unto the
disposicion, and order of the soul. Beware therefore what gothe in at your
mouth. And be as well ware: what cu^meth forth. Math. 12. ^.
For our savior says. Ex abundancia cordis, or loquitur. The mouth speaks
of the abundance of the heart. Beware (than) first what thoughts you suffer to
come into your heart. For thereafter will the mouth speak. The tongue does show
the manners and dysposicion of the man. And after the speech of the mouth, shall
a person be judged. A vain, light, and unclean tale of the mouth: is a
testimony, wytnes and token of an unclean, light and vain heart and
conscience. The mind heart and conscience of the man: is judged much after
his words. Beware therefore what you say. Let no thing pass your mouth: that
should displease god, charge or lade your co^scions, or hurt, offe^de / or give
occasion unto your neighbor. Math. 12. c.
Remember that our savior says, in the gospel. The good man (says he) of
the good thresour (that is virtue) does bring forth, and speak good words, and
the yuell man, of the yuell tresour of vice: does bring forth and speak yuel
words. For this I tell you (says he) men shall give account and reknynge: at
the day of dome or the day of judgment: of every ydel word they speak, For
of thy words man: shall thou be justified: and of thy words shalt you be
condemned. * Note here that if so streyte reknynge shall be made for ydel
words: what a reckoning (think you) shall be given for more sinful and
shameful words. The best porter (than) and the most suer custody and guard of
your mouth, and tongue: is silence and never to speak but in due time, and place.
Of due matter and unto due persons.

Of Detraction or bachytynge.
Among all the words or saynges that may pass the mouth of man: Detraction
or bacbytynge: is of most difficulte, and most hard to be amended and
recovered. For no sin may be forgyuen, without restitution satisfaction and
such amends as the person may make as if a man had stolen an horse: he may
be sone forgyuen: if he be sorry and have full mind to do no more theft, and be
confessed thereof, and take penance, and then r^store the horse or an other horse
as good or the price thereof, and so of other sins. But not so lightly o^
detraction. For when a man has defamed, and hurt his neighbors good name,
and fame, and though he be sorry, and confessed thereof: yet must he restore
that name, and fame, and that is hard to do when y^ matter is in many mouths,
yet must he do what he can thereunto. Consider now (I pray you) how hard
this thing is to be done: although hit be in a true tale, and unto few
persons, as unto three or two or one person alon. Let (in case) a man se his
neighbor do fornication, and he tells this forth: he does therein dedly
sin. For hit his contrary unto the law of nature / and unto the good ^^der
of charity, Math. 18. c.
and directly contrary unto the words and mind of the gospel. How shall he
now make restiticion, and a mendes. For if he speak unto the party where he
made the detraction: he may not say he lied, and told a falls tale. For than
should he make an unlawful lie, upon him self, and also defame him self. And
if he should say hit was true, that he said: he should so more depely defame
the said person, how should he now do in this case. I will tell you how. And
I pray you Note hit well. He must seek the person, or persons, unto whom he
made the detraction / when he may conveniently. And say after this form.
Friend or fre^des: I told you such a tale of such a person or persons: hit
was a detraction, he needs not to say, hit was true, or false, but (as I
fayde) hit was a bachytynge and sclauuder, of my neyggbour and a great offense
against god I should not have told you any such: nor you should have herd hit,
nor bylyued hit, but you should rather have axed me what proof, and wytnes I had
of my tale and if I had said: none but my self: then should you have rebuked
me for my so sayng and at the least, you should have given unto me no credence,
but rather warned and counseled me to show hit no forther. And thus I cry our
lord mercy: I did both offend him and you. For if you have (upon my mouth)
told hit any forther: then be you bounden to do unto them, as I have done now
unto you. Look well now (good christians) how hard, hit is to make amends
for detraction, and yet some persons when they know how to make the amedes:
will not so do for shame, but rather do put their souls in ^operdy. Keep
therefore your mouth, from detraction. Recounte well your own sins: and you
shall rather be sorry for all other sinners: then be ready to rehers them. Search
not what other men do or say. For so may you lightly fall into suspicion, and
thereby say that is not true, and so fall from an yuel sin into a wors.

Of A lie or lyenge.
IN detraction: be communely many lies. And suerly hit is a great shame for a
chrystiane to be a liar. For Christ is the essenciall truth and father unto
all the true christians. Io. 8. f.
And the dyuyl (from the bygynnyng) is a liar, and father of all lies, and
liars. Defoule not therefore your mouth with any lie. Sap. 1. c
For the wyseman says. Os quod mentitur: occidit animam. That mouth that
makes a lie: does slay the soul. Sane your soul, use to speak the truth
plainly, without craft or colors, other in your word or work.

Of swerynge.
TO affirm and bind a lie with an oath: is erectable, and much abominable.
Sweryng is forboden by ye law except it be, for a lawful cause, required by
lawful pso^s: in lawful in time and lawful place^. Otherwise, have you no will,
appetite, pleasure to swear (says our savior) omnino, y^ is ^or, utterly, so
ye we should utterly have, no mind ne desure to swear and never to swear but
constrained thereunto and then that the other (in conscience) be true, Math. 5.
^.
with y^ circumstances before said. The use of swerynge is perilous, both for
the body / and soul. For that use may engender a custu^, so that a man shall
swear great oaths, and not perceive him self yt he swereth any oath at all,
and although so to swear by custom, be not always dedly sin: yet is it hard
to excuse the ingendrynge of that custom from dedly sin. In customable
oaths: a man may lightly, fall into for swerynge. And to forswere wyttyngly,
and wyllyngly by deliberacion: is always dedly sin. To avoid all ioperdies
therefore: use not your mouth unto oaths. For trothe needs none oaths. A true
saying shall be well byleued without any oath. Ye and nay, is enough for a
faithful christian. And though a man were dredles of god, yet the periel of the
body should move him to leave sweryng and the custom thereof. For holy scripture
says. De domo iurantis, non recedet plaga. Eccli. 23. b.
The vengeance of god ha^geth ever still over the house of the swerer, and he is
ever full of iniquite. And then must nedely all that household be ever in
perile, and ioperdy: where the customable swerer dwells. Use not (tha^) to
swear your self, not yet suffer you any other to swear that you may let.

Of promise, and vow to be rendered and kept.:*:
Notwithstanding if you by sworn oath make any promise or vow: that vow
must you nedely render, keep, and perform, if you so may do without the
offense of god. For our lord god said by his prophet Moses. Deuteronomy. 23. d.
Cum votu^ voueris domino deo tuo. etc. That is when thou have made a vow unto
thy lord god. Make have, and tarry not, ne make any stoppage to render, and
perform hit, For thy lord god, will require hit. And if it be holden back,
and thou tarry and stop thereat: hit shall be reputed: and laid unto thy
charge for sin, if thou wylt make none such promise thou may be without
any sin, but that vow that ons has passed out from thy lyppes: shalt thou
observe keep, and perform, according as thou have promised unto thy lord
god, and by thine own proper will and with thine own mowth: thou have spoken.
And the prophet David says. Vouere et reddite. Psalm.
and Make you vow at your will, and then render, and perform the same unto
your lord god. Be not therefore, light to promise and hard or loath to pay.
Prove you by deliberation (as saint John says) what spirit moves you to make
the promise, 1. Io. 4.
and then never slycke ne tarry to pay. For much displeases god: a folysh
promise. And they be accounted and no^bred among infideles and faythles
persons: that do not perform, and fulfill yt they have vowe^^, and promyssed.

That all things be open and known unto god.:*:
ANd let no man think nor believe: that the vow or promise that he makes in
secret manner unto him self alon: be unknown unto god. For suerly all things
be plain opyn unto him. Think none yuell in your heart therefore. For by no
silence: may hit be hyd from him. No thing can be so covered ne cloked, but
that hit shall be reveled, and showed, nor any thing so hyd but hit shall be
known. For those things that you have said in dark corners: shall be told
in open light, and that you rowned in your felous care: shall be openly preched
upon the house tops. Another (therefore) do you, Luck. 12. ^
say nor think yuel any where but where you know well: god is not ne can se
you. Do no thing (than I say) nor yet say or think: but that you believe: all
ye world may and shall se, and know. God seyth, and beholds, al things
now present. And man shall here after, se and know, that now is hid.

Of good conscience.
ALthough our merciful lord god, se now / and byholdeth and does take
patience with your sin and though another the publyke and opyn fame, ne yet any
synguler person can accuse you: you ca^ not yet so excape vnaccused. For your
proper conscience: does both accuse, and co^dempne you. And suerly there is no
pain more greuons: then the murmur and gruge of conscience. Will you than
avoid all sorrow. Keep then your conscience clean. For a clean and suer
conscience, does lightly bear all troubles, and the spotted conscience: is
ever in pain, and woo. The greatest glory, laud praise joy, or pleasure
that man may have in this life, is (after saint Paul) the testimony, 2. to.
1. c.
and wytnes of a clean and clear conscience. And the cu^bred conscience, is
ever unsteadfast, and ready to despere.

That all things should be attributed and applied unto god.:::
But yet be you ware yt you presume not upon your own virtue, to have a clean
conscience, by your own merits, but rather, if you so trust and believe:
ascrybe, and apply hit unto god. For saint Paul says. 1. co. 15. d
Gracia dei sum id quod sum. What so ever I am: that am I by the grace of god.
And yet although you trust and believe that your conscience be good and clean:
yet make never yo^ self ^eker and sure thereof. For the same apostle says in
an other place. 1. co. 4. ^
Licet nihil mihi conscius sum. etc. Though I know not my conscience gyltyne
grieved with any offense, yet am not I therein justified and made ryghtwyse
before god. Return you therefore, and turn back all your virtues / and good
deeds unto god from whom they came, and knowledge, that you have no thing that
is good, of your self, but all of him.::*

That the virtues of man should be hid and kept clos.:*:
ANd sithe you so know / hit is a great folly for any man to set forth and
show as to be seen and praised for his: that is not his. For so were he worthy
to lose ye use and profete yt he has thereof, by the goodness of the oner. If
you will therefore keep, and inioye the prophet of those virtues that god has
send you: boste the^ not. Set not them forth to be supposed as yours and
thereby to have the praise, and favor of man. Keep the^ secret and then shall
they increase, and multiply unto your more conforte. When fine powder is kept
clos in a box: it will wexe more fast and stycke, to gether. Bear hit opyn in
the wind: and hit will fly a broad, and peryshe. And so certainly is it of al
virtues showed a broad in the wind of vain glory. Lose not than by vain
words: that may be kept by silence.:::

Of confession.
ANd as your virtues and al good deeds should always be kept priuey and secret
except when they may be showed unto ye glory of god: so must you nedely show
forth your sin and yuel deeds in due time and place, according unto the /
condition and manner of the same, as if your sin be opyn: then must you openly
confess the same / as hit is known. And if hit be secret, then show hit
unto your gostly father the priste. Senec.
Qui sponte fatetur facimus: (says Seneke) habetur tan^ non reus. He that
does wylfully vnco^strayned confess and plainly knowledge his default and
offens (though hit be never so great and grievous) yet shall he be taken as he
were no thing gyltye. Show you therefore the vices of your heart. Let another
word nor thought be vnco^fessed. For the sin that is plainly confessed: is
sone and lightly cured, and the hyd sin: rancleth and increases and
poysoneth and wexeth ever more and more incurable and vnhealable as abodely
sore. Yet it is always better to avoid sin: then to make amends therefore.

Of premeditacion.
Hit is good therefore to have ever a foreloke a foresyght, and will to
remember, and consider before the deed, what shall come thereof. The saying of a
learned man. Salust.
Ante^ incipias, consulto: and post^ consulueris mature, opus est facto. Before
thou bygynne: take counsel, and when thou haste rypely and sadly well
counseled: Eccli. ^1. c. Prouer 11. b. and 24. a.
then is time to work, and do thereafter. The wise man says. Let stable and
sad counsel: go before every act, and deed thou do. For there is much
health, and salvation: where be many counsels. But when that counsel is had:
then is it not good to tarry, stop ne make deley: in good deeds, yuel deeds
ca^ never be done be good counsel. Counsel (says Solomon) will keep you, and
prudence will preserve you from all yuel wayse, Proser 13. b.
who so ever (than) do work and do all things by counsel premeditacion, and
foresyght those be ruled and ordered by wisdom.

Of sapience and wisdom.
SApience, prudence, and science, wisdom / prouysyon and conynge: do go
co^munely to gether, one does follow upon an other. And some time be put and
used each for other, as may be taken of the wise Salolomon. No thing is
better: Prouer 8. a. b.
then sapience, no thing more profetable then prudence, no thnge more pleasand
and more sweet, and delectable then science. Learn wisdom then. Ibide^.
For so she her self says by the said wyseman. Take of me discipline and
techynge: rather then money. And choose you to have doctrine, and learning
rather then gold. For sapience is better then all the most precious jewels of
the world. And no thing is so desyrable:that may be compared unto wisdom. I
dwell in counsel (says she) and I am present with all learned cogitacions and
thoughts. As no thing (than) is better then wisdom: so (contrary) no thing
is wors then folyshnes. And as no thing is more profetable then prudence, and
polityke provision, so is no thing more noyouse, and wastful: then careless
prodigalite. And as no thing is more pleasant, and delectable: then science and
conynge: so is nothing more miserable and co^fortles: then ignorance, love
well therefore sapience / and prudence: and they will show them self unto you
and then keep their cu^pany, follow them, and give good head unto them:and they
will teache you doctrine, and learning.:::

Of doctrine or learning.
AN old Englysh proverb. Who so no thing can, ne any thing will learn:
though he never thryue who may him werne. Have you therefore A desire to have
doctrine and learning, and give great diligence, and importune labor thereunto,
and you shall have both profete, and pleasure thereby. For as doctrine, and
learning cu^meth of wisdom: so does hit bring the person unto wisdom and
prudence, and of the scoler make a master: and so consequently make him
honorable, and both byloued and dred. But yt forseth much of whom, and what
you learn. Choose you therefore a techer that has wisdom and prudence, and
that lives and teaches thereafter. For as the master is, such co^munely the
scoler will be, and never learn any thing that does sown or appear contrary
unto the law of god. Learn then that doctrine that may be profetable both unto
your soul and body. The way and mean to get and increace lernyng: is put in
two old verses.

Sepe rogare. Rogata tenere, Retenta docere
Hec tria difcipulum faciunt fuperare magistrum.
To axe often well to keep, and to teach ye learned was
These.iii. do make y^ scoler his master for to pas.
To take often, keep, that is taken. And to teach that learned was. These iii. do
the scoler make his master for to over pas. *:*
BE you therefore, another abashed nor loathe to axe and to learn that thing that
you can not. and when you can hit rehers hit often in your mind and lyberally
teach hit unto some other persons. For by teaching your lernyng shall
meruelousip incrense, and by collaciou and communicacion of learning, you shall
bult out, and* bring unto knowledge those things that be fore were hard,
dark, hid and unknown. But look well whom you teach, and what you teach.
For every learning is not convenient ne mete for every person. And beware that
in teaching of other persons you hurt not your self that is that you take no
pride therein nor yet to be chafed, angry, or ve^geable unto them that can not
or do not lightly learn. Be not ashamed to speak that you know is true, nor
afraid, deuly to defend the troth with soft words, and sobre manner. Strive
not in disputacion to venquish, and to get the maystre. Be not styfe in your
opinion. But ever give place yield your self, and lightly give over / and
grant unto the truth. Speak not again justice. Ne ever be about to defete
and put a way the right.

Of ru^iosite.
ANd in all your teaching or lernyng, avoid curiosite. Use not to speak with
ynkhorne terms new retricke, nor in da^ke words and hard to be understand,
speak plainly yt your disciples or herers may perceive what you mean. Study
not to be over much eloquent, nor yet in any wise barbarous. (...) mean style
is most cu^ly, and most profetable. And desire not the laud, and praise of the
world, for so may you los^ all your merit and turn your science, and conyng
into pride. Sciencia inslat, 1 cor. ^. ^.
^nyth saint Paul. Science and great conynge, does swel, boll, and blow up
the person unto pride Study not to learn and know, prive hyd things nor those
arts or sciences yt be not lawful, ordo nor apperteyne unto you, to know,
have you ever (in cu^pany) desire and pleasure: rather to here / the^ to speak.
Be not ready to speak first before al por cu^pany specially, if your souerene or
seniours be present.

Of obedience.
Have you ever a regard unto your souerene elders, and betters. For unto them
apper^ey ^leth first to speak, and unto the subject and iuuinours to he^ken to
give head, and ever to be obedient unto their byddinges, and to give them due
reverence and honor, eueryche, according unto his dignite degree, and unto their
merit of sancrite, and holiness, and so may you do unto god seriuce and honor
^n the^, and follow his will in following theyrs. Make not your self ma^e, and
fellow, nor yet very^ familier, and homely with your superiors. For after ^^^e
old proverb. Nimia familiaritas parit conrem^^um. Ouennuche boldness, makes a
person m^lepa^^, and vnreuerene. Show a meke, and gentel countenance unto all
persons. And what so ever you do at commandment: let hit be done without
mu^^nur or gra^dge, and without styckynge of stop page, freely ^^lfully and
spedfully Hila^em ^aro ^om dillgi^ deu^. God soue^ha glad gyu^^, yt ^^the his
dut^t^ with glad her^e, 2. co. 9. b
and ther^full by ha^^ion. And be you eue^^^^ ^o take any honors* Premisne^^^,
sou^ ^^yu (...) ^or^te, if you mayes auo^de the^ without the offense of god for
doubtless he is in most perrel, and ioperdy, Aug. inregula.
that is in most hight rowl^^e, and dignite.

Of prelacie.
EVery prelate should study, and defyre, rather to be of his subjects
byloued, then dred. Ibide^.
The most sure castle tower or guard that any souereyn may have is ye love of
hes subjects. Dion. de regno.
For a souereyn that has many loving subjects: is much like unto a person
that should have many souls in one body, and all (with like diligence) to
serve and to provide for then. Let therefore your virtue / your^ goodness and
gentelnes win the love of your^ subjects for so shall you by love have
better service and more comfort of the^: then you can have by rygour and rugh
dealing. Yet must you keep a due mean, so that sin be corrected, and that
ever with the love, and favor of the persons, Aug. in regula.
and hate of the vices. And vfterly to exclude parcialite, another to praise any
persons very much above the residue, and celdome to excuse any defaulte but
never utterly to defend any sin. Hit apperteyneth unto a wise, discrete, and
virtuous prelate, to moderate and tempere every cause, that the good persons be
not brought, or turned into yuel, by over much favor, nor yet the yuel wexe
wors by over much rygour. Be as a very father by seuerite and ernest byhauiour
and as a mother by compassion and pir^e. Currage and conforte the diligent
persons that mean well, and blame and reform the vn^estful and negligent,
Aug. inregula.
and unto all, be patient. And ever remember that as you have subjects under
you: so have you a prelate, and souereyne above you / at the least almighty
god. Do than as you would be done unto. Forget not what you have been. The
common puethe is. The priste reme^breth not that ever he was clerk, nor the
master, that he was sometime a disciple or scoler, you may be sure that as you
do entreat: you shall be entreated, as you deal with your subjects: so will
your soueryne / and high prelate (when you come home) deal with you, let
therefore mercy be in place, before justice, although they both must be kept,
and joined to gether. The extreme rigor of justice: may be kept in the
discussion search, and examynacion of the cause: but in the definicion, and
gyuyng of sentence and judgment. Let mercy have the rule. and so yet go forth
euenly to gether: that troth be kept and another of them excede in them self.
For the most high justice: Eccli. 8. c.
is most high wrong. And therefore the wysema^ says. Nol^ esse iustus multum.
Be not ^ueriuste. And to much mercy: has been the marrynge of many persons.
Use the does in due manner: and they will agree and stand both well to gether.
Exelude in all judgments: al parrialite. And never give judgment upon
suspicion / or supposition but always try, out y^ troth before you give
se^te^ce. For two falls and perslous ^yers ther^^ yt do dr^^e, or father
deceytfully led, and bring the soueryns or prelates from right iudgemetes,
that is to say, I herd say, and I wend. Many will make a co^playnt and tell
a falls tale, and when hit comes (by trial) unto the proof: then will they say
I said as I hardesaye. Or else, I wend hit had been so. The judge (than) that
gives sentence upon the mouth of these two liars: does of times come unto, had
I wist, and that comes ever to late, be sure therefore of the troth, and then
may you suerly give sentence. If you be in doubt of the troth: differ or
dispatche your self of the cause and remyt the matter unto him that knows all
troth almighty god. And remember well ye sayng of the gospel. Math. 7. a.
By what measure you do measure your neighbor: be the same shall be remesured
unto you. Such judgment as you give: such shall you have. Herein you may
perceive that a prelate has a great burden, a great charge. In old time:
the most holy, and best learned persons: did most avoid, and fle that rowlme.
And suerly who so ever does desire hit is most unworthy to have hit.::

Of contempt, and despysynge of the world. *:: *
THose persons (that time) that most despised the world were chefly chosen,
ye and compelled (by force) unto prelacie. And doubtless they were best worthy
ye rowlme. And yet were they of more high merit in that rowlme: then in their
quiet and restfull life. Because they did their labors of obedience, and for
no worldly pleasure, but onel^ for the love of god. And contrary, those that
aspire and make labor, means and ways to be prelates: as they be most
unworthy: so be they never quiet, ne content, but always, labor still to clymbe
and gether riches, godwottes home. If you will (therefore) be quiet to serve
god, and to keep a clean conscience: have none appetite ne desire unto the
world. The holy fathers that (in time past) were forced unto prelacie: did all
the labor they might to be discharged thereof. Their tresure, and heart were in
heaven, and therefore they put away, and cast from them, all that might set them
thens. Follow you them, despice the world. Our savior said he was not of
this world nor his dysciples another. How than may they be worldly, that would
be of his flock. The perfete Christian: should be ded unto the world, and ye
world unto him. The ded man looks not upon the glory of the world No more
do you, if you will be very disciple unto Christ. Forsake now in this life,
and utterly despice and set at naught: that thing that when you be ded you can
not have.

Of alms deed.
RAther study you, how you may discretely depart with that you have. Play
the wise merchant, y^ is no thing loath to send his goods over see. where he
supposes to have other goods better and more pleasant, for them. And
specially if he purpose, and determine him self to go after his goods into
that country for ever to remain / and there to bide. So do you. Remember what
saint Paul says. We have here no city, Hebre. 13. c.
town nor home to dwell in, but we seek, and labor for an other. Send your
goods then before you. Deliver them unto a sure carier, a faithful factour,
yt is unto your savior Jesus christ, he will not deceive you, he can not
deceive you. At y^ day of judgment he will say unto you. Math. 25. d.
What so ever you gave unto the pore in my name, and for my sake that gave you
unto me. And all yt shall you find before you, with the usury, and gaynes
according. You shall have more winning then the common gaynes, a shylynge of
the pound. For you shall have more then a pound for every penny. Eccli. 7. a.
Despice not then to give alms, says the wise man. For alms (says he)
claused or hid in the heart or in the bosum of the poor man: Ibide^. 17. c.
will pray effectually for you and will keep you from all yuel. And also alms
unto a man is like unto a bag of money or tresour, borne or carried with him
to serve him at need, and hit will keep him derely in grace / and favor and
afterward hit will arise, and reward every man according. To. 4. a and 12. b.
And it will deliver a person from fynne and from death. For as water does
quench fire ^o does alms ^^ecke, and resyst sin. Lu. 11. f.
De^e and give alms (says our savior) and then be all things clean unto you
and without sin. Ibide^. 12. d.
And in another place. Sell you (says he) your possessions, and give in
alms. Now you se well and perceive that good it is to give alms. But yet se
and look well that you give hit after a due form. First you must look unto ye
end, to what intet and why, or wherefore you give your alms. That is first
chefly, and principally for the love of god, and for the reward that he (of
his goodness) has promised therefore. Alms must also be done with a good will,
with a glad heart and iocunde mind, 2. ^o. 9. b
for that, god loves, and not with murmur or grudge, as loath to depart
withal, but lyberally freely hastyly forwith without stoppage when the need
appears. And ever with pytie and compassion upon the nedy. For so does that
name Elemosine, sown, that we call alms. An other cyrcumsta^ce of alms is to
be secretly done. Math. 6.8.
Cum facis eleemosinam, noli tuba canere ^^te te. When you do alms (says our
fauiour) have not a mind or will that hit should be blown abroad bosted, and
showed forth as do ypocrites, because they would be praised and honored of the
people. For I assure you (says he) they have received here their reward
therefore. But when you do your alms (says he) let not your lift hand know
what your right hand does. So yt your alms be done in secret manner,
pryuely, and then will your father that byholdeth and syeth all secrets:
render and reward you. He does not forbede / in this saying, that you should
not deal alms opynly, For that must some persons nedely do, or else deal
none, where and when hit were most need / but he said deal hit not openly
because men should se hit, know hit, and so praise you thereof The intent and
mind will he judge / rather then the deed. The less mind you have to take
here the glory, laud and praise of your alms: the more shall hit be when the
time cu^meth that god your father shall say unto you before all the world
come blessed child of my father, Math. 4. d.
come unto me. For this alms or that alms, gave you unto me at my need in the
pore persons, and this glory and praise shall be precious, and joyful and
never have end, and contrary those that here will have the praise thereof:
shall there have shame everlasting of their alms. Do you than all for the life
everlasting and you shall finally there find hit. One circumstance yet must
you have in gyuynge alms, byonde these, that is to say, that the alms be of
your own proper goods, and not of any other persons. For many do make large
alms of other men's goods yt shall have but little thank therefore. For
although goods wrongously gotten, or unlawfully obtained: should be given, and
most be given in alms, or as for alms, yet is not that alms: worthy the
name of alms, because hit is rather restitucion the^ alms. And yet if the
right owners may be found: hit must nedely be there restored, or restituted.
And else hit is another alms nor yet restitucion, but plain robery, and stelth
or theft. Yet I do not deny, but that the dealer of such goods in
restitucion when or (where ye owners can not be found) may have such
compassion and such good will in that distribucion and dealing: that he may
obtain as much merit of god, as some that do deal their own goods. Deal
you than your own proper goods, with good will and good intent unto the pore
with compassion and pity, not unto the rich, unto them that can not get their
own living, not unto vacabundes. Deal hit secretly, without desire of
worldly praise. And for the love of god, and the wealth of your soul. And also
deal hit while hit is yours and when you may use hit your self, that is to
say in your life time. For when you be ded, then the goods be not yours. Nor
yet may you have any use of them. Nor so much profete of them by the use of
any other person: as by your ministracion and dealing in your life. Deal
alms than daily, and be your own executour, and so shall you be most sure to
have the gaynes and profete of them in your own country at your own home with
your father and mother, sister and brother, in the tresorie of everlasting
riches in joy and blys perpetual whyther he bring us that bought us, our
lord god, and most sweet fauiour Jesus christ, that with god the father and
the holy goft lives and ^eygneth ye same god world without end. Amen. Of
your charity (devout reders) pray for the translatour a late brother of Syon
Richard Whytforde.:::::

This draught that follows was a pyce of a sermonde that I spoke unto ye
people years ago, and because hit was translate out of so holy a saint and so
great a clerk: one of my brether volde nedely have hit send forth with this
foresaid work because hit does agree with some artycles therein contained. Take
all unto the best I pray you.::::

Of Detraction. Chrisostomus homelia tercia.: *:
THe bachyter etethe the flesh of his brother. He gnaweth the flesh of his
neighbor whereof saint Paul says. Gala. 5. e.
If ye gnawe and eat each other: byware ye be not among your self consumed
and destroyed. Thou bachyter thou doste not festen thy tethe in ye bodyly flesh
of thy neighbor, but that is wors, thou haste wounded his name and fame, and
over that thou haste infected and hurt thy self and many other with wounds
innumerable. For the herers be hurt and poysened by the bachytynge of the
neighbor, wylfully herd, and the same herers whether they be good persons or
yuell: have thereby occasion rather of yuel then of good. For if they be yuel:
they (by the herynge of the yuel of ye neighbor) be more glad to do yuel and
to continue their sin, And if they be good persons: yet (by the herynge of
that yuel) they be tempted and moved to iustitye them self: and to despise
their neighbor. And yet forthermore, they bachyter hurts not only the name
or fame of him, that he speaks of: but also al other of his faculty and manner
of living and oftymes of his country as if he bachyte a soudiour, a merchant
or a pressed, the herers will not only gruge / and take opinion against that
sowdiour, yt merchant or yt pressed alon: but also against all soudiours, all
marchantes, and all prestes, and likewise of the countrese. As northern men
sotherne men welshmen yryshe men. Scotts or fre^shmen. And over all this, ye
bachyters causes the glory of god to be blasphemed. For as by ye good name and
fame of every christian: the name of god is glorified: so by the yuell name,
is hit blasphemed and dishonored. Thus the bachyter dishonoreth god,
co^foundeth and hurts his neighbor, and renders him sell gylty and worthy
pain and punishment. Sith he medleth with matters: that he has nothing to do
withal. And let no man say that he then only bachyteth: when he says falls of
any person. For thought hit be never so true, if hit be yu^^, and preuely that
he says: he bachyteth, he ^^^aundreth. For he shows opynly, that before was
done, or said in priuue. And yt (as I said) is always yuel, and forther (as
seems by the words of this holy saint) to speak that thing, that is opynly
known, unto the rebuke or sclaunder of any person: is also Detraction, as he
puts example by the proud pharisey, that rebuked the pore publicane, which
was openly known for a publicane, and yet went and departed the pharisey:
condemned in the sight of god, and lost all his good works. For if he would,
or if any person will refourme, and correct the defaulte of his neighbor or
brother: The way and mean thereunto: is not by detraction, by bachytynge, by
showing of his sin or trespace, unto any other person: but rather by an
other mean, that is to say: by the way of charity, and brotherly co^passyon,
remembrynge that they both be children of one father, and both have offended
and displ^^sed him, and that he would do unto him as he would be done unto,
weep for him pray our lord for him, with all thy whole heart, monyshe and
warn him gentelly, counsel him sadly, and exhort him devoutly to leave his
sin and yuel manners. So did saint Paul, 2. cor. 1^.
saying unto the Corinthes after he had named many sins. I am affrayde
(says he) lest when I come unto you almighty god will humble me that I shall
mourn and wayle for many yt among you have done amysse. Thus should we show,
unto the mysdoer: charity, persuade him, counsel him, help to cure, and amend
him, and not diffame ne yet vex him. Show him (as I said) his defaulte
gentelly louyngly mekely. And hertely entreat him to amend his manners and
thus may we verily cure and help our brother. For so do phisycyons, entreat
the seek persons to take that mete or medicine that ye seek is full loathe to
receive. So should we refourme our neighbor and christian brother. And never
bachyte him, ne show his sin. Not only the speker of detraction: but also
the herer thereof had need to beware and stop well his here is, reme^brynge what
the prophet says. Detrahentem secreto proximo suo: hunc parsequebar. I did
(says he) pursue him that in priuite would bachyte his neighbor. So should
thou do christian, when thou herest a bachyter. Say, if there be any person
that he will justly praise: I will gladly here, but if ye say yuel by any
person: I will stop mine ears, that water ne such fylth: shall not enter
mine ears, water or any wete in the ears: much noyeth, I will none receive. I
will not here you. What am I the better to here and know that an other man is
yuel. Much hurt and ioperdy of soul may come thereof, but never any virtue ne
goodness. Speak unto the self person charitably, if he would amend him. Let us
speak of our own matters. Let us remember what account we must make for our
own sins, we shall not answer for his. Let us not therefore search the
sins of other persons. but our own. For what excuse may we make unto our
lord, if we be curious and ready to spy and find the fautes of other persons:
and no thing remember our own, none suerly. Is hit not a rebuke for a
stranger to look in every corner of an other man's house where he has
naught to do, yesse suerly sir. And more rebuke is hit to search an other
persons life or acts. Notwithsta^dydge here ye must know, that masters,
souereynes, and such persons as have charge of people, by any office: may
(according unto the same) search the acts of other persons, and they be also
bound thereto. But not to bachyte them / but rather to refourme them? Well sir
say you hit is a pleasure to the bachyter to tell his tale / and a pleasure
for me to here hit, what shall I than do be not deceived man. For all that is
gaye: is not gold, sin seems sweet, but hit is not so. For co^munely, these
bachyters when they have said yuel: they be weary of their own sayng, and
oftymes they wyshe they had not so said. For the fere hit should come out that
they said, and they be rebuked thereof, and make them self (as oftyn they do)
of their friend a foo, and so is hit also of the herer that often wysheth he had
not cu^ in that cumpeny that day, hit is not therefore pleasure yt so frayteth a
person, and puts him to pain. The wise man says, haste thou (says he)
hard a tale, keep hit within thy self than, and let hit deye in the. For
believe me, it will not breast ne break thy belly, what is that to say: Let hit
deye within the, that is (says chrysostom) quench thou hit, burye hit let
hit never come forth, ne yet be moved ne signified by any mean of the, but
rather blame thou the bachyter, and forgete thou what thou hard / put clean of
thy mind what he said as if thou had never herd speak thereof. And so shall
thou live in great peace and suerty, of conscience. And if thou use to blame
the bacbiters, and to thretyn the^ yt thou will tell the parties: thou may
peradventure unto thy great merit: bring them from that custu^, or at the
least thou shalt make them affrayde to bacbyte in thy presence. For as well
saying, laud and praise: is a bygynnynge and nuryshynge of amyte frendshyppe,
and love: So yuel saying is a bygynnynge of hatred discord and debate. Bid
therefore the bachyter look upon him self, hit is an yuel thing for any manner
of persons to be curious and bysy about other men's deeds and to search their
lives: and be neglyge^t of them self. But the bachyter has no leyser to
examyne him self ne to search his own life: for lokynge upon other men's. For
while he gives so great diligence unto yt curiosite of knowing upon others
men's deeds: he must need be negligent of his own. And that is a great folly
Sith all the time a man may have: is little ynogh and to little: to search his
own life, to recounte his own sins. And if he ever be occupied with other
men's matters: when shall he have leyser tocure and head his own? Beware now
therefore christians of this breath. Beware of this pestilence, yt infecteth
both parties: for doubtless hit is the very assail of the dyuel, that we by
the negligence of our own sins: should be the more in his danger and our
sins ever more grievous and more inexcusable. For who so streytly fyndeth hes
neighbors defaulte: shall the more hardly obtain forgeuenes for his own. For
by the same judgment that we judge our neighbor: shall we of god be judged,
and that appears by the gospel where our savior says. ^a^^. 7. (...)
Nolite iudicare^et no^ iudicabimini. That is to say. Have not you will ne
consent to judge other persons: and then shall not you be judged. For not only
the sin of a person: shall apere at the judgment as hit was: but also hy^
shall both seem, and be, much more grievous: by the judgment that he made upon
his neighbor. For as the meke, mylde, and gentle heart by compassyon of his
neighbor in excusing his faure: does mynyshe and make less his own sin:
so does the cruel inuious stomach in judging and showing his neyghburs
sin: much multiplye and make grievous his own sin. Let us therefore
(christians) avoid and eschew all detraction and bachytynge. And suerly know,
that no penanance, ne good deeds may in this life avail ^^: except we absteyne
from bachytynge. For after the gospel those things that enter by the mouth:
do not defoule the person: but those things that do issue and pass out by the
mouth: do defoule and blemysh the soul. If a person in thy presens should
fterre in dryt or any stynkyng matter would thou not blame and rebuke him.
Yesse verily. So than do thou the bacbyter. For I assure the, no stynke can so
move and grieve thy smelling: as Detraction does hurt the souls of the
herers. Avoid therefore and beware of bacbytynge. For the bacbytynge of thy
neighbor: is also the bacbytynge of god, his master and maker. And many
bacbyters have been so mad that from the bacbytynge of the neighbor: they
have fallen unto the blasphemynge of god. For sake therefore and flee this
bacbityng in any wise. If you will fle sin, and please god.

(...).

Imprinted at London in fletstret at the sign of the George next to saint
Dunstons church by me Wyllyam Myddylton. Anno domino. M. CCCCC.XLI.

: *: *: * CVM PRIVILIGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.:

crucifixion scene He tria ma^^^^ spes Ihesus / Maria / Ioha^n^s.



printer's or publisher's device


