A DISCOVERY of Brownisme: OR, A brief declaration of some of the errors and
abominations daily practiced and increased among the English company of the
separation remaining for the present at Amsterdam in Holland.

A wicked man deceives his neighbor, and leads him into a way that is not
good. Pro. 16. 29. By Thomas White.

LONDON Printed by E. A. for Nathaniell Fosbroke and are to be sold at his
Shop at the West end of Paul's. 1605.

To the Reader.
TWo extremities (dangerous) there are which in these days bring no small
detriment or annoyance to the Church of God. The one Atheistical prophanes,
which is fearful; and the other hipocritical contention, which is abominable.
And these howsoever they seem to differ the one from the other, yet the one is
strengthened and hardened by the other, and this with a mutual reciprocation:

Against both these, the holy Ghost applies a sovereign remedy: Heb. 13. 14.
Follow after peace and holiness, without which no man ca^ see God. And Luk: 1..
14. 15. That we being delivered from our enemies, might serve him in holiness
and righteousness (to avoid prophanes) before his face (to fly hypocrisy) all
our days.

Of the latter of these, or rather of both, (for the former often times
proceeds from the latter, howsoever for a while envy palliateth it self
under the name of zeal as both are signified by one Greek word) I have given
an instance in this treatise following in that congregation, (...)
which God has made as a spectacle for others to beware of rash, heady, and
contentious courses.

This have I done (all other peaceable means being before used) for the
discharging of mine own duty both to God and his Churches, the staying of
others, who would never be so affected to them as they are, if they knew their
fearful estate.

If either for the breuity or rudenes of the style it satisfy thee not: for
the former I confess that I have rather endeavored to point at things
briefly, then by dilating to fill up large volumes, of purpose omitting many
the vilest things, partly for offending chaste ears, partly for sparing them,
unless further occasion be ministered by themselves. And as for the rudenes of
the style, either by superfluous repetitions, or redundant speeches, let the
inconvenience both of time and place something excuse me, being but newly
arrived, neither enjoying health, nor help of books in the penning thereof; my
mind also many ways distracted about other businesses. The time to come may
bring forth some further thing more answerable to thine expectation: In the
mean time accept this in the best part. And the Lord give thee understanding
in all things.

A BRIEF DISCOVERYE, of some of the errors and abominations, dailye practiced
and increased, amongst the English Company of the separation, remaining for
the present at Amsterdam in Holland.
IT may seem strange, that any, who pretend (above all other) sincerity in
Religion, and there-vpon forsake their own native Country, should yet
notwithstanding, be found to abound above others with all kind of debate,
malice, adulteries, cousonages, and such other like enormities: And that so
much the more in the days of their banishment and extreme poverty, which
outward affliction, does even humble the wicked: And yet so far from
repentance, that when they are showed and admonished of their evil dealinges,
they seek to cover, hide, cloak, reproach and revile their admonishers of
better counsel; which for mine own part I could have borne in silence,
committing it to him that judges justly the sons of men: yet least others be
deceived by the^, as some of us have been, and should be drawn by them through
their painted color of holiness to partake with their abominations and
unfruitful works of darkness, and to run with them to that fearful
extreamitie in co^demning al other churches and men: I thought it my duty
according as my leisure (which is small, and my ability which is less, would
permit) upon experience to give warning to others of their leaders evil
dealing, whereby their people are devoured.

And, although I know I shall object my self herein but to the reproach of
virulent and venomous tongues, yet shall I be content to bear it, that others
may reap benefit thereby. Neither do I this, any way to discourage the true
upright hearted, but rather that all that call upon the name of the Lord, may
learn to cast from them the cloak of hypocrisy, and the leaven of contention
and maliciousnes, and so not in show, but in deed depart from jniquitie,
least they reap the fruits thereof as these have done.

I have already written to their leader M. Fr. Johnson, of his (with the rest
of their elders) falsehood, shiftings, and other contraryties: as also laying to
their charge, partaking in and with their church in these blasphemous doctrines.

1, That they held it lawful for a man to live with her that is not his wife,
rather then to reveal himself, which first denies the prophecy of Christ;
secondly destroys the nature of repentance, and thirdly is a fundame^tal error
contrary to these scriptures. Math. 3. 2. 8. Rom 3. 8. and 6. 1. Heb. 6.

2. That there are qualities in God not essential, and that love in God is not
of his being, but that the self same love that is in god, that is also in us,
which ouerturnes the nature of God, and the simplenes of his being, and is a
ground of famulisme, and a blasphemous Doctrine contrary to these scriptures.
Ex. 3. 14. Es. 43, 25. 1. John. 4. 8.

To this he promised answer and performed it not, though he took no small
pains by falsifying to discourage the witnesses, but was content to let it lie
upon him unanswered, so becoming by his own confession a du^be Minister. Page.
147. Last answ. to M. Iac.
Now therefore I see no further cause of writing to him, but will turn to the
Christian Reader; giving him a taste of their dealing, both in writing and
practice, profession and conversation, and yet laying that to their charge
whereof due proof can be made, as the Reader shall well perceive by my
proofs, and their answers judging indifferently.

They indeed are the men, Answer to M. H.
that accuse others of simplicity, absurdity, inconstancy in turning their
coats, of being hearers and not doers of the word, of retayning open offenders
and so becoming cages of every unclean bird, of being neither willing nor
able to justify their estate, and this not alone of their countrymen but
against those Churches also with whom they live. Answer to M. Iun. let:


1. But what if themselves have. 1. betrayed their own cause in writing. 2
Given the black letter of comdemnation not alone to the churches of Christ
that either are, or have been since the Apostles days, but also to
themselves, and their practice by their describing of a visible Church?

3. Doc practice that amongst themselves which they condemn utterly in others,
and have amongst themselves open and notorious cousners, and such other like
offenders?

4. Have given themselves over to Satan, and brought the curse on their own
heads by wicked and ungodly excommunications. As in the True descript: of a
visible Ch:
Are they then the holy assembly of Saints marching in such a heavenly order
after the Lamb, whether soever he goes, whereunto no unclean thing enters,
nor remains? whether these accusations be true or no, let the sequel
declare.

And first that Master Fr. Ih. has utterly disproued the maine drift of all
his book, and so betrayed his own cause, As Christ alleged against the
Pharisees, Mat. 12. 27
the example of their own Children, that they might be their judges: so may I
his own writings against himself, that they may be his judge, which thus I
show.

The drift of His book is by the description of a true church, Last answ: to
M. la.
to discover the false. This description as often elsewhere, so also he has,
Page 196. last answer to M. Iac: viz.

That a true visible Church of Christ, is a company of faithful people, called
out by the word of God, and separated from the world, and the false ways
thereof, gathered and joined together in fellowship of the Gospel, by a
voluntary profession of the faith and obedience of Christ. And his meaning of
this description does further appear by co^paring it with the third false
Doctrine alleged by him, Page 158. of the same book, as also with the 17.
Art: of there confession, where he expoundes it, by seperating his Church from
vanitye, Idolatry, dissolute life, and all false works of darkness.

This description so propounded and expounded, Last answ: to. M. Iac:
he thus overthrows, page 47. of the same book before cited, where he
affirms, that the Israelites in Egypt were Gods Church, proves it by Exodus
4. 22. 23. even then, while they sinned with the Idols of Egypt, alleging
Ezekiel. 20. If they committed Idolatry with the Idols of Egypt, how were they
then a company of faithful people separated from all false ways? If he say
this their sin was not their general estate, Answ: to M. H. page 49.
as he answers in an other case to M. H. Page 49. The place quoted by himself
out of Ezekiel. 20. shows the contrary, affirming none of them to have for saken
the Idols of Egypt. If he say this their sin was not of obstinacy, the same
scripture shows that they were admo^ished, v. 7. yet they rebelled against
him. v. 8. And as for the nature of their jdolatry it was heathenish; will he
then say that Idolaters in their general estate, with heathenish jdolatrie,
rebelling after admonition, are such a faithful people separate from all false
ways, as he describes a true Church to be? If not, how were they Gods Church?

To use Tullies words, Cic. orat: P. Qu.
testimonium tuum quod in aliena releue est, hoc contrate grave. etc. Thine
own testimony which in an other case is of small weight, this against thy
self is of much moment.

And here he must remember that he describes not a true Church, what it ought
to be, but what it is if it be a true Church as the drift of that place, where
this description is set down declares, As that,

1. It is for the clearing the question between them. Last answ: to M. Ia:
Page. 196.
2. For the discerning of the true church from the false. 3. Bids M. Iac
compare their best asemblies with this description. etc. Otherwise his
adversary might have answered, that though the Churches of England agreed not
with that description, yet might they have been true Churches notwithstanding;
and he had written nothing to any purpose against him.
Moreover in the answer to the preface of the same book, Last answ: to M. Ia.
Sect. 6. M. Fr. Ih. thus speaks: Any Church though truly constituted, if
they will rather abide in error then obey the voice of Christ, are not true
churches. And yet the Jews in Egypt rebelling after admonition, are Gods
church by his account: how well these things hang together let the Reader
judge. In like manner M. Ih. denies not. page 87. of the book before cited,
that the Jews in Christ's time, yea and after his death, were true Churches,
which had despised admonition before: Lu. 7. 30. Math. 23. 37. yet this which
M. John's. acknowledges, M. H. Barrow calls blasphemy: so well they agree
together. Refut. of Giff.


Is it possible so to overthrow the maine drift of his own writings, and
perceive it not? Or is it not veryfied which the wise man speaks? Pro. 12. 13
Answ: to the pref. Sect. 1.
The evil man is snared by the wickedness of his own lips. And yet this
book he says he did not make alone, but consulted with others herein, and
namely with Master Ains-worth, a man that has turned his coat as often as ever
D. B. if not oftener, whom he terms approved in Christ: and Daniel Studly
an elder of there Church, a man, (not alone for his filthiness wlth his wives
Daughter, As namely in Judith Holder and others.
but also for supporting of manifest and shameful uncleanness and cousning
amongst them in others) fitter for the stews the^ to be an elder in any
christian society. No better is his dealing in condemning the Dutch and French
Churches, for despising their admonition, and yet acknowledge the Jews in
Christ time, to be a true church, (...).
dispising more admouition, and that of greater sins then ever they
admonished the Elders of these Churches of: he that wauereth in his own
testimony, how shall his witness be received? but he is not alone content to
confute M. Ih. viz: himself, except he do also by his description cut off
from being true churches in their account, all the churches of Christ that ever
have bin since the Apostles days: 2. now are, yea and 3. themselves which thus
I pooue.

If no church that has been since the Apostles days or now is that we read
of, be separate from al false ways in their account, then by his description
and in their account must they be no true churches, but the former is true:
therefore the latter.

The proposition is undeniable from his own description.

The Assumption is as certain, as will appear, in that they account the very
using of the Lords Prayer as a Prayer, to be a false way, which was used from
the Apostles age, Tertul: lib. de orat:
as Tertullian says: Premissa legitima and ordinaria oratione, ius est super
struendi extrinsecus petitiones. etc. The lawful and ordinary prayer (speaking
of the Lords prayer) being premised, etc.

2. For the Churches that now are, their dealing with the Dutch and French
Churches declare it sufficiently: and howsoever they seem to put difference
between those churches in the Low Countries whom they have admonished, and
those that they have not; yet to put the matter out of doubt, let him tell us
if they account it not Apostasy for one of them, so much as once to hear the
word preached in any congregation Dutch or French in all the Low Countries
besides* Or if he can, let him name any one church on the face of the earth
now, that holds not false ways, yea even in their constitution in their
account: Neither shall he shift off the matter with his distinction of faultye
and false worship, for when he has put down the difference, whereby he
distinguishes the one from the other, which yet he has not done to my
remembrance, then will I show him that there is no church that he can mention
besides themselves, that holds not only faulty, but false ways also in their
account, and that in their constitution.

Are not they then the blasphemers of the Christians and their churches? Or is
not this to rob Christ of his honor? Or may not that saying. Pro. 11. 12.
be veryfied of themselves: Bazleregnehu chasar leb. He that despises his
neighbor is a fool.

3. But herein others may pardon them, for they are as favorable to others as
to themselves, for except themselves be agreeable to their own description,
after wounding others, they have turned the point of their weapon into their
own bowels: that they are not separate from all open offenders, and all false
ways appears.

1. In that they retain amongst them open offenders: to give instance, one
Castle was noted amongst themselves publicly in their meeting for cousnage,
and that by one of their elders, and indeed known notoriously so to be,
which if M. Ih. doubts of, he may ask his elder Sta: Mercer, their Deacon:
Tho. Bishop: W. Knowling, Robert Iackson etc. And yet would M. Ih. with h^s
teacher M. A. and the rest of their elders, defend that he ought not to be
publicly dealt withal for it, because it was not orderly made public: Mr.
P. I. L. W. N. and others.
and this before many witnesses: neither did that Castle show any repentance in
like sort of this sin.

Besides him was not R B. Robert Bailey.
(after other most horrible adultery) publikelye accused in their meeting for
creeping in at a window to come to bed to an other man's wife in her husbands
absence, yet was this man never publicly dealt withal, H. C.
until this day for it, that I can learn. Or if these instances serve not
their turn, what will they say to their Elder, Daniel Studley? (who together
with his filthiness before mentioned, in supporting uncleanness in a woman a member
of their church) did also refuse to pray with his own wife a member likewise
of the same Church, and yet will show no repentance for thus doing, though he
has been dealt withal for it; yea and worse carryage then this, of which his
wife has often and does continually complain, which though he be not ashamed
to commit, yet I am ashamed to mencyon. I am sure M. Ih. cannot pretend
ignorance herein, for he has been told often of his evil dealing though he
durst not, or would not redress it. Or if these yet be not enough, you shall
have more (if need be) as Judith Holder, Canady, Iaacob Johnson etc. How are
they the^ separate from all open offenders? or are they not defiled by
communicating with such? Or shall I say fit members for such a fellowshippe?
If they say this is not in their constitution; I answer yes even in the
constitution they hold false ways, which thus I prove.

1. In their constitution they hold. First that the Lords prayer is not to be
used as a Pray, rcontrary to christ's express co^maundment, which is neither
against reason nor proportion of faith. Secondly, contrary to the tenor of the
words, having the form of a prayer in all things, as Our Father, give us, and
amen annexed in the end, which shows that they arepetitions not positions or
rules which are set down in another form. Math. 77. 21. 22. 1. Ioh. 5. 14.
Thirdly, contrary to the use of al christians, that we read of, as before out
of Tertullian and others may be alleged:

2. They hold also that it is not lawful for the innocent parties, to retain
the offe^der, as the wife her husband, or the husband his wife, if either party
have committed adultery, no though the innocent party upon the others
repentance, forgiving the others sin, be desirous still to live with the
other party in the marriage covenant as before, but have excommunicated the
parties innocent for so doing, as namely H. C. and one Homes his wife, upon
this, diverse of them accused themselves of adulterye, that so they might be
rid of their wives, as namely one W. Holder and Tho: Canady.

3. They have altered many things which they held in their constitution, as
among other, that it was not lawful for Apostates to bear office, then must
they confess that they did hold false ways in their constitution, and so by
consequent, then were no, true Churches.

4 But what would it profit them to be free from false ways in their
constitution, if their practice be not according to their profession?

This (to use their own words) makes their sin the more grievous. Answ: to M
H:
And since their knowledge is but in part as well as their love, are not they as
well as others subject to err in constitution as well as practice? If M. Fr:
Johnson with his other helpers should yet find out a further shift, and say
that their meaning in their description before mentioned, is, that A true church
must be separate from all false ways, which they see, for the preventing of
them therein, I answer:

1. If they had meant only such false ways, it had been needful in the
description to have employed so much.

2. Though they have been already pressed with exceptions against this
description, yet have they no where as yet taken up this starting hole that I
can perceive.

3. Yet if now they should, they have stopped it themselves, Page. 107. 108.
127. of his last answer to M. Iac. and in other places of their writings.

4. Let them mind, whether enough has not been showed them for the clearing
of these errors in their constitution before cited.

5. Whether they give not their adversaries advantage if they should thus
answer:

Besides that there be false ways, which though they were held of ignorance,
would disanul a company so gathered, from being Gods Church notwithstanding.

Thus have they paued their way with snares, to entrappe themselves. Had not
the simple need to take heed how they take up wares upon their credit? And
have they not abused the world that publish in print, Page. 202, last answ: to
Ia.
that they neither receive nor retain any such as care not how they borrow and
make no conscience to pay again? I doubt not but their own hearts know how
false this is, in Io. Nicholas and others.

And here it shall not be amiss to put down a brief opposition between
their true description of a visible Church, Treatise so entitled.
and their practice: that so the Reader may the better perceive the difference
between their profession and practice, and this only in some few known
particulars, by this description. First for the Pastor:

1. The Pastor must be endued with much patience: but their Pastor with much
impaciencye, as has appeared not alone in his dealing with M. Ad: and his
Brother G: I. and his threatening to forsake his own congregation when he was
crossed of his mind: Of his book entitled A discourse of certain troubles
and excom. etc.
all which are discovered already by his brother: Page 126. 143. 144. and
known to be true by other witnesses, but also in other particulars whereof
some shall be after mentioned An angry man stirs up strife and a furious man
abounds intransgression.

2. The Pasto^ of the true Church must be loving and co^passionate, but their
Pastor unnatural and unmerciful, and that to his own father, yea for the time
which his Father was with his Brother G. I. he would not so much as once see
him, or relieve his necessity, By M. S.
though he were not yet excommunicated from the^ This I heard justified to his
face before many witnesses, Pro. 17. 21. and 20. 20.
and he could not deny it: so true it is, that he that begets a fool,
begets himself sorrow, as the wise man speaks. For the teacher.

1. The teacher of a true Church is sincere: their teacher steined with
Hypocrisy, as in his dealing concerning G. I, M. Sl:

2. The teacher of a true Church must be unreprovable: 1. Tim, 3.
but their teacher is spotted again and again with Apostasy in their account
as before has been noted.

3, The teacher of the true Church must take diligent care to keep the Church
from errors: their teacher has been a means to bring in, and defend false
Doctrines, as the latter of those two before mentioned and others that may be
alleged. For the Elders:

1. The Elders of a true Church must be endued with the spirit of God: their
Elder Da: St: with the spirit of uncleanness.

2. The Elders of a true church must see the laws of God kept: their Elder
would defend the transgressing of them in himself and others.

3. The Elders of a true church do govern their own houses orderly: but the
Elders mentioned most disorderly as else where is cited.

4. The Elders aforesaid must be loving: their Elder D: St: cruel and
tyranicall, in so much that some of their own members have complained, Before
M. Powell and others.
that if they had a matter as clear as the sun against him, yet durst they
not deal with him for it.

5. The elders of a true church, must be unreprovable: but their Elder St:
Mer: has (as their teacher) been noted for Apostasy. For the Deacons:

1. The Deacons of the true Church of Christ, must have a pure conscience and
must not be given to filthy lucre. But their Deacon Christoph: Bow: for his
deceiving of many poor, eue^ of their own company, of half that which the
Magistrates of Narden had given them weekelye, was thereupon (when it came to
light) through widow Colgates means called Judas the purse-bearer in Narden
for so doing: Not to speak of many such like instances that by him may be
given. And for the Elders jointly:

1. The church of Christ do privately admonish a private sin of a holy and
loving affection: but their Elders could call, R: W: before the^ in the first
place, for a private thing: and threate^ her excommunication for that which
after ward for shame they let fall.

And for the peoples uncleanness, cousning, disgracing, backe-biting, and
undermining one of another amongst themselves, it is a thing so common and well
known of them at home and abroad, that I need not in this place to speak
further of it, heaven and earth can bear me witness against the^ in those
things: oh that they would apply unto themselves and their practice that which
the Prophet Jeremy speaks! Will they steal, murder and commit adultery
etc. And yet cry the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord?

Are these then this beautiful? yea most wonderful church, rauishing the
senses to conceive of it? are these the Saints then marching in such a heavenly
and gracious array, where every stone has his beauty, his burden, and his
order, where no law is wrongfully wrested, or wilfully neglected, no truth hid
or perverted? or rather have they not deluded many poor souls, with such
sweet words, who when they have seen their estate, and their expectations so
frustrated have used these words: They need never separate themselves, W.F,
and E.H.
if they live thus: for any Godly society will quickly thrust them out from
them so practicing as they do

Certainly this their description of a visible Church is as clear a
testimony, and as pregnant a sentence of condemnation against themselves and
their practice as may be possible.

But yet that their hypocrisy may further appear, let me give the reader a
taste also of their dealing in condemning others, even in those things that
they would and do practice themselves, and that in these particulers.

1. They condemn others, Page. 157.
for communicating with open offenders and yet practice it themselves as is
before showed.

2. For making men to swear to accuse themselves, Page. 63 John Landen.
yet M. Ih. practiced the same to one I.L, and it is moreover a common practice
among them, both publicly and privately, so to do, yet would their Elder Dan,
Studly never so much as deny the matter of incest with his wives Daughter, for
the clearing of himself, though he were requested for the satisfying of weak
Btetheren so to do.

3. They condemn the Dutch churches, Answ: to Iun. letters page
for baptising the seed of those that are not members of their church, and yet
M. Johnson with the rest could offer to receive M. Deuksberies child to
Baptism, and were offended at G: I: George Ioh.
for witstanding it: and yet he neither was, nor would join himself as a
member unto them.

4. In like manner do they deal with the Dutch churches of Amsterdam,
Consisting of so great a multitude
for having but one church in the City. And yet M. Johnson to urge others to
join to them: (which for diverse disorders amongst them would not so do) could
allege that there was no warrant for two several churches to be in one city
in the scriptures.

5. In the place above quoted, they give the like sentence against the Dutch
and French Churches, for deciding matters by the elders, without the body of
the church, and not suffering in this respect the 18. of Mat rightly to be
observed amongst them: and yet their Elders, viz: M. Fr: Ih. and his fellows,
could decide one T. Canadyes matter, who had accused himself to be rid of his
wife, Of adultery.
and this without their knowledge or consent: But the said Canady not resting
in the Elders determination, brought it to their Church, alleging that he had
injury done to him, W. Holder.
in that W, H could be separate from his wife on his own accusation of
himself of adultery, and he could not. And further to justify the bringing of
matters in the third place to their Elders (for so they practice before the
matter be brought to the whole church) they could allege the very same
reasons against M. P. that they had before condemned in the Dutch. And for the
18, of Mat. how it is made a matter of partiality and envy, yea a cloak to
cover filthiness withal at eueuery pinch amongst them, would grieve ones heart
to consider.

6. They condemn the Dutch and French aforesaid for worshipping God in the
Idol Temples of Antichrist, yet themselves suffer their poor to receive the
alms of the Dutch, which is a Sacrifice, Phil 4. 18. in the same place: and if
they give thanks in receiving their alms (as duty both to God and man binds
them to do) Then do they likewise worship God in the Idol Temples: neither
will it help them to say that it is not public worship, which if they could
prove, yet the commandment Deuteronomy. 12. if it be moral, as they account it, and
must be executed on these temples, then no civil use of them may be had at
all; much less spiritual.

7. They witness against the Dutch, for using the censure of suspension: And
yet themselves, could suspend M. S many months together before his
excommunication, a man for learning and gifts worthy of his preferment among
the dutch, and to good too be of their fellowship.

They condemn in others nonresidency, Page. 65. Last answ: to H. I.
And yet their Deacon D. Br. could near three quarters of a year be absent
from their church, save that twice or thrice, about his Masters business, he
came over from London to Amsterdam to buy and sell wares. And this without any
leave of their church at Amsterdam so to do. Romans 12.
How did he that has an Office wait on his Office?

9. Lastly, M. Ih. etc.
they pass the like sentence on the Dutch, for becoming one body, with
excommunicates, when as they excommunicate their own members only for hearing
the word so much as preached amongst the Dutch or French, yet are they one body
with an excommunicate from the French church themselves. I might here also
note their like dealing with the Dutch, for their observation of certain Holy
days: yet do these M. Fr: Ih: and the rest.
me^ observe these holy days as much as the Dutch, as well in shutting their
shops, as also having their public meetings for worship on these days:
Neither have they in so many years space had time to debate and discuss this
matter among them, Of the last answ: to M Ia:
as M. Ioh. Answered, Sect. 3. to the Preface, five years ago. But it would
be long and teadious to bring the manifold examples that in this kind may be
alleged, but until further ananswere, these may suffice. Now let me ask
them, Are these things evil in others and good in them? or as the Poet speaks
iustu^ non iustum non iustum-iustum quod vobis labet: Plautus.
or will they say as Medea in Ovid, video meliora proboque deteriora sequor? But
rather will they hear the Apostle Romans 2, 1. 3. What art thou that condemnest
another and do the same? Or the prophet Ps. 50. 16, Why take thou my word
in thy mouth and hate to be reformed? Or Christ himself, hypocrite first
cast the beam out of thine own etc Mat. 7. 5. One would little think that
knew not their evil dealing that ever they would snatch up that to serve their
own turn, which they condemn in others.

And here although I might declare their false and impertinent allegation of
Scripture, as if it were no sin to take the name of God in vain and make the
Scripture serve their fancy; but because this has been done already in part
by G, I. in his book page 85, which yet lies on them unanswered, and upon
further occasion may be further manifested: I will pastle by this, as also
their false accusations of whole Chuches, as will appear by comparing the 7.
Neh. 6. 8. Pro. 24. 28. Confess: with Iun: let: page. 54
accusation, with the practice of the Duch Churches, and come to the 4. thing
that I proposed, namely, to show how they have drawn the curse of God on
themselves by rash, unjust and wicked excomunication.

1 And here I may speak of 27 or there abouts even one half of them, at that
time, and that of the elder sort: which all within a very short space were
cast out for refusing to come being sent for, to the meeting of the other part,
although they answered, that on the sudden they could not come at so short
space and warning, for diverse business, but would come at any other time which
on both sides should be thought convenient, And although one of the^ H. A. was
distracted in mind: but they spared none, and this excommunication was
confirmed by the Pastor M. Ih. Howbeit, afterward was this excommunication
repealed with fasting and prayer, and acknowledged to be rash and unjust, and
all received in again, and they that withstood their receiving in, were on the
other side excommunicated. W. A.
Notwithstanding, after this again, because their Pastor was urged to
acknowledge his sin by one of the^, C. S. they were all turned out again.
Such dallying with the Lords ordnances is fearful.

2. As also how they delivered diverse to Satan for hearing the word preached
in the Dutch church, though some were encouraged by their pastor and teacher so
to do, and promised to be borne out in it by themselves, as namely M. S. yet
after they brake, promise with him and cast him out.

3. Or what will they say to this? M. Johnson with diverse others of their
leaders, put down reasons under their hands, that Apostates might: not bear
office from the Scriptures, and so practiced; yet after that M. Ainsworthes
Apostasy was discovered, to keep him in office, they altered their judgment
and practice, and those that would not be brought to their will, W. A.
they cast out likewise; although they would never answer their own reasons
in writing, in like sort as they had set them down: no nor suffer their own
reasons to be read in their meeting, being requested thereunto. Is not this to
play Satha^s part to bring men to destruction, and not use as good means to
recover them out again? M. Ad. for less Apostasy was not suffered to bear
an inferior office among them.

Besides, William Asplen.
they have cast out W. A. for recalling a former Schism; yet the said W. A.
did and still does stand to that acknowledgement which was under his hand,
wherewith all they were satisfied. Of this I with others have written to them,
but could get no answer; Before his departing from them.
yet that schism was for not appealing to the Dutch Churches: and if they do
appeal, then has M. Ih. with the rest refused utterly to be tried by them.

5. Others they have likewise accursed, that being the parties innocent desired
to live with the parties offenders, as man and wife together, as before they
did in the marriage covenant, upon forgiveness of their sin of adultery as
already is mentioned in H C. and one Homes his wife. Hen. Cook.


Another woman they excommunicated, because the brought not her Child to
Baptism to them, when her husband had forbid her in any case so to do, who
had likewise reproved diverse gross abuses amongst the^, and could receive
neither answer nor due repentance thereof from them; the woman alleged that
Tymothies mother was a faithful woman, and one that brought up herson in the
fear of God from his Childhood, yet did she not circumcise him: and no other
cause mentioned, but that his Father was a Grecian. 1. Tim. 4. 6. 2. Tim. 1. 5.
Act. 16, 3. whereunto she could get no answer. Their And the only Doctor in
the world in their account.
Doctor indeed said, that Tymothies mother was dead, and so he might have said
of Moses, and the Prophets too.

Their Pastor Master F. I. made doubt of that Scripture, and staid her
excommunication, as saying he would not consent to it: yet after the woman had
a little unfolded his evil dealing, the same Master F. Ih. at the same time,
could change his note and say, if that none else would, yet would he be the man
that should excommunicate her. And indeed asterward they so did, and all that
would not yield to her exco^municatio^, as namely Mistress S. Widdowe Ch: and R.
R. though the chief The head skout.
magistrate of the city forbid them so to do. Diverse other reasons were
alleged about this matter, which we shall have time to relate, after that we
have seen their answer to this, if they will be at leisure so to do. Now may
I not wish that they had not verified the Orators saying? He that once passes
the bounds of modesty, becomes impudent out of measure.

Thus do they abuse the holy ordinance of God to satisfy their own revenging
stomachs, Pol. virg: li: 4o. cap. 12
non it a precipitanter in quenquam torquendum. Is this the long suffering
spirit of meekenes in recovering and seeking the lost?

Or do they not know that the curse is not in vain, if it cleaues not to
them to whom it is given it lights on the giver? Are not then their Bulls of
excommunications so many curses on their own pates? shall I say to use their
own allegation out of the Prophet, Ps. 109. 17. 18.
As he loved cursing so shall it come unto him, and as he loved not blessing,
so shall it be far from him, and as he clothed himself with cursing like a
raiment, so shall it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his
bones? Surely God that will not hold him guiltles that takes his name in
vain, Ex. 20. 7.
will never such profanation of his name and ordinance to go in vain.

And for some of them that are by these accursed I know they have learned
Christ otherwise then so, as to fear the curse causeles. The Lord promised to
Abraham whose children they are, even many which they have cast out, that he
would bless them that bless thee, Genesis 12. 3. 2. Sam. 16. 12.
and curse them that curse thee. etc. And let them say as David of Shimei, It
may be the Lord will do us good for their cursing this day, yea, let them
acknowledge Gods goodness toward them in drawing them out of their Tents, as
I do his mercy toward me in keeping me from joining with the^, being yet
sometimes addicted too much unto the^, before I perceived their fearful
estate. I could cite many other things yet viler, as their Sauadge and cruel
dealing to fatherless Children: as namely Master P. and Master B. his
Children, and other such like.

But I like not now to sail further in this Ocean, but will content my self
with the confession of their own members, W. Clerk.
W. C. I thought (said he) that they had been all Saints, but I have found
them all devils, and this before many witnesses: yet is this man still a member
amongst them. And for these excommunicators the Lord give them grace to repent,
that they may never have their portion among the cursed, to hear that
fearful sentence, Go ye cursed: which is the thing I wish them from my
heart. Amen.

Since then they have confuted their own writings, and given the black
sentence of condemnation to the other Churches of Christ that have been, yea
and themselves, by their description, and practice that amongst themselves
which they condemn in others: let others take heed how they partake in their
sins, least also they taste of their fond excommunications.

And for the profane (not to speak here of the popish faction drowned in
superstition, whole fruits are treachery) let them not heerby be hardened the
more in their sin, and prophanes, but rather seeing they that ftriue if they
strive not lawfully, do yet miss of the mark they aim at; what shall be
the end of those that set not forward at all in the ways of God? let them
remember that the gate is strait and the way narrow that leads to life,
Math. 7. 13
and the sewnes of those that find it. And for the Israel of God, The Lord
give them holiness and peace, Heb. 12. 14
without the which, they shall never see him to their comfort.

He that causes the righteous to go astray by an evil way, shall fall into
his own pit. Pro. 28. 10.

Thine in Christ, Tho: White.
Since I had finished this treatise, I hear that Tho: Canady before mentioned,
has lived in Sodometry with his Boy, as the Apostle speaks of the heathen,
Romans 1.
men with men wrought filthiness, etc. and notwithstanding his great wayling, is
now cast out, wherein it seems they have forgotten their wonted allegation:
Mat. 18. 22
If thy brother sin against thee not alone until seven times, but seventy
times seven, thou shall for give him; Luc. 17. 4.
If he return again and say it repents me etc.



Certain brief reasons proouing the use of the Lords prayer as a Prayer.
1. AN express commandment neither contrary to nature, nor analogy of Faith,
and agreeable also to the drift and tenor of the place, ought literally to be
understood and obeyed.

But this, Mat. 6. 9. (...) etc. And Luc. 11. 2. (...) say our Father, etc. is
such an express commandment etc. ergo It is also so to be understood and
used.

2. It Christ had taught only to pray to this effect, then had he taught
nothing but that which John's Disciples and all the faithful practiced before:
for the Prayers of the Saints, as of Solomon, Nehemiah, Daniel, were to that
effect before.

3. Whatsoever Scripture has in every respect the form of Prayer, that is not
alone matter of Doctrine, but has been used also as Prayer.

But this Scripture Math. 6. 9. has in every respect the form of Prayer: as,
Our Father, give us, lead us, and amen, annexed in the end: ergo. And indeed
how can they tell, which were Prayers and which not, if not by their form of
Petition? whereby they are distinguished from Doctrines, and rules proposed in
an other form, as Mat. 7. 7. and 21. 22, 1. Ioh. 5. 14.

4. In a duty to be used of all, the holy Ghost is plain: but if those very
words are not to be used as a Prayer, no christian for 1500. years and more,
did understand our Lords meaning.

But they say that the Apostles never used those very words in prayer. I
answer:

1. An express commandment is warrant sufficient without example.

2. There is no example in the whole book of Gen: of the observation of the
Sabbath for 2369. years space after the institution of it. Genesis 2. Neither to
come nearer, is their any example of Baptising, in the name of the Father,
Son and holy Ghost) yet is the commandment of Christ sufficient warrant so
to do. Compare Math. 28. 19. with Act. 10. 28. and 19. 5.

3. It is the Anabaptists reasoning against childrens baptism, asking for an
example, when otherwise there is sufficient warrant so to do, yet are their
Pretenses as good or better then M: Iohnsons in refusing obedience to our Lords
commandment for want of an example.

4. The Prayers mentioned in the new Testament, are such as were poured forth
upon special occasion as Act. 4. 24. Ioh. 17.

5. Let them show me an example where ever the Apostles prayed before their
Sermons; if they can.

FINIS.
Errata.
IN the Preface the first line, leave out (dangerous) for Luc. 1. 14. 15. read
Luc. 1. 74. 75. For H. C. read H Cook. Page. 10-in the margent For latter,
(read former.) Page 14, line 22.


