CONFIDITE EGO VICI MVNDVM. IO.XVI.
A Sermon Preached at Pawles Cross on Sunday the third of November 1577. in
the time of the Plague, by T. W.

Imprinted at London by Francis Coldock. 1578.



In the name of God Amen.
IT HAS bin an old proverb of proof (right honorable and dearly beloved
etc.) Veritas odium parit, That Flattery breeds friendship, and Truth
bri^ngeth hatred: and therefore it has wanted no manner of practice, because
it is of so good experience both in Court and Country, and I would to God
not in the Church it self. Nevertheless, as the true minister of God ought
to keep himself unspotted and undefiled from all offenses: so especially must
he be free from the great contagion of so foul a fault, always regestring
and remembering yt golden sentence worthy an Apostle. If I were a ma^pleaser, I
were not the servant of God. Gal. 4.
And yt none can serve two masters, Math. 6.
our master himself has taught us plain enough in ye Gospel, that God and
Man or Mammon, that God and Ba^l or Belyall, can at no hand be served together,
for God must be served alone: so yt Peter's saying is fyrme, and out of question
true, that when both cannot be served together, it is better to obey GOD than
Man: Acts. 4.
and the reason for conclusion is very great: For it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of God: a more perilous lapse by odds to come into his
fingers who can deal with body and soul, and cast both into Hell than into ye
danger of man, Math. 10.
be he Prince or Tirant whatsoever, who ca^ but prison or persecute the body
only, but must let the soul alone. Wherefore it is mete that we being ravished
of al outward respects, and setting before our eyes the fear of God only,
should wholly employ our selves unfeignedly to please him, and to speak those
things chiefly which shall be most acceptable unto him: for look how the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles does concern you, and so ye
commandment of god to the^, reaches unto us: and though they were al dead and
gone long ago, yet God is alive still, and his word endures for ever: and as
there is no other doctrine for you, so is thereno new commandment for us. Look
what authority they had the^, and ye same have we now, though not in the same
sort, For it vv^^ extraordinarye.
nor afterthe same measure of gifts, yet al of the same grace and spirit, as
you may read Ephesians. 4. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Eua^gelistes,
some Pastors. etc. All the prophets had not like gifts, nor all the Apostles
equality of graces: Peter is not chief Apostle, then in respect of his
Apostleship.
yet he that had least was a Prophet or an Apostle, as well as he that had
most, because of the same spirit, or else should there be Magis and Minus in
our ministers. Now because their gifts be diverse, some more, some less,
according to the proportion and measure of Gods spirit, thereafter is our
portion: and yet all that are lawfullye called and orderly qualifyed, are the
undoubted Ministers of the Lord: and (howsoever you will answer the
contrary) it is as truly said of a Pastor now, as it was ever of any Prophet
or Apostle the^, He that receives you receives me, and the contrary, Luke.
10. Verse. 16
He that refuses you refuses me. Wherefore, how base and simple so ever we
seem, we are the ambassadors and servants of god.

Two principal notes do arise by due consideration of this that I have said.
First, that against flattering falsehode, we use faithful flatnesse.
Secondly, that contrary to childishness and folly, we show wisdom and
discretion: and these being joined together, are the most necessariest of all
the number of graces, which concern a Steward, without the which he shall do
his master but simple, small, and very slender service. Wherefore seeing one
Christ is the soul and substance of all Scriptures, the only mark of both
Prophets and Apostles, and the only matter of all their doctrine: as Paul
curses all aftercommers that shall Preach any other Gospel, yea though he be
an Angel: so he pardons no predecessor that has broched any other doctrine,
though he were a Prophet. Let us then with Trustiness (the first note) join
Wisdom, the second also, as two legs to go withal, or hands to labor in
the harvest of the Lord. I am not here to give out any rules, or to
prescribe precepts of wisdom, for I am not so skillful to teach that way: I
had more need learn a great deal. Neither is it my purpose to reprehende
any of my breethren, for I know no such cause, and if there were, yet as this
place is vnmeetest of any, so is my person vnfyttest of all: only this I say
at a venture, I would we were al as wise as I hope we are faithful: and
howsoeeuer we excuse our selves before God, we can not justly be accused among
men, no not ye carping enemy himself, who comes for the same nonce, can
convince us the contrary, but that we keep touch with the verity written,
and speak wisdom, not of man nor Apollos Oracles, nor inventions and fables
of man's brain, but the infallible truth of the holy Ghost. Wisdom is to
divide and cut the word kindly, to break this bread skilfully, to give every
man his portion as a good disposer, to the godly counsel his part, to the
weak comfort his, to the wicked correction his, to the obstinate condemnation
his, for so the word is profitable, and the word is plentiful, even for every
sore a salve. And howsoever I shall deal in dividing, I am sure I am well
enough for the choosing of my text, for while I thought to fytte a plaster
for the feet, I saw the head diseased, and finding the whole body in the same
pickle, I knew not what to do: full feign I would have delivered any piece
of scripture rather tha^ this, but I could not so rid my hands of it, till
it had passed my mouth: turn whether I would, and every place was like unto
it and plentifully expounding it, so that whylest I sought a text, I found a
Sermon, A Sermon of the Prophet Sophonye to Israel. I pray GOD make it a
profitable Sermon to London. Amen.

Give me leave therefore to be plain I pray you, for I profess no other
thing, and if I could otherwise, yet of purpose I would deceive all such
curious comers, as neither hunger nor thirst after righteousness, but with
itching ears delighte themselves with strange things which are forespoke^ of
in the.2. Tim. 4. And it shall be a good note for me now, and for all my
breethren for ever hereafter that are planted in this City, to be known by
this mark of plain speaking: not that familiarity in you has bredde
contempt in us, for there is no such cause but that your contempt of God
should breed boldness in us which are his ministers: and there is such a
commandment, and therefore as we see more than other, so are we bound to say
more, except you would have us see all and say nothing. And though here I
shall say nothing, but that that has bin said, yet that is no shame to me. But
I would feign know of all that has bin said, what has bin done, which
is, or may be a great shame for you.

Desperate were the days of Ieremye, wherein superstition and sin (as two
scorpions) were grown so rank, that high time it was for the very safeguard of
Gods remnant, that the sound of vengeance, the exclamations of we. and
terrible threatenings of God, should be given out to terrifye and stay a^ many
as he had appointed to repent. And our age being in no better case, but well
worse, has extreme need of eiulation, and exclamation of the like woes and
curses, to stop (and it may be) the intolerable abuses of our time, to
turn (and it be possible) our stubborn and stony hearts at length unto the
Lord.

It is lamentable (my brethren) that the husbandmans corn can find no good
ground, but the enemies tares not sown but shed and scattered, do yet take
root, prosper and prevail, to the utter choking and smothering of the Lords
harvest. But as where the word is not preached, there the people perish: So
where it is plentifully delivered, and the people wilfully negligent, there is
deep damnation and utter destruction shortly to be looked for. Our Savior
truly said, the Harvest is great, and the laborers are few: Mat. 9. Verse.
37.
let us follow his counsel therefore and pray the Lord of the harvest, to send
in more paynefull and faithful laborers, least the Bore of the woodde do
root up the vine, least the cockle do ouergrowe the corn, least the
Devil make havoc of altogether. And in this prayer, let us commend unto
him, his universal Church, and specially England and Irelande, and herein
particularlye our most gracious sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and all her most
honorable Counselors, the whole ministry, and every private member of his
body, praying for the rest, that in his good time they may be planted in, or
else supplanted out, that if they will never be good, that they may yet never
do harm unto Israel which is of God. Amen.

Woe to that abominable, filthy, and cruel City, she heard not the voice,
she received not correction, she trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near
unto her God, her Rulers within her are as Roaring Lions, her Judges are as
Wolves in the evening. etc. Text. Zophony ^

THis Text may well be divided into four parts as it lies, and seeing the
words themselves do lead me to so good an order, I will content my self,
and not seek to be wyser than the holy Ghost.

The first and principal part is a grievous accusation of the whole state of
Jerusalem both for life and religion.

Secondlye, an enumeration of the particular causes thereof.

Thirdly, a reprehension of the persons, but especially of Magistrates and
Ministers. And fourthly, a denouncing of woes and plagues against the^.

For the first, it is wonderful to see, that nothing will do the wicked any
good. And again, there is nothing can do the godly any harm. All the woes in
the world will not make the wilful once to beware, but to the faithful
servant of God one word is enough. When the Lion roreth, who quaketh not?
Amos. 3. verse. 8.
and when God threatens, who is not afraid? Wide open were all the Prophets
mouths, and every one cried woe, but words are but wind, and will not
prevail with the wicked, who are sworn to sin, and sold over to work
wickedness without measure, And Gods own children sometimes are taken tardy
too, and threatninges are in vain even to the^. But as where words will take
no place, there blows must be put in proof. So where one nor other can do
any good at all, there remaynes nothing, but a horrible expectation of
destruction. Nevertheless, the very reprobate and cursed wretch should quake
at Gods check, who though he have no hold nor hope of Eternal life for lack
of faith, yet to avoid the very bodily plagues and miseries of this mortal
life, should tremble and shake at his irefull and fearful Judgments.

Gods threatenings have a tw^folde operation and effect: the one in the chosen,
and it touches them very near, and turns their hearts, and humbles them
in all their soul, Jonas. 3. verse. 5.
as Niniuie may be a lively example: the other in the wicked, and they are made
more obstinate, froward, and hard at the heart, and thereby more inexcusable,
as the example of Pharao in Egypt does testify. Exodus. 9.10. Chap.


It is and has bin ever a merciful manner of our God, to speak before he
strike, and he is not by and by at a word and a blow neither, but gives time
and space for repentance: Joel. 2. verse. 13.
but and his patience be wounded once, then his wrath kindles as the coal,
and flameth as the fire, and no man is able to abide the rage thereof. Flintie
and perverse were this people, and this Prophet prevailed not amongst them: he
was one of the last that preached to them before their captivity into Babylon.
Yet I trust better of you, and pray better for you, and am persuaded that you
will do those things that we warn you of, though we thus speak as Saint
Paul said of the Thessalonia^s. 2. Ephesians. 13. Cap. Let this drive you somewhat
more near your self, Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. Galath.
6. verse. 7. As Adam and Cayne did.
that God will not be mocked, and when he accuses, it is but lost labor to
excuse, and as his word endures for ever, and every iotte thereof is perfect
and to be performed, so these woes being a part of his word, can not return
in vain, (...) thy Prophet, yet be perused and read Ieremies books as it
seems, and found out the Prophecy of the peoples captivity.70. years, which
he calls w^^^s, that so long Judah should lie by it, and that for their
transgression. And the Angel Gabriel revealed to him afterward, that the Lord
in mercy would yet restore them seven fold again, that is.70, times seven,
which amou^teth or multiplieth in accoumpt to 490. years, and then this Messiah
should come. Jeremy here speaks indefinitelye, and says, the time comes,
where the present time is put for the future (as I take it) not to express the
shortness, but the assurance of the time, when Christ should come. Eccle.
3. verse. 1.
The Wise man says, all things have a time, and it is a high point of wisdom
to know the time of all things, but to know this time of all times, is
wisdom of all wisdoms. The Prophets foreshewed it to the Jews, but yet he
was chiefly received of the Gentiles, for he came to John. 1.
his own, and his own knew him not: I pray God for the second triumphant and
kingly coming it fall not out so, that to who^ he is most preached, they be
least prepared. How long was it I pray you yt Israel longed to come out of
Egipts bondage? and how long looked Judah to be delivered from Babilons
captivity? But for ye great freedom indeed, from ye perpetual and everlasting
thraldom: by this only Messiah, there were very few or none. Right so play we
in these days: we are very careful for the times and seasons, concerning our
worldly affairs. A prisoner duly wayteth his delyueraunce: a prentise still
thinks on his freedom, and both keep just accoumpt of every day: yea the
sick man leteth not one hour escape, nor misseth not a minute, but still
longs for his health: but for our great delyuerance and departure hence, it
is not only the last but the very least care: when friends and Physicians
forsake us, we trust yet in our selves, for no man is so old, but he thinks he
may be older: and no man is so sick, but he hopes he may recover: Where the
Philosopher ends the Physician begyns, and after the Physician, commes the
Divine when senses and all are gone.
and the last messenger shall still be for the Mynister: the danger sure is
very great, and every man is not sure to be at Christ's right hand just
when he dies: and repentance is not in our own hands: thou trustest to thy
end, and thy end brings distrust, for the greatest assault is in thy weakest
estate. As I would not have any man to distrust god, no not specially in the
end: so would I not have any to tempte God, and trust only to the end: and
yet I say all is well that ends well. This example is plain enough of
Christ's coming to the Jews, prophesied and prophesied again, and yet not
understood. So the natural example of our mortality, and daily dropping away,
might move reasonable men to take heed, and it warning would serve, to teach
us to watch and weight for his coming, or to be prepared and provided for our
going.

Says the Lord. Look what the Lord has said, and that is sure to come to
pass in all points as he has said it, for God is not as man is, mutable in
repenting his promises, albeit he is said to repent that ever he made man. Genesis
6. It is but to express the hearty hatred he bears against sin, and
against their sins of the old world: or else why do we so confidentlye
build, and constantly assure our selves of the inexplicable comfort of
everlasting salvation: but because of his word which is immutable? and has
he said it? nay, he has sworn it, Heb. 6. verse. 18. Psalm. 33
he that commanded the heavens and they were made, and but spoke the word
and they stood fast, stands still upon his honor, and will perform what
he promises, in number weight and measure, as he has given his word for
some testimony, and examples. Why did not the fire consume those three thrust
into ye burning Oven, Daniel. 3 verse. 25
was it not hot enough? or did it not burn, when the very flames did lycke
up those torme^tors that put them in? and what is the reason but yt it shall be
so? and why did the Seas so spy the Lord? why ran they back and were
afraid, and became as a wall to Israel, and ran together again to drown
Pharao and all his host? 114. Psa. but this that it shall be so: Psalm. 14.
Why did not the Lions in their den, snatch Daniel rather before he came to the
ground, Daniel. 6
and tear him in pieces, than lie still before him as Lambs, and no Lions?
but this, ye water may not wette, though it be a great Sea: fire may not heat,
though it be a flaming fire: many Lions, many hungry Lions, may not touch a
seely man, when the Lord has said it shall be so, for heaven and earth shall
perish, and vanish as a scroule, but his word endures for evermore. Math. 13


That I will raise up the right branch David. This alludes to that raising of
seed to a man's brother, if he dye without issue, as it is in the law. Here we
must note, howsoever God promised to Adam, the Womans seed shall break the
serpents head. Genesis 3. Howsoever to Abraham in blessing I will bless thee, and
in multiplying, I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, or as the
innumerable sands of the shore: and howsoever to David, thy seed shall endure
for ever, and thy seat as ye Sun, etc. That is, how so ever the couenauntes,
or merciful promises of God made to our Forefathers, did differ in
circumstaunce, yet do they all agree in effect and substance. Again, how
soever the Prophets dreamed dreams, or saw visions, whether they prophesied
some plainer, some darker, some as it were farther off and mystical, some more
evident and near, as the spirit gave them vtteraunce: Yet all inspired from
above, spoke in effect one and the same thing. And there can not be found any
contrariety in all ye doctrine of the Prophets of God, tha^ is possible to be
in the spirit wherewith they were inspired. The mark they all shot at, is
Jesus Christ, Luke 16. verse. 16.
the end of the whole law and the Prophets which were until John: and this
partycular Prophecy which I have in hand, as I told you, concerns the
pacte or covenant with David, but not in the Jewish sense. But look how it
was promised of God, so is it prophesied of Jeremy, and right so has it been
performed in Jesus Christ: for the unity of Gods spirit is still one, and
indivisible as the dietie. Why, some Jew may object, is it not plain? that
Solomon, Ezechias, Objection.
and Josias, being lawful Sons and succeders of David, were raised of God as
righteous branches? I answer, that it is God in deed, by whose power all
Princes do reign, Solut.
and through his authority they have their seats: It is he which rayseth them
up, and raseth them out again at his pleasure, which turned out Nabuchodon^zer
as a Beast in his justice, 1. Esdr. 9
and in his mercy made the sheephooke of his servant David, to be a Scepter
over Israel. But all that propagation or Princely posterity raised of God, was
not without the means of man: and this is immediately of God him self, a great
difference. And if you will go further, and ask how this branch should be
raised then? I answer, that first you must circumcise your hearts and ears,
least you think it an impossibilytie, John. 3 verse. 4
as Nycodemus thought of a ma^s regeneration: so you having ye veil of
fleshlinesse, and the foreskinne of filthiness, shall vncleanlie and grosely
imagine of this blessed generation or raising: 1 Cor. 1 v^rse. 14
for carnal man sauoreth not those things that are of God.

This done, I say he was begotten of God, conceived by the holy ghost,
incarnate in the sanctified womb of ye Uirgin Marie, even in the fullness of
time according to the Scriptures: and it is part of the Articles of our
Christian belief: which none of all David's posterity could say, ^sal. 51
no not he himself, for he was conceived and borne in sin.

But here may a more strong and mighty objection be gathered than before as it
seems, Objection.
and all by my own saying: for is it lykely, or is it possible, that he
should be rightly called, the ryghteous branch of David, which came not of
the seed of any man, of all that stock, before so many Kings good and bad, of
which every one yet naturally descended, and were his sons after ye flesh? I
answer, Solut.
though I say he was not begotten of any man, yet I do not say, that he came
not of yt stock therefore: for Ihesse, David's father, was the root, and David
as the branch: Marie the Uirgin was the flower of Dauides branch, and Christ
our Savior was the fruit of Mary's blossom. Therefore is he called the son
of David in the Genealogy by Math. 1. and often in the new Testament, Math. 1
coming in deed of that Trybe, kyndred, or stock.

He is called therefore the righteous branch for three respects.

Three cause^ why Christ is called the rightuous branch of Dau^d.
First, because he came of the same kyndred by his mother.

Secondly, because of those degenerating bastardes, Roboham, Manasses, and the
like wicked Princes, who notwithstanding, were of his line, yet followed not a
foot of David's ways, but defiled his seat, and profaned the Sanctuary, and
turned his Scepter another way. And as he is not a Jew, which is a Jew
borne: nor he a true Israelite, which is so called: nor all are not Abraham's
sons, that are after the flesh. Roma. 9. No more may they be called right
branches of good Princes, which bear no like fruit, although that otherwise
they be their own sons.

Thyrdlie, he is called the ryghteous branch, in respect of the good Kings
also, Solomon, Josias, Ezechias, and those few more, which not only were of
David's loins, but also did tread in his steps, and walked in the way of
David their Father, in obedience to the commandment of the Lord, in setting
forth the true service of the GOD of Israel, in fyring the supersticious
Idolles, cutting down their groves and wooddes, to the ruin and spoil of
their Idol aultares, which far better deserved the title of David's righteous
branch, than any of the wicked Kings forespoken of: And yet they are not
this branch neither, but only, and truly, and properly, it is Jesus the
Messiah. You will think then that I do to much wrong to them which were
lawfully begotten Sons, and laudablie raygned Kings, which came of his
seed aryght, and reigned righteouslie in the seat to, and yet not the true
branch? I shall satisfy you, if you mark, and that in a word: I do not
deny them to be the right branch according to the flesh, and so is Christ to,
but I deny them to be the right and righteous branch, for so is Christ
alone: for such a sprygge or stem, never sprouted out, neither of Abraham,
whose Isaac was so increased, nor out of David, whose kings so succeeded, nor
out of all generations again, for the fountain is too foul, and our petigrue
must be fetched from Adam which is earth: and this second Adam is the Lord from
heaven. 1. Cor. 15. And the reason is, that those excellent virtues, and
Princely qualities of wisdom, justice, and Religion, in any of those good
kings, the sons of David, or in all, it was in them but as shadows, and
imperfect figures of him in whom dwells the fullness of all goodness, So
that he only and alone, is this ryghteous branch.

Here we may see the infinite love of God toward his Church, never forsaking
her, but in her first fall renewing of her with promises: in her forgetfulness,
reviving of her with prophecies, that she might still hope, an^ not be
confounded for ever. And if the Patriarchs and men of God, in elder times
received such plentyfulnesse of joy and gladness, in the only promise of the
Messiah, whereby their faith was full: What flowing, and ouerstreaming
unmeasurable comfort should we reap, to whom those prophecies do mynister
more, than to the Prophets them selves. 1. Peter. 1. For kings and Prophets
have desired to see what we have seen, and yet saw it not, but in the promise
only. Luke. 10. They lived in the time of the promise of this branch: and ye
Apostles lived as it were under the shadow of his leaves: but we live as under
the fruit it self. For the time of Grace, the longer, and the later it is,
the more merciful it is to them that shall be saved. And how graciously he
has dealte with us of England besides, may not pass unspoken of in planting
a right branch to raygne over us, not a bastard bramble, as Abimeleche was,
the son of a bond woman, as ye may read, Judges. 9. The Uine, the Olive,
the Palm, the Fig tree, and the rest, chose a Bramble to be their king: Who
began with murder, reigned in cruelty, and dyed in blood. But over us he
has planted a peaceable Prince, Englands happiness.
the right branch of her royal Father, and most worthy King, Henry the
eight: keeping all good steps of her prodecessors, going farther in Religion
than many of the^, (if not than any of them). The Lord lead her farther,
stir up her counsel to comfort her, strengthen her kingdom to keep her,
lengthen her life long to raygne over us: And though I may not say as the
Olyue tree to bear fruit, yet to florishe as the Palm, to be fresh as the
Laurel, to be strong as the Oak, to spread abroad as the Ceader, and to be
an old Tree of continuance, as the Cypre: and though she be fruitless one
way, yet fructify her O Lord many ways, with g^^d and faithful subjects,
that sh^e and we, as well graffed branches may abide still in the stock,
and tarry in the Uine, and fructify by the operation of Gods holy spyrite
unto eternal life in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Which King shall bear rule. Here he is proclaimed King by the Prophet,
head of his Church, and Prince of his people. Traiterous are all other heads
then, monstrous, and rebellious of King or Caesar, or Turk, or Pope, or
Devil, lifting them selves above this King, which must bear all the rule. He
is said to be our Prophet, our Priest, and our King: a Prophet, being a
fulfyller of all that they spoke, and the end of them: a Priest, to fynishe
all the Sacrifices of the old Law, by one suffycient and most blessed
oblation of his own body upon the Cross: a King, by rulyng and governing his
Church, having full authority alone over the same, being anointed not with
the confections of balmes or spices of sweet odors, but with the holy Oil of
gladness above his fellows. Psalm. 45.


Objection.
But what rule bare he, some will say: could he come simplier than borne in a
Manger, despised of the Doctors, had in derision of the multitude, spytted on,
and most spitefully dealt withal? alas, what crown ware he, but a crown of
thorns? or what King was he, being so poor, and so persecuted, that it was
not possible it should be he that is here prophesied. Thus they looking for a
Princely appearing, in power, authority, and wealth, and to have an earthly
kingdom restored (as they dreamed) received not the King of Kings: and
therefore though they ask for the day of the Lord, the day of the Lord, yet
have they nothing to do with it when it commes, for it is darkness and no
light unto them. Amos. 5.
And yet as naked, poor, and simple, as Christ (...) bulls, are all beasts,
which think that God and Idols, the Sacrifice and the Sacraments, Circumcision
and Baptism, the law and the Gospel, nay that flesh and the spirit, and
God and Man may be joined together, are but common pedlers and patchers of
Christ coat, which had no seame in deed: this is to build but with
untempered mortar, and to bodge up a house, which will never abide the trial.
Wherefore my counsel to you all is, that as many as find themselves faulty,
do presently yield in their hearts to the Soueraintie of Gods holy word,
betake themselves wholly to read it, to hear it, and to meditate there in,
which is all sufficient to instruct us, and able to save our souls: that we
vomit out all superstitious points contrary thereunto: that this be the line
and leauel of al our life, the touchstone of all truth, whereby Antichrist and
his adhere^ts, that is, the Pope and his hyrelings are described and convicted,
and The Lambs of Christ's flock, nourished, comforted, and preserved for ever.

Covetous Atheists, but if of any side, of Papists, for it is most gainefull.
And there are a third sort who have embraced this present world, and
therefore have made shipwreck of Conscience, and these sail frankly to
Spain, to Rome, and Hell had any vauntage, I think surely they would venture
a voyage. This was touched the last Sunday, and I had been well prevented in
it, if sickness had not otherwise hindered me: yet this I add, the ignorant
Idolatrer is more excusable far, for thou do it with a Conscience of
evil, For his own conscience is against him James. 4. verse. 17.
and to him that knows how to do well and does it not, to him it is sin
with a witness. James. 4. Again he is but a simple Idolatrer, but thou a
double and Diuelishe dissembler both before God and Man. But some will say
unto me, and you were there you would tell me another tale: I cannot tell
what I would do, but what I and thou should do that I can tell: So
playde Peter when he said he would die before deny christ. Math. 26. verse.
35.
I will not brag before the battle, nor triumph before the victory: I
thank GOD I am not there, but that is no piece of excuse for thee, and if thou
were but a beholder of such Sacrilege, yet ( Salua Conscientia) with a saufe
conscience thou must not be silent and so betray the truth. But and thou
become an actor once, That is, swallow any jot of her pestilent doctrine.
and do participate with them, if thou drink but one drop of the Chalice of
the whore, it is top full of deadly poison: or if thou break bread at the
table of Devils (for drink thou can have none) what leporous case is thy
whole soul in, the poison whereof though many have concealed for a time, yet
has it boiled and broken out, at the length, to the destruction of their
bodies, Papists prove traitors apace.
and fearful danger of their souls.

Yet many think they may safely do it and keep their conscience clear, as
they bear themselves in hand: but as well may they deny Christ on earth,
and as safely too, whom he has surely promised to deny in heaven. Math. 10.
verse. 33.


1 First, though God be a spirit and must be worshipped in spirit and truth,
John. 4. verse. 24.
yet the body belongs to God also, both because he made it, and chiefly now
because he has redeemed it. Wherefore does the Scripture else command our
hands to be lifted up, and our knees to be bowed down, but that it is
unlawful to offer them to any service of Satan? But if you will needs stand
in it, then must you condemn Sidrach, Misaak, and Abednago: you must count all
the Martirs fools, and the prophet David, who said, Psalm. 16.
he would not once name their Gods in his lips, nor mention them in his
mouth.

2 Secondly, if I should grant that God is to be worshipped with the heart
only, yet it must be with a single heart I trust: but that is a double heart
that speaks one thing and does think another, whose mind is clean contrary
to his mouth. For all the members of the body are but ministers and expressers
of the mind, although the tongue be chief thereof: full feign I see they would
serve God and Man, and they are answered by Christ himself, it cannot be.

3 Thirdly, if they will needs give their soul to God, and their body to the
Devil, let them be sure that God will have either both or none: for as he
made both, so has his Son bought both: so that as the soul and all her
powers are due unto God, so likewise the body and all his parts are deep in
debt and bound unto the Lord, to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. But these good fellows incline toward the error of the
Manichees, and make two beginnings, god and the devil, but in truth they are
rather Atheists, which serve no God at all, except their belly be their God, or
else it is so by halues, with such lame knowledge and rotten faith, with such a
wounded conscience and a wicked heart, Gods service requires a whole and
perfect man.
as it is detestable and abominable before the Lord.

I will say nothing of Gentlemen trauelers, yt hold in good sadness this
devilish opinion, Cu^ fueris Romae Romano viuite more, when thou art at Rome
live after ye Romish manner: but they learn their lesson so perfect there, yt a
great number cannot forget it here: and therefore let them remember another
saying, Roma recipit bonos reddit malos, Rome receives good me^ but returns
evil me^. Well, that I may tell you what I think and no more, surely a man may
be a very naughty person and yet a good servant (I speak it not to maintain
unhappiness, God forbid) but he ca^ never be a right Roman and a faithful
subject. For the other matter wherewith Israel is here to be charged and England
to be condemned, is, that she answered not in deed what she professed in word,
and for ourselves it is past cry (I fear) for we are both helples and hopeless
in this point, and therefore they for all their fair looks and Pecocks tail,
were yet abominable and filthy Hypocrites, and cursed in the sight of God,
even as a strumpet never so richly decked, and it be with purple velvet,
stincketh the viler rather in the sight of honest matrones: for there is no
vice more pestilent, than that that is like virtue: there is no such Judas
kiss, as with an Apostles face: there is no such deceyuing Devil, as like an
Angel of light: and there is no such dissembling city as Jerusalem for
hypocrisy. Wherefore I pray you was christ so gentle to Publicanes, over he was
to Pharisees? and why is God so earnest with Israel, in ye.1. of Esai. Why offer
you so many sacrifices? I am full of your burnt offerings, I have no pleasure in
the blood of bullockes, And yet he commanded them.
I hate your new Moons, I cannot away with your sabboths and solemn
meetings, I am weary at my heart with them, offer me no more oblatio^s etc. but
that the service of God appointed by those sacrifices was utterly perverted, and
no truth in their dealings: There is nothing provoke god more, tha^ when with
a cloak or color of religion his people shall wallow in sin or superstition.
Psalm. 50. verse. 16.
Read ye. 50. Psalm. Unto the ungodly man, said God, why do thou preach my
laws, and take my covenant in thy mouth, whereas thou hate to be reformed,
and have cast my words behind thee? So be you well assured, yt it is not
enough to have a gospel in our mouths, but we must express the truth thereof in
our lives: it is not enough to have a name of a Christian, but to be found a
Christian in deed. Many have a show of godliness says S. Paul, 2. Timot. 3.
but they have denied ye power thereof. If nature helped not Abraham's own
children, but because they lacked Abraha^s works, they are called Devils
sons, John 8. alas what shall a naked name without virtue, a bare title
without verity, profit us at all? Does not Christ foretell of such in the
day of judgment? who have done many things in his name, Math. 7. verse. 22.
and yet when all is done he knows them not? Math. 7. Surely the blind
charity of Papists does lay sore to the lame and halting faith of
Christians: Our knowledge shall but help us to Hell, if we do not that we
know: for the servant that knows his masters will and does it not, must
look for many stripes: and to whom more is given, more is to be required. We
have received plentifully, but if we yield barrenly, Christ cursed a figtree,
surely he will not spare thee. The Author to the Heb. 6. shows, Hebr. 6.
verse. 7.
that the ground that drinks in the deaw, or receives the rain falling often
upon it, and yields fruit, Vnfrui^tfull earth without water, so
vnfruictfull man without the word.
is blessed, but the barraine and unfruitful is to be cursed and burned. The
Are is at the root of every tree, and judgment is not far, and by his
fruit shall every man be known, and no fruit as well as naughty fruit, is
both for ye flame.

It was abominable before God for Israel to swear, the Lord lives, and yet
to deceive, Ier. 5. to fast, and yet to do no less violence: Esa. 58. verse. 4.
to wash, and yet to be unclean: to sacrifice, and yet to sin: to keep
Sabbothes, and yet to tumble in all sensuality. For swearing, it was never so
common, and custom makes it nothing in these days, in every place, in every
person: ye magnifice^t name of God, who is glorious, great, and fearful, is
tossed to and fro as a tennis ball, and that for very trifles. The Jews yet
when they heard blasphemy, would rend their clothes. It would grieve a
Christian heart to hear at every word an oath, at every lie an oath, bying and
selling is not without lying and swearing, And therefore not without stealing.
but if ye mouth yt lies slays the soul Wisd. 1. what deep damnation even
in the nethermost hell remains for the perjured person? There would be some
exquisit punishment for such helhoundes, and seeing God will not hold them
giltlesse, let al Magistrates that fear God condemn the^ to some pain, for
they are past shame. And because I spoke of Sabbothes, know you yt every day
is a Christian Sabbath, yet one amongst the rest was specially commanded to the
Jews, Jews Sabbath Saturday, Christians Sunday.
and commended unto us both to rest our bodies and our beasts: but the chief
end was for Israel to go to ye Sanctuary, and for us to come to the house of
prayer. The ceremony of ye seventh day is not much amiss, and yt the number
of.7. signifies perfection, you may often read in scriptures, especially in
the Revelation. Of churches, stars, spirits, tru^pets, seals, Angels, and al
appeared by seven, as a most absolute and perfect number, multiplied in it
self, albeit this is somewhat mistical, yet no harm follows if we say God
rested ye. vij. day to show unto us ye perfection of his works, and
labored.vi. days, to give us an example of vocation. It may be not one of the
least causes, that God ceased the seventh day to behold the excellencye of
his creatures, and though he sees them always, from whose eyes nothing can be
hid, yet to take delight in their assemblings, singing of hymns, in their
praying unto him, and praising his name, in their reading and hearing his word.
And if he look down on our Sabbothes, what shall he find I pray you? every
day evil, and the Sabbath worst. Ephesians. 5.
Redeem the time for the days are evil. If the Apostle said so then, what
would he say if he lived now, when the Lord can not have a piece of a day,
no, scarce of the Sabbath day, which he has so charged to be kept, and
straightly commanded to be observed? But it was to the Jews you will say: it
is true indeed, for those solemn and ceremonial assemblies, sacrifices, and
feasts: but otherwise there has bin ever in the primative Church and from the
Apostles, some observation of one day among the rest, and for special
consideration, albeit the whole life of Gods chosen is a perpetual sabbath,
and every day sanctified, and every hour holy unto them. Assuredly we come
nothing near the Jews in this point, for on our Sabbothes, all manner of
games and plays, bankettings, and surfettings, are very rife: If any manne
have any business in the world, Sunday is counted an idle day: If he have
none, then it is bestowed in other pleasure. Trahit sua quenque voluptas, Every
man follows his own fancy. And the wealthyest Citizens have houses for the
nonce: they that have none, make shift with Alehouses, Tauernes, and Innes,
some rowyng on the water, some rouing in the field, some idle at home, some
worse occupied: thus what you get euelly all the week, is worst spente on
the Sabbath day, according to the Proverb, Il gotten, ill spent: blame not
your servants if they follow your example, for your prodigality makes them
unthrifty. But what account? how answer you? is this the Lords day or no? if
it be, how intolerable, nay how accursed and most condemnable are these
outrageous Bachanalia, Lupanaria, I can not tell what to call them, such as
Heathen men were ever ashamed of (I am sure,) and therefore practiced better
matters, although profane exercises: but ours sauors so of Venus Court and
Bacchus kitchen, that it may rightly be entitled an abominable and filthy
City: and without doubt London shall justify her elder sister Jerusalem,
if in time she turn not to the Lord. I say nothing of diverse other abuses,
which do carry away thousands, and drown them in the pernicious vanities of
the world. Look but upon the common plays in London, and see the multitude
that flocketh to them and follows them: behold the sumptuous Theater housee,
a continual monument of Lo^dons prodigality and folly. But I understand they
are now forbidden because of the plague, I like the pollicye well if it hold
still, for a disease is but bodged or patched up that is not cured in the
cause, and the cause of plagues is sin, if you look to it well: and the
cause of sin are plays: therefore the cause of plagues are plays. Quicquid
est causa causae est causa causati. Shall I reckon up the monstrous birds that
bread in this nest? An old reason.
without doubt I am ashamed, and I should surely offend your chaste cares: but
the old world is matched, and Sodom overcome, for more horrible enormities,
and swelling sins are set out by those stages, then every man thinks for, or
some would believe, if I should paint the^ out in their colors: without doubt
you can sca^tly name me a sin, that by that sincke is not set a gogge: theft
and whoredom: pride and prodigality: villainy and blasphemy: these three
couples of helhoundes never cease barking there, and bite many, so as they
are incurable ever after, so that many a man has the leuder wife, and many a
wife the shreuder husband by it: and it can not otherwise be, but that which
robs flatlye the Lord of all his honor, and is directly against the whole
first table of his law, should make no bones of breach of the second also,
which is toward our neighbor only. Wherefore if thou be a father, thou losest
thy child: if thou be a master, thou losest thy servant: and thou be what
thou can be, thou losest thy self that hauntest those schools of vice,
dens of Thieves, and Theaters of all lewdness: and if it be not suppressed
in time, it will make such a Tragedy, yt all London may well mourn while it
is London, for it is no playing time, (and every man bethink him well) but time
to pray rather: but faith is fainted, and when the son of man coms, shall he
find faith upon the earth? Blessed is the servant whom when his master
comes shall find doing not playing, but working, Luke. 18. verse. 8.
and doing not evil but good, for that is our duty that are Gods servants,
but Satan's slaves do run another race.

And cruel City. This is the other part of his accusation, wherein whether
he allude to that general breach of this commandment (Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self,) for as Charity in this respect performs the law,
so Cruelty breaks the same, and therefore is it said on this word (Love)
depends the whole law and the Prophets, because all their labors have no
other end than to raise up our affections, al our desires and delights to be
in love with God, and to move our compassion and tender bowels in charity
toward our neighbor: or whether by this word (cruel) he means a special
vice, which is covetousness, ever unmerciful: and it is nearer the sense,
for that I read in some translation, Vae direptrici ciuitati, Woe to her that
is a robbing City: It was boldly done of Zophony to call them all thieves:
surely deceypte deserves no better name: and therefore as David counsayles you
in the sixty and two Psalm, Psalm. 62. verse. 10.
O trust not to wrongs and robberies, give not your selves to vanities, if
riches increase, set not your heart upon them.

Here is the difference, that Thieves steal without the compass of man's
law, and dye for it, and you do it within your compass, and escape: they in
the high ways, you in your Shoppes: they plainly enough, but yet with force:
you use no force indeed, but suttletie is your shifte. Well, though the law
be on your side, and lays no Item to your charge, yet I am assured, the
Gospel is clear against you: and therefore remember the law of GOD and his
bar, where though the country quitte you here, Let him that stole, steal
no more.

Ephesians. 4. verse. 38.


yet thy conscience shall condemn thee there, and GOD is greater than thy
conscience.

Covetousness is the root of all evil: that is no evil, 1. Tim. 6. verse.
10.
but has issued out thereof, Auri sacra fames, quid non mortalia Pectora
cogis (says the Poet) What does not the love of money make a man to do?
Idolatry, Adulterye, Murder, Theft, Lying, Swearyng: yea Treason, both
against Christ and Chrystyan Kingdoms, are the natural fruits of this
monstrous tree, and the bitterest Berrie that this root bears.

I had almost forgotten (Usurye) a younger Spryg, and later graffe indeed,
than any of those I showed you before: but yet for mischief, it does surpass
them all (excepting ever Idolatry) I think in my conscience the Devil is the
only life thereof: and as a man having many children, yet sometimes the last
does most resemble his father, so can not I see the Devils countenance,
complexion, and condition more lively natural in any one, tha^ in this bramble
of Hell. How often will you hear of this gear without amendmente? there is
small or no hope left for aftercommers to do any good at all therein: and yet
we must speak still against it for all that. The Prophets had not all
success, nor the Apostles prevailed every where, and Christ himself ceased
not to give it out, though he knew the perverseness of the proud Pharisees
would not learn Wisdom, nor receive Counsel of the Lord. As a net full
of birds, so are your hooses full of things gotten by deceypte, Jeremy. 5.
says Jeremy: will you never enter this in your account? when I have
gotten the whole world and lost my own soul, what have I gotten? or what
shall I give to buy it again? no no, there is nothing left, you must let
that alone for ever.49. Psalm. It cost more to redeem a soul, not gold, nor
silver, but the precious blood of Jesus Christ, 1. Peter. 1. verse. 18.
as of a Lamb undefiled. etc. It were a golden sentence therefore, and worthy
to be prefixed over all your reckonings and dealings, which the wise King
has, Proverbs. 4. ver^^. 2^.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, for thereout springs life. Shall I not
say that you are covetous and cruel? can you for conscience deny it? if
slyght wares and light waightes: if lying words and false oaths will prove
both, then may I safely conclude both. What trade can you name me that Satan
is not as free of as the best? I list not to blow up your skirtes, or to
show your sh^me abroad, but your selves do not hyde it, and it is
displayed in a manner to all the world: your entertaynemente of Satan is so
good, you prefer him, and pluck him in with both hands, and many trulyer
serve him, than the Lord, himself: and therefore as Saint Paul says,
Romans.6. you are his servants whom you obey. Rom 6.
If you be out of obedience of God, you are straightway out of service, and by
consequent out of wages: and wherefore else is the Devil called the Prince of
this world, but for his multitude of Subjects: the way to Hell is wide and
broad, and many do trample and run in it.

I can compare covetous men to the Gyauntes in Noah's time, which were not
only cruel, Genesis 6.
but filthy with the daughters of men, which brought in robberye and spoil
first into the world: such monsters were their fathers, and such Camels are
their Children, and therefore it goes hard with them, and there is a sore
trial remaining for them: For it shall be easyer for a Cammell to go through
the eye of a nedell, Math. 10. verse. 24.
than for such rich men to enter the Kingdom of God: or to the foul
carrion Raven, which flewe out of Noah's Arc, and returned not again, being
deteyned or holden back with the filthy styncke of carrion dead bodies that
were drowned, Genesis 7.
every garbage or baggage is good enough for them, Duleu odor lucri ex re
qualibet, The savor of gain is sweet out of the vylest thing: Or to foolish
Esau, which for a mess of pottage did make away his inheritance. They may
say they are Abraham's Children long enough, but Abraham had two Sons, the
one of a bondewomanne, which was Ismaell: So Hagar is your mother, Genesis 21.
and you resemble much the envious children of covetous Laban, an Idolater,
who might well be your father, for covetousness is Idolatry: Achabs example
does declare your fault, ^. Kings. 21. verse. 19.
and does it not threaten your punishment? I am weary to enter the common
beaten discourse of this biting and dogged sin, nay devouring and diuelishe
sin Usury. But for short and long, this you have to trust unto, that if Syon
be buylt with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, Miche. 3. verse. 10.
Syon shall be ploughed up, and Jerusalem made an heap of stones. London
builds apace, beware of blood and iniquity, for it is not Tire, nor it is not
Sydon: it is not Gomorrah, nor it is not Sodom: it is not Iherusalem: it is not
Syon: it is not London: nor it is not England, that shall so escape scotfree,
and sweep stakes without all measure, but GOD shall reckon with you in his
rage, and give you a taste of his anger, as an earnest penny in this life, of
everlasting pains in ye life to come, if there be no ho. And if you breed
Cockatrice eggs, of which whosoever eats he dies, and he that treads on
them, Serpents come up: if you weaue the Spyders web, which makes no
clothe: Esaias. 59. verse. 5.
if the deeds of wickedness and the works of robbery be in your hands, well
you may look for health but it is far from you. Of the several sorts of
wicked branches, all sprouting out of this poisoned body (usury) covetousness
being the root of all, I leave to speak at large: as of Masters detayning
servant wages, it is a cruelty and co^mes of covetousness, a roaring sin
which shall make the wringers houle for it, if they repent not in time:
Collos. 4. verse. 1.
remember you have a Master in heaven, and let not the hyrelings wages tarry
with thee al night, as many make them reap their labor for their pains: such
grubbers there be, which grynde the faces of the poor, and lurche them as
they list, Esaias. 3. verse. 15.
using them worsse than many a man would use a beast: they cost more, and are
as dear in Christ's eyes as thou, and more precious too, and thou keep that
way, for the end thereof is destruction: this is a great fault of Gentlemen
in the Country, and of some in the City too, as hard hearted and mercylesse
as the best: take heed least in the bitterness of their grief they curse
thee, and their cry come up unto the Lord.

I say nothing of exequutors, which may well be called executors, for spoylyng
of Orphans, infantes, and widows, which are their own caruers, and beggar
and beguile them to whom the right belongs. And here my thinks I see the
secret judgments of God on goods ill gotten, as David says, thou scrapest
and can not tell for whom: thou rakest into thy clouches and know not who
shall possess the^, perhaps thy exequutor, and perhaps a stranger, sometimes
thy enemy, and sometimes thy own son (and none sooner) shall consume and
scatter abroad, what thou with toil and turmoile, with vexing of thy body and
ventryng of thy soul, have miserably scratched together in all the days of
thy life: it is flushe in a year, nay sometimes in an hour, if they fall
kyndly too it, as many young masters do: such prodigal prancks have made a
clean riddaunce of fair possessions in a short time, and their punishment is
right for it, that seeing they are so forward too begin where their parents
left, they must be feign to make an end where their fathers began: thus
misery meets with prodigality, and prodigality ends in misery as it is
meet: and I would both old and young would mark this lessen well, and learn
to do well with Mammon whilst they have it, for either the man, or Mammon, or
both will away at length, and cannot tarry still. It is an old verse and
forgotten of all, Da tua dum tua sunt, post morte^ non tua sunt: Give thine
while they are thine, for after death they are none of thine.

I am led by occasion of these words to another kind of cruelty, and it is
very needful now to be heard, in good time be it spoken therefore, I pray
God: and this grows out of the bowels of covetousness too, and bears
hardness of heart, and as Christ foretold so is it come to pass, Math. 24.
verse. 12.
ye charity is waxed cold. But as it is an argument of the whole worlds
overthrow when universally winter shall come over charity, so is it strong as
a conclusion of the confusion of ye city that has lost the heat of christian
love and pity: if thy enemy hunger, feed him: but we are so far out of
charity, that we would feed on him rather, Prouer. 25. verse. 20.
though Solomon himself counsel us, or a greater than Solomon, eue^ our
Savior, command us the contrary: and herein he goes, so far that many are
content to let him go alone. When he bids us love our enemies once, that goes
hard, Math. 9. verse. 44.
and it is against Adams adamant heart: yet must we so be perfect as our
father is perfect. But we are so far out of square, that we scarce love our
friends, every man is so in love with himself, and Christ's new
commandment is made no commandment, love you one another. John. 15. verse.
12.
I cannot deny but that there is a general provision for the poor in this
City, and your Hospitals find good relief, (God be thanked for it) for he
does it, but every private man's devotion is very small, and I shreudly suspect,
that privy alms come short, your shoppes have so shaped you after this
world. The Pharisees were prodigal for praise, I would Christians would
learn to be liberal for very shame. It were well and some would not take away
that ye pore have, such clinchers there are: but as he that gives unto the
poor lends to the Lord, so he that takes or stops away from the poor
takes from the Lord: or else how should that be true, I was hungry you gave me
no meat, Math. 25. verse. 35.
I was thirsty, you gave me no drink, etc. Shall our master command us to
sell and give, Marc. 10. verse. 21.
and shall we gain and yet give nothing? whose servant are you, judge your
selves, that you be not judged of the Lord: surely his whom you obey. Romans 6.
Well, what say you, and the poor lie under every wall, and cry under every
stall, and die in the streates in the time of the Gospel? undoubtedly there
must needs be cruelty with extremity, you will say, and therefore surely I
say, that as this City is lamentable for the multitude of ye poor and
wretched me^, so is it more to be lamented for the miserable rich me^: why did
James else say, weep and howl for the James. 5.
miseries that shall fall upon you you rich men: but that because you eat Gods
people as bread, your selves shall be eaten as flesh, and you shall be but a pray
to ye enemy and aue^ger, and come to a miserable end for it. Object.
But some will say unto me, what needs all this, I am sure we keep good
houses, and spend largely, and deal liberally, and therefore this is a slander
(in a matter of truth say I for the greatest number: Solut.
) In deed there is a miserable sparing, and you will avoid yt well enough:
and there is an unmeasurable spe^ding, and you ar wise enough for yt too: but
there is an unmercifully profusion, and what say you to that? Amos. 9. verse. 4.
ye Prophet Amos says of the^ in his time, they lie in beds of Yuory, not so
costly a woodde at that time, as is to be found in the beds of our age,
co^paring time with time, and place with place, or howsoever they bettered us in
yt wood, we pass the^ all for curious work: ye prophet names no down beds
nether, perhaps ye feathers was the^ the only use, but now, niceness is more
dainty tha^ so, and covetousness more cunnyng for the turn: their drinkyng
of wine in bolles, does show that curious wrought goblets, and counterfaite
Hypecrice was not then known of old: they noynted themselves with sweet
odors, but we perfume our selves with the dearest musk: they did eat the fat
calves out of their stalles, and the yonglings out of their flocks, but we
are far beyond them, for Ueale and Mutton is to gross for our diet, nay ye
Sea with all his fish, the air with all his birds, and the earth with all her
beasts cannot satisfy our beastly appetites. A Cook among profane men was
a strange art, and banished out of some commonweals, as a superfluous
science to make men eat more than needs: but in England, it is a great
occupation, and in London a very rich company. I speak it not against the
necessary use of them, but against the needelesse abuse of such as are cunning
and curious, and very costly to no purpose: and he is counted ye finest Cook
now adays that ca^ invent new fashio^s, new devises, and new disguises. None of
all this could Amos charge Israel withal, Amos. 6. verse. 6.
and with all this is England too truly to be charged. Well, let us see what
this wrought in them, surely this, that no man was sorry for the affliction of
Joseph: and can there be any less effect in us, the cause being greater? or is
not the Devil so wise now as he was then? Surely rich men to spend are
frank and free, but the poor fare never the better. So Dives spente largely,
Luke. 16. verse. 19.
for he fared deliciously every day, but Lazarus could not get a crumme for
all that: he speedes well that gettes a cruste in these days. But you will
say in deed, he was hard hearted and mercylesse, and we trust that there is
none such now: I pray GOD there be not: I mark this yet, whether to cause
your Charity, or to condemn your cruelty, GOD does so appoint it, that the
story of Dives and Lazarus is the oftenest Grace at every rich man's table, I
hope for the best. I will help you a little to my power, and put you in
remembrance of this, least you should deceive your selves, Math. 26. verse.
11. The poor shall you have alvvay with you, but not me.
because that Dives is dead, and yet he is alive, and so of Lazarus who is
dead, and yet he is alive also: for though Lazarus be in Heaven, yet Lazarus is
on earth, and Dives is on earth, and Dives is in Hell. Go to now you rich
men, take heed, and beware of cruelty, and pray for charity: you are but
stewardes, lay it out: you are no Lords you may not lay it up: Make you
friends of the wicked Mammon, while you have time, for your time is not for
ever, and perhaps it is not long.

She heard not the voice. I will run over the particular causes as briefly as
I can, for I have been long, and I am afraid of the time.

This first fault is the Original cause of all error, both in Religion
and living, and it has bredde monstrous Heresies and mischievous enormities at
all times, (especially in the Church) while we have left the voice: Ierem.
2. verse. ^.
and when Jerusalem had committed those two evils, to forsake God, the Well of
life, and to dig broken Cysterns, that would hold no water, it was no
maruayle that God gave them over to strong illusions, and to believe lies, to
kneel to every piece of wood, and say these are our Gods. First they hard it
not because ye greater sort gave no ear to the Prophets: and so London hears
it not, for though here be a great assembly, yet what are you to all the rest?
This is a general plague, that the fewest flock to the church in every place.
Secondly because they hard it not effectually: and so we are guilty too. We
preach not (my brethren) because you should hear us only, and for no other
end: For so we were as good hold our peace, or make a noise with our feet as
with our tongues, but that you should do, also, Luke. 11. verse. 28.
for none are blessed but they that hear the word, and keep it: Which fault
is greater judge you, not to come at all, or to come, and not to hear, or to
hear and not to follow? as good never a whitte as never the better: the
audience of ye dead bodies under your feet, is as great and greater, is as
good and better, than you, except you mind to follow that you hear, for so
Christ said, let the dead bury the dead, Math. 8. verse. 22.
but follow you me. If the word be the power of God, as it is, Hebrews. 4.
Let it work somewhat in you for shame. I can tell you thus much, you shall give
account for that you have heard this ninetene years long, GOD will call a
repetition, you can express no greater contempt against God, than so lightly
to accept of his word.

For our living. Thy word (O Lord) is a Lantern to my feet (says David) and
a light unto my steps: whereby then shall a young man or an old man, Psalm.
119.
or all men safely direct themselves, but by the word of God? which lays
down rules for all estates, ages, persons and degrees. Here is the Fathers
duty and the sons, the masters and the servants, the Princes and the
peoples, the Magistrates and the Mynisters, which while Jerusalem heard not,
she cared not which hand she took, for the ungodly have no fear of God
before their eyes, Psalm. 10.
because they know nothing of the word as they ought to know. So plays the
Pope, he will not be tried by the word (but he shall whether he will or no in
the day of judgment,) let him ride on cock horse, nay on men's backs, and
tread on Emperors necks, and keep a coil like the Devil in every kingdom
of this world, his exaltyng up to heaven, shall but deeper plunge him into
Hell, for not hearing the voice. Obedience is better than sacrifice, and the
holy Ghost always wiser than men: God is true, and all men are liers: the
gold that is purified seuentimes, is not so perfect as his word: wherefore
all adders too, or takers fro, Reu. 22.
are accursed. Hear O heaven and harken O earth, said Esaias, Esai. 1. in his
time, Esaias. 1. verse. 2.
and what may we say in our time, it would grieve your heart to tell a tale to
a post, and it would encourage us well to speak to willing men. I will
hyde nothing from Abraham, Genesis 18. verse. 19.
said God, for he will show it his children, and teach it his posterity.
Would GOD that as you are not always children but sometimes fathers, so you
were not always learners but sometimes teachers. I would you were all
preachers. Numeri. 1^. verse. 29.

She received not correction. This is a second cause that the prophets warnyngs
were but wind, but this word shall burn as fire, and make the people smoke
for it. As doctrine is cold without reprehe^sio^, so are threatenings in vain
without correction. This made Jonas so angry with himself, that he wished
death again, Jonas. 4
because he thought it a discredit that God had not so dealt with Nyniuie as
he had pronounced. But the anger of man does not accomplish the judgments
of God: and he is merciful to spare, and rightuous to reward, when and whom he
will. I would to God, the case were so with this City now, as it was with
Niniuie then. The incurable malice of Israel, even of Gods own people is here
displayed and expressed, that neither words nor blows, neither speaking nor
striking, neither gentle promises nor sharp reprehe^sions, neither fair means
nor foul could do the^ any good at all: for if prophesying would have served
ye turn, why? early and late, she lacked none: or if punishment could have
wrought the feate, for dearth, sword, captivity, plague, etc. she wanted
not: warning by words does work with many of Gods children, but correction
winnes them all: Because they are reprobate.
and nothing will do with the wicked till condemnation come. He is said to
receive correction that is bettered by it, as Ezechias the King, David the
Prophet, Joseph the Patriarch, Job the holy man. It was good for all these
that GOD had humbled them: but where there is no fruit, there all is lost,
and that correction is not received. As a potion taken for health, if it work
not, there must be a quicker, or else the disease remains still: even so if
one punishmente will not do, a kynder must be put in proof, and as where
the Physician ceasseth of the second attempt, he sees small sign of
recovery, and that man's state is dangerous: even so where GOD gives over and
lettes alone, there is no hope of remedy: and that man's case is desperate, for
whom he loves, Reu. 3. verse. 19.
he chastises, and scourges every son that he receives: and if you be not
under chastisemente, that is, if you receive not correction, whereof all his
children are pertakers, then are you bastardes and not sons, Heb. 12. but it
was far otherwise with this people, Heb. 12. verse. 6.7.8.
they were as Horse and Mule, in whom there is no understanding, nay the Ox
does know his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe, but Israel will not
be made to know her God, Esaias. 1. verse. 3.
it is a stiffenecked people, she will receive no correction, she has cast
the yoke of obedience over her shoulders: why should ye be stricken any more
(says Esaias) seeing that you are ever falling away? Verse. 5.


Let us now see this in our se^ues, whether we have any correction or no,
and if we have, whether we receive it as we ought to do. God has played the
fathers part, in sparing us from Famine, from Battle, from the Sword, and
from Captivity and bondage, the common euentes of Wars: and he has
visited us with a gentle plague, the disease that David chose. 1. Chron. 21.
Verse 13.
And what has it done? it has mended, as many as it has ended, not one
that has not bin sick is the better, where as the good child is in awe, and
does as much at the shaking, as at the strykyng with the rod: nay I may
say to you, many have bin visited, and are recovered, but for their life and
conversation, they are the worse: and do they receive correction then? except
he should rent asunder the very Heavens, and break the Clouds, and come
down himself to visit, I think we are at a point for all other
visitations. I remember what the wicked man says in his heart, Psalm. 14.
There is no GOD: but let us not egg him too far. God is provoked every
day, but if a man will not turn, he has whette his Sword, he has
bente his bow and made it ready, Psalm. 7.
he has prepared for him the instruments of death. It is not enough to
say GOD SAVE THE QVEENE, and yet by our disobedience, cause him to take her
away. Our Savior wept over Jerusalem, for that she knew not those
things which belonged to her peace. Luke. 10. verse. 41.
England has peace, the Lord long continue it, and open our eyes, to see
the things that belong unto it, as well in piety and religion, as in policy
and reason. Happy are they whom other men's harms can make to beware. If
France, Flaunders, Spain, and all the whole World besides, can not be a
fair and sufficient warning to us, let us take heed we be not made an
example to all the world. God forbid.


She trusted not in the Lord. This is the third cause, and it is the
fountain of all unhappiness, not to depend of Gods providence. This made
Israel hunt after Idols so, and put her trust in Horses and strength of me^,
to be so cruel in dealing with deceyt. And what shall I say of our
engrocers, forestallers, forfet takers, Usurers, oppressing Landlordes, of
murmuring rich men, that ever are afraid, and never have enough? that you trust
in the Lord? I will not disprove your faith, but if you do those things which
deny and defye the faith, which fight against faith, if you iustifye them
of little faith, that cared but for to morrow, Math. 6.
and your carke be for a hundred years, though your carcases can not tarrye
so long. A long living and a short life.
You may talk of Gods Providence as long as you will, and believe you he that
list. Your trust is not rightely in the Lord: and if you mistrust his
providence, by my counsel you shall mystrust your own provision, and good
reason to, for he will take whether he will at his pleasure. Thou feel,
Though our Landlord be on earth, yet our life Lord is in Heaven. L^ke. 22.
verse. 20.
this night shall I take away thy soul, and whose shall these things be
then which then haste provided?

Again, there are a sort that go down into Egypt, Esa. 31.
whom Esaias curses, which seek wise women, old beldames, for young women
with child, Witches and cunnyng men, for things loft.

It was a great fault in this people, and Manasses ye Idolater was sorely
given to it, to observe dreams, singyng of birds, and the like paltrie as
many do now, Popery joins with Sorcery.
the howlyng of Dogs, the gnawyng of Rottes, the spots in the hand, the
crying of Ravens, the flying of Owls, a sort of fond observations and
dreams, old wives fables, whereby the Devil deludeth many, and weakeneth
their faith. Saul would needs consulte with a Witch though he himself
had put them down: yet when Samuel the Prophet was dead, so bewitched
was King Saul, 1. Sam. 2^.
but shortly after, if not the next day, he ran on his own Sword. There
is a Plague in store for all forsakers of GOD, and seekers to the Devil: he
does abhor it, and precisely forbydde it in the eyghtenth Chapter of
Deuteronomie. Deuteronomy. 18. verse. 10.


Now for them which fly the Plague, whether they trust in the Lord or no,
here are many would feign know, and I will be as willing to declare my
opinion therein. I can not defyne it absolutely, or fynallye determine the
case, but I leave it to my betters, and it is conscience in deed that strykes
the stroke of trust or mistrust, and therein every manne can best tell
himself: for as thy life does declare thee to manne, so thy faith does
show thee unto GOD, and Tenera res conscientia est, quae nec tangi nec angi
debet, Conscience is a tender thing, and may not be touched nor troubled. I
may term it a sign of weakness, but not flat infidelity, for thou
may both tarry and flee an Infidel. And there is a desperate kind of
tarrying with preposterous words, which I utterly mislike: and that same
hard opinion flat against all Physic, that the Plague is not infectious,
I can not allow: they have no reason to make it good that so say: but they
bring particulare experience, which is no proof at all, as though God could
not be god, and the Plague infectious. Let him that has a gift to tarry,
praise God for it, and let him not triumph over him that has it not: and yet
I would every man were as he. But man's nature is very frail, and his flesh
soon afraid, and every body has not the like measure of perfection and
strength. Again, some are more bound to tarry than other some: as public
persons, the Magistrate, the Minister, the master of householdes that have any
public office, charge, or function, let them look unto it: and for the rest
that fly away, if they do provide that their neighbors do not lack that
conueniente comfort and sufficient succoure which their presence might
yield, I say it is the safer. But to answer rash concluders, which are
hasty to give sentence, and do condemn their brethrens conscience, which say
absolutely, it is lack of faith, and altogether unlawful, it is to fly from
God etc. As though God were the plague. I say, if you will needs prove your
faith for your tarying and playing ye men, then must you find a promise for
your faith, or else it is no faith. For eternal life we have a promise, and
therefore a faith: and where in all the Scriptures have you any promise that God
will spare him or her, that upon their trust remain and tarry by it? whereas as
godly and as faithful are taken away, as Infidels and wicked: nay, I think
rather the worst are left behind to amend, and it will be, or to feel a
sorer plague. For as Augustine says, it is a temptation not to be tempted, so
surely may it be a horrible plague not to be plagued, as I have proved before.
Away with that Heathen proverb, which is too common among Christians: He that
dies this year, is scused for the next. Nay, he that dies this year, and not
in the Lord, is excused never, but dies for ever. Let us rather pray the
Lord to enable us to do our duty in all spiritual strength, and to comfort
one another in sickness and in health, and let us beseech the lord to remove
this plague far from us, seeing we can not remove our selves from the plague,
the wings of the morning cannot do it, A prayer.
for he is every where. Have mercy upon us therefore, O Lord, according to thy
wonted mercy, like as when thou commaundedst thy Angel to cease from slaughter
in the time of king David: so if it be thy blessed will, take from us now this
pestilence of mortality, and show thy loving countenance once again, and be
not angry with us for ever.

She drew not near to her God. This is the fourth and last cause. As a wild
Ass in the mountain co^mes not near his catcher, so Israel withdraws her
self from god her keeper. Christ's crying, Iere. 11.^ Verse. 28.
Come unto me. etc. Mat. 11. does tell us that he can not abide that we should
wander and stray to any other. To come near, is not thy bodily going to the
church, or Pharisaical pressing to ye high Altar, but it is a spiritual
approaching, even as God is a spirit. John. 4. Which words S. James uses too,
James. 4^ verse. 8.
and expresses what it is to draw nea^^ unto god: it is to cleanse our hands,
and to purify our hearts. It cannot be but a great comfort to us, that God is
every where: and religion does nothing else but join us unto him, as
superstition does separate us from him: and therefore it is called fornication.
Also prayer is a special of this general, whereby we talk with God, and come
before his presence, as Abraham talked with God for Sodom, and every faithful
child of God for himself. But they that seek other shifts, and never ask of
god, as king Asa sick of ye gout, sought Phisitio^s and never sought ye Lord,
they are runagates from god, and they shall dye as ye king did, without help:
for the Lord is sovereign, and rules al things by himself, and though he lend
us ordinary means, yet he leaves us not to the^ alone, but would have us seek
all things of him, who is the fountain of al good things.

Her Rulers are as roaring Lions. Least the Prophet should seem to say any
thing that ^e could not prove, and so slander the state of Jerusalem, therefore
as he named the faults before, so he commes now to the persons also, and that
the very chief. Note here how necessary it is to come to particulars, and
to point at, and paint out sin, in whom soever it is. He that speaks
generally, speaks to no man now a days, for every body can post it off, or
sport it out so pretily. John. 4. V^^se. 16
As the woman of Samaria by the well of Sichar, was very pleasant with
Christ, until he took her up for her adultery: So every man had bin
faultlesse here, and the Prophet had not bin very plain, they would have set
as good a face on it as we do. But as the good Physician to heal the body
does minister many things against the mind, so much more should we to heal
the soul, deal plain against the body, especially seeing that, Quo grauior
est causa, eo intentior esset cura, The cause being greter, there should be
better care.

I pray you see how he calls the best (Beasts) here, what are the rest then?
judge you: and not only under Manasses, but also under Josias a good king, were
naughty Rulers to be found. And here are names of purpose meet for them,
whatsoever other titles they take to them selves. As a roaring Lion and a hungry
Bear, Prou. 28 verse. 15.
so is a wicked Magistrate over tho poor people, says ye wise king. The
proverb of a slouthful slouen is written in the.22. of the Proverbs, Prou. 22.
Verse. 13.
that ever when he should do any good, there is a Lion in the street. But and
it be true in deed that a Lion sittes in judgment to devour whom he should
defend, then equity shall have a cold suite: and therefore among many other
things it was wisely said of Solomon: There the commonwealth does flourish
where the good do bear rule: but where the wicked strike the stroke, there the
godly hide their heads.

We have a most merciful and gracious prince, Elizabeth, God in mercy long
preserve and keep her. Amen. She is a Lamb and no Lion: and where she gives
the Lion, it is to be wished that in this sense she had many Lions, God is our
keeper.
I mean men of courage and valor: But as she has hands ynowe, so I pray God
she have many hearts, and then we shall do well enough.

Here is the picture of Jerusalem, a monstrous body, For both her Magistrates
and Ministers were corrupt.
a roaring Lions head, a ravening Wolves throat, a Camels neck, a Cormerants
heart, never an eye but stark blind, not a right hand or foot, but talants
like the Devil: so that you might rightly borrowe the Poets verse, to say,
Monstrum horrendum inform ingens, cui lumen ademptum. And all this is for the
cruelty in the Princes, the covetousness in the Priests, and corruption in
the people. Such a foul body was it, that from top to toe there was no whole
part, Iere. 6. verse. 13.
from the head to the heel no sound place: for from highest to lowest they
were all set on covetousness.

And here I could wish one property yet of a Lion in all our Rulers. They
say the Lion quaketh at the crowing of a Cock: So I pray God that the
threatenings of the word may work with them, and quayle them: that the spirit
of Elias doubled upon Elizeus may be raised in John: and that such men may
be found out as meetest messangers for them, which go not about the bushe,
neither are blaunchers, but as plain as a pack staff, which put them in
remembrance what they are, that as the Lion though he be the King of beasts,
yet at length is made a pray to small birds, and then is that saying veryfied,
Better is a live Dog than a dead Lion. So they although they be great in
authority, yet at the last they are but a bayte for the small worms.

And her Judges are as Wolves in the evening. I will not stand on the curious
distinction of these degrees, but only show you some difference of the beasts
to whom he resembles the^. A Lio^ prays in the day, a Wolf in the night: a
Lion catches stout beasts, a Wolf kills Lambs: a Lion takes no lambs,
as an Eagle takes no flies, A quila non capit Muscas. If a beast humble
himself to a Lion he is the less cruel, but do it to a Wolf and he is the
more fierce. A Wolf has a more ravenous nature, for though he be full of
spoil, yet he takes pleasure in the blood, for he thrustes his snoute into the
bowels of a lamb, rooting and noufling for the heart: and therefore in
scriptures, the enemies of the Church are often called Wolves, and for no
unlike quality are wicked Judges here resembled to them.

Whatsoever is rightly done of the magistrate, may be said to be done of god
himself: and I have said you are gods. Take heed therefore what you do (said
Iosaphat a good captain, 2. Cro 1^
when he ordained Judges) for you execute not the judgments of men but of God,
and there is no unrighteousness with him. Sit not with his authority then to
practice your own cruelty, if you do? you have lost your warrant, and it is
of your self, and you are no magistrate, but a Wolf: and the widow cry, and
the fatherless weep for his right, the lamb is fallen into the Wolves jaws.
But the blood shall cry for vengeance, and never cease, and revenge shall be
ready, and never sleep, for he that made him shall hear him. Ecclesi. 4.
Verse. 6.
Now, as that Judges case is clear, that judges thousands in truth and
equity, so is his most grievous that condemns but one unjustly. Remember
the righteous God that has no respect of persons but is a just Judge, remember
that Potentes potenter punientur: the mighty shall be mightily punished, and
mercy (...) is granted to the lower sort, but the magistrate shall have a sore
trial. Wisd. 6. Verse. 9.
Will you know who has set you in your seat? that same God, that raised
judges unto Israel. 2. Judge. Uerse. 16. Will you know to what end? it is to do
away evil from among his people and to judge the^ with just judgment. De^tr.
16. and. 19.
Put to your helping hand then in the name of God, and let two scales fall from
al your eyes that have to deal in justice, the one is (covetousness) that you
may see right, the other is (cruelty) that you show no wrong, and as much as
you can, by clemencye, pity, and mercy, avoid the name of Wolves. But
against the wicked be Lions and spare not, as Iethro counseled his son in law
Moses, Exo. 18. Verse. 21. Mark these three notes you that are Magi^^rates.
to pick out men of courage, men that feared God and hated covetousness to
govern ye people. You had need of stomach and courage, and to be Lio^s some
times, for you shall meet with devils else now and the^. Here is such cutting
and flashing, as if men were Oxen and not Christians. I think the sword you
carry should be able to command up every sword into his sheath, or if they
cannot rule their hands, I am sure you have authority for their legs. I
read in the 4. of Genesis, Gene. 4. Verse. 15.
that he that killed Caine a murderer, should be punyshed seven fold: I am
sorry it is made so light a matter in our time. I speak not unto you to make
new laws, I know you cannot, but to execute old laws, and to be more
exquisite on the trial of him that has cut a throat, than of him that has
cut a purse. Oh Lord, that a murderer should find any one friend in a
Christian common weal: For as the body is more vvorth than raiment, so the
life is more precious th^^ living.
but of nobles? of Judges? of magistrates? it were to intolerable: a poor
thief packes to Tyborne, but a man kyller, a murderer, can shyfte his
legs out of the shackle, and slip his neck out of the haulter. In
Platoes commonwealth, he yt killed one was thought worthy death twice: first
for natures duetye, secondlye, for the life he took away: and shall a Ruffyan
kill twice in a Christian estate before he can be met with once? And here I have
a suit to your honors, I will not spare to speak, howsoever I speed, I shall
discharge my conscience yet, and the burden shall be yours: it is to renew my
petition, which once I made to your predicessor, for poor condemned
prisoners: make no such post have I beseech you, that you danger their souls
with their bodies. They are cut off to save their soul, but and you make no
care of that, take heed that you have not as short a warning, and a more
sudden departing your selves. God has given you fair warning, by many late
and lamentable examples, even of your own Cloak. I discommend not due execution
of Justice, it is no piece of my meaning, but mercy is always better than
Sacrifice. Wherefore let it ever join with your justice, or else there is no
difference between damning and condemning on your part: the old Poets had a
blind saying, ( Dimittamte orco) I Will send thee to hell, when any man was don
to death: but Christians have a better phrase (I trow) and I trust they go to
heaven. Well, to draw toward a conclusion with you which are our honorable
governor and Mayor of this City, you must remember that you are chosen in the
time of a plague, and therefore in the time of sin: you are come to a sick
and a sore city, you must therefore play both the Physician and Surgeon, you
must awake out of Endimions sleep, and thrust dilligently your sword of
justice in, to lance out all corruption and bagage which is gathered in the
bowels, we stop not our nose so at the plague, as the Lord does stop his
nose at our sin: the stincke of London is come up before him, God has a
work to do by you, do not the Lords work negligently, for fear of a curse:
Tully truly said ( Magistratus virumindicat) authority does declare a man,
whether he Love superstition or religion, whether he love Justice or brybes,
whether he be inclined to mercy or to cruelty, and whether he be covetous or
liberal: and if he be a Lio^, his paws: or if he be a Wolf, his jaws will
soon bewray him: the cry of the Orphane and oppressed will Hunte him and find
him out.

It co^mes to my mind, those three ships, sent to Mar. Aurelius Emperor of
Rome out of Spain (as I remember) full fraught with vagabo^ds, loiterers,
thieves, Iuglers, and Iesters, and in a letter he wrote that these were but the
masters of this misrule, and the captain Roges, but for the scholars
themselves three hundred ships would not suffice. To this end I tell you this,
because we have more than three ships full, by odds. I will not say, the
City is full: but sure adulterers and Harlottes, thieves and Uacaboundes do
swarm in most places of the same, and no marueyle, for Dicing houses, Daunsing
schools, bowling-aleyes, Alehouses, are almost lawless in every place: me
thinks the policye were as good to note on those places ( LORD HAVE MERCY
UPON US) as on infected houses, and more need to, even at this time, if there
were due search, you should find my words true. Service or Sermon, all is
one to them. I leave to tell the ribaldrie, contempt of God, and of good
order, blasphemy and vilanous speeches amongst them, that a man would take the^
to be rather Devils than Christians. You cannot have all of me now, give ear
to other when they come, I beseech you, and in any case despise not the
least that the Lord does send: so shall you show in your years account
that you have kept your conscience unwounded, unburdened, as Samuels was
before the Lord: you may chance else to get such spots and scarres in this
year, as will not out again before the Judgment day, the which the Lord
God forbid. Amen.

And as for thee London, I must needs say thou art deep in debte, double and
treble danger does enuiron thee round about, and compass thee in on every
side, for thou do ouerflowe with sin. Even as a Cundit^ sprouteth out
water, Iere. 6. Verse. 7.
and as the Sea fometh with mire and gravel: So thou doste discover thine own
shame. Prodigality and pride, deceit and fraud, and all the rest, it was
first began in thee: Thou have infected both Court and Country, and their
blood will be required at thy hands. Great need have we therefore (my
brethren) by our tymely repentance to turn unto the Lord, that as by our
example we have fetched them in, so by our general lamentation and mourning, we
may bring them out again. Who ca^ tell whether the Lord will yet have
compassion upon us, or no, and stay the thing that is concluded against us? It
was one of the last offers that god made to Israel, when he said, Amend,
Iere. 6. verse. ^. Esai. 24.
or I will withdraw my heart from thee. Now if in his rage he shall swear that
we shall not enter into his rest, and in his anger he shall withdraw his
countenance, which has been our continuance, then soon shall
fearfulness, the pit, and the snare, come upon us, and all them that dwell
in the world. The Lord turn our hearts rather unto him: work in us timely
repentance before it be too late: make us more obedient to his holy word, that
we may serve him more truly in holiness and righteousness all the days of
our life, that this miserable and paynefull life being passed over, and ended
once, we may receive an eternal and everlasting life, which is the only
purchase of Jesus Christ our only redeemer and savior: to whom with the
father and ye holy ghost be al glory, praise, and power, for now and evermore.

Amen.
IMPRINTED AT London by Frauncis Coldocke.

Anno Dom. 1578. Februarij. 10.


