A Godly and fruitful Sermon against Idolatry: Wherein the foolish
distinctions and false interpretations of the second commandment, and other
scriptures pretended by the Papists, are plainly and fully confuted: Preached
the.xv. day of January. 1581. in the Parrishe Church of Eaton Sooken, within
the County of Bedforde, by P. W. Minister and Preacher in that place.

Tertullian. Jdolum tam fieri, quam coli, Deus prohibet.

Lactantius. Non est dubium quin religio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachrum est.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Frauncis Coldocke. 1581.

To the Reader.
SVCHE HAS been the rash and indiscreet deling of the defendours of the
Popish errors and abuses, reproved in this little treatise, that after the
preaching of this Sermon, diverse slanderous reports were given forth of me:
whereby I am enforced in the defense of my Ministry, to bring to the view of
many, that thing which at the first I delivered to a few, rather yielding my
self unto the judgment of every indifferent reader, then to hazard with
silence the credit of my function to the mouths of slanderous reporters. And
herein I am to desire the reader to bear with me, for that I have not so
strictly followed my text in this place, as the nature of reading and preaching
requires: but taking occasion thereof to enter the handling of a common place,
remember (I pray you) that extraordinary occasion did lead (yea rather draw)
me thereunto. For where I had begun to read and interpret the revelation of S.
John, and had in my last Lecture handled some part of this Text here recited,
by reason of a contention begun amongst us, about a remnaunt of a Roodelofte,
then standing in the Church where this Sermon was preached, (which Roodelofte
indeed wants nothing of his former state, but only the images and uppermost
front. The loft being nine foot in breadth yet stands, with the beam where
the Roode or Idol did stand, having the Tabernacles that sometimes stood
upon the Alters placed from the beam aforesaid, downewarde unto the loft for
a Division, and all the neither front downward, remaining as it did In the
time of popery.) A monument with small charge and less labor, quicklye
repaired for the idolatry that it was first appointed unto. Upon this
occasion (I say) after a short recital of things touched in my lecture last
before, I took matter of the Candlesticks mentioned in the Text to handle the
Question then in contention among us, following the same at large as I have
laid it forth to the view of all that shall read it. Wherein I have neither
(as I think) showed malice, rashness, or yet played the part of a mad man, (as
it has pleased some to report of me) but simply and truly, to the conuincing
of popish errors and idolatry, and to the quieting and strengthening of the
weak consciences of the simple of mine own charge, laid forth the truth for
some discharge of my duty and function in this behalf. But such is the
difficulty of the reedifying and building up of the Lords house, as well
appears both by the building of the material Temple, in the days of
Zorobabell, Iosedech, Nehemias, 1. Esdra. 4. Agg. 1. Nehem. 4. Ioh. 2.
and Esdras, where not only the foreign enemies but also counterfeite
Israelites, did so disturb and hinder the Builders, that in forty and six
years, they with much difficulty did hardlye finish the same. And the
building of the spiritual house or Temple of the Lord, but cheefely now in
these evil, last, and dangerous days, wherein the Devil and Antichrist
rages extremely (because their time is but short) yea even amongst us, where
the freedom in building of this House under a most godly and gracious Prince,
(whom the Lord ever preserve) is freelye granted: by outward enemies, as the
professed Papists, Harding, Saunders, Dorman, Heskins, Allen. etc. with the
rabble of Jebusites (no Ihesuits) subuerters, no sauers, do together with
domestical enemies, as Atheists, Newters, counterfeit Gospellers, and
dissembling Papists, serving the time, and seeking the overthrow of our common
Weal, busily let and hinder this heavenly building. Wherein they do and will
prevail until such time, as al filthy rubbish of popish religion, be utterly
removed and cast forth, as well from the hearts, of all such as build and are
to be builded, as from churches and all other places: which the Lord Jesus*
spedily accomplish, that we his people of England, may be framed an holy and
acceptable building unto him self, that his glory may ever shine among us,
and we continuallye preserved through the power of the same.

Finis.
The Text.
And I turned me, and saw seven golden Candlesticks, and in the midst of the
seven Candlesticks, one like unto the son of man.
WHere heretofore, (Derelye beloved) we have by occasion of this, learned that
Christ Jesus our Savior is alwais present unto al those which at ye hearing
of his voice turn unto him, and ye figure of this Angel, testifying the
presence of Christ, shows how impossible a thing it is, to lay forth and
express the glory and properties of the person and office of Christ, by an
Image made, graven, and painted by man, whereby, not only the madness of the
Heathen, that in graven Images pretended the representation and worship of god,
but also of the Papists, who in their Imagery pretended the like is evidently
convinced.

It now remains, that we examine why in this place the church of God is
resembled or represented by Candlesticks, and why it may not be lawful to have
the use of Candlesticks, and other such ceremonial figures, now in the church
of God, And this the rather, because in this place, the questions of these and
such like, has broke in among us. For the deciding whereof, the right reverend
and learned father my L. of L. was determined this day to have occupied this
place, who being let with weighty matters otherwise, cannot now answer your
expectations, wherefore as it shall please God to make me able for the time, I
will speak to the conuincing of error, and satisfying the consciences of the
troubled.

First, that the holy spirit of God, may always appear to be constante and
unvariable, he uses not any one similitude in this revelation, or in the
whole new Testament, but he has either the same or the like in the old, as
the figures of Candlestickes from Exodus the xxv. Other causes may be given,
Exodus 2^.
which when the Angels interpetation shall (of these Candlestickes) be handled
you shall hear.

Then that it is not only unlawful, but also manifestly wicked, to bring
ceremonial fygures and Images into the Church, because that all ceremonial
fygures at the death of Christ were removed and clean taken away, And to
bring them again, Galat.
were (as Saint Paul says) to deny Christ, Exodus 20.
And images by the law and word of god are forbidden.

But if any do pretend the Cherubs over the Ark and the brazen serpent to
color Imagery, they do bewray their folly, and lack of understanding, for as a
particular precept does not disanul or make frustrate a general commandment:
but serves or is applied unto the particular or special parties and place,
for whom and where it is commanded: so these Cherubs were not seen but only by
the hie Priest, and that but once by the year, and the brase^ serpent was not
erected in the Tabernacle or temple, but in ye wilderness, where the fiery
serpents did bite ye people, which serpent Ezechias brake al to powder, and
cast it into the brook Cedro^, which he would never have done, if there had
any use at all remained thereof unto the people. Therefore these things be so
far from the coulering of imagery in the Church, yt they utterly overthrow
the^. Thus much for ye candlesticks. The question among us now in contention is
of imagery, and whether this part of the Roodelofte yet standing be a monument
of Adolatry or not: which question through the pain iangling of some rash and
unskillful persons are grown into these branches.



St. Hierome, which has the Text in this manner, Non facies sculptile vt
adores, Thau shalt not make any graven image, to the intent to do Godly honor
thereto. There is further pretended Lactantius de Jmaginibus, and Augustine,
who should say, you shall not break down images where they may do good as by
images S. Austin thought some good might come.

Jdolum and Simulachrum do far differ from that which is called image or
similitude.





Now touching the first branche, It shall plainly appear that the papists
both by decrees of Counsels, writings of their Doctors and practices, had
Images in their Churches not only to represent, but especially to be
worshipped. In the 2. council of Nice it was thus decreede, Definimus enim
omni diligentia et cura, venerandas and sanctas imagines ad modum et formam
venerande et viuifica^tis crucis coloribus et tessellis aut alia quauis materia
commode paratas dedicandas et in templis sanctis Dei collocandas habendasque.
We do with all care and diligence decree that holy Images worthy of worship be
made after the manner and fashion of the worshipful and holy Cross that gives
life, with colors and wainscot or any other matter conveniently prepared be
placed and had in the holy temples of god, And in ye same sessio^, Council Nic
2. An. 681 temp Adriani primi Pope act. 10.
Imaginis enim honor in (...) resultat, et qui adorat imaginem, in ea adorat
quodcunque descriptu^ argumentum, Truly the honor done unto the image
reboundeth unto that thing that the image does represente, and he that
worshippeth an image worshippeth in the image, whatsoever is by the image
represented. And ymmedyatelye after, in the same session, Jbidem.
Sancta synodus exclamauit, omnes sic credimus, omnes idem sapimus, omnes
approbantes subscripsimus, haec est fides Apostolorum, haec est fides patrum,
haec est fides orthodoxoru^, haec fides orbem terrarum confirmauit, credentes
in vnum Deum in trinitat^ laudatum venerandas imagines amplexamur, qui secus
agunt Anathemate percelluntur, qui sic non sentiunt ab ecclesia depelluntur.
The holy Synod cried out a main, we al do thus believe, we all so think, we
all allowing the same have subscribed, this is the faith of the Apostles, this
is the faith of the fathers, this is the faith of all them that taught the
truth, this faith has confyrmed the whole world, we believing in one God
praised in trinity do receive and embrace Images to be worshipped, whosoever
do not so, be excommunicated, whosoever thinks otherwise, let him be expelled
out of the Church. The fourth council of Constantinople holden in the time of
Pope Adrian the second has thus decreede, Sacra^ imaginem domini nostri Jesus
Christi et omnium saluatoris equo honor cu^ libro sanctorum Euangeliorum
adorari decerminus, We do decree, that the holy image of our Lord Jesus Christ
the Savior of al me^, Act. 8. Cap. 3.
shall be adored and worshipped with equal honor of the books of the holy
Evangelists. And in the end of the same Canon, Dignius est enim propter
congruentia^ rationis, et antiquissimam traditionem, propter honorem qui ad
principalia ipsa refertur, et iam declaratiue imagines honorentur et adorentur,
It is very meet both for the congruence of reason, and the most ancient
tradition, and for the honor that is referred unto the principal that images be
honored and worshipped, And in the council of Trident the last session, usdem
Episcopis mandat, vt doceant sanctorum inuocationem, reliquiorum honorem, et
imaginu^ vsum, et eos qui aliter doceant impie sentire, praedicent, id quod
consilioru^ praesertim vero secundae Niciae decretis contra imaginum
oppugnatores est sancsitum. The Synod commanded the Bishops, that they teach
the invocation of Saints, the honor of relics, the use of images and they
shall preach that all that teach otherwise, are of a wicked judgment, the
which thing is stablished in the decrees of Counsels but especially in the
second counsel of Nice against the oppugnors or gainsaiers of images. Rationale
durandi lib. 3. de pict. et ornamentis Ecclesie.
And doctor Durandus among other things for ye worship of images, has this
verse: Effigiu^ Christi qui tra^sis pronus adora, Thou that passest by the
Image of Christ, fall down groueling and worship: And a little after, Picturas
non licet frangere ea occasion quod adorari non debent, pictura namque videtur
plus mouere animum qua^ scriptura. It is not lawful to break images because
they should not be worshipped for it is thought an Image does more move the
mind then Scripture. Thus you hear that imagery was placed in the Church of
Papists to be worshipped, whereby you may well perceive, how little learning
they have, that among you so stoutly and boldly affirm the contrary, yea,
their knowledge is little worth, no not in Popery.

To the second branch of this question, The second branch.
I say it is evident unto al men that are not wilfully blinded that the second
commandment does as sharply forbid the making and having of images in
religion, as the worship of them: The commandment stands of three
branches, The first forbyddeth the making of Images in relygion: For the
Lord in the first table does only respect his own worship, and things
belonging unto his worship and Relygyon: Wherefore all vain jangling of
cauelynge Papystes, that draw the use of stamping, printing, grauing, caruing,
or paynting, to profane or civil ends, is utterly removed from the meaning
and interpretation of this commandment, and can therefore have no place in
this question. Exodus 2.4.
Non facies tihi scuptile, nec vllam similitudinem eorum quae sunt in coelo.
etc. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven. etc. Of the second branch these are ye words, yea
after S. Hierome, Non adorabis neque coals ea, Thou shall neither bow thy
self unto them, nor before them, nor worship them. Deuteronomy. 4.
And thus does Moses in ye fourth of Deutronomy interpret the commandment,
saying* Take heed unto your selves diligently, for you saw no Image, nor
likeness of any thing at the time or day when the Lord spoke with you in Horeb
in the midste of the fire, Deuteronomy. 4. ver. 15.16.17.18.19.
least happilye you corrupt your ways, and make unto your selves any graven
image or likeness of any thing. etc. Lo here not only the Worship, but the
making is forbidden, and the making of Images is here called the corrupting of
their ways. Esayas after Hierome his translation Plastoe idoli omnes nihil
sunt, Esaias. 44.
All the makers of Images are of no reputacion, yea not only the Image, but the
Image maker is accursed. The Prophet David after Hierome his translation says,
Psalm. 113.134.
Similis sunt ijs omnes qui ea faciunt, They are all like unto Images that make
Images, And Tertullian that is pretended for Images, says: Jdolum tam fieri
quam coli Deus prohibet, Libro de. Idolat.
God does forbid as well the making and the worshipping of images. Quanto
precedit vt fiat quod coli possit, can^^ prius ne fiat si coli non licet,
propter hanc causam ad eradicandam, scilicet materiam idolatriae lex diuina
proclamat ne fecerit is idolum, et coniungens neque similitudinem eorum etc. By
how much the making of an Image goes before the worship: even so much must the
making be first avoided if it may not be worshipped, therefore to the utter
pulling up of the matter of Idolatry, the law of god proclaims that you make
no image and joins heereto, nor any similitude of things in Heaven. etc.
And Lactantius, Lac^a^t. R. de origin erroris. cap. 19.
Non est dubium quin religio nulla sit vbicunque Simulachrum est, Nam si
Religio ex diuinis rebus est, Diuini autem nihil est nisi in Coelestibus rebus,
carent Religione Simulachr^: There is no doubt, that there is no religion
wheresoever there is any imagery, for if religion be in divine things, and
nothing is divine, but that is in Heavenly things, then is imagery void of
all religion. Council. Eliber. Anno dom. 300.
The council of Elibertine holden in Spain Anno three hundred, thus decreede
against Images, Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur
et adoratur in parietibus depingatur. It is decreed that pictures ought not to
be in the church, nor that which is honored and worshipped be painted or
stained upon Walls. And Saint Augustine judged that Marcus Varro the Roman
came so much nearer unto Religion, August. de Ciuitate Dei.
by how much he abhorred Imagerye in Religion. The Law of Nature did teach
Varro, that God being invisible, and withal incomprehensible, could in no
wife be represented by things visible, and things made by the skill of man of
the same judgment was Iuuenall and diverse others, Dicite pontifices (says
Iuuenall) in sacro quid facit Aurum: Tell me ye Priests what profits your
golden Images in Religion: Lactan. lib. 2. de origin erroris. 2.
In like manner Persian and Horace, who in deriding imagery are brought in by
Lactantius and S. Jerome.

O curas hominum, o quantum est in rebus inane,
O curue in terras omniu^, et coelestium inanes.
Oh the cares of men, how void of the understanding of things heavenly, oh how
groueling upon the earth do they vainly bend their cogitations. And Horace,

Olim truncus eram siculnus inutile lignum, cum faber incertus scannum faceret
ne Priapum, maluit esse Deum, Deus inde ego furum atque auium, maxima formido.
Yerewhile I was a doted wild fig Tree, both barren and unprofitable, when
the workman was in doubt whether he would make me a form, a trestle, or (his
God) Priapus, in the end he would have me a god, from this parentage I am
become a god, a terrible scarecrowe to thieves and crows, Thus we hear by
scripture and fathers that the second commandment does as well forbid the
making of Images as the worship of them, and Doctors, Councels, yea and heathen
men, also condemn the having of them in religion. The learning therefore
reading and wisdom of those that with all boldness say the contrary, ye see
is nothing, and in these matters is as little worth, but you may see in them
the common Proverb verified, None is so bold as blind Bayard that sees
nothing, Thus much for the second Branche of the Question.

That the places of Scripture reproving the Idolatry of the Heathen are not to
be applied unto the Images of Christians, and that between idolum simulachrum
and imaginem, is great dyfference, whereto was aleaged Saint Paul, Non est
Idolum in Mundo, 1. Cor. 10.
There is not an Image in the world. Also S. Augustine was aleaged to the same
purpose. This dystinction (I say) is lewd, wicked, and Popyshe first it is lewd
and wicked, because it is dyrectly against the word of God, and the practice
of the true Church of God, and misconstrueth the meaning of Saint Paul and
falsifieth both the words and meaning of Saint Augustine (as you shall
hear.)

For between the Jew and the Chrystyan in substance of Relygion, there is no
difference, they both have the self and the same GOD and Salvation in Christ
Jesus as appears by Adam, Genesis
Isaac, Jacob, and all others. Therefore Christ said unto the Jews Abraham
was glad to see my days, he saw it, and rejoiced. And Saint Paul
brings the Relygion of Christ from the promyses made to Abraham. Galat. 4.
And to the Hebrews, he joins the Jew and the Christyan together, in one
promise and felowshyppe in Christ, Heb. 11.
Christ being as says S Peter, the Corner stone. Irenaeus also witnesses the
same in these words: Sieve d^bitatione igitur etc. Pet. act. 2.
Therefore without all doubt or gainsaying, ye Apostle witnessing ye same, there
is one and ye self same god which judged those things (of ye Hebrews) and
sifteth out the things (of ye Christians) yt now are. This also affyrmeth
Origin, Origin hom. en Esaias. 6.
Eusebius also, and Augustine agree in ye same. In outward things in deed as
Polityque government, Ceremonies, Eus. hist. eccl. lib. 1.
Ceremonyal Laws, and the outward parts of the Sacrament, Aug. sup. Ioh. hom.
2^.
there is great dyfference, but in signification, grace, substance of
Religyon, Morrall precepts, and commands, there is no difference, otherwise
Christ Jesus, S. Paul, and the other Apostles, had expounded and applied them
unto Christians in vain, then there being no difference in these respects,
between the Jews and Christians, when we see the Appostles apply the name
Idol, and the having or making of Images, with the detestation as well unto
the Jew as unto the Gentile, Ier. 2.
we may well see and perceive that the like application belongs unto us.
This shall you see in Jeremy, Ezech. 16.
Ezechiell, Esaias, and S, Paul, and many other places: It is lewd and wicked
therefore to deny the application of the scripture by condemning the Idolatry
of the Jew and Gentiles unto or against the imagery of Christians in Religion.
Romans 1. 2. Cor. 6.
Now concerning the abusing of these words of S. Paul, Scimus quod idolum
nihil est in mundo, 1. Cor. 8.2.
We know that an Idol or Image is nothing in the World, Whereby he denies
not the being of Idols, or Images in substance and fourm, but in use,
quality, and power, 1. Cor. 8. ver. 4.5:
and thereto he adds, and that there is no other GOD but one, for although
there be that are called Gods in Heaven and in earth, (as there be many
Gods, and many Lords) yet unto us is our GOD the Father, of whom are all
things, and we in him, And our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things,
and we by him. Esaias. 44. Romans 1.
The Gentiles and Idolaters, pretended the representation of GOD, who is
incomprehensible, by an Image made by man, which cannot be, and therefore to
this end or use there is no Idol or Image, they also pretended by their
Imagerye many and diverse Gods, which is also false, and is not as Saint
Paul says.

They also pretended power unto their Idols, and that the things offered in
the presence of their Images were sanctised and dedicated unto GOD, which is
also false, for Saint Paul says, Such Offeringes are the Offeringes and
Cup of Devils, and thus you may see, Saint Paul denies not the being and
form of Idols, but the use, qualitye, and power unto them ascrybed by men,
and using the words of Esaye, who says: an Idol or Image is nothing: it is
vayn, and vanity it self.

Esaias. 44. Habac. 3.
Habacuc says: They are Mendacia, Leasinges. Thus ye also see, that the
abusing of these words of Saint Paul, is as lewd and wicked. And where
Saint Augustine is pretended to allow of Images, and the Matter of them to
stand where they may do some good, De verb. dom sup. Math, Sermon. 6.
(as though this Father thought they might do good) here is the Book from
whence that was pretended, the place is clean contrary. In his Sermon upon
the eyghth of Mathewe, he greatelye enueigheth against Idols, saying they
call us, the Enimyes of their Idols, so God grant and bring them into our
power that they may be broken as the rest are, but this I warn you, when
they are not in your jurisdiction, you do it not: for it is the property of
evil men and furious Circumcillions, where they have no jurisdiction to
adventure upon them, and desire their own Death, they make unprofitable
haste. You all that were latelye present, heard what was read, When the
Land is given you in possessyon: First he says in possessyon, and then he
tells what you shall do: You shall break down their Alters, hew down
their Groves, and overthrow their Monumentes, when you have authority, this
shall you do, where we have no authority we do it not, but where we have
authority, we leave it not undone, There be many pagans among us, that have
these abhommacions within their possessions, what shall we go and break
them? No, let us remove them first out of their hearts, and when they
beecome Christians, they will either desire us to break them, or prevent us,
in breaking them themselves, And in the end of that Sermon, he says: We
preach against Idols and Images, we pluck them forth of men's hearts, we
are the persecutoures of Idols, we confess it: What are we, the reseruers of
Idols, in deed I brake them not where we cannot, I do it not where the
Owner of the possession complayneth, but where the Owner will have it done, I
do it with thanks, and if I shall not do it I am guilty.

Thus far Augustine, who is so far from bearing with imagery that he professes
him self a sharp persecutour of Imagerye how skylfullye, and how truly yea
how wyselye this place of Augustine was aleaged, for defense of the Roodeloft
judge you, except the aleagers will affirm this rood lofte to be exempted
from the Princes iurisdictyon, that has according to the words of God
commanded the overthrow of all such monumentes. Now because I have
Augustine in mine hands and that openly in the Church, and many of you
present, it was boldelye and rashlye said, Romans 1.
that there was as much dyfference beetween the Sacraments of cyrcumsition,
and baptism, as between a new coat and an old. Collo. 2.
Saint Paul teaching us that they are both one, 1. Cor. 10.
I will read unto you the Iudgementte of Saint Austine touching this matter,
Tr^c. 26.
upon the sixte of S. John, Sacramenta illae fuerunt in signis diuersa, Sed in
re significata paria sunt: These Sacraments in signs differed from ours, but
in the thing signified, they are like, and all one, and to this purpose, in
that place he alleges the Apostle Saint Paul, and further, 1. Cor. 2.
ad Quodvult deum, this Augustine who is pretented to allow Images do reckon
them for Heretics that pretend the resembling or representynge of GOD by an
Image, and calls them Antropomorphets, Antedecor.
so does Origin upon the Romans, so does also Epiphanius the Bishop of
Cipris, who as he went toward Bethell to meet with the Bishop of
Jerusalem, passing by a Village called Anablatha, he entered an Oratorye or
house of prayer, and says he: inueni velum dependens in foribus eiusdem
Ecclesiae, tinctum atque depictum, et habens imagenem quasi Christi, vel sancti
cuiusdam, non enim satis memini cuius Jmago fuerit: cum hoc vidissem in
Ecclesia Christi, contra authoritatem Scripturaru^ hominis pendere imaginem.
scidi. etc. I found a cloth hanging in the enteraunce of the Church, stained
and painted, having the Image, as it were of Christ, or of some other Saint,
I do not well remember whose Image it was, when I saw the Image of a man
hang in the Church of Christ, contrary to the aucthoritye of the Scriptures,
I cut it down. etc.

Thus you also see the Scriptures by Augustine, by Origin, and Epiphanius,
applyedde against Christiannes, for the having of Images, yea so far, that
by those Scriptures, they condemn images, matters in religion for Heretics:
but now between Jdolum, Simulachrum, Similitudinem, or Jmaginem, there is great
difference, for Idolnus and Simulacrum, do ever signify the Idols and false
Gods of the Gentiles, and are not to be applied unto the images of Christians,
this is as skillful and learned distinction as the rest, Tert. de Idol.
and of like truth. Tertullian in his book against Idolatry deriueth (...)
from his Greek primitive (...), quod greece formam sonat ab eo per
dimunitionem, (...) deductum, aeque apud nos formulam facit, igitur omnis
forma, vel formula idolum se dici exposcit, That in greek does signify a
form, or fashion, for idol by diminutio is brought and does with us
indifferentlye signify a shape or fashion, therefore every shape or form
requires the name of Idol. Lo here is the difference of Jdolu^ as a greek
word et Similitudo or Imago a Latin word, signifying the self and the same
thing, for Simulacru^ a Grammar Boy having learned the second part of
Grammar, can tell you that similitudo comes from similes that signifies like,
so does simulacrum come from simulatum, that signifies to liken, so
simulacrum and similitudo are both one, and signifies a likeness or Image, as
imago: Lo here is their great learning that so boldlye and rashly talk they
know not what, thus much for the third branche.

They say this Roodelofte is no monument of Idolatry, Tert de Idola^
Tertullian tells us, that monumentum is any thing that puts in mind the
memory of things not present. Now enter into the consideration of your own
minds, and remember with your selves, whether when you behold this lofte,
you at some time or other, think with your selves, sometime yonder stood a
Crucifixe, Mary and John, or when your Children do ask you what this Lofte
is, or why it stands there, and is more gaye, then the residue of the
Church: Do you not answer, It was the Roodelofte, there stood the Roode,
Mary and John, and when they say further, where is now the Roodes, and why is
it now taken away, do you not answer, They were Idols, and therefore are
taken away.

Thus both the judgment of Tertullian, yea of all learned men, the cogitation
of your own minds, the questioning of your young ones, the common name whereby
it is called, teaches that it is a Monumente of Idolatry. Further the Laws
of this Realm, the judgment of our most gracious prince, (whom the Almighty
ever preserve to the utter overthrow of Idolatry) with the practice of her
Commissioners given unto diverse learned men of this Realm, as well in the
common Laws, and civil Laws, as in Divinity, teaches us that this
Roodelofte is a monumente of Idolatry, for every where in the first year of
her Gracious reign, they gave commandment to overthrow them in every place,
as may appear unto you by Saint Neots your next neighbor, where Doctor
Benta^, and Doctor Neueson, and Sergent Fleetwood caused the Roodlofte there to
be cut down, by the seats of the quyer, leuing no memoryal thereof, yt their
doing might be an example unto the residue of the country to do the like.
Seeing therefore that these proofs do so clearelye declare it to be a
monumente of Idolatry, which in truth has and does greatly offend the
consciences of the best sort, and disquieteth the whole number of this
congregation: Let me say unto you as Moses at the red Sea said to the
Israelits, Exodus 14.
when Pharao had he^med the^ in with his army, fear ye not, stand still, and
behold the great works of the Lord, ye see the Egiptians now, but after this
day shall yee-see them no more, be not offended, quiet your minds, ye now see
this monument that has so troubled us, but after this, in this form and
fashion shall ye see it no more, the Lord will so deal with us, assure your
selves, And thus much for the fourth branche.

Now what learning, wisdom, and gouernmente those men have, that take upon
the^ ye defense, that Images were not by the Papists, brought into the Church
to be worshipped. That the commandment does not forbid the making and having
of Images in religion, but the worship only, that there is such difftrence in
signification, between idolum, simulachrum and imaginem, or similitudinem,
that one may not be put for an other, and the scriptures reproving the
Idolatry of the heathen, may not be applied against the images of Christians:
finallye that this Roodloft is no monument of Idolatry, by these things already
said you may easily perceive, what learning soever your Minister has, trust me
they have no learning wisdom, discretion, nor government at all, let them
therefore deceive you no more, for as in these things, so in other things
belonging to religion shall you find them. There be the books that they
themselves pretended, take them who will, carry them whether you will, and if I
have not dealt simply, plainly, and truly, then believe me no more, but if
you find this saying true, then quiet your selves, and receive the Doctrine
and doubt thereof no longer. But some will say this is very hot, and
vncharytable, so openly, and so sharpelye to reprove, it would have been
more mylde, and private: GOD is my witness I wish no man's finger to ache, but
only in the fear of God reprove not the persons, but reprove and convince
the Errors, that the mayntayners thereof may be ashamed of them, and leave
them, the simple warned to open their ears, to the hearing of any such
things hereafter. S. Paul unto the Galathians wishes such as troubled the
Congregation to be cut off from them. Galat.
Phil. 3.
To the Phillippians he calls them Dogs that maintained superstition after
the receiving of the gospel. To the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.
he will not call them men that at Ephesus impugned his doctrine, but calls the^
beasts. Christ calls such, wolves. In the revelation of Saint John, Apoc.
9. 2. Pet. 2.
such be called Locustes. Saint Peter calls them beasts without reason,
which the mild spirit of God compares ye enemies of his truth unto, Nahum. 2.
Dan. 9.10. Mich. 4.
in Nahum, Daniel, Miche as and in other of the Prophets: who will read shall
perceive. Christ our Savior, the mildest of all others calls them Wolves,
thieves, and murderers* John Basttist calls the^ the brood of adders. Mat.
3.
Such therefore as mislike of the upholding and maynteinance of errors in the
sight of God, Ioh. 1.
that he by his Ministers does with all sharpness rise up against them,
giving them great charge, that when the Wolf assayleth the Sheepeful^^, Mat.
10.
that then they do earnestly oppose and set themselves against such Wolves,
yea even unto the loss of their lives* for if they be cold in such assaults,
and prefer the benefit of their temporal quietness and safety, Eze. 34.
before the glory of God, and ye safety of the souls committed unto their
charge, they shall lose theirs own lives in ye world to come, and the blood of
the simple that so peryshe through their coldenesse, will GOD in the rygour of
his Justice, require at their hand, the LORD therefore grant unto the
ministers of his Gospel such assistaunce of his holy spirit, that with all
knowledge, zeal, and boldness, they may diligently set forth unto his
people, the truth of his word, and with all constancy to withstand and
convince the gainesayers thereof, to the advancing of his own glory, the
everlasting comfort of his chosen, the downfall and ruin of Antichrist, whom
the Lord Jesus with the glorious presence of his spedy coming, confound and
utterly overthrow, unto whom with God the father and the holy Ghost, one
eternal and everlasting God be all glory power and dominion both now and ever.

FINIS.

