A Most godly and Learned Sermon, Preached at Paul's Cross the 17 of November,
in the year of our Lord. 1583.

Maledici Regnum Dei non possidebunt.

1. Cor. 6. 10. Raylers shall not in herit the Kingdom of God.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Chard. 1589.

To the Christian Reader.
OF late, perusing certain writings which lay by me, it was my good hap to
light upon one which was full welcome: both for the profit which presently I
reaped in reading of that, which before time I had heard, as also in regard
of these our days: wherein, if ever in any former age, these, or such like most
learned and godly instructions, are more then necessary. The treatise is not
long, and therefore I mind not to make any recapitulation thereof: and the
rather too, because I would be loath to dismember that, which so learnedly and
so methodically is conioined together. Only this in general, that it meets
with a kind of bad people, who were budding and sprouting up then, but since
in respect of their outrageous demeanor, both to God, and man, without all
compass. For proof hereof, let the lewd and shameless libels speak, of late
set out.

But herein they express the ancient and old disturbers of the Church, who
dealt in such manner with their Bishops then, as they do now. The quality of
these men at this time, shall not be particularized by me. Although if we would
do as their manner is, that is, to cull out me^ by name, and make legendes of
them, without either fear of God, love of brother, or care of religion,
perhaps they might be made to blush, as well as others. But that course is
vile, and hardly (if at all) will we be drawn to the practice thereof. And
yet let Ireneus say what he felt by them, and thought of them. They are cruel
(says he) they have not the love of God, they seek their own glory, rather
then the peace of the Church: for every small cause they divide and cut in
sunder the glorious body of Christ, as much as in them lies, they have peace
in their mouths, and war in their hearts, they strain at a gnat, and swallow
up a Cammell.

Nazianzen writes, that the like kind of People also troubled the Church in
his time, and that such were then of diverse accounted the godliest, which did
most spitefully slander their brethren, and scornefully use other. Omnes
(says he) per hoc docti et Catholici volumus videri, si alios reprehendimus
and impios iudicamus: that is, we do all now a days, by finding fault with
others, and accounting them ungodly, procure to our selves an opinion of
learning and religion. The rest of the ancient Bishops were in the same
taking, as it is manifestly to be seen in their writings, especially, in
Ambrose, Athanasius, Jerome, Basil, Augustine, and many others. The learned of
our age, have likewise tasted of this cup. Calvin writes that these kind of
me^, did more slander him, rail upon him and revile him, then did the open
enemies the Papists: yet that he was therewith so continually exersiced, that
he made no account thereof. And so Chris. as if he had lived in Caluins time.
Non tanta ab infidelibus conuitia and probra, quanta ab his qui ^obis
iunctireligione videntur, fidelibus iaci videbit aliquis: that is: A man may
easily see, that the faithful do not bear so many slanders, and reproaches at
the hands of the infidels, as they do of such, as seem to be professors of
the same religion. It is therefore no marvel, though some in these days
tread in the steps of their predecessors. But for my part, I am fully
persuaded, that these worthy and godly Fathers, who of long time before, (and
of late most straungely) have been thus set upon, may and do, in the testimony
of a good conscience, say with Call. I am pridem ad eiusmodi probra, quibus and
Prophetas, and Apostolos, and vnigenitu^ dei filium obnoxios esse video,
continuo vsu obdurui: that is, long since have I bin hardened against such
slanders, from which, neither the Prophets, neither the Apostles, neither yet
the only begotten son of God, could be clear and free. In a word, let the
civil magistrates look to themselves. Let them call to mind, how the
Anabaptists did first deal so with the ministers of the word, and afterward,
both with words and blows, fell likewise upon them. As for the most reverend,
and godly learned member of our Church, the author of this sermon, upon who^
they yawne most, and snatch at, without all modesty or truth: I know in
respect of himself, he makes small reckoning of their doings, which in truth,
are too too odious and intemperate; yea sorry he is, and sorry again, that
Martyn and his Martynistes, have given so great an offense to the Church of
God, and yielded to the common enemy so just occasion of Joy and Triumph.

Ad Titum tertio.
In the third Chapter to Titus. Admone eos vt Principibus and Potestatibus
subditi sint, vt Magistratibus pareant, vt ad omne opus bonum sint parati, ne
de quoquam maledicant, ne sint Pugnaces, etc. Warn them to be subject to rule
and power, to obey Magistrates, to be reddie to every good work. To blaspheme
no man, to be no fighters, etc.
WE have here to consider first what moved the Apostle thus to write to Titus,
and to command him to preach obedience to Magistrates, etc.

Secondly, we learn that obedience is necessary, and required of all
Christians. Thirdly, we may also note who they be that are disobedieut, and by
what notes, and qualities they may be known.

We read in the fifth of the Acts, of one. Judas of Galaley a troublesome.
person, who (as Josephus reports) taught that by the law of God, none ought
to be called Lord, but God himself, and that there was no obedience due to
civil Magistrates, no tribute due unto Caesar. Which doctrine of his was so
plausible, and so well liked of the common people, that they followed him in
great multitudes, and in the end grew into open Rebellion: Yea, it so
troubled the better sort among the Jews, even the Pharisees themselves, that
they began to doubt of the matter, and moved the question to Christ, whether
it were lawful to pa^ tribute to Caesar or not.

Hierome thinks yt this herisie was either not altogether extinguished in the
Apostles time, or began then to be revived: which he says to be the cause why
the Apostle wrote in this manner to Titus, and gave him in charge, that he
should admonish them to be obedient to Princes, etc.

And surely whosoever diligently reads and considers the writings of the
Apostles, shall well perceive, that they had much to do in their time to keep
men in due obedience to their Magistrates and Superiors. And therefore S. Paul
often, and S. Peter very earnestly exhorts Servant to obey their Masters,
Children their Parents, wives their Husbands, Subjects their Princes, and
Magistrates.

Now, if whiles the Apostels lived, and the Church was as yet in her
Uirginitie, the number of the Christians few, and the same under persecution,
this doctrine of obedience was thought so necessary to be taught: what shall
we think thereof in these our days, wherein all things are so corrupt, and
so far degenerated? For these are the times of which Christ speaks, when he
says, that Iniquity shall abound, Charity wax cold, and that there shall be
no faith among men. This is the time whereof the Apostle prophesies, when he
says. This know for a certain, that in the latter days shall come perilous
times. For men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, disdainful, proud,
cursed speakers, disobedient to their parents, false accusers, fierce,
traiterous, etc.

And likewise Peter and Jude, who prophesied that in the latter times should
come mockers walking after their own lusts, which separate themselves,
contemn Magistrates, and speak evil of them that are in auctortie.

Whereunto the saying of that ancient Father Lactantius very well agrees,
that toward the end of the world, laws shall be contemned, there shall be no
peace among men, no humanity, no obedience.

All which experience it self does sufficiently teach to be most true in
this our age. For when was there ever more disobedience, when greater contempt
of laws? Now it is tome to pass, that the doctrine of obedience, is loathsome
unto us, the teachers thereof accounted time seruers, flatterers, and I know
not what.

If it were ever true that Hierome writes, Quicquid licet, minus desideratur:
quicquid non licet, fomentum accipit desiderij: Whatsoever is lawful, is less
desired, what* soever is not lawful is wonderfully desired. or the common
proverb: Nitimur in vetitum, etc. We desire to do that which we are
forbidden. It is at this day most true.

Wherefore, we that are Preachers must now especially teach obedience.

The commandment of the Apostle is perpetual, and at this day most
necessary to be observed, and therefore we ought not to neglect it:
admonish them (says he) to be subject to Princes, etc.

The second is, that obedience is necessary 2.
and required of all; which may be proved by diverse reasons, especially by
four: by the express word and commandment of God; by the ordinance of
God; by the commodity that redounneth to the Subjects; through Princes and
Magistrates; and by the plagues and punishment, whereby those from time to time
have been plaged that were disobedient.

It is the first commandment of the second Table, that we should honor and
obey our Parents: where, by the name of Parents, (as all learned writers do
confess) not they only are comprehended that are our natural Parents, but
those also which have government and charge over us, as Princes, Magistrates,
and such like.

The people of God had always their Magistrates and governors, whom they were
commanded to obey by the word of God, yea sometimes when they were wicked and
infidels.

Christ paid tribute to Caesar, a manifest sign of subjection, and he
commanded that those things should be given unto Caesar which belong to Caesar.

S. Paul says, let every soul submit it self to the superior power, etc.
Romans 13.
And in the epistle to the Hebrews. Obey those which are set over you, and
Cap. 13.
give them place, for they watch for your souls. S. Peter likewise commands
obedience saying. Be ye subject 1. Pet. 2.
to every human ordinance, for the Lord, whether it be to the King, as to
the most excellent, etc. And the Apostle in this place, admonishes the^ to be
subject to Princes and powers, to be Ad Titu. 3.
obedient to Magistrates: whereby it appears, that obedience is commanded by
the express word of God, and therefore we must obey: S. Paul makes it a
matter of conscience, *and of necessity: it is no thing indifferent.

Now if Christ, Paul, and Peter so earnestly commanded obedience, when Princes
and Magistrates were as yet infidels and enemies* to Christ, is it not now
much more to be brged, when they be Christians? The people of God were
commanded to obey Nabuchadonozer, a heathen Prince, who had them in
captivity: Paul and Peter taught obedience when Nero lived, a cruel Tyrant,
and rather a monster then a man, and shall not we obey, command, and teach
obedience to her Majesty our natural Prince, a defender of the true Religion
of Christ, by whom also we enjoy so great liberty, peace, and abundance of
all things: God forbid that any man should once think, much less teach or
do contrary.

The second reason is, the ordinance of 2.
God, for Magistrates are appointed of GOD, and therefore in Scriptures are
called Gods? Dominatur excelsus in regno hominum, et cuicunque voluerit dabit
illud: The highest has power over the Kingdom of man, and gives it to
Daniel. 4. 14.
whom it likes him, Per me Reges regnant, says the spirit of GOD in the
proverbs: Et legum conditores iusta decernunt: per me Principes imperant, and
potentes decernunt iust^^iam Through Pro. 8. 15. 16.
me Kings reign, and Princes make just law. By me Princes bear rule, and
Noble men do judge the earth.

The Psalmist says, that promotion comes neither from the East Psalm. 75.
nor from the West, noryet from the South, because GOD is Judge himself, who
sets up one and casts down another. The Devil (says Ireneus) lied, when
speaking of the Matt. 4.
Kingdoms of the World, he said unto Christ: All these are mine, and I give
them to whom I will: Nam cuius iussu homines nascuntur, huius iussu and Reges
constituuntur. By whose commandment men are borne, even by his also Kings
are appointed. Saint Paul says, that there is no power but of God, and they
that do resist, resist the ordinance of God. Therefore whatsoever the men are,
good or bad, their power and authority is of God. Nocendi voluntas (says
Augustine) potest esse ab hominis animo, sed potestas non nisi a Deo. A will to
do harm may proceed from the will of man; but all power whatsoever is only
from God. GOD sometime suffers an hypocrite to reign for the iniquity of
the Pro. 28.
people: and for the sins of the land, Kingdoms often change their Princes.

Irenaeus affirms, that God does always send such Princes and Governors,
as are apt and meet for those which are governed, sometimes for their profit
and benefit, and sometimes for their punishment and correction. Bonus si
fuerit, qui tibi praeest, nutritor tuus est; August.
malus si fuerit, tentator tuus est: and nutrimenta libenter accipe, and in
tentatione approbare. If a good man have government over thee, the same is a
foster Father or Nurse unto thee: if a bad-man, he is one that does try
thee: accept willingly of the nourishment, and approve thy self in the trial.
So that Magistrates, be they good, or be they bad, must be obeyed, because they
are the ordinance of God, and by him placed and appointed.

The third reason, is, the commodity 3.
that redoundeth to the Subjects by having and obeying of Magistrates. S. Romans
13.
Paul says, that Princes are not fearful to those that do well, but to those
that do evil, etc. S. Peter like wise affirms, that Kings and Princes are
sent of GOD, to the punishment of 1. Pet. 2.
those that do evil, and to the praise and commendation of those that do
well. S. Paul exhorts us to pray for Kings, that we may lead under them a
quiet and a godly life: So that 1. Tim. 2.
Princes and Magistrates, are the cause and means of quietues and godliness.
Where there are no Magistrates, there is contention, strife, sedition, etc.
yea, oppression, and injury: for the mightier deuoureth and spoyleth the
weaker. Well says Chrysostom, Malum quide^ est vbi nullus est Principatus,
and multarum cladium haec res existit occasio, and confusionis, turbationisque
principium. Sicut enim si ex Choro ipsum Choriphaeum auferas, nequaquam
modulatus Chorus, vel ordinatus existit: and phalanx militum si ducem non
habeat, nullo modo numero acies illa, vel ordine procedit: and nauis si
gubernatore priuetur, pessum eat necesse est: and gregi si pastorem abstuleris
cunctus dispergetur and peribit: malum igitur est, vbi nullus est Principatus,
subuersionis quippe hoc est argumentum. It is passing ill where there is no
government, for that is the occasion of great harm, as also they beginning of
trouble and confusion. For even as, if you take from that Quire, their
Chaunter, the same will neither be in good tune, or good order: and so if a
band of Souldiars have not his Captain, it can in no case march on, either in
dew number, or decent order: and a Ship wanting his Pilot, must needs
miscarrie, and at length be sunk: also if a flock forgo his Sheppard, the
same necessarily must be scattered and so perish: Even so is it to them that
have no government: for that is to them, an argument of their ruin and
destruction. And again. Libertas dissoluta and moderamine carens, vbique mala
confusionisque causa est. Loose liberty not restrained by government, is
every where naught, and the cause of all confusion. Because equality (says
the same Author) engenders strife, nature it selse has appointed diverse
kinds of gouernements, as of the Master over the Servant, Parents over their
Children, Husbands over their Wives, Princes over their Subjects.

Vbi nullum est imperium, ibi nullus ordo: Nazian.
vbi multorum, ibi seditio: vbi autem non est or do, ibi iam ruinae ostium
patet. Where there is no government, there is no order: where many govern,
there is sedition: and where no order is, there a gap is opened to all
desolation. It is therefore euideut, that Magistrates are for the benefit and
commodity of those that are governed, and therefore must be obeyed.

The fourth reason is, the punishment 4.
of those that are disobedient. It is said in the Commandment, that those
which obey their Parents, shall have long life: then it must needs follow, that
the days of such as are disobedient, shall be shortened. It is Gods own law,
that Deu. 17. and 21 Iosu. 1.
such as disobey the commandment of the high Priest, of their Parents, or of
the Magistrate, shall die the death. The horrible destruction of Corah and his
companions, whom the earth for their disobedience, swallowed up quick, shows
how grievous a thing it is in the sight of God to disobey: So does likewise
the example of Absolon, Achitophell, and diverse others. Read the Histories,
sacred or profane, you shall plainly see, that disobedience to Magistrates,
was never or very sildome suffered to be unpunished. Experience it self does
teach so much. For mine own part, in inferior governments, I have sundry
times noted, that those, which have showed themselves contentious against their
Governors, have either never come to be Governors themselves, though they
have desired it, or else if they have attained thereunto, have received the
same measure. But howsoever disobedient persons in this world escape temporal
punishments, sure it is, that they shall not escape eternal in the world to
come, unless they repent. S. Paul says, That they which resist and disobey,
procure unto themselves damnation. And in another Romans 13. Gala. 5.
place, he reckons disobedient persons, among those which shall never come
into the kingdom of heaven. The Apostle Jude pronounces an everlasting woe,
against all those, which follow Corah in his co^tradiction and disobedience.
Well then, the word of God expresselie commands obedience: Magistrates are
appointed of God: it is profitable, and beneficial for us to have them: God
plagueth and punishes disobedient persons, therefore obedience is necessary,
and obey we must. So that this lesson of S. Paul may not be forgotten: you
must be content to hear it, It is our duty to preach it. The Apostle says:
Admone illos vt principatibus ac potestatibus subditi sint, etc. Warn them to
be subject to rule and power.

But now peradventure some will be desirous to know wherein obedience
consists. Obedience consists principally in these four things: first in
doing that which the Magistrate commands, and in observing of laws:
Secondly, in praying for the Magistrate: Thirdly, in fearing and honoring of
him: Fourthly, in paying unto him tribute. Touching the first, the Apostle
says here expresselye, that Titus must teach them to do the Magistrates
commandment. There are many that profess obedience in words, but deny it in
deed: they yield a certain general kind of subjection, but perform it not
in specialties. They grant (as the Schooleman says) Reuerentiam subiectionis,
but they deny, obedientiam iussionis: They grant reverence of subjection, but
deny, obedience to that which is commanded. Whereas they ought to perform
both. Why call you me Lord Lord (says Christ) and do not those things which I
command you? Not he which said he would do his Fathers commandment, and did
it not, was counted obedient, but rather he which said he would not do it,
and yet did it. And to what purpose serve either Magistrates or laws, if they
be not obeyed* Populus (says Chrysostom) non obsequens Principi, similis est
populo principem non habenti, imo etiam deterior, etc. That people that obeys
not the Prince, is like to them that have no prince, yea and woorsse too. And
again he says: Ne mihi dixeris esse regnum, vbi est legum transgressio.
Never say that to be a kingdom, where laws be neglected and broken. Regnum
amisisse videtur (says a Philosopher) qui obedientiam amisit. Solitudinis and
vastitatis Dominus esse videtur Rex ille, cuius dicto ciues non obediunt:
Desinunt esse Principes, quando qui parere debent, mandata spernunt. He seems
to me to have lost his kingdom, who has lost the obedience, dew unto him,
from his subjects. Nay the king seems rather to be a Lord of un inhabited and
desert places, whose subjects obey not at his command. Then kings leave of to
be Princes, when as such as ought to obey them, contemn their laws. Therefore
it is a principal point of obedience to observe laws, and to do that which is
commanded. But some peradventure will say: must we obey the Prince in all
things, he commands? Is there no exception* What if he command that which
is against Gods commaundment* The answer is easy and common. There is no
power given to any man (says Basil) either to command that, which God has
forbidden, or to forbid that, which God has commanded: therefore if any such
commandment happen to be, thou must answer with the Apostles in the Acts,
Acts. 4. and 5,
that it is better to obey God then men. But take this with thee also, which
Hierome notes upon this place: that this Rule does not only belong to that
obedience which is required in the Subject toward the magistrate, but in that
also which is required in Servants toward their Masters, in wives toward
their Husbands, and in Children toward their Parents: for neither must the
servant obey his master, nor the wife her husband, nor children their parents
in those things which are contrary to Gods commandments. And therefore
measure thy obedience toward the Prince and Magistrate, by that which thou thy
self requirest of thy servant, wife or children. Certain it is that thou must
obey Magistrates and Laws in all things, not contrary to the word of God.

The second point of Obedience is, to 2
pray for Magistrates. The people of Baruc. 1.
GOD being in captivity, were commanded to pray for the long life of the King
of Babylon, and of his son. S. Paul exhorts, that above all things,
prayers, supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men, for Kings and those that are in authori tie. Tertulian testifies, that
in his time the Christians in all their assemblies, prayed for the Emperors
and Potentates of this world.

The people of God were commanded to pray for Nabuchadonezer a foreign King
and a Tyrant. S. Paul exhorts to pray for Kings and Princes, 1 Timothy 2.
when they were (as Augustine not^eth) enemies to the Church of Christ.

The Christians in Tertulians time prayed for their Emperors and Magistrates
being persecutors, and shall not we pray, and exhort to pray for her
Majesty our natural Prince, merciful, Christian, and a constant defendor of
the true Religion of the Church of Christ? Here then is the Bishop of Rome
condemned, who is so far from praying for Princes, that he curses them, and
prays against them, if they displease him never so little. Likewise those
fantastical spirits are likewise here reproved, which dissalow and mislike
this manner of yerelie celebrating this day, (to give God thanks for the great
and wonderful benefits, which we enjoy thorough his goodness by the ministry
of her Majesty, whom it pleased him as this day five and twenty years to
place in the Throne of this Kingdom, and to pray unto him for her long life
and prosperity) as though we did it superstitiouslie, or dedicated the day
unto her, as to some Saint, whereas in deed we do but our duty, and that
which is most lawful for us to do. Mardocheus (as we read in the book of
Hester) without any express commandment of God ordained that the Jews
should year* lie celebrate and keep holy the foureteenth and fifteenth day
of the month Ader, in remembrance of the delivering of the Jews by the
ministry of Hester, from the blouddie conspiracy of Hammon. And is it not
lawful for us to celebrate this day, and to dedicate it unto God, which by the
ministry of Queen Elizabeth, has not only delivered us from the cruelty
and tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, but also opened unto us the door of his
Gospel, and as yet keeps it open, and has further given unto us that peace,
tranquillity and abundance of all things, that of all people in the world
we are thought to be the most happy, and as it were an astonishment to our
enemies? But let us not regard what they think or say, who either malign and
envy this our felicity, or are pleased with nothing which they themselves do
not devise. It is certain that this our sacrifice of praying and
thanksgiving, is most acceptable to God, and approved of al godly men: and I
most heartily beseech GOD, that we may continue this exercise in this manner,
and upon this occasion, even to the worlds end: and the Lord bless and
preserve her Majesty, increase the number of her friends, and convert or
overthrow all her enemies.

The third point wherein obedience 3
consists, is, in fearing and honoring of Magistrates. The wise man says, my
Pro. 24. Rom 13.
son fear God, and honor the King. S. Paul likewise wills that honor be
given to whom honor is due, and fear to whom fear is due. Likewise Saint
1. Pet. 2.
Peter says: Fear GOD, honor the King.

By fear and honor is comprehended not only the outward gesture of the
body, reverence of words, etc: but also the inward good will, and reverence
of the heart and mind, which especially is required of all subjects toward
their Princes and Magistrates. The Kingdom of the Persians continued very
long, and greatly increased. Isocrates says, that the chief and principal
cause thereof was, for that the Persians above all other nations, did most of
all fear, honor, and reverence their King. God grant that we may also
perform our duty in this point as we have just cause to do.

The fourth and last office of obedience 4
is, to help and relieve Princes and Romans 13.
Magistrates when need requires. Christ himself paid tribute to Caesar, and
the Apostle commands tribute to be given to whom tribute is due.

Obedience then consists in observing of laws, praying for the Magistrate,
fearing and honoring of him, and in paying unto him tribute. And thus much of
the second part. 3


In the third I have to declare who they be, that are disobedient, and offend
against this commandment of the Apostle.

There are three kinds of men guilty of disobedience. The Papist, the
Anabaptist, the conceyted and wayward person. The Papist restrains the
authority of the Magistrate, more then is convenient. The Anabaptist takes it
altogether away. The conceyted person obeys and disobeyeth at his pleasure.

The Papist restrayneth the authority of the Magistrate in two respects: in the
respect of persons, and in the respect of causes. For he denies the
Magistrate to have authority over Ecclesiastical persons, especially over
the Bishop of Rome: he denies him also to have authority in
Ecclesiastical causes: but this error is soon confuted. For, that he has
authority over Ecclesiastical persons, it is manifest, Christ himself being an
Ecclesiastical person, and the head of the Church was subject to Caesar, as I
have before declared. S. Paul says. Let every soul submit it self to the
Superior power: be exempteth none, and therefore Chrysostom expounding this
place says: Ista imperantur omnibus, and sacerdotibus and Monachis, non solum
secularibus etc: Etiam si Apostolus sis, si Euangelista, si Propheta, sieve
quisquis tandem fueris. These commandments are enjoined unto all, to
Priests, to Moonkes, and not to lay men alone, etc. yea though thou bean
Apostle, or Evangelist, or whatsoever else. Therefore Chrysostom does also
include the Pope in this precept of obedience. Peter, from whom the Pope
claymeth his Supremacy, speaking of the obedience due unto Kings, calls the
King most excellent, that is, above all others, and greater then all other:
neither does he exempt himself, much less those that claim to be his
successors. Colimus (says Tertulian) Imperatorem sic quomodo nobis conuenit,
and illi expedit, vt hominem a deo secundum, post quem primu^, ante omnes
homines, Deos. (...) was a Priest of the Church of Rome, and if he had known
or remembered the Pope to have bin above the Emperor, or equal unto him, he
would not have said, the Emperor had bin next unto God: the first after God,
and before all other men and Gods: Chrysostom says that the Emperor has no
peer upon earth, and calls him: Summitatem and caput omnium super terram
hominum. The chief and head of al men upon earth. Many of the Popes themselves
have acknowledged this superiority in the Emperors; for they have bin
complained of unto them: pleaded their causes before them, received judgment
by them, and yielded thereunto: as it is to be read in their own histories:
yea diverse Emperors have deposed diverse Popes from their Popedomes, as it is
also manifest in the same histories. One of their own Canonists says, that
the Emperor may require of the Pope an account of his faith. And Gratian
himself, where he does most of all exempt the Pope from the jurisdiction of
the Emperor, makes this exception: Nisi fuerit a fide deuius, aut in crimine
haereseos deprehendatur. Unless he be slid from the faith, or infected with
the sin of herresie. Therefore it is manifest that the Emperor has
authority over Ecclesiastical persons, even over the Pope himself. That he
has also authority in Ecclesiastical causes, it is easelie proved.

When I say that the Emperor or Civil Magistrate has authority in
Ecclesiastical causes, I mean not as the Papists, and some other maliciously
cavil, that he has authority to execute Ecclesiastical functions, proper
to the ministers of the word, as to preach the Gospel, to minister the
Sacraments, to consecrate bishops and such like, which was never given to any
civil Magistrate, neither yet did any Chrystian Prince take it upon him. But
by authority in Ecclesiastical causes, I mean that it appertains to the
Office and duty of the Civil Magistrate to see the commandments of God
observed, true Religion mayntained, every man in the Church to do his duty,
and to provide that all things be done therein decently, and in order according
to the rule of the Apostles. That Christian Magistrates ought to have this
authority, it is notorious. For first, the custody of both Cables is committed
unto them, which they can not perform accordinglye, unless they have
authority in Ecclesiastical causes: The first Table containing things
merely Ecclesiastical.

The Prophet calls Kings the nursing fathers of the Church, and Queens the
nursing mothers: which title is given them in vain, if they have no authority
in matters of the Church.

All the good Kings and Magistrates of the old Testament, as Joshua, David,
Solomon, Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, etc. had and used this authority. For
they did not only rule over the Priests, but also prescribed unto them what
they should do in divine matters, as in Sacrifices, Circumcision, Blessings,
Cursings, dedication of the temple, casting down Idolatry, Idols, and such
like. Some of the Papists themselves confess, that the Kings of the old
Testament had this authority. That Christian Kings also had the same, it
appears by sundry examples. Elutherius, Bishop of Rome, who lived within
two hundredth years of Christ, writing to Lucius King of this land, calls
him Gods vicar within his kingdom, and says, that it pertayneth to his
duty, to make laws according to the word of God, for the government of his
kingdom, as well in matters of Religion, as in matters of policy. Eusebius
calls Constantine the great, quasi communem quendam Episcopum a Deo
constitutum: As a common Bishop appointed by God. And it is certain, that
the said Constantine did not only call the Council of Nice, but had herein
also the chief government and superiority* he compounded controversies
betwixt the Bishops: he prescribed unto them a rule, according to which, they
should judge matters then in question etc.

Justinian, and other godly Emperors, made laws concerning public prayers
in the Church, concerning the Trinity, Baptism, the Sacrament of the Supper,
Festival days, ordering of Bishops, against Heretics etc. Socrates says,
that since the Emperors were Christians, the matter of the Church, especially
depended upon them, and that the greatest councels were called by them.
Nabuchodonozer (says Augustine) when his heart was perverted, set up an
Image, and made a law for the worshipping thereof. But when his heart was
converted, he pulled it down, and made a law for the true worshipping of the
true God. In hoc enim (says he) Reges Deo seruiunt, sicut eis diuinitus
praecipitur, in quantum sunt Reges, si in suo regno bona iubeant, mala
prohibeant: non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad
diuinam religionem. In this behalf, Kings serve God (for so God commands
them* in that they are Kings) if in their kingdom they appoint good things, as
also forbid that which is naught: and this not only in those causes which
concern the outward Communion, and society of man's life, but also such, as
appertain unto Gods Religion and service. And again. Seruiunt Reges terrae
Christo, leges ferendo pro Christo. The Kings of the earth do serve Christ,
in making and appoynting laws for Christ. And writing against the Donatistes
(who granted and denied the authority of the Emperor, in causes
ecclesiastical, at their pleasure) he says. An forte de Religione fas non
est, vt dicat Imperator? cur ergo ad Imperatorem vestri venerunt legati? cur
eum fecerunt causae suae Iudicem? non secuturi quod ille iudicaret. Is it not
forsooth lawful for the Emperor to command, concerning causes of religion?
why then come your Ambassadors unto the Emperor? why did they apoynt him Judge
in their business, if they intended not to stand to his judgment? In the same
Book he writes that the Emperor made pecuniarie laws against those which
called themselves Christians, and yet did not communicate with the universal
Church, but gathered themselves together in private Conuenticles: which laws
although he sometimes misliked, yet upon better aduisement, he did not only
allow of them, but also thought them to be most profitable and necessary.

It appears therefore, that the Civil Magistrate has authority in
ecclesiastical causes, in manner and form as I have declared. And therefore
the Papists, in abridging this authority, must needs be found guilty of
disobedience. But I would to God it consisted herein only: it reaches further,
for when they list, they altogether take away the authority of the Magistrate.

The Bishops of Rome, usurp unto themselves power, to place and displace
Emperors and kings at their pleasure, to deliver their subjects from their
oath of obedience, to move them to rebel against them, and if that will not
serve, to suborne some priuilye and secretlye to murder them.

Pope Zachary, who lived seven hundred years and more after Christ, was the
first that took upon him that authority, but diverse afterward put it in
execution.

Gregory the seventh did not only excommunicate Henry the fourth, and
animated his subjects to revell against him, by delivering of them from their
oath of obedience, but when that would not serve, sought also ways and means
secretly to murder him, by hiring one to let a stone fall from the top of the
church upon the Emperors head as he was praying, but God prevented that
practice by punishing the murderer, and crushing him in pieces with the same
stone.

Paschalis the second continued the same course against the same Emperor, and
in the end caused his own Son to rebel against him. Alexander the third
dealt in like manner against Friderick the Emperor, and betrayed him to the
Turk. So did Innocentius the fourth with the Emperor in his time, and at the
length poisoned him. It were too long to rehearse all examples which might be
used in this matter: does not experience teach us, that they continue their
practice even at this time? The Lord defend her Majesty from them, and
confound their devises against her: Certain it is that they are enemies to
Princes, and guilty of disobedience.

The second kind of men, offending against this precept of the Apostle, are 2.
the Anabaptists, who think it not lawful for Christians either to be
Magistrates, or to obey Magistrates, grounding themselves upon that which the
Apostle writes in the fifth to the Galathians. Stand in the liberty wherein
Christ has made you free, etc, and such like places, forgetting that which
follows in the same Chapter. Take heed you make not your liberty an occasion
to the flesh: whereby it appears that Christian liberty is not of the flesh,
but of the spirit: not of the body, but of the mind: not of freedom from
being subject to men, but from subjection to sin and to death. Lex spiritus
vitae (says the Apostle) liberum me reddidit a iure peccati and mortis. The
law of the spirit of life through Jesus Christ, has made me free from the
law of sin and death. Romans 8. 2. Christ himself obeyed the Civil Magistrate.
Peter and Paul command Christian Servants, Children, Wives, and Subjects, to
obey their Masters, Parents, Husbands, and Magistrates. The Gospel does not
destroy commonwelthes, but establishes them. And Christian religion takes
from no man that, which is due unto him. Therefore the opinion of the
Anabaptists is of it self absurd, and needs no confutation.

The third kind is of those that are 3
conceited, and wayward, who only obey when they list, wherein they list, and
so long as they list: men delighted with singularity, whom nothing can
please, but that which themselves do invent. Of whom the Apostle S. Peter
speaks, when he says. Dominationem contemnunt, audaces, praefracti, qui
gloria praecellentes 1. Pet 2.
non verentur maledictis incessere. They despise authority, they are
presumptuous, and stand in their own conceit, which fear not to speak evil
of them that excel in worship. They contemine Lordship and Superiority. He
says not that they condemn Lordship and Superiority, but that they contemn
it, being bold, wilful, and froward, which are not afraid to speak evil of
those that are in authority.

The Apostle Jude in like manner writes of them in his Epistle. S. Paul gives
unto them these titles. Lovers of 2. Tim. ^^.
themselves, disdainefull, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient, unthankful,
calu^niators, fierce, rash, heddie, having a form of godliness, but denying
the force thereof: they creep into houses, living at other men's tables:
specially into women's houses laden with sin, always learning, and never
stayed in any opinion. S. Augustine also speaks of these kind of men, when
he says. Non iam (vt vetus prouerbium fertur) quod volumus* sanctum est, sed
etiam quando volumus, and quam diu volumus. Not now (as the old Proverb is) is
that holy which we fancy to be holy, but the same also, when we fancy, and
so long as we fancy. For nothing is holy, but that which they will have to be
holy, and that when they will have it holy, and as long as they will have it
holy, and not otherwise. I my self do know and am able to prove, that some
things are now holy (in their judgment) which before they compted unholy, and
likewise something now to be unholy, which heretofore they have set down to
be holy. But these are holy ones, and may not be touched. Therefore I will
cease to speak any more of their persons, and come to the qualities, and
notes whereby they and al other disobedient persons may be discerned and known.

It follows in the Apostle: admonish them that they speak evil of no man,
that they be not contentious. And the Apostle Jude, speaking of disobedient
persons; says, they are murmurers and quarrilous, whereby I gather that there
are two notes, by the which disobedient persons may be known: Evil and
slanderous speaking, and contention: else the Apostle would not have given
Titus special charge, to warn disobedient persons of these two crimes. Well
then, those that are disobedient, may be known by their evil speaking of
Magistrates, and by contending against orders and laws. Touching the first:
the nature of man it self, is prone and bent to speak evil of two kinds of
persons principally: of those which have government in the Church, as of
Bishops, Preachers, etc. And of those which have government, in the common
wealth, as of Princes and Magistrates: the devil also provoking thereunto. For
by speaking evil of the one, the Religion that they profess and preach, is
slaundered, the good success of the Gospel hindered, and by speaking evil of
the other, contempt of superiors is wrought in the hearts of the subjects,
whereupon springs all disobedience.

That Bishops and preachers, and such as have government in the church, have
been always subject to the slanderous tongues of disobedient persons, it
appears by the example of Christ him self, who though he never offended
either in life or doctrine, yet could he not avoid the malitiousnes of the
tongue. They called him Samaritane, they said he had a devil: they accused him
for keeping John. ^.
company with Publicans and sinners. Therefore in purging of himself, he faith
not, which of you accuses me of sin, but which of you can convince me of
sin. Neither does S. Paul require that a Bishop should not be blamed, but
that he should be blameles: and admonishes Timothy, that he receive not
against a Bishop or minister, any accusation without two or three witnesses. It
has been the lot of Bishops, etc. at all times to be ill spoken of. Basil
says, that in his time, whosoever could rail most of the Bishops in their
sermons, (as many young Preachers then did) were best liked of the people, and
coumpted most perfect, and most holy. Nazianzen complained, that the state and
condition of Bishops in his time was far worse, then the condition of the
Apostles in their time. For they were a gazing stock to Angels and men only:
to men (says he) of the better sort, to Princes, Magistrates, etc. But we,
(meaning Bishops) are a common spectakle, and talking stock to Angels and men;
but to men of the basest sort, to the common people, to men unworthy. They
rail upon us in every place, in the streets, in the Tauerns, in their
feasts, standing at their doors: yea they bring us upon the stage, and the
very Players jest of us. This says Nazianzen.

The same complaint makes Chrysostom like wise, so does Jerome and other of
the ancient (...), which is soine comfort unto us who live in these days, and
receive the same measure. But I will leave off to speak any more concerning
our selves, and commit our cause to him that judges justly, and knows the
secrets of the heart: before whom I summon to appear all those blasphemous
tongues, which cease not continually to slander us, there to answer me,
and others of my brethren, when it shall please him to call us all to an
account, unless they shall in the mean time repent.

I will in a word or two declare how heinous a crime it is, to speak evil of
Magistrates: God does exp^esselie forbid Ex. 22. 27. Eccles. 10.
it. Dijs non detrahes, and Principi populi tui non maledices. Thou shall not
rail upon the Gods, neither blaspheme the ruler of thy people. Thou shait not
(says the Preacher) speak evil of the King, no not in thy thought: neither
shall thou slander the rich man in thy privy chamber. For the birds of the
Apre shall bewray thee, etc. God so abhors the speaking evil of Kings and
Princes, that he will not have it kept secret, though it be spoken never Number.
12.
so secretly. Marie, Moses sister was smitten with Leprosy, because she
murmured against her Brother. If Marie (says Chrysostom) was so punished for
murmuring against her brother, and that but once, how can thou escape
scotfree, which daily railest against thy Prince and Governor.

He that speaks evil of Father and Mother, by the law of God ought to die.
If those (says Chrysostom) that speak evil of their Parents, by Gods law
are punished with death, what judgment art thou worthy of, who dare speak
evil of him, which is to be preferred before Father and Mother, meaning the
Magistrate?

God said to the sinner, as the Psalmist Psalm ^0.
reports: Why do thou preach my laws, and take my Testimony in thy
mouth, etc. And showing the cause why he would not have him to preach his
laws (he says) Sedens aduersus fratrem loquebaris. Thou sitting speak
against thy brother. Now (says Chrysostom) if God by his own voice pronounce
him unworthy to preach his laws, and to profess his word, which speaks
only against his Brother, shall we think him worthy to preach, or count him
a professor, which speaks evil of Magistrates.

The wise man speaking of all slaunderers, Pro. 24.
says, that they are to be abhorred of men. David says, that he will
persecute him that slaundreth his neighbor. The Law pronounces him to be
accursed which backbiteth his neighbor. S. 1. Cor. 6.
Paul places backbiters and slaunderers among those that shall never enter
into the kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle Jude writes in his Epistle, that
Michaell the Archangell, when he contended with the devil about the body of
Moses, did not give unto him any railing speech: Michaell the Archangell did
not rail upon the devil, no not to his face. Then they that rail upon
Princes and Magistrates, not to their face, but behind their backs, are no
Archangels, nay, they are no Angels, nay, they are devils. For the devil was
the first Calumniator, as his name testifies, and is the father of backbiters
and slaunderers, even as he is of liers. Certain then it is, that back biting
and slaundering is an horrible crime, and a manifest sign of disobedience. And
therefore Peter and Jude join them together, saying, they contemn
superiority, and are not ashamed to speak evil of those which are in
authority. And the Apostle in this place to his precept of obedience, like
wise joins this, that they speak evil of no man, as though he should say,
if they speak evil of men, they cannot be obedient.

The second note is Contention. For 2.
the Apostle adds: admonish them that they be not contentious.

Contentious persons cannot be but difobedient: for they are proud. Pride
engendereth contempt: contempt brings forth disobedience. And proud persons
are ever contentious. Inter superbos semper iurgia. Among the proud, there is
ever strife. Prou. 13. 10. And again: Homo peruersus suscitat rixas. A froward
body causes strife* Prou. 16. 28. Contention of it self is such an evil,
that it is sufficient alone to make a man wicked, though he seem otherwise 1.
Corin. 3.
to be never so holy. So long as there is amongst you (says the Apostle)
emulation, contentions, and factions, are you not carnal, and walk according
to the flesh: And in the epistle to the Galathians, Gala. 5. Iam. 3.
he places contention among the works of the flesh. S. James says, that
where contention and emulation is, there is trouble and every evil work:
Jude says, that those which separate themselves (meaning coutentious persons)
follow their own lusts. S. Paul secludeth those that are contentious from the
Church, only because they are contentious. If any man be contentious amongst
11 Cor. II.
you (says he) we have no such custom, neither yet the Churches of God: as
though he should say, a man can not be contentious, and of the Church of God.

Chrysostom says, that the name of the Church, is a name of consent and
concord, and that therefore, they that are contentious, and make division, can
not be Li. de ^nit. ecclesia.
said to be of the church. Augustine affirms, that though a man do believe
all the Articles of the Christian faith according to the Scriptures, yet if he
do not communicate with the unity of the church, but break the peace thereof,
he is not of the Church. And again, that whosoever so commends himself to
the people, that he causes them to follow him, and thereby makes division in
the Church, In. psalm 75.
non est de illis montibus in quos illuminat altissimus. Is not of those hills
which In cap. 4. ad Ephe.
the highest God gives light unto.

Chrysostom affirms, that it is no less crime to make division in the
church, then it is to fall into heresy. Therefore horrible is the crime of
contention and yet is it oftentimes colored and cloaked by the name and title
of religion, of zeal, and of perfection. So has it bin in times past, and so
is it at this day. Irenaeus speaking of contentious persons writes thus:
Propter modicas and quaslibet causas, magnum and gloriosum corpus Chr.
conscindunt and diuidunt, and quantu^ in ipsis est, interficiunt: pacem
loquentes, and bellum operantes: vere liquantes culicem, and camelum
transglutientes. For Lib. 4. cap. 62.
mean matters and every trifle, they divide and tear in pieces, yea, and as
much as in them lies, they kill too, the great and glorious body of Christ:
They talk of peace, and practice war: Even such they are, as strain at a
gnat, and swallow up a cammell. Nazianzen, like wise speaking of the same
persons, says thus: Spirituales isti fastuosi, iudicantes singulos, and
condemnantes, and pro nihilo omnia ducentes, si ita libuerit, abcedunt
communionem nostram velut impiam recusantes. These spiritual proud men,
judging and condemning al but themselves, and accounting of every thing too
too lightlye, when they are so disposed, with-drawe themselves from our
company, and refuse it as ungodly and wicked. And again: Qui ingentes rixas
mouent ex rebus vel sermonibus paruis, veletiam non diuinis sed humanis motibus
incitati, sibi quam plurimos asciscunt insaniae suae socios, dum contentioni
atque insolentiae suae, magnificum and venerabile omnibus fidei nomen imponunt,
faedissimae inte^tionis suae causam, honest issimi huius vocabuli specie
colorantes. Such as be occasioners of great braules, by reason of some things
or words of small moment, or else moved thereunto not by godly, but worldly
motions, they draw unto themselves companio^s to their madness, while they
ascribe to their contention and pride, the excellent and reverend name of
faith, thereby shadoing the cause of their beastly purpose, with the visor of
this holy and most good name. And again: Nos inuicem impugnamus, dum videmur
nobis nimis Catholici, nimis and fideles, and zel^ Dei excitari, sed non sicut
expedit, and lex certaminum continet. We gainesay and cross one another,
whilst we seem to our selves too Catholic, and too faithful, and to be
stirred up by the zeal of God, but we do not as it is behoofefull, neither
as the law and order of contention does allow. Hierome likewise speaking of
the same persons says thus. Aurem populi mulcent, and quicquid dixerint, legem
Dei putant. They curry favor with the people, and therefore what they say, is
thought of them to be the word of God. To be short, Chrysostom says, that
those which divide the church, least they should seem to do it for contentions
sake, glory that they teach more perfect things, and that they are wiser then
others.

Whether these sayings of the ancient Fathers may aptly he applied to those
that make contention in the Church at this day or no, I refer it to the
judgment of such as be indifferent. Howsoever it is, contention is the plague
and pestilence of the Church, and of the Commonwealth likewise. Every kingdom
divided in it self, comes to decay, and every house divided in it self,
will be made desolate, as Christ says.

Nazianzen compares the Church, troubled with contention, to a ship upon the
Sea, tossed with waves and winds, and in danger of enemies, where in the
Mariners disagree amongst themselves, and will not follow the advice and
commandments of their master and Governor.

The same Nazianzen compares contentious persons to mad men, who oftentimes
set their own houses on fire, thinking them to be other men's: and smite their
own Parents, supposing them to be their enemies.

Basil likeneth the Church rent with contention, to the City Jerusalem when
it was besiedged by Titus and Vespasianus: for it had enemies without, and it
was divided within: and therefore the end was destruction. And is not this our
state at this time? Are we not compassed about with enemies abroad? and do we
not contend amongst ourselves within? etc: well then, let us at the length leave
of contending, and live in peace, one with another. The wise man says, Honor
Prou. 20.
est homini, qui seperat se contentionibus. It is an honor to a man to
separate himself from contentions. It is no honor for any man to maintain
contentions. Peace is the thing yt Christ commanded to his Disciples. Have
Salt in you, and have peace one with another. Christ joins salt and peace
together. Sal sine pace (says an ancient Father) non est virtutis donum, sed
damnationis argumentum. Salt without peace, is not the gift of virtue, but an
argument of condemnation. Peace and love is the liuerie that Christ gives
unto his Servants: Hereby shall all men know (says he) that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another. It is the legacy he bequeathed unto them
in his last will and Testament. My peace I give unto you. My peace I give unto
you. My peace I leave unto you. Double peace, peace of conscience, and peace
amongst your selves. The Anabaptists were wont to allege for the maintenance
of their contentions, that saying of Christ, I came not to send peace into the
world, but the sword: whereunto they have been long since annswered, the
meaning of Christ there to be, that he came to divide the faithful from
Infidels, and not to divide the faithful amongst themselves. S. Paul does
earnestly Philip. 2.
exhort to this unity and peace: If there be any exhortation in Christ
(says he) if there be any comfort of love, if there be any communion of
the spirit, if there be any pity or compassion, fulfill my joy, that ye
think one thing, that ye love one another, that ye agree amongst your
selves, that nothing be done by contention or vain glory, but thorough
modesty of mind, let one think another to excel him. And in the Epistle to
the Hebrews: Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and good
works, not leaving our mutual society, as the manner of some is: but let us
exhort one another, and so much the rather, because the day is at hand: and
the Apostle in this place commands Titus to admonish them, that they be not
contentious. I would to God these exhortations of Christ and of his Apostles,
could any thing move us. etc

FINIS.

