TWO SHORT TREATISES, AGAINST THE Orders of the Begging Friars, compiled by
THAT FAMOVS DOCTOVR OF THE CHVRCH, and Preacher of Gods word JOHN WICKLIFFE,
sometime fellow of Merton, and Master of Ballioll Coll. in Oxford, and
afterward Parson of Lutterworth in Lecestershire.

Faithfully Printed according to two ancient Manuscript Copies, extant, the one
in Benet College in Cambridge, the other remaining in the Public Library at
Oxford.

Eccles. Chap. 44. verse. 8. There are of them, that have left a name behind
them, so that their praise shall be spoken of. At Oxford, Printed by Joseph
Barnes, printer to the University. 1608.

Faults escaped in the printing of these Treatises against the Friars.
Page 1. l. 10. seet, read set. p. 2. l. 27. still, read skill. p. 13. l. 31.
lawfully, read lawful. p. 17. l. 3. Famulororum, read Famulorum. p. 21. l. 14.
if this, read this p. 25 in the Title for. oderrs, read orders. p. 29. l. 14.
yea, read the. p. 29. l 16. then, read them page 33. l. 7 them* read* then, p.
33. l. 20. needful, read. meedfull. p. 40. l. 18. last, read least he. p. 47
l. 16. so, read tho. p. 50. l. 27. si, read is. p. 50, l 29. bidden read
binden, p. 58. l. 16. sinfnll* read sinful.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE my singular good Lord, Sr THOMAS FLEMYNGE Knight, Lord
Chief Justice of England.
RIght Honorable and my good Lord, being tied unto your Lordship with those
bonds, which to recount in particular, were to exceed the bounds of an Epistle,
as first for my election into that famous Seminary of good learning near
Winchester, secondly for my better promotion into that enermore justly to be
called Inde value ex Equo Troiano, vi ri omni te^pore, virtute excelle^tes
prode u^t Polyd. Virg Hist. Angl. l. 19. p. 381.
New College in Oxford (two most honorable foundatio^s of one sole Founder
William of VViccham) lastly for my exceeding great hopes and farther
incourageme^ts in the Ministry; all which kind favors, as I acknowledge them
to have proceeded only, or especially by your Lordships means, so in a
thankful remembrance thereof, accept I beseech you these two small Treatises
ensewing, as pledges of my duty, and the mere Interest of that Honor which is
due unto your Lordship, and has been of a long time (Iconfesse) unpaid, but
not vnreme^bred wherefore, having not as yet any thing of mine own store
worthy the bestowing, I have borrowed these few lines from one, that is rich in
this kind: whose soul I trust is with God, his fame with the world, and his
bones had rested in the grave, had not the restless malice of his cruel
adversaries herein exceeded, by taking, or rather raking them up out of the Sea
the decree of the Council of con stance, and the Execution in ^ox
grave, after he had quietly slept in the Lord, for the space of 41. years;
committing them to the mercy of two merciles Elements, Fire and Water; And as
if this cruelty had not s^iced to aswage there blood thirsty appetites,
Council must be called upon Council, Bishops, Archbishops, See Walsingham*
page 188. Lib. memo rabilium ex done Nic. H^re Atm^ ger^
and lastly the Popes Sanctity must be consulted, about the utter rooting out,
and abolishing of his name, and doctrine from amongst the memory of men, and
hereupon letters are sent in all post haste from the Bishops unto the
Walsingham. Ib page 204.
Pope, from the Pope to the king, from the king to the Archbishop, and from
both king Pope and Archbishop unto the Ib p. 306. Pope Gregory ^ent a Bu^e by
(...)* breathing out th^eats against the University for ^uffering Wickli^es
opinions to take so deep (...) aduen^us dicti (...) nun^ij d^u in pendu^o,
haerebant, vt^um papalem Bul^m (...) honor^ reciper^ velomnino cum dedecore
refutare. Walsing. p. 200 (...) ^undry other Bulls against him Ib.
Chancellor of Oxford, and last of al to make the matter more sure* the high
Court of Parliament is summoned wherein his articles being before condemned,
must needs be published and recorded; But man Ipse consilium eo^u^ d^ssipauit,
qui perdit sapientium sapientiam and prudentium prud^ tiam ^eprobat solo nutu
Wal^* words retorted page* 218.
purposes, and God disposes, for behold that God which sits on high,
laughed the^ to scorn frustrated their bloody designements, preserved his
painful and learned works, to stop the mouths of lying The Apology of the
Roman Church is divided into three several tracts whereof the second is this
that the Protestants Religion was not so much as in being at* or before Luthers
first appear ing. See the Title page This is a m^st manifest^ (...)
Pamphleters which write that our Religion is nothing else but a new and
vpstart doctrine, scarsly ever heard of before Luthers time, the sharpnes of
which objection (if there be any edg in it I have rebated in another Treatise
dedicated unto an other very Honorable Judge of this land, of your ^ordships
near acquaintance Iudicia^ sit pene^ lectorem* where I have demonstrated most
clearly, to the eye, (as they say) the fondnes and vanity of Father Par^ons
in his 3* Conuers. Part* 2 page 487. The Apol. Tract. 2. Cap 2. page 105.
Parsons, and our Pseudo-Catho like Apologists calumniations, both against the
parson of Wickliffe, and doctrine of our Catho* like Protestant Religion:
accusing the one of foul heresies, and monstrous absurdities, and appealing the
other of manifest newnes and new-fa^glene^* I have (as I trust) freed both from
that unjust and slanderous imputation, in the judgment of the indifferent
reader: for others that stand popishl^, indeed sottishlie affected, in the
Romish religion, from whom a man shall not be able to wring any other answer
but this, we know that we are in the right and you are in the wrong (I am
affraide) I shall not be able to satisfy non si persuasero no, not when I have
persuaded them. But to let them pass, and to excuse my self unto your
Lordship, why amongst so many Scholastical Treatises by him written, which are
with us extant, I should choose rather to publish these two small Books,
taken out of his popular discourses, and those pe^ned (as it should seem) not
long after his first open manifestation of his mislike with their noted
corruptions and abuses. The motives or inducements were these: first because
these Treatises are short and entire of them selves: secondly because our He
with his Disciples went barefooted and basely clothed, in course russet
garments -- ad^oined himself to the beging Friars, approving their poverty
and extolling their perfection Apol. Tract. 2. Cap. 2, page 106. Wickliffe
himself sai eth, he went too well apparelled, rather the^ otherwise consumendo
bona pauperum in excessiuo victu and vestitu De Ver. Scrip. page 192. and
persecuting the begging Friars more then any man of his rank place or time.
Woodeford in a Ms. Treatise in defense of the orders of Friars obiecteth too
great excess of apparel unto his followers.
Adversaries, whose forheads are tenderer then other men's, shame not to write
and cite Wickliffe for one of the order of the Begging Friars, adioining
himself unto that Sect, approving there poverty, and extolling there
perfection: which notorious untruth, is confuted in every page and passage
almost of these Two Books: lastly I have chosen rather to publish somewhat of
this argument, in regard of your Lordships utter detestation of all Jesuitical
Friars, and Friarlike Jesuits. For what is spoken of the one, mutato nomine may
well be understood of the other, and what is intended against the Friars, may
truly be extended unto the Jesuits, they are so like in hypocrisy, blasphemy,
treacheries, treasons, lyings, and damnable Equivocations. And as Tales
potentes in Clero* ^siue personae simplices Collegiat^ aggregatae, quae
religionem Christi dissip ant sub pallio sanctitatis vel punien tur hic per
praepositos suos, aut laicos; vel destruentur per vastrationes hostiles; vel
congrega^t facino^a in vltionem diuini iudicij, dicente Apostolo Romans 2
Existimas autem o homo etc -- Est enim dare mensuram in scelera vsque ad* quam
opo^tet vltionem diuini iudicij expectare. De Verit. Scrip page 432 433.
John Wickliffe prophesied of the Friars, that in short time their great
Monasteries, (their great sins so requiring it, when the measure of their
iniquities should be complete and full,) would come to great confusion and
desolation: so of that other Sect is there a prophecy extant of a Arias
Mon^anas praefatione praefixa Bib^iis Interlinearibus, sublata sunt haec verba
in quibusdam edit, contra eos qui soli sapere soli been viuere Iesumque propius
insequi sibi videantur, atque id palam professi iactitent. Atque hi (inquit)
quod neminem qui alias been audiat, palam improbare audent, aliorum quos ad eam
rem occulte inducere possunt ingenijs and nominibus abutuntur. Horum aut (...),
^ec arts fallunt, nec gregem prodere aut cognomen indica^e iuuat: vtuntur
quidem il^i ma^no and inaccessibile ad suas agendas res mysterio, sed quod
faci^e ijs qu^ si^plicius (...) agere volunt pelluceat: quodque non post multos
annos tandem aperiendum est (...) illius qui illuminabit abscondita cordis, and
occulta tenebrarum, tunc laus erit vnicuique secundum opera sua.
man very famously learned, that in short time these counterfeit Jesuits, would
be unmasked, their vizors pulled of from their faces, and there knaueries and
treacheries discovered unto the whole world. For my particular I neither wish
nor prophecy there final destruction, only the downe-fall and ruin of that
damned Sect, is that which I profess I do aim at, and to use Against the
order of Friars page 22.
VVickliffs words to save there persons and destroy their errors. Wherefore,
fearing lest too many of all sorts of men should be bewitched with this
Circean Sect, I have presumed to offer up these few lines, as it were so many
warrants to be signed by your Lordships hand, and sent abroad into all parts
of this land, that by virtue of them, me^might either apprehe^d, or amend the^,
take the^, or take heed of the^. What should I trouble your Lordship any
farther, Wickliffe has not as yet wanted a There was one William James a
great Follower of Wickliffe. Vir vtique pulchrae literaturae, and elegantis
facundiae* Walden. To. 2. p. 47.
James to follow and embrase his doctrine, nor your Lordship a divine to honor
you and your most honorable Profession; professing my self to have learned of
this Vide lib. Ms De exposit. 10. Mandat in sine libri. Heagreeth fully with my
L Cook in his 5. book of reports and the book De fundamentis legum Angliae in
defe^se of the Kings Regaltie.
Doctor of the Evangelical truth (as I find him by Papists styled) to make
more account and use of the Common Law of this la^d. And thus craving pardon
of your Lordship for having so long detained you from grea ter businesses of
the Common wealth, committing both him and my self unto your Lordships pro
tection, I end, wishing unto your Lordship, and to your virtuous Lady my derest
Sister, with all yours endless comforts both of this life, and of that other to
come From the Public Library in Oxford. Feb. 10. 1608.

Your Lordships in all Christian duty. THO: JAMES.

A COMPLAINT OF JOHN Wickliffe, exhibited to the King and Parliament.
PLease it to our most Noble and most Worthy King Richard, king both of England
and of France, and to the Noble Duke of Lancastre, and to other great men of
the Realm, both to Seculars and men of Holy-church, that been gadered in the
Parliament, to hear, assent and maintain the few articles, or points that been
seet within this writing, and proved both by authority and reason, that
Christen faith, and Christian religion ben increased, maintained, and made
stable; since our Lord Jesu Christ, very God and very man, is Head and Prelat of
this religion, and shed his precious heart blood, and water out of his side on
the cross, to make this religion perfect and stable, and clean without error.

The first Article.
The first Article is this: that al persons of what kin, private sects, or
singular religion made of sinful men, may freely withoute^ any letting, or
bodily peine leave that private rule, or new religion founden of sinful me^,
and stably hold the rule of Jesu Christ taken and youen by Christ to his
Apostles, and for more profit than any such new religion fou^den of sinful
men. The reason of this axing is showed this, thus. The rule of Jesu Christ
yoven to Apostles, and kept of them after Christ's Ascension, is most perfect to
be kept for state of living in this wordle, and each rule of what kin, private
sect, or singular (...) of sinful men, is less perfect tha^ the rule (...) of
Christ of his endless wisdom, and his endless (...) kind; therefore it is
leueful to each (...) of this singular religion and profession, to leave it
clea^e fast to the rule of Jesus Christ, as more (...). This rule is plain to
each man of wit and discretion, and namely to Clerks: since men of the Popes law
witnesse^h plainly, that a man may lawfully, yea against his Soverains will go
fro the less perfect religion, to the more perfect. Why than may not a man of
private religion, forsake that, and take Christ's clean religion without error
of any sinful fool, as most perfect; and that Christ's rule in his own
cleannes and freedom is most perfect, is showed by this skill. For in as much as
a Patro^ or a Fou^der, is more perfect, more mighty, more witty, and more
holy, and in more charity than is an other Patron or Fou^dour; in so much is
the first Patro^s rule better and more perfect than is the second patrons rule.
But Jesu Christ Patron of Christen religion youe^ to Apostles, passes
withouten measure in might, wit and good will or charity, the perfection of
every Patron of any private sect or singular; therefore his rule is more
perfect. Also, that Christ's clean religion without clow^ng of sinful men's
errors is most perfect of al, is showed by this still. For other Christ might
give such a rule most perfect for this life to be kept, and would not, and than
he was envious, as Af Austin proves in other matters, or else Christ would
ordain such a rule, and might not, and than Christ was vnmighty; but it is
heresy to affirm that on Christ; or else Christ might, and couth, and would
not, and than he was vnwittie; but that is heresy, an no man should suffer to
hear. That there fore Christ both might, and could, and would ordain such a
rule most perfect, that ought to be kept for state of this life, and so Christ
of his endless wisdom and charity ordained such a rule, and so on each side men
been needid up peine of heresy and blasphemy, and of damning in hell to
believe and knowledge that there religion of Jesus Christ to Apostles, and kept
of them in his own freedom, without clowting of sinful men's error, is most
perfect of al, and so to let no man to forsake private religion, and keep
Christ's clean religion, without new wrong traditions of sinful men, that often
erreden in there own life and teaching. Also Christ in making the rule and order
of Apostles, was in this time, and ever before, Almighty, alwittie, al full of
good will and charity, to make perfect rule: therefore he made not only a perfect
rule, but most perfect of al* but each Patron of private rule was vnmightie; and
let both in yiftes of kind and grace, and not alwittie; but in comparison
of Christ an ydiot or fool, and not so well willing, to make so good and perfect
as Christ: therefore he made a rule less good, and less perfect, and hereof it
sueth plainly that Christ clean religion is most perfect of al.

Also Apostles and there followers, keeping the rule youen to them of Christ,
won most merit and thanks of God in this keeping before al other times;
therefore if al Christen men both in old time, and new hadden kept the same
rule of Christ, in his own cleanness and freedom, should have deserved most
thanks of God in degree possible to them? Therefore no new sect of religion
striving fro Christ's sect, should have begun: but that that was first should
have be kept in his cleanes, of such new founder; up, of novelries and Patrons.
Also hit were now as good, and of as much merit to keep the rule of Jesu
Christ, as it was at the beginning; since Christ's rule is enough, and able for all men on live of what ever complexion or age they ben of; but this rule was
kept of Jesu Christ and his Apostles, and there best sewers, by five hundred
year after his Ascension, withouten any finding of any such new planting, or
religion, in which time holy Church increased and profited most; for than
almost al men disposed the^ to martyrdom, at ensample of Christ* therefore it
were now not only meritory or medeful, but most medeful to the Church, to live
so in all things, and by all things.

Also both Monks and Chanons, forsaken the rules of Benet and Austin, and taken
withouten any dispensation the rule of Friars, as most perfect; but the rule
of Apostles is utterly and algates most perfect, therefore men may forsake
private rules in religion, made of sin full men, and taken the clean religion of
Apostles, that is preached with freedom of the Gospel, without dispensation of
wordly Clarks, that in caasqueke deueles as Christ Judas Scariot.

Also the Pope may dispense with the rule of each private sect or religion, and
has dispensed and yet does but he may not dispense with Christ's rule youen to
Apostles; therefore the rule of Christ ordained to Apostles, is more perfect,
than any rule of of private religion, and most perfect of al, and hereof it
sueth openly, that men may lawfully forsake private religion, and keep
Christ's religion in his cleannes, since it is most perfect, most easy, and
light for to keep, and most siker to bring men to heaven, and to highest degree
of bliss.

And if our adversaries of this private religion striue^ algats, that the rules
ben more perfect, than the rule of Apostles why than so many persons, as who
so says without number of each such private sect, by license of the Pope been
made; some Chaplains of Households, some Chaplains of honor, some Byshopps
dowid with secular Lordships, some Bishops among heathen men, and dare not
come to their children; but what profession a Friar be of ano^, if he be chose^
thereto, he accepts ye office of the Pope or Cardinal, of Patriarks, of
Archebyshop, of Eyshop, and forsakes his own state, since Christ says in the
Gospel, that noe man putting his hand to the plowgh, and looking backward is
worthy to have the Kingdom of God; that is no man taking perfect state of
poverty, meeknes. and penance, is able to be saved, if he turned again to
wordly life, pomp, and pride, and covetousness and ease of body and sloth, and
riot and gay clothing and costly. Therefore they changen not the more perfect
for the less perfect, for* than they were Apostates; but they purchasen the
more perfect, for the less perfect, therefore the clean religion and rule of
Priesthood by form of the Go^pell, is more perfect* than any rule or religion
made of sinful me^. Also, nothing that is abominable and reproved of Saints,
showld be browght in of other, by any color or cauteel; but those new sects
ben such, that been of flesh, as St. Paul says, in his Pistells: therefore such
sects should not be browght in to Charging of the Church; but al Christen men
showld cast away, and hold fast the unity, freedom, and clea^nes of the rule
of Jesus Christ. Parauenture these Ypocrits sayen to exclud al these reasons,
and many mo, that the rule to which they make profession, is not strange, ne
diverse fro the rule of Apostles, that Christ ordained, but it is utterly the
same, and none other: but the contrary of this excusing is openly showed by
four the last reasons before said. For if these new rules were^ al one with
Christ's rule youen to Apostles, Christ showld have taught them both, and
ensampled both in his life and speaking* and writing with Cermonies and rits,
and customs thereof; but did not this never in his death, ne after his
resurrection, ne to his ascentio^. And if this excusing were soth, the sects of
Friars showlde not have begonnen about a thousand and tweyn hundred year of
Christ. But the contrary is open in Chronicles; hit*sueth also of the same,
that Christ's Apostles hadden both Monks, Chanons and Freers, if men taken Monks
Chanons and Freers, for men that professen such private sects, but thi^ is
openly false. Also Christ's rule yo^e^ to Apostles is like and of o form to al
me^ that maken profession thereto, to speak of substance of the rule; but rule^
of these private sects beeth full diverse and contrary, as to substance of
these rules, since some of them receauen dymes, and dotations, as don these
Possessioners; but some for saken al such tithes and possessions, as Fr^ers
mendicaunts. But to descend down in specialtie, full many articles of rules of
such sects, be openly contrary to the Apostles rule; since it is lawful to each
true man of Christen religion, to convert a man of wrong faith to Christen;
but this is forboden in the rule of Friars Minours, since only to Ministers, and
none other is license granted to restrain Friars, to hear private sects
notwithstanding that evermore Friars, don the contrary, and Christ received
penies, but they shoulden not by there own rule, receive penies, nether by
themselves, ne by mean person. Also Christ preaching the Gospel, entered into
places both of women and men, as the Gospel of Luke tells; but is forboden to
Friars to entren into Abbeyes of women, but Friars glosen these rules to the
contrary: but Frau^cis there founder commanded them in article of his death,
that they should not receive glosses upon his rule. Also if Christ's rule youen
to Apostles and the rule of private sects weren al one withouten reason, men
leaven the first and professeden the tother': but if it were to show there
hypocrisy. Also if this faining be soth, it seems that it is as perfect and
meedful to keepe^ Christ's rule of Frauncis, or Dominike, or any such other
man. Also if these rules been al one, and in nothing diverse, than such a rule
should not be cleaped rule of Frau^cis, ni Dominiks ne any such other, but rule
of Christ; for so it should be of more authority, and more commended. And so
the Gospel ought to be kept withouten any fouling of al Christen men, withouten
such novelries, and put nothing thereto, and draw nothing therefro, and if this
thing were done such private sects should be super flue and wast, as flies
living in the air: and it was none need of Frauncis, Dominik, or any such
other new man beside him, about making of this rule of Apostles that Friars
faynen to be thern. For that rule was made of Christ, God and man, and kept of
Apostles, and confermed by the holy Ghost, and at the full declared by a
thousand year and two hundred, before Frauncis, Dominik, or any Friar of such
private sect were into this wordle.

The second Article.
The second point or Article is this, that tho me^ that vnreasonablie and
wrongfully han damned* and all this counsel be amended of so great error; and
that their error may be published to me^ dwelling in the Realm: the reason of
this axing is showed thus. Nothing owght to be damned as error and false, but
if it savor error or vnrightewisenes against Gods law: but neither the King,
ne his Counsel, dud unrightfully, for as much as he took away the
possessions of some Prelates, that trespaceden, whose contrary Friars han
determined openly; therefore reasonably men should assent* to this axing. For
some Friars written thus in Coventre, among articles that they damneden as
heresy and error, that Secular Lords may lawfully and medefully taken away
temporal goods youen to men of the Church, but since our king has done so, and
other kings his predecessors han done so, many times by lawful cause, as
pertaining to there regalie, and of common Law by counsel of Peers of the
Realm it sueth that not only our king, now present, has erred; but also his
predecessors, and generally al his Counselors, as Lords, and Prelates and al
men of the Parliament counsailing thereto.

Also if this be error touching the health of man's soul, than it is against
holy writ, and than if a man sustain or maintain this error, he is an
heretic; but full many Kings Lords, and Prelates, and other wise me^ han
sustained this, and maintained, and yet done as per taining to the Kings
Regalie, and of common law; tha^ been these Friars, al Kings Lords and Prelates,
and al wise men of our Realm been heretics, Also since this is an old custom,
the which our King, Lords, and Prelates, been sworn to sustain and maintain,
if this be error (as Friars sayen openly) it sueth by Friars, that al these
been forsworn and heretics. Also if this be error, as Friars fayne^, that
thowgh an Abbot and al his Covent ben open traitors conspiring into death of
the King and Queen, and of other Lords, and enforce them to destroy all the
Realm, the King may not take fro them an halfpenny ne farthing worth, since al
these been temporal goods. Also thowgh other Clarks senden unto our enemies all the rents that they han in our Land, and what ever they may rob or steal of
the Kings Liege men, yet may not our King punish by o farthinge ne farthing
worth. Also by this ground of Friars thowgh Monks or Friars, or other Clarks
what ever they been slain Lords tenants, the Kings Liege men, and defoule^
Lords wives, yea the Queen (that God forbede) or the Empiresse; yet the King
may not punish them by o farthing. Also it sueth plainly, that men cleped me^
of holy Church, may dwell in this land at there liking, and do what kin sin,
what kin treason likes them, and natheles the King may not punish ne in
temporal goods, ne in their body: since if he may not punish them in the less,
he may not^in the more: and also they maken one of them self King, and so no
secular Lord may let him to conquer al Secular Lordship in this earth, and so
they may slay al Lord; and Ladies, and there blowd and affinity with any
pain in this life, or in body or in cattle. Ye Lords sees and understands
with what punishing they deserve to be chastised, that thus unwarily and
wrongfully, han damned you for heretics, for as much as you don execution and
rightwilnesses by Gods law and man's, and namely of the Kings regalie. For the
chief Lordshippe in this land of al Temporalties both of secular men and
Religious pertain to the King of his general governing; for else he were not
King of al England, but of a littel part thereof. Therefore the men that bysien
them to take away this Lordship fro the King, as don Friars and there fautours
in this point been sharper enemies and traitors, than French men and al other
nations. Also it pertains to the King the while a Bishop or any Abbots see is
void, to have in his hand al Temporalties, and at his own will to give them to
Prelates; therefore the King may take a way these Temporalties from Prelates,
when law full cause excitith. Also the king owght grant no man freedom to do
sin or trespass, but to take away the fredome; but men of the Church had
free license to trespass if the king might not bereue there Temporalties, when
they sinneden* greevously. And so Saint Paul teaches that each man be subject
to their Potestates, for there is noe power but of God, and tho things that
been of God been ordained, and so they that withstondeth power withstondeth
Gods ordinance. For why? Princes been not a dredd of good works, but of evil.
But wilt thou not dread a power, d^e good, and thou shall have preysing thereof
that is of him that is ordained in the high estate, for he is Gods minister or
servant to the in good; but if thou have done evil, than dread, for he bears
the sword not without cause, for he is Gods servant vengere in wrath to him
that does evil, and therefore by need or of need, be ye subject or vnderlout
not only for wrath, but also of conscience. All this says St. Paul of which
authority it is, to known to al men, that Clarks owen to be subject of need
to the kings power. For St. Paul that puts al men in subjection to kings,
out takes never ene, and so Secular power owes and is bound to punish by just
pain of his sword, that is wordly power, tyrants rebelling against God, and
trespassing against man, by what kind trespass, and that is more to chastise
his subjects by pain and torment of there body; and no dread, much more he
may punish the^ by taking away of there temporalties, that is less than
bodily pain: therefore Secular Lords done this rightfully, since this is done by
commandment of the Apostle, and by ordinance of God and therefore it is plain
of these reasons and auctorities, and Secular Lords may leuefullie and
medefully, in many cases taken away Temporal goods youen to men of the
Church.

The third Article.
The third Article is this; that both Tithes and Offering; been youen and paid,
and received by that intent, to which intent both Gods law and the Popes law
ordained them to be paid and received; and that the betake away by the same
intent and reason, that both Gods law, and the Popes law ordainen that they
shoulden be with drawn. This axing is reasonable, for many skils: for the
intent of the maker in every law should be kept, and most the intent of God
that may not err. Sothely thus says Gods law in the 1. book of Kings that
the sin of Helies children was full great before God, for they withdrawn men
fro sacrifice of God, taking by strength or violence that part of the
sacrifice, that pertained to the Priest and God says afterward I speaking
have spoken, that thine house and thy Faders house should minister, and serve
in my sight evermore, but now God says; be that thing far fro me, but who ever
shall worship me, I shall glorify them, but they that despisen me, says God,
shall ben vnnable, or without honor; of which authority it is plain and open,
that the things that be due to Priests, should not be axed by strength, by
violence or cursing, but be youen freely withouten exaction or constraining,
and if the Priest be reproved of God for his sins, he should be put out of
his office, and the sacrifices shoulden not be yoven to him but taken fro him,
as God commands from the high Priest Hely, and an other true man walking in
Gods ways, as did Samuel, shoulden be ordained to receive such sacrifices.
Also in beginning of Tobie men finden thus, when Priests of the Temple wenten
to calveren of gold, to honor the^ for Gods of Jeroboam King of Jsrael made,
Tobie offride truly al his first fruits and tithes. So that in the third year
Tobie ministered al his tithes to proselytis, and comelings or guests, and
withdroweth them wholly fro the wicked Priests, and the book says that the
Little Child kept these things and other such after the law of God. Therefore if
our Prelates or other Priests what ever they been, openly blecked by sacrifice
of maumetry, as with coveitise, that is, openly sacrifice of false Gods, and
other great sins, as Pride, Symonie, and Manquelling, Glotanie, drunkenness,
and Lechery, by the same skill tithes and off^ings should be withdrawn from
them by Gods law, and be youen to poor needy men, at ensample of rightful
Tobie.

Also S. Paul speaking to Timothe Bishop, says thus: Be we pay with these
things, if we han lifelode, and to be hiled with. And S. Barnard speaks thus
in this matter: what ever thou take to thee of thine entrage, that is Dymes
and offerings beside simple lifelode and streit clothing, it is not thine, it is
theft, ravine, and sacrilege. Whereof it sueth plainly, that not only simple
Priests and Curats, but also Sovereign Curats, as Bishops should not axe there
subjects by constraining more than lifelode and heling, when they done away al
manner wast both of money, and worldly array. Also Christ with his Apostles
lived most poor life, as it is known by all the process of the Gospel,
nothing chalenging by exaction, ne constraining but lived simply and scarcely
enough of alms freely, and wilfully youe^: therefore they that pretenden
them to ben principal followers of Christ's steps, should live and walk as
Christ did, and so lead full poor life taking of things freely youen as much as
need is, for there ghostly office and no more, and therewith be apaied. Also
the Popes law commands in the best part thereof, that Priests open Lechours,
taken no part of portion of goods of the Church, therefore it is lawfully to
parisheners to withhold there tithes for open fornication, of there Curat, and
turn them into better use, and much more they may and owen to withdraw there
tithes for great sins and open, as for Symonie, that is heresy, as the Popes
law says, and for covetousness, that is worshipping of Gods, as holy writ
says, and for pride, envy, gluttony, and dronkennes since both by Gods law
and man's law God curses such men's blessing, and prayings as S. Austen and S.
Gregory teachen this in many books by holy writ and reason.

Also commonly when parrish Churches been appropred to men of singular
religion, since appropriation is made by false suggestion that such religious
men ha^ not enough for lifelode and healing; but in truth they han overmuch.
Also commonly such Churches been appropred by Simonie, as they witte^ better
them self paying a great sum of money for such appropriatio^, if the benefice
be fat. But what man led by reason and good conscience should pay to such
religious men tithes and offerings gotten by falsenes, leasings, and Simonie.
But suppose that such parrish Churches weren lawfully gotten, yet since they
been superflue ^o such men, the tithes and offerings shoulden ben youe^ to poor
needy men, as S. Ierom and the Popes law teachen, and therefore the true great
Clarke Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, writes to the Pope, that when
appropriation of parish Churches is made to men of Religion, of fourteen great
sins and defauts that commen of evil Curats, is made a perpetuation, that is
endless confirmation; also by God and his law, Curats ben michel more bounden to
teache^ there subjects charitablie the Gospel and Gods hests, both by open
preaching and ensample of good life for to save there souls, than there
subjects been holden to payen them tithes and offerings, and of this suen twey
things. The first if Curats do not there office in word and in ensample, that
God co^ma^deth than there subjects be not bounden to pay them tithes and
offerings, since the principal cause for which tithes and offerings should be
paid is away, the paying of tithes should cease. Also Curats been more cursed
in withdrawing this teaching, in word and ensample, tha^ been Parisheners
withdrawing tithes and offerings, though Curats dudden well there office.

A Lord God, where this be reason to constrain the poor people to find a
worldly Priest, sometime unable both of life and cunning in pomp and pride,
covetise and envy, glottonie, drunkenness and leacherie, in Simonie and
heresy, with fat horse, and iolie and gaie saddels, and bridles ringing by the
way, and himself in costly clothes and pelure, and to suffer their wives
and children, and there poor neighbors perish for hunger thirst and cold, and
other mischiefs of the world. A Lord Jesu Christ since with in few years men
paid there tithes and offerings at there owen will free to good men, and able
to great worship of God, to profit and fairenes of holy church fighting in
earth. Where it were lawful and needful that a wordlie Priest, should destroy
this holy and approved custom constraining men to leave this freedom,
turning tithes and offerings into wicked uses, or not so good as they weren don
before times.

The fourth Article.
The fourth Article is this that Christ's teaching and beleaue of the Sacrament
of his own body that is plainly tawght by Christ and his Apostles, in
Gospels and Pistles may be tawght openly in Churches of Christen people, and
the contrary teaching and false believe is brought up by cursed Hypocrites, and
heretics and wordlie Priests vnkunning in Gods law which seem that they are
Apostles of Christ, but are fools. Also Christ would not take the kingdom when
the people would have made him king, as Ihons Gospel ^elleth, but if it had be
a Priests office, to deal about thus bodyly alms, Christ that could best have
do this office, would have take these temporal goods to deal them among poor
men, but he would not do thus, but fly and took noe man of the Apostles
with him, so fast he hiede Lord. where than wordlie Priests kunne^ better don
this parting of wordly goods of Jesus Christ, and if they sayn that Christ fed
the people in desert with bodily alms many thousand, as the gospel says, that
did Christ by miracle, to show his God head, and to teach Priests how they feed
ghostly Christen me^ by Gods word, for so did Christ's Apostles, and had not
whereof to do bodily alms when they mighten have treasure and meals enowgh,
of Kings and Lords. Also Peter says in deeds of Apostles, to a poor man; that
to him neither was gold, ne silver and yet he performed well the office of a
true Priest. But our Priests ben so busy about wordlie occupation, that they
seemen better Baylifs or ^eues, than ghostly Priests of Jesu Christ. For what
man is so busy about merchandise, and other wordly doings, as been Priests
that showld be light of heavenly life to al men about them, but certes they
should be as busy about studying of Gods law and holy prayer not of
Famulororum but of holy desiers, and clea^e meditation of God, and true
teaching of the Gospel as been laborers, about wordly labor, for there
sustenance; and much more busy if they mighten. For they been more holden for
to live well and ensample of holy life to the people, and true teaching of holy
writ, than the people is holden to give the dymes or offerings, or any bodily
alms: and therefore Priests showld not leave ensample of good life and
studying of holy writ, and new teaching thereof ne for bodily alms ne for
wordly goods, ne for saving of there bodily life. And as Christ saved the wordle
by writing and teaching of four Evangelists, so the fiend casts to damme the
wordle and Priests; for letting to preach the Gospel, by these four; by
feigned contemplation, by songs, by Salisburie use, and by wordly buysines of
Priests.

God for his mercy stir these Priests to preach the Gospel in word in life,
and beware of Sathanas deceyts.
Amen.
A TREATISE OF JOHN Wickliffe against the orders of Friars.
Cap. 1. Friars orders perfiter then Christ's.
FIrst Friars seyen, that there Religion fou^den of sinful men, is more perfect,
then that Religion or order, the which Christ himself made, that is both God
and man. For they say that each Bishop and Priest, may lawfully leave there
first dignity, and after be a Friar: But when he is once a Friar, he may in
no manner leave that, and live as a Bishop or a Priest by the form of the
Gospel. But this here sie says that Christ lacked wit, might, or charity, to
teach Apostles and his Disciples the best Religion: But what man may suffer
this foul heresy to be put on Jesu Christ? Christian men say, that the
Religion and order that Christ made for his Disciples and Priests, is most
perfect, most easy, and most siker. Most perfect, for this reason; for the
Patron or Founder thereof is most perfect, for he is very God and very man,
that of most wit and most charity gave this Religion to his deare-worthe
friends. Also the rule thereof is most perfect; since the Gospel in his freedom
withouten error of man, is rule of this Religion. Also knights of this
Religion been most holy, and most perfect. For Jesu Christ and his Apostles
been chief knights thereof, and after them holy Martirs and Confessors. It is
most easy and light; for Christ himself says; that his yoke is soft, and his
charge is light, since it stands all in love and freedom of heart, and bids
nothing but reasonable thing, and profitable for the keeper thereof. It is most
siker; for it is confirmed of God, and not of sinful men, and no man may
destroy it or dispense there against: but if the Pope or any man shall be
saved, he might be confirmed thereby, and else he shall be damned. But men saien
that other new orders and Rules ben nowght worth, but if they ben confirmed of
the Pope, and other sinful men, and then they been not worth but if they bin
confirmed of the devil, and in case the Pope shall be damned, for then he is a
devil, as the Gospel says of Judas; and thus men sayen, that Christ's religion
in his own cleannes and freedom, is more per fit then any sinful man's
religion, by as much as Christ is more perfect then is any sinful man. And if
new religions sayen, that they keepen all that Christ's religion bidds, they
sparen the soth, for they lacken the freedo^e and measure of Christ's Religion,
and ben bounden to errors of sinful men, and thereby bin let to profit to
Christian men's souls, and not suffered to teach free lie Gods law, ne keep it
in themself. For by the first and most commandment of God, they been holden
to love God of al their heart, and al their life, of all their mind, and al
their strengthes, and their neighbors as themself* but who may do more then
this? then may noe man keep more then Christ's religion bidds. And so if this
new religion of Friars be more perfect then Christ's religion, then if Friars
keepen well this religion they bin more perfect then Christ's Apostles, and else
they bin Apostataes; and if men bin Apostataes they leaven the better order,
and taken an other less perfect. And the order of Christ in his cleannes, and
freedom is most perfect, and so it seems that al these Friars bin Apostataes.

Cah. 2. Friars hinder the free preaching of the Gospel
ALso Friars sayn plainly, that it is Apostasy and heresy for a Priest, to
live as Christ ordained a Priest to live by form of the Gospel. For if there be
any Friar that is a Priest cunning in Gods law, and able to travel to sow
Gods words among the people, if he do this office freely going fro country to
country, where he may most profit and cease not, for Priour ne any other
Satrap, and charge not singular habit, and beg not, but be paid with common
meat and drink as Christ and his Apostles were, they will pursue him as
Apostata, and draw him to prison, and say that he is cursed for this deed. For
if this free going about, and free preaching is lawful to such a Friar, since it
is ensampled and commanded of Christ, and not to be closed in a Cloister, as it
were Caymes Castle, and so Friars shoulden be nedid to leave this living of
Cloister and fained obedience, by singular profession, and to dwell among the
people to whom they may most profit Ghostly. For charity ne did Christ and
Baptist to come out of desert, to teach the Gospel to the people, til they were
dead therefore, much more charity showld drive Friars to come out amongst the
people, and leave Caymes Castles that bin so needeles and chargeous to the
people; since they cannot occupy themself so well in such solitary life and
contemplation, as couthen Christ and John Baptist. And to this same Christ
ordained all his Apostles and Disciples, to live an open good life, in mecknes
and wilful poverty, and discreet penance, to teach busily his Gospel to the
people, and not be closed in great Cloisters and costly as Caymes Castles. And
it seems an open doing of Antichrist not to suffer Priests freely to do this
office of Christ, but need them upon pain of prisonning to be ruled in this
after the will of a simple Idiot, and in case a damned devil of hell, and so
there leaves no mean to hold these sects together, but if it be this
blasphemy, to prison a man for as much as he does after the will of God. And
thus this new profession is harmeful for many skilles. For it is not
ensampled of Christ, ne any of his Apostles, and he taught us all that was
needful and profitable. Also this profession serves of nowght, but if it be to
make fools do more after the errors of sinful men, then after the
commandment of God. For by virtue of Christ's teaching, each man is holden to
do after each other, in as much as he teaches Christ commandment or
counsel, and more may no man bind an other. Also Christ gave his Disciples
power of each work, that turns to profit of their souls, and help of other
men, and this freedom is let by this profession made to sinful men, and in
case to ^iends of hell. But here me^ will not destroy Friars ne flee them ne
curse them, but destroy their errors, and save the persons, and bring them to
that living that Christ ordained Priests to live in. For that is algats the
best, to the most worship of God, to most profit of holy Church, and to
Friars also. But what man showld not help thereto upon al his power, wit and
will.

Cap. 3. A man once professed to their religion may never leave it.
ALso Friars saien, that if a man be once professed to their religion, he may
never leave it and be saved; thowgh he be never so unable thereto, for all time
of his life; and they will need him to live in such a state ever more to which
God makes him ever unable, and so need him to be damned. Alas, out on such
heresy that man's ordinance is holden stronger then is the ordinance of God.
For if a man enter into the new religion against man's ordinance, he may
lawfully for sake it; but if he enter against Gods ordinance when God makes him
unable thereto, he shall not be suffered by Antichrists power to leave it. And
if this reason were well declared, since no man wot which man is able to this
new religion by Gods dome, and which is not able, no man showld be constrained
to hold forth this new sect; and thus this new religion may not last, but if
it be by this blasphemy to constrain a man unable by Gods dome to hold this
new sect, and suffer him not to come to freedom of Christ's order.

Cap. 4. No preaching without lice^e of their Sovereign how bad soever.
ALso Friars saien if a man be professed to there holy order, he shall not
preach freely and generally the Gospel of Christian men without en license of
his Sovereign, for virtue of obedience; be his Sovereign never so cursed man
of life and uncunning of Gods law, and enemy to Christian men soul. and in
case a foul devil of hell; thowgh this man professed have received of God never
so much cunning of Gods law, and power, and will to work after this cunninge,
and so this man shall needs be damned for misspending of Gods treasure. For since
Gods law says, that he is out of charity that helps not his brother with
bodily alms if he may in his need, much more is he out of charity, that
helps not his brothers soul, with teachinge of Gods law, when he sees him
run to hell, yea by ignorance. And thus to magnify and maintain there rotten
sects, they neden men by hypocrisy, false teaching, and strong pains, to
break Gods heasts and leese cha ritie. Out one this false heresy and
tyrantrie of Antichrist, that men be neded strongly to keep more his laws,
and obaye more to them then to Christ's commandments ever rightful.

Cap. 5 The lawfulnes of beging maintained by Friars. Deuteronomy. 15.
ALso Friars saien and maintainen, that begging is lawful, the which is damned
by God both in the old testament and in the new. For in the fifth book of holy
writ God says to his people Algats a needy man an beggar shall not be amongst
you. Also the holy ghost tawght Solomon to pray these two things of God God
make vanity and leasinge words far fro me, and give not to me begging or
beggingnesse; but give only things that been needful for my liuelode;
inanter lest I fulfilled be drawn to renaye and say who is Lord? As who say,
I know no Lord: and lest I be compelled, or made of force by needines to
steal, and to for swear the name of my God. Also the wise man says. It is a
wicked Ecclesi. 1. 29.
or way word life, to seek there berowgh fro house to house and he shall not do
trustily, there he shall be hereborowed, and he shall not open his mouth. Also
Christ bidds his Apostles and Disciples, that they should not bear a sachel ne
scrippe, but look what meynes is able to hear the Gospel, and eat and drink
therein, and pass not thence, and Luc. c. 9. and. 10.
pass fro house to house. Also S. Paul labored or traveled Act. Apost.
with his hands for him, and for men that weren with him, and covered nether
gold ne silver, ne clothes of me^ that he taught, to give other teachers
ensample to do the same in time of need; and S. Peter fished after Io. 21. 2,
These.
Christ's resurtectio^. Also S. Paul bids that men that will live in Idleness and
curiosity, and not travel, should not eat. Also S. Clement ordained, that
Christian me^ should not beg openly. And for to put away this begging S.
Austen makes two books how Monks oughten to travel with there hands for there
liuelode. And the same teaches Be^et to his Monks and S. Bernard, and so does
Frauncis to Friars. And Jerome says that Monks shoulden travel with there
hands, not only for need, but rather to exclude idleness and vanity. For in
state of Jnnocencie God ordained man to travel, and afterward in the state of
sin God gave this labor to man for his penance. Then since each open begging
is thus sharply da^oed in holy writ, it is a foul error to maintain it; but
it is more error to say that Christ was such a beggar; for then he must have
been contrary to his own law; but it is most error to continue in this
damned begging, and rob thus against charity the poor people, and make them
to believe that Christ was such a beggar, and that this begging is well done.

Cap. 6. Friars draw al alms from poor and needy me^ tomain tenance of their
sinful and superfluous order.
ALSO Friars saien, that it is meedful to leave the co^ma^deme^t of Christ, of
giving of alms to poor feeble men to poor crooked me^, to poor blind men,
and to bedredden men, and give this alms to Hypocrites, that sainen them holy
and needy, when they been strong in body, and have over much riches, both in
great wast houses, and precious clothes, in great feasts and many Jewels and
treasure* and thus they slayen poor me^ with there false begging, since they
take falsely fro the^ there worldly goods, by which they should sustain there
bodily life, and deceiven rich men in there alms, and maintainen or comforten
them to live in falsenes against Jesu Christ. For sithen there were poor men
enough to take men's Alms, before that Friars comen in, and the earth is now
more barren then it was; our Friars or poor me^ moughten want of this alms:
but Friars by subtle hypocrisy getten to themselves and letten the poor men
to have this alms.

Cap. 7. Traditions of Friars preferred before Christ's commandments.
ALso Friars chargen more breaking of there own Traditions, then breaking of
the commandments of God. For a Friar shall more be punished for breaking of
one of the^, then for breaking of Gods hests. For breaking of Gods hests is not
charged of them, and in this they shown how they love there own worship more
then Gods, and thus they taken to themselves the worship that is appropred to
God, and so been blasphemers and here^icks, and so they chargen more there
bodily habit then charity and other virtues. For if a Friar leave his bodily
habit to the which he is not bound by Gods law, he is holden Apostata, and
sharply pursued; sometime to prison, and sometime to the death, though he
serve better God without his habit, then therein: but though he trespass
against charity by impatiency, and false leasings, or pride, or covetousnes,
it is little or naught charged; but rather praised, if it bring them worldly
mucke.

Cap. 8. Friars great Hypocrites, as poor as Christ in show as sumptuous as
Lords and Prelates in deed.
ALso Friars fainen them as Hypocrites, to keep streitlie the Gospel and
poverty of Christ, and his Apostles; and yet they most co^trarien to Christ
and his Apostles, in hypocrisy, Pride and covetise. For they shown more
holiness in bodily habit, and other signs then did Christ and his Apostles, and
for there singular habit or holiness, they presume to be eve^ with Prelates and
Lords, and more worthy then other Clarks, and in covetise they can never make
an end, but by begging, by queething, by burying, by salaries, and ^rentals,
and by shriving, by absolutions and other false means crien ever after worldly
goods, where Christ used none of al these; and thus for this stinking covetise,
they worcester shippen the Fiend as there God.

Cap. 9. Their stealing of children and entising of them to there order.
ALso Friars drawn children fro Christ's religion into their private order, by
hypocrisy, leesings, and stealing. For they tellen that there order is more
holy then any other, and that they shall have higher degree in bliss, then
other men that been not therein, and sayen that men of there order shall never
come to hell, but shall deem other men with Christ at Doomes day: and so they
stealen childer fro father and mother, some time such as been unable to the
order, and sometime such as showlden sustain there father, and mother by
commandment of God. And thus they been blasphemers, taking upon them full
counsel in doutouse things, that be not expressly commanded ne forbidden in
holy writ: since such counsel is apropried to the holy Ghost. And thus they
been therefore cursed of God, as the Pharisees were cursed of Christ, to whom
he says thus: woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees that been writers of Law,
and men of singular religion, that compassen about the water and the land to
make a man of your religion, and when he is made of your religion ye maken him
dowble more a child of hell. And since he that steals an Ox or a Cow is
damnable by Gods law and man's also: much more he that steals a man's child that
is better the^ al earthly goods, and draws him to the less perfect order: And
thowgh this singular order were more perfect then Christ's; yet he wot never
whether it be to damnation of the Child, for he wot not to what state God
has ordained him, and so blindlie they done against Christ's ordinance.

Cap. 10. Curats defrauded of their duties by means of Friars.
ALso Friars for pride and couetise, drawn fro Curats there office and
Sacraments, in which lain winning or worship, and so maken dissension betwixt
Curats and there Ghostly childer. Friars drawn to them confession and burying
of rich men by many subtle means, and Massepence and Trentals, but they will
not come to poor men's Dirige, ne receive them to be buried amongst them. And
they cryen fast that they have more power in confession the^ other Curats; for
they may shriue all that come to the^: But Curates may no farther then their
own parishees. But Curates sain that since they shall awnswere before God for
the souls of there sogettis, they will know their life; and Friars saien it is
no need, for they have more power then the Curat; and thus dissension and hate
is made betwixt Curats and there children, and pride and covetousness of Friars
is cause of all this and many other sins and thus for they maken discord among
christian me^, they been hatcd and cursed of God almighty.

Cap, 11. Friars come in under the name of Saints and forsaken the Rule.
ALso Friars come in under the name of Saints, and for saken the Saints rule,
and live and putten there own errors to the Saints, and so slaundre^ both
them and God. For if men speken of Frauncis, he used and taught much meeknes,
poverty, and penance: and Minours now vsen the contrary. For they maken
statuts of their own will, and them they keepen fast, and make men to ween
that Frauncis made them. But Preachou^s sayen that Dominick founded them, and
the^ he kept Austens rule, fith he was a Canon before; for else he was Apostata,
if Austens rule were good. But Austen would algats sue yea Apostles living, and
preachours done even the contrary. And Friar Austens founded then on Austen the
great Doctor; but his rule speaks not of Friars, and so they been grounded on
leasings, for they haven no Patron Saint. And of tho carmes known men another
founder ne rule, and so the Friars that have founders done against there
fou^ders teaching, and Christ's also, and colouren there own wicked laws under
name of these Saints, and so ben grounded on leasings, and slaundren there
Patrons and Christ also. And other Friars that have no Patrons liuen after
themselves and putte^ there errors on Saints, and so slaundren them and
Christ, and so hypocrisy reigns, and sin is maintained, by color of
holiness.

Cap. 12. Persecution of true Priests by false Friars
ALso Friars pursuen true Priests, and letten them to preach the Gospel,
notwithstanding that Christ enioined Priesthood, and preaching of the Gospel,
and so they departen that thing that God joined together, and so (as much as in
them is) they foredone Gods ordinance, and so they harmen Christian men more
cruelly, then the Souldan of Sarracens, for they been nere and more malicious.
For since Christ charges al his Priests to preach truly the Gospel; and they
pursuen them for this deed, yea to the fire, they will slay Priests, for they
done Gods bidding, and therefore they been man* slaiers and irregular and
cursed of God. For they letten his people to be saved, and so need them to be
damned. And since the principal point and end of Christ's dyeing and his passion,
was to save man's soul, and the Principal work of Sathanas is to leese men's
soul, they been traitors to Christ and Angels of Sathanas transformed into
Angel of light and cruel traitors of al men.

Cap 13 Capped Friars served as Lords or Kings at table
ALso Capped Friars, that been called Masters of Divinity, have there
Chamber and service as Lords or Kings, and senden out Idiots full of couetise,
to preach not the Gospel; but Chronicles, Fables, and Leesings, to please the
people, and to rob the^. A what cursednes is this, to a dead man, as to the
world, and pride and vanity thereof, to get him a Cap of masterdome by prayer
of Lords, and great gifts, and making of huge feasts, of a hundred and many
hundred pounds, and then be idle fro teaching of Gods law; but if it be seldom
before Lords and Ladies, or great gatherings, for name of the world, and then
to leave there poverty and simplenes that he is bounden to, and devour poor
men's alms in wast, and feasting of Lords and great men, and so give slander
to his brother, and other men to live in pride and covetise, glotenie and
idleness, and leave the service of God as though they were exempt fro al gods;
and yet forfending of these covetous fools, that been Limitours, goes much
Simonie, envy, and much foul merchandise; and who can best rob the poor
people by false begging* and other deceipts, shall have this Judas office, and
so anest of Antichrists Clerks is maintained by subtle cauteles of the Fiend.

Cap. 14. Great flatterers of the people nether reproving nor removing there
sins from among them.
ALso Friars shown not to the people there great sins stably, as God bids,
and namely to mighty men of the world, but flatteren the^, and glozen and
nourishen them in sin. And since it is the office of a Preacher to show men
there foul sins and pains therefore, and Friars taken this office and done
it not, they been cause of damnation of the people. For in this they been
foul traitors to God and ^eke to the people, and they been nurses of the
Fiend of hell. For by flattering and false beheasts, they letten men live in
there lusts, and comforten them therein, and sometime they pursuen other true
preachers for they will not gloss mighty men, and comfort them in there
sins, but will sharply tell them the so the: and thus mighty men hire by great
costs a false traitor, to lead the^ to Hell. And ensample men may take how
Friars suffren mighty men, fro year to year, live in avowtrie, and covetise,
and extorsions doing, and many other sins. And when men been harded in such
great sins* and will not amend them Friars, should flee there homely company,
but they do not thus, lest they leese worldly Friendship, favor, or winning;
and thus for the money they sellen men's souls to Sathanas.

Cap. 15 How much and how often they deceive and coose^ the laypeople by then
letters of Fraternity.
ALso Friars by letters of Fraternity deceiven the people in faith, robben
them of temporal goods, and make^ the people to trust more in dead p^rchment,
sealed with leasings, and in vain prayers of Hypocrites, that in case been
damned Devils, then in the help of God, and in there own good living.
Commonly these letters been powdered with hypocrisy, covetise, Simonie,
blasphemy, and other leasings* With hypocrisy; for therein been told
withouten end many good deeds, and sometime been false, and more to show them
holy to get worldly goods, than to save men's souls. With covetise; for they
done this to win the penny, for a poor man that may not give them be he
never so true to God, shall not have them: but a rich, be he never so cursed,
shall have such letters, and weanes that he is siker enough thereby, do he
never so much wrong to poor me^. With Symonie; for they sellen this supernal
good, for temporal goods and that unskillfully for luch chaffering and granting
of letters was never ensampled of Christ, ^e his Apostles, and yet they loved
best men's souls. With blasphemy; for these sinful wretches taken upon them
yea dealeing of good deeds, but this thing is appropried to God, and so they
been blasphemers: For they passon Bishopps, Popes, and eke God himself. For
they grant no pardon, but if men be contrite and shriuen, and of merit of
Christ's passion, and other Saints, but Friars maken no mention nether of
contrition, ne shrift, ne of merit of Christ's passion, but only of there own
good deeds. And so Christ graunts to no sinful man continuing in his sin such
part; but Friars graunten rather to cursed men for worship or winning them to
good poor men. And thus falsely they passen Christ. For Christ wowld not grant
to his Cosens part of his Kingdom but if they wowlden suffer passion as Christ
did: But Friars will make men heirs in the bliss of heaven, since they graunten
men part of there good deeds after this life, and they may not have then part
but if they showlden be saved, But christian belief teaches, that al men in
charity, ben procurers by grant of God of al* meedeful deeds* Why then
graunten Friars this part, for they will have propretie of Ghostly goods where
noe property may be, and leaven propretie of wordlie goods where christian men
may have propretie* And thus they teachen the people that it is more needful
to give such hypocrites bodily alms, then to give it to poor needy men after
the Gospel. And thus they deceauen the people in belief, and robben them of
temporal goods, and maken to recke less of there own good living for trust of
these false letters.

Cap. 16. Friars pervert the right faith of the sacrament of the Altar by
making it to be an accident without subject.
Also Friars perverten the right faith of the Sacrament of the Auter, and
bringen in a new heresy. For wha^ Christ says that the bread that he brake
and blessed is his body, they say it is an accident with outen subject, or
naught. And when holy w^it says openly, that this Sacrament is bread that we
breaken, and Gods body; they saien that it is another bread, ne Gods body, but
accide^t withouten subject, and naught. And thus they leaven holy writ and
taken new heresy on Christ and his Apostles and on Austin, Ierom, Ambrose,
Isidore, and other Saints, and the Court of Rome, and al true Christ men, that
holden the faith of the Gospel. For Christ says that this bread is my body.
And S. Paul says The bread that we breaken is the communication of the Lords
body: and S. Austin says, that that thing that we seen is bread, but as to
faith, fully taught the bread is Christ's body. Ambrose says that thing that
is bread, shall be Christ body* Jerome says, that that bread which Christ brake
and gave to his Disciples, is the body of our Savior; for Christ says this
is my body. Berengary by approving of the Court of Rome says thus: I
acknowledge with heart and with mouth, that the bread that is laid on the
Auter is not only the Sacrament but very Christ's body. Ah Lord what hardy
Devil durst reach these Friars to deny thus openly, holy writ and al these
Saints and the Court of Rome, and al true Christian men and to find this
heresy, that this Sacred host is accident withouten subject or naught; since
this is not taught openly in holy writ, and reason and wit is against this
and Austin in 3. or 4. great books says expressly, that none accident may be
withouten subject; and al wise Philosophers accorden here with Austin. Lord
what should move Christ Almighty, al witty, and well willing, to hide this
belief of Friars by a thousand year, and never to teach his Apostles, and so
many Saints the right belief; but to teach first these Hypocrites, that comen
never into the Church, til the soul F^end Sathanas was vnbounden. Hereby
shoulden al Christian men know the Friars he* resie, and not receive them into
there houses, before that they confesseden under there general Seal, the right
belief of Christian men and had forsaken there old heresy.

Cap. 17. There excess in buil ding of great Churches and costly houses and
Cloisters*
ALso Friars builden many great Churches, and costly waste houses and
Cloisters, as it were Castles, and that without need, where thorough Parish
Churches, and common ways been paired, and in many places undone. And so
they teachen in deed that men shoulden have heritage and dwelling City in
earth, and forget Heaven against S. Paul. For by this new housing of Friars,
though it rain on the Auter of the Parish Church, the blind people is so
deceived, that they will rather give to waste houses of Friars, then to Parish
Churches, or to common ways, though men, cattle, and beasts been perished
therein. Before that Friars comen in, there was more people, and the earth more
plenteous, and then were Churches enowgh. What skill is it now to make so much
cost, in new building, and let old parish Churches fall down? And if me^ sayen
that in these great Churches God is fair served; certes great houses make not
men holy, and only by holiness is God well served. For in heaven that was so
fair Lucifer served God untruly and so did Adam in Paradise. And Jesus says
that tho great Temple of Jerusalem that was a house of prayer, and sometimes
Gods house, was made a den of thiefes, for covetous preachers dwelliden
therein. But Job served Good full well on the Dunghill, and so did Adam out of
Paradise, and Christ before when he prayed in hills and deserts, and
baptisteke. And therefore Christ and his Apostles made no great Churches ne
Cloisters; but wenten fro country to country, preaching the Gospel and
teaching men to do there alms, to poor men and not to wast houses. For
Christ tawght men to pray in spirit and truth, that is, in good will and
devotion and holy living. And to destroy this hypocrisy, he ordained the
Temple of Jerusalem showld be destroyed for sin done therein.

Cap. 18. Friars teaching the vow of obedience contrary to Gods law.
FRiars also destroien obedience of Gods Law and magnifien singular obedience
made to sinful men and in case to devils, which obedience Christ ensampled
never nether in himself ne in his Apostles. For by teaching of S. Paul, each
man owght to be subject to other in the dread of Christ, that is in as much as
he teaches them Gods will, and no man showld obey more to any man* And ever the
more that a man were, the more showld he thus meek himself, as Christ did, to
al his Apostles. But Friars tellen nowght by this obedience, but if they maken
singular profession, to sinful fools that many times teachen and commanden
them against Gods will, and sayen that in such things as ben not expressly
commanded, ne forfended in Gods law, they should algats do after there
Soueraines; yea thowgh it be vnwi^tinglie against Gods will: And since it is
appropred to the holy Ghost to give full counsel in such points, they maken
there sinful Priours even with the holy Ghost. And where they showld be
governed in such doutie points by the holy Ghost, they leaven his counsel and
ruling many times and taken them to the ruling of a sinful fool, and in case a
damned fiend in hell, And thus they leaven obedience that Christ tawght and
ensampled as imperfect and not sufficient* and praysen more fained obedience to
sinnfull fools, that they taken of there own presumption, as if such fools
had founden perfiter obedience then ever did Christ God and mam.

Cap. 19. How they forsake the perfection of there order for wordly respects
ALso Friars forsaken perfection of there order for worship of the wordle, and
couetise, and been not suffren to take the freedom of the Gospel for to
preach Gods word to the people. For Friars ben made Bishops, yea many times by
Simonie, and swore^ strongly to go and preach and convert heathen men and
leaven this Ghostly office, and been Suffragans in England and robben men by
extortions, as in punishing of sin for money and suffren men to lie in sin,
fro year to year, for an annuel rent, and so in hollowing of Churches and
Churchyards, and Auters, and commonly al other Sacraments for money. And thus
these Friars Byshopps liuen commonly ever after in Simonie, pride, and
robbery, and thus they been exempt by Caiphas Byshoppricke fro all good
obseruances of Gods law, and of there own order and be free to live in
sin and to rob our land and envenime it by many cursings. And so they
bearen out first the gold of our land to Aliens, and sometimes to our
enemies, to get of Antichrist this false exemption, and ever after live in
robbing of poor men, and maintainen much sin, cursing, and simonie, that is
passing heresy. And other Bishops of the^ that have Dioceses in this land,
forsaken poverty, and penance, and obedience: for they looken to be Masters of
al Friars of that order in this land, and to live in pride, lusts of there
flesh, idleness and spoiling of the people, more subtly the^ other. And thus a
Friar shall dwell in Courts of Lords and Ladies to be there Confessor, and not
displease them for nothing, though they liuen in never so cursed sins, for to
live in his lusts and to get falselie mucke to Antichrists covent, and let
poor men of there alms, and thereto he shall have leave and commandment upon
virtue of obedience: but he shall no leave have, to go generally about in the
world, and preach truly the Gospel without begging, and live an open poor
and just life as Christ and his Apostles didden. For this were destroying of
there fained order. And therefore they louen more pride covetise and lusts of
there own flesh, then the worship of God and heal of man's soul. And thus
they maken sacrifice to Lucifer, to Mammon and to there own stinking belly.

Cap. 20. There rotten habit esteemed above Christ's body.
ALso Friars praisen more there rotten habit, then the worshipful body of our
Lord Jesus Christ. For they teachen Lords, and namely Ladies, that if they
dien in Fraunces habit they shall never come in Hell, for virtue thereof, and
certes this is an open heresy damning all that trusten thus into there lives
end. But a man may have the Sacrament of the Auter, and that is very Gods
body in his mouth, and straight flee to Hell withouten end: and the more be
damned for the evil taking of this Sacrament. Such Heretics been unable to
be amongst Christian men.

Cap. 21. Friars beg without need when the poor want without remorse. See
Chap. 6.
Also Friars beggen withouten need for there own rich Sect, and not for there
poor bedradden men that may not go and have no man to send for there
liuelode: but rather drawn rich men's alms fro such poor men. And therefore
charity is outlawed among them, and so is God: and leasings, and covetise and
Fiends been enhabited among them, for they decea* ven men in there alms to
make costly houses, not to harbor poor men but Lords, and mighty men; and
teachen men to suffer Gods Temple, that been poor men, to perish for default;
and thus they been traitors to God, and his rich people whom they deceaven in
there alms, and manquellers of poor men, whose liuelode they taken away fro
them by false leasings, and therefore they been irregular before God and
despisen him, and harmen the people when they saien Mass or Matines in this
cursed life, as Holy writ teaches and Austin and Gregory declaren fully.

Cap 22. Friars reprove not there Brethren as the Gospel wills but as
themselves will.
FRiars also keepen not correption of the Gospel against there brethren, that
trespassen, but cruelly done them to paineful prison; but this is not the
meek suing of Jesus Christ, for he and his Apostles prisoneden not sinful men
in this life, but sharply reproved there sin and at the last, when they
would not amend them taughten good men not to common with them: But these
Friars shown there tyrantrie at the full: who so knew well there pains and
torments: and it seems no wisdom, ne profit, to give Friars power to prison
men. For when the King by his officers priso^s a man, that is commonly done for
great and open trespass and that is good warning to other misdoe^s, and some
profit comes of the Kings Ministers: But when Friars prisonen their brethren
the pain is not known to me^, thowgh the sin were never so open and
slanderous, and that does harm to other liege men, and profit of Kings
Ministers is away, And when the potestatis of Friars been proud, covetous, and
sinful and haten the truth, they will soon prison true men that reprouen
there sins, and spare other shrewes that they may flatter them and
mainetaine them in there sin; and so beside the Kings leave tormenten true
men, for they wolden do Gods heasts, and since the king graunts occasion
thereto, the King is holde^ to revoke and let Friars prisoning, lest he be
guilty of the sin that comes thereby, since he may destroy it, and does not:
and thus did beggars Friars leapen up to Kings power, and many times more then
the Kings dare do, and maken the King the Fiends torment or to prison true
men, for they saien the troth. And so the King stoppes Gods law to be known in
his land, and nourishes evil men, and prisons good. For this dread and many
more, showld the King revoke this prisoning, and make Clarks be ruled after the
Gospel by simpleness and holy living.

Cap. 23. Friars lawless egging the King and the mighty ones of the land to
maintain there sect begging there alms and beggering the whole land.
ALso Friars maken our Land lawles; for they leaden Clarks and namely rulen
Prelas and Lords and Ladies and Commons also; and they been not ruled by Gods
law, ne laws of the Church, ^e laws of the King. For they glosen Gods laws
as them likes, and been exempt fro Bishops and other ordinaries and leaden the
Bishops of Rome, as them likes. And men saien they been not liege men to the
King, ne subject to his laws. For thowgh they stealen men's children, it is
said there goes no law upon the^, and that seems well; for they robben the
Kings liege men by false begginge of sixty thowsande mark by year as men
dowbten reasonably, and yet they be not punished therefore. And the lawless
Friars by there false ruling, maken our land lawless. For they letten
Clerks, Lords, and Commons to know the truth of holy writ, and maken them to
pursue true men to the death, for they teachen the commandments of God, and
crien to the people the foul sins of false Friars. And thus falsnesse is
maintained, and false men been raised to great estats, and truth is put on
back, and true men been pursued, yea to prisoning, to loss of al there goods,
and to sharp judgment, for as much as they wowlden destroy sin that was
openly and cursedly done, and in point for to fordoe our land. And of this
ruling been Friars most guilty, for they leaden Prelates Lords and Ladies,
Justices and other men by confession, and tellen them not speedely there
sins. For if they tellen them there sins, and they wowld not amend them,
the Friars that been there confessors, showlden leave them up as Christ and
Paul teachen; but they done not thus, for then they showlden leese winning and
favor of the wordle. And thus for love of money and welfare of there body,
they leaden our land out of the law of God and alrighteousnes.

Cap, 24. Friars no peacemake is but makebates striuers themselves and stirrers
up of others to wars and dissentions:
ALso Friars been irregular Procuratours of the fiend, to make and maintain
wars on christian men, and ennemies of peace and charity. For Friars
counsellen and openly preachen that men shoule^ flee to heaven withouten pain,
if they woulden go and slay in there own person, or maintain and find one
at there cost to slay christian men. And the end was to make Christ's Vikar
most rich to the wordle, the which Vikar showld be most poor, ^suing in this
most highly Christ and his Apostles: But Christ died to make peace and
charity and if men mighten thus freely grant pardon, they showlden yea to
leese there own life, grant pardon to make peace. Yet they preachen noe
pardon ne meede to make peace and charity: And yet they been bounden of God to
make men siker to have the bliss of heaven if they will truly procure for peace
and charity. But of the pardon that men vsen to day fro the Court of Rome,
they have no sikernes by holy writ ne reason, ne ensample of Christ, of his
Apostles. And so of other wars and debats that Friars mighten let if they
wolden, and since they done not; but rather counsel thereto, and comforten men
therein. and tellen not the peril* of them, they been cause and Procuratours of
al war^s and specially of this war in Flaunders, for they preacheden that and
haden it forth against the King, the Duke, and other Lords and Clarks, and
sharply pursueden Priests that stoden by charity, and profit of the Realm,
And so they weren then above the King, Lords and true Priests, and robbeden the
Kings liege men by false leasings, of many thousand pounds that thowgh the
King showld now be taken and our land now conquered or destroyed, the King
might not raise so much to help himself and his land. And certes there was
treason to God and the King, and false deceit of al men, both of cattaile and
of foul, and letting and destroying of peace and of charity.

Cap. 25, Judas children seling Christ and al for money.
FRiars also been Scariots children, betraying true men of the Gospel, and so
Christ for money, and for money they senden souls to Sathanas by example of
there evil living, by counsel to wars, and nourishing and comforting men in
sin, for lusts of there flesh. For in pleasing of Bishops and other men, they
preachen against poverty of Christ and sain that Preachers of the Gospel and
Christ's life been Heretics, worthy to be brend. And so for gifts of Bishops
and other men, and worldly favor, they sellen truth of the Gospel and so
Christ as Judas did. For S. Bid and S. Ambrose saien, since Christ is truth, he
that for money says falsenes and leaves the sooth, does such sin as Judas
did, and so they counsailen to wars for they winnen much thereby and for defaut
of charity they senden souls to Hell, when men by there counsel taken false
wars and enden in them, weening that they done well, and therefore dien
withouten sorrow of them. And for to heart men in this cursed warring, they
gone with them into war and been there Confessors and sometime slaien men
in there own person, and thus they been Antichrists Martyrs and fleene to Hell
to draw other menthither after them.

Cap. 26. They sclaunder ^rue Priests and flatter wicked men.
ALso Friars distroien this world most of al cursed men for they backbite^
good Clarks and saien that they distourblen the world, and flateren evil
Clarks in there sin, and so they praisen Lords that been tyrants,
extortioners, and evil livers, and Ladies also. And they despisen Lords and
Ladies that be given to leave pride and vanity of the world, and saien it was
not merry sithen Lords and Ladies tooken reward to the Gospel, and leften
there ancestors ma^ners, that weren worshipful to the world. And so of rich men
and other they praisen them that bring them much money with wrong, and many
deceits and saien that they been holy: but other men that given not Friars
much more then enough, they lacken at the full, though they done there alms
much better to there poor neighbors. And since God says that evil teachers
been cause of destruction of the people, and Grosted declares it well, and
Friars been principal evil teachers, they been principal cause of destroying
of this world. For they been Confessors Preachers and Rulers commonly of al
men, and they teachen the^ not there foul sins and perils of them but
suffren them in there sins, for winning of stinking mucke and lusts of there
own belly, that is foul worms meat, and a sack of dirt.

Cap. 27. Friars most impatie^t of al men living, in bearing reprooff.
ALso Friars been most rebel against the teaching of Christ's Gospel, and most
out of patience and pity. For they been most impatient against reproving of
sin and destroying thereof. For a Lord will meekelier suffer sharp despising
of his little sin, then they will suffer meek and soft reproving of there
great heresies. For they been wood that men's alms should be rightly departed
among poor needy men, feeble, crooked and blind, for then they saien they
been undone, but they been of vain religion as S. Iame says: For this is a
clean religion withouten spot anentis God the Father, to visit the fatherles
and modirles children and widows in there tribulation, and to keep aman
vnfouled fro this world, that is, fro pride covetise and vanities. But Friars
done all the contrary, for they visiten rich men, and by hypocrisy getten
falsely there alms, and withdrawn it fro poor me^; but they visiten rich
widows for there mucke, and maken them to be buried at the Friars, but poor
men comen in not there. And wilful poverty they forsaken, and most covetous of
al men and boasten more of there holiness, and been most dislanie of there vain
speech and worldly, and as true men tellen, Friars saien apertlie: if the King
and Lords and other men stonden thus against there false begging, and will not
suffer Friars to rob there Tena^ts, but give there Alms to there poor
neighbors, Friars will go out of the Land, and come again with bright heads.
And look whether this be treason or none.

Cap. 28. The Holy scripture accused by these unholy men of falsehood.
ALso Friars teachen and maintainen, that Holy writ is false, and so they
putten falsenes upon our Lord Jesu Christ, and on the Holy Ghost, and on all
the Blessed Trinity. For since God Almighty taught, confermes, and maintains
Holy writ; if this writing be false, then God is false, and maintainour of
error and falsenes, but certes then he is no God: yet known we never that
any sect would say that laws of there God were false, and there with believe
on the same God: but this despite done these blasphemers to the Holy Trinity.
Alas who may suffer this blasphemy, that Christ in whom is al treasour of
wit, wisdom and truth, couthe not or would not say true words, and sentence,
but sinful fools have true manner of speaking, contrary to the speech of our
Lord Jesu Christ. For if this be, sinful fools, yea in case Devils of Hell,
been wiser and truer then is Jesu Christ. And when this cursed ground is
sought, it stands in this error. For I am Master of vanity and of Heresy,
misvnderstond the words of God, therefore they been false* But these Heretics
shoulde^ know, that it sues of there cursed ground, that God is the falsest
thing in earth or heaven or in Hell. Why? for men falsely vnderstonden most
falsenes of him. And thus might each Panime or Sarracene make our God false, as
him liked. But why saien they that Holy writ is false, for they been wont so
much to leasings and falsenes that they taken falsenes for truth. As men saien,
a man may so long be nourished little and little by venime, that he weanes it
be wholesome, meet, and good. Also Holy writ damnes there foul* Hypocrisy,
begging, couetise, and other sins, and therefore they saien that it is false
to color by there falsenes. Also Holy writ praises much Christ's religion and
tells how new Sects, full of Hypocrisy and covetise shullen come and deceive
Christian men, and bids them know them by there couetise and Hypocrisy. And
therefore they saien as Sathanas Clerks, that Holy writ is false.

Cap. 29. How strongly wedded to there rotten habit.
FRiars also been stronglier wedded with there rotten habit against the
freedom of the Gospel, the^ the husband is with his wife by ordinance of God.
For the husband may lawfully be absent from his wife by a month, an half
year, and sometime seven year, and by common consent of them both by all
there life: But if a Friar be out of his rotten habit, yea an hour, he is
Apostata, though he love more God, and serve him better, and profit more to
christian men. And they putte^ more holiness in there rotten habit the^ ever did
Christ or his Apostles in there clothes. For Christ was thrice on a day out of
his clothes, and yet he was not Apostata. But they chargen so much this rotten
habit, for thereby the people weanes that they been holy, and given them more
dirt then is needful, or profitable* and therefore each party draws an other
to hell. So Friars for there false taking of alms when no need is, ne have they
leave of Gods law thereto, blind the people, for they drawn there alms fro
there poor and needy neighbors where they showlden do it by the heast of
God and maintainen Friars in there false begginge hypocrisy and other sins
many.

Cap. 30. The Popes dispensation or commandment of the superior more regarded
then Christ's commandment.
ALso Friars teachen that it is not lawefull to a Priest or any other man to
keep the Gospel in his bounds and cleannes withouten error of sinnful men
but if he have leave thereto of Antichrist. And thus they sayen it is not lawful
to a Christian man to do Gods commandment, but if a fiend give them leave
thereto: as if the leave and commandment of God be not enowgh thereto. For they
saien that a Priest that has bounden himself to errors of sinful men by new
profession, may not go to the freedom of the Gospel and live thereafter as
Christ tawght Priests, but if they have dispensation of the Pope. And J
suppose that he be Judas, and shall be damned, then he is a devil as Christ
says: and then it is plain, since this Priest may not keep the Gospel in his
freedom withoute^ his leave, and he is in this case a devil, then a Priest may
not keep the commandementes of God withouten leave of a fiend: But for to get
this leave, is our gold given to Aliens, and sometime our enemies; and yet the
Priest shall be bounden commonly to the rotten habit and be exempt fro goodness,
and bolded in sin.

Cap. 31 There vsery. Symony Covetousness, extortion, sapine and theft.
ALso Friars been receipt, and a swallow of Symonie, of usury, of extortions,
of rauines, and of theft and a neast or hoord of Mammons treasure. For thowgh
men liuen in Symonie they will not counsel them, and charge them in shrift to
resign there benefice, but comfort them to hold it still, and bring them much
dirt thereof, and they will undertake for there sin. And so of usurers they
chargen them not speedily to make restitution, but rather colouren this sin
to be partner of this winning, and so of other robbery they receauen it
priuelie, and so maintainen and colouren thefts in there theft, where other
liege men should be punished therefore, and so they been more covetous, then
the wicked Jews that bowghten Christ for they wowld not take the money of
Judas and do it to there money ne treasour, for it was the price of Christ's
blood* for Christ was sold and traied to death for that money. But Friars will
receive money, gotten by as great sins or more to make great houses and great
feasts to Lords, and not buie a field to bury in pilgrims as the Jews
didden; but rather laien it up in there treasure, to maintain wrongs against
there Curates and other poor men, by false plea at Room and merchandise in
England,

Cap. 32. Friars cannot endure to hear of Christ's poverty preached.
FRiars also crien loud that poor Priests been heretics, for they teache^ by
Gods law how Clarks showlden keep wilful poverty and Christ's Gospel, and the
King and Lords owen to compel them thereto. And thus they damnen holy writ,
and the kings regalree. For since poor Priests have tawght both in English and
in latin, how many open laws both in the old Testament and in the new, forfend
al Priests and Deacons to have secular Lordshipp and these laws been
confirmed by Christ's life and his Apostles, and Friars saien that this is
heresy, they damnen openly holy writ: and since the Kings regalie asks by
old stat^te, that the King may in many, in case take Temporalties fro
Clerks, and Friars saien that this taking is error against Gods law, they
damnen this rightful regalie of our King, and also our Kings and Lords, as
heretics if they maintain this rightful law to stable peace of our Realm.
And since by Gods law the office of the King and Lords is to praise reward, and
maintain good and rightful men, and to chastise sharply wicked me^, and
constrain Clarks to hold the state that Christ put them in and algates
wilful* poverty: Friars say if the King and Lords done there office of Gods
law that they been foul heretics. But why showlde the king maintain in
his land such traitors both to God and him and cruel ennemies of al Christian
men.

Cap. 33. Friars like thieves co^g into the Church by the window not by the
door.
ALso Friars been thieves, both night thieves, and day thieves, entering into
the Church not by the door, that is Christ. For withouten authority of God,
they maken new religions of errors of sinful men, and yet they maken worse
rules ever the longer that they lasten, and they seeken not meeklie the worship
of God and profit of Christian men's souls, and this thing they musten do if
they comen in by Christ: but they chosen and finden a new order less perfect
and profitable then is that that Christ made himself, and so they maken
division in Priesthed against the commandment of God; and since they been not
grounded on Christ and his law, they moten needs be drawn up, and the
ordinance of Christ mot stond in his cleannes and perfection.

Cap. 34. Binde^ there novices to impossible things.
ALso Friars by hypocrisy binden them to impossible thing that they may not
do, for they binden them over the commandments of God, as they saien
themselves, but they may do no more then the commandment of God. For God
bids in his most commandment, that thou shall love the Lord thy God of al thy
heart, of al thy life, of al thy mind and of al thy strengthes and mights, but
who may do more then this? No man. Then they binden them to more then they
may do, and since it si not counsel of Christ to make singular profession to
a sinful Jdeot and in case a Devil, and they bidden the^ to such one that they
done over the counsel of Christ: but all that is over the counsel of Christ,
is algats evil, since Christ's counsels to each good thing. And thus many blind
fools binde^ the^ to the high counsels of Christ that cannot keep the lest
commandment: but see hypocrisy of them; since each counsel of Christ is
commandment for some time, and some circumstances, how binden they them to
more then to the commandments? Not by the counsels, for they been
comma^dements but they fainen this to draw young children into there rotten
Habit, and other fools that known not the perfection of Christ's order.

Cap. 35. The necessity and multitude of there vain and cha^geable Ceremonies.
FRiars also been worse Heretics, the^ weren Jews, that woulden keep
Ceremonies of the old law with freedom of Christ's Gospel. For the Jews
kepten reasonable laws made of God and meedefull for time that God ordained
them: But Friars keepen new laws fained of errors of men, mo then God
ordained in the old Law, and more uncertain: for to day this law is holden
among the^, and to morrow destroyed; but this uncertain was not Gods law, and
these laws of Friars been more against the Gospel. For the laws of the old
Testament were figure of Christ's coming and passion, and ledden men to the
Gospel: but new laws of Friars been not such figure, and letten men to hold
freedom of the Gospel. Ah Lord, since good laws ordained of God musten need
cease for freedom of the Gospel, much more moten evil laws ordained of error
of sinful men, and worldly cease and let not men to keep the Gospel in his
freedom,

Cap. 36. Friars return evil for good.
ALso Friars been adversaries of Christ and disciples of Sathanas, not
yielding good for evil as Gods law teaches, ne good for good as kind and man's
law teachen; but yielding evil for good, as the Fiends law teaches. For they
casten and imagine the death of true men, that desiren and travailen to deliver
them fro the Fiends mouth and everlasting death, and to bring the^ to that
state in which Christ ordained Priests to live in. And they proferen Friars
this condition, if they will teach by holy writ or reason, that Friars order and
living is best for Priests, they will gladly be professed to the Friars order.
And if Priests may teach both by Holy writ and reason, that there order is
better then Friars, since Christ himself made there order and not Friars, they
praien Friars for love of God to take that order and to leave there singular
order, in as much as it draws them fro the freedom of the Gospel. And thus
they pursuen Priests, for they reprouen there sins as God bids, both to bren
the^, and the Gospel of Christ written in English to most learning of our
nation. And thus for the great alms that men given to Friars they letten men
to con Gods law, and so letten them to be saved, for they may not be saved
withouten conning and keeping of Gods law, and so Friars needen our land to be
damned with Fiends in Hell.

Cap. 37. Friars under the habit (...) holiness le^d men into sin.
FRiars also been worse enemies and slaiers of ma^s soul, then is the cruel
Fiend of Hell by himself. For they under the Habit of holiness, leaden men and
nourishen them in sin, and been special helpers of the Fiend to strangle
men's souls. For the name of holiness and of great Clarks in reputation of the
people, that the people trusts not to few true men preaching against there
covetise hypocrisy and false deceit. And the Friars for love of a little
stinking mucke, and welfare of there foul belly, sparen to reprove the cursed
sin of the people. For commonly if there be any cursed Jurour, extortioner,
or a^outrer he will not be shriuen at his own Curate, but go to a flattering
Friar, that will assoile him falsely, for a little money by year, though he be
not in will to make restitution and leave his cursed sin. And thus if the
foul Fiend might be showed in his shape to the people, as men saien he was in
time of S. Bartholmew the people would be ferde to dwell in his service, that is
sin: But the cursednes of sin is h^d, and the people is made sicker by
false Pardons and Letters of Fraternity though they al breaken the heasts of
God and keepen not charity and certain then is the Devil sicker of both
parties.

Cap. 38 They perswad men to recko^ more of there Anathemaes then of Gods curse.
ALso Friars leaden and nourishen our Prelates, our Lords and Commons in great
blasphemy, against God. For they teachen all this people to recke less of the
most rightful curse of God, then by the wrong curse of sinful man, thowgh he
be a damned devil. For they callen the curse of God the less curse, and the
curse of sineful man the more curse. For thowgh a man be never so cursed of God
for pride, envy, couetise or avowtrie, or any other this is not charged ne
pursued nether of Prelat ne Lord ne Commons: But if a man with stand ones the
Citation of a sinful Prelate yea after the commandment of God, then he shall be
cursed and prisoned after forty days, and al men shullen go upon him, thowgh
the man be pursued for truth of the Gospel, and be blessed of God. And thus
sinful men's dome and in case of the fiends is more dread and magnified the^ is
the rightful dome of God almighty.

Cap. 39. Friars heresy in affir ming the wick ed to be members of Christ
Church.
FRiars also destroien this Article of Christian men's faith: I belief o common
or general Church. For they teachen that tho men that shall be damned be members
of holy Church, and thus they wedden Christ and the devil to gether. For Christ
is ghostly wedded with each member of holy Church, and some of these as they
saien shul be damned, and then as Christ says, they been friends: Therefore by
them Christ and the devil been wedded to gether. But God say, by Paul, that
there is no commining ne consent to Christ and to Belial, and then may there
no wedding be betwixt them, but this general holy Church is the congregation of
Christ that is head and al good Angels in heaven and al men and weomen in earth
or in Purgatory that shullen be saved and no more. For Christ says that none
of his members shall perish, for no man shall take them out of his hands. And
John Evangelist says of false teachers that they went out of us but they were
not of us. And therefore Chrysostom says that tho that keepen not Gods law
but dien out of charity weren never Christ's body the which shall not reign with
him: and since each part of Christ's ghostly body of which Austine speaks, as
Holy writ does, shall reign with him in bliss. then no man that shall be damned
is part of Christ's ghostly body and so part of member of Holy Church: But
Friars saiden thus, for men shulden give them much money to pray for all both
good and evil; and also to please Bishops and Possessioners.

Cap, 40 Arrogating unto themselves glory due unto other men and sometimes to
God him self.
ALso Friars seeken busily there own worldly worship, and putten the worship
of God behind, against the teaching of Jesu Christ and S. Paul, yea that is
worse, they taken upon themselves glory that is appropred to God and so maken
them eue^ with God, for they seeken fast by great gifts and vain costs to be
called Masters of Divinity, and speak before Lords, and sit at the meat
with them, and not to teach truly the Gospel to al manner of men by meek life,
and freely as Christ bids. Also to be Confessors of Lords and Ladies algats
to be much told by and fare well, and not seek poor men, though they have more
need. And so of other business of Friars who so takes good sight to them. For
if a Friar do little well that shall be praised algats: but if another man do
much better that shall be lacked or despised. Also they shullen swear by him
that they callen Patron of there order, and leave God behind, and yet they
done so for worship of there own Patron and there own Sect, and natheles God
teach to swear by him in need, and not by his Creatures, but for there proud
swearing and ydel, they de spisen God and there Patron also.

Cap. 41. Exalting themselves above Christ himself.
FRiars yet highen yet falsely the^ self above Christ. For where Christ bids
that men trow not to him, but if he do the works of the Father of Heaven,
Friars chalengen that men trust and obey to them, as needful to souls health
when they done not the works of God. For else they may not ask that men do
after them when they witten not whether the thing that they commanden is
against Gods dome or there wit. And thus no man should do after them, but
when they teachen certainly the heasts of God or his counsels, lest men
doing after there teaching, in this do against the will of God, but farewell then
this new fained obedience, with this new profession.

Cap. 42. Christ's rule no sufficient warrant for them to be ruled by.
ALso Friars falsely enhaunsen themselves above Christ and his Apostles. For
they will not be paid with Christ's rule in the Gospel, to teach truly the
Gospel, and have meat and drink freely of a good man and devout to God, ne
be apaied with food and hylling as Christ and his Apostles weren, but they
robben Curats of there office, and ghostly worship, and letten them to know
Gods law, by holding books fro them, and with drawing of there vantages, by
which they shulden have books and learn. And also they robben Lords of there
rents, and some by more hypocrisy taken free annual rents of Lords cofers, and
they robben the Commons of there liuelode by hypocrisy and false begging,
damned by Gods law. And thus at the beginning they fainen them most poor of al
Clerks, but at the last they passen al other in great Houses and costly
Libraries, and great feasts, and many other prides and covetises and ever they
passen foul Christ and his Apostles. For where Christ had not to rest in his
head, Friars fained beggars have Lordly places, that almost thorough England
they may each night lie on there own.

Cap. 43 Friars policy in binding there nouices to unknown things
FRiars also of great cautele binding nouices to un known thing. For they
will not suffer them to know there priuities of there rule and there life til
that they ben professed, and then they shullen not be suffered to leave there
rule thowgh they witten well that they may not keep it; and this is openly
against Christ's teaching and John's Gospel. For Christ says that he spoke
openly to the world, and in hiddennes nothing, and Friars done here fully the
contrary. For first they shown great devotion and sweetness of holy life to
young children til they be professed, and then maistren them by tyrauntrie to do
many things against there conscience, and so needen them to go to Hell or to
prison, or some time to cruel death.

Cap. 44 Mispenders of the treasure of this land.
ALso Friars been wasters of treasure of our land by many blind and
vn^kilfull manners. For first they blinden them blindlie fro freedom of the
Gospel, and then spenden much gold to get them dispensatio^. And many times
bring vain pardons couuienales and other vain privileges, and in all this the
gold of our land goes out, and Symoney and curse and bold nesse in sin comes
again. And God wot where priuities of our land been thus showed to our
ennemies And God wot where matrimony be thus departed for money by such
Friars making false suggestion and false pursuit after. Also it seems that in
this they magnifien a sinful caitife, and in ca^e a damned fiend, more then God
almighty. For they dare not by free grant of god do a good thing to please
him therewith, but if they have leave of such a sinnful caitife: and if they
have leave of such an vnwittie caytif they dare do against Gods pleasing an
vnreasonnable thing and sinful and slanderous to al christian men.

Cap. 45. Friars holier then other men.
FRiars also by Lucifers pride highen themselves, and holden them hollier the^
al other out of there sect, for as much as they binden the^ to new Traditions
of sinful me^, the which ben full of error, over the most sufficient rule of
Jesu Christ, that left no profitable ne needful thing out of his rule. For
though a Priest or Bishop do never so truly the office that God bade Priests
do, yet they saien he is more holy if he come to there new fained religion
and obedience. But since boasting and reioicing of sin is one of the greatest
sins of al, and these Friars boasten so much of there sinful error how they
have founden a better religion then Christ made for his Apostles and Priests,
it seems they been most sinful and cursedlie proud over al other wicked men.
For it seems that they maken themselves wiser then Christ more witty and more
full of charity, since they teachen better way to heaven, then did Christ as
they fainen.

Cap 46. Friars altogether ^et upon covetousness.
ALso Friars setten more by stinking dirt of wordly goods, then they done by
virtues and goods of ^lisse. For if a Caymes castle of Friars has much dirt of
worldly goods, though the Friars therein be full of pride covetise Symonie and
false robbery by false begging and flattring yet they saien, that that rich
House is better then a poor house of Friars, though they liven in meeknes
poverty and penance and much holiness. And they travellen more to get dirt of
this world then to get the bliss of heaven, and they commenden more a Friar
that con subtillie and thick get this worldly dirt, then an other, that con
do and teach much virtuous life. And thus these Friars make sacrifice to false
Gods for there coveti^e and forsaken God Almighty, since they louen more
worldly mucke then virtues and the love of Jesu Christ.

Cap 47. Friars dead unto the wordle but raised by Antichrist to pride
Covetousness and maintenance of sin
FRiars also shown and witnessen in themselves Antichrists miracles, right as
Lazar and other raised by Christ sheweden and witnesseden Christ's miracles. For
as Lazar and other weren verily dead and verily raised by Christ to live of
kind and grace: so these Friars ^ainen them dead to pride of the world and
other sins but they been raised by Antichrists doing to pride of States
covetise and subtle maintaining or coloring of sin. For though men been
cursed avowterers, extortioners and wrongful maintainers of falsenes and
debates: yet Friars will color these sins and undertake for these sinful men,
if they will give them much dirt, and maintain there vain sect, and commend it
more then Christ's own religion. And they been quick to strive, pleet, and
fight bodily for worships and states of this world: and so they been dead to
meeknes charity and good religion, and been raised to cursed life of sin, and
this is Antichrists miracle.

Cap. 48. Friars spiritual Sodomits.
FRiars also been fowly envenimed with ghostly sin of Sodom, and so been
more cursed then the bodily Sodomits, that weren suddenly dead by hard
vengeance of God; for they done ghostly leacherie by Gods word, when they
preachen more there own findings for worldly mucke, then Christ's Gospel for
saving of men's souls, and when they leaven to preach the seed of Gods word and
leesen it, by which me^ shoulden by ghostly gendure be made Gods sons, they
done more sin then though they losten man's seed, by which the body of man
should be gendrid. For the misvsing of the better virtue is more sin, but the
seed of Gods word is better then the seed of man, therefore it is worse to
mispend that then to miswast man's seed. And Rob. Grosted declares this reas^n
well against cruel Curats.

Cap. 49. Friars notable factors for the Pope herein England.
FRiars also been most privy and subtle procurators of Simonie and soul
winning and begging of benefices of indulgences, and travels, pardons and vain
priniledges. For men saien, they will get a great thing of the Pope, or of
Cardinals in England better cheap then other Procuratours, and they been more
wily, and more pleasantly can flatter the Pope and his Court, and most
privily make Lords to maintain the Pope and his, in rob^ing our land of
Treasure by his Pardons, privileges, and the first fruits of benefices in our
land, and Dimes and Subsidies to war on Christian men, for stinking worldly
Lordship that God has forbidden to him and al Priests; and in false confession
they stirren Lords much thereto and needen to destroy the land, when they
maintainen the Pope and this false robbing.

Cap. 50. Friars most Perilous enemies to ho ly Church and to al our land.
YEt Friars been most perilous enemies to holy Church and al our land, for
they letten Curates of there office, and spenden commonly and needless sixty
thousand mark by year, that they robben falsely of the poor people. For if
Curats didden there office in good life and true preaching as they been
holden upon pain of damning in hell, there were Clarks enowgh of Bishops,
Parsons, and other Priests; and in case over money to the people, and yet not
two hundred year agone, there was no Friar, and then was our land more
plenteous of Cattle and men, and they were then stronger of complexion to
labor the^ now, and then were Clarks enowgh. And now been many thousand of
Friars in England and the old Curats sta^den still vnamended, and among al sin
is more increased and the people charged by sixty thowsande mark by year,
and therefore it mowght needs fail, and so Friars suffren Curats to live in
sin so that they may ^obbe the people and *live in there lusts. For if
Curats done well there office Friars weren superflue, and our Land showld be
discharged of many thowsa^d mark, and then the people showld better pay
there rents to Lords, and dimes and offerings to Curats, and much flattering
and nourishing of sin showld be destroyed and good life and peace and
charity showlden rain among Christian men: and so when all the ground is
sowght Friars saien thus indeed, let old Curats wax rotten in sin, and let
them not do there office by Gods law, and we will live in lusts so long, and
wast vainelie and needless sixty thousand mark by year of the poor Commons
of the land, and so at the last make dissension between them, and there
childer for dimes and offerings that we will get privily to us by hypocrisy,
and make dissension between Lords and there Commons. For we will maintain
Lords to live in there lusts extortions and other sins, and the Commons in
couetise leacherie and other deceits, with*false swearing and many guiles, And
also the Curates in there damnation for leaving of there Ghostly office and so
be procuratours of the fiend, for to draw al men to hell: thus they done
indeed, howeuer they faynen in hypocrisy of pleasing of words.

Of these fifty Heresies and Errors, and many more if men will seek them well
out, they may know that Friars been cause, beginning, well, and maintaining of
perturbation in Christiandome, and of al evils of this wordle, and these
errors shullen never be amended til Friars be browght to freedom of the
Gospel, and clean religion of Jesu Christ.

God for his endless mercy and charity make very peace and charity among
Christian men, and bring al Priests to Christ's clean religion withouten error
of wrong by-lawes.
Amen.
An exposition of the hardest words.
Algats, always, evermore, notwithstanding, forsooth. Axing, demand. Apayed,
contented. Appropred, appropriated. A, oh. Anentis, toward. Apertly, openly.
Assoile, absolve.
Blecked, spotted, defiled. Been, be, bin. Berowgh, living. Beheast, request,
commandment Brenne, burn. Brend, burnt. Backed, put back. Bylawes,
Traditions.
Cowth, could. Cleaped, called. Calueren, calves. Certes, truly. Chargeous,
chargeable. Childer, children. Carmes, Friars Carmelits. Couetise, covetousnes.
Chaffering, merchandising. Convienalis, belonging to there covent. Caymes,
Cayns.
Dowyd, endowed. Dymes, tenthes. Dudden, did. Doutouse, doubtful. Doutie* high,
deep. Distourblen, trouble. Dislany, lavish. Dome, judgment.
Ene, one. Eke, also. Ensampled* declared by example. Enhausen, raise, extol.
Envenimed, poisoned.
Fro, from. Forboden, forbid. Fautors, favorers. Fiend, Deevill. Fore-don,
break overthrow. Forefending, forbidding. Fore do, undo, break.
Gendrure, generation.
Hiled, apparelled. Healing, apparelling. Hylling, apparel. Hests,
commandments. Heal, health. Haden, holden. Highen, extol. Hiddenes,
secrecy. Hien, extolle. Hied, extolled, praised.
Inanter, peradventure.
Kin, kind, kin. Knights, disciples, followers.
Leuefull, lawful. Lifelode, living. Lacked, dispraised. Leasings, lies.
Meedefull, helpefull. Medefullie, metitoriouslie. Mawmetrie, Mahometrie,
Idolatry. Mean. Michel, much. Meynes, houses. Manquellers, murderers. Meede,
help.
Needid, constrained. Ne, nether. Nowght, nothing* not. Nere and more,
altogether, right so. Needen, to force. Natheles, nevertheles. Novelries,
novelties.
O, one. Owen, ought.
Pleete, plead. Pelure, furs. Potestatis, powers, great men. Paid,
contented.
Queeke to cry. Queething, bequeathing, testaments.
Regalie, or Regalrie, Regalty, the Kings Right, Crown and dignity. Reward,
regard. Rauines, opp^essions. Recke, esteem, reckon. Reues, Bailiues husbands.
Sueth, follows. Sue, to follow. Suers, followers. Siker, true, well,
verily. Skille, reason. Sothe, truth. Satrap, A great man either of the laity
or Clergy. Salarie, wages. Sogetttis subjects. Sikernes, truth. Since,
sithence, since. Sothely, truly.
Traied, betrayed. Tho, those, that, althowgh. Tyrauntrie, tyranny. Trow, to
esteem.
Unwarily, unwarily. Vnkunning, unskillful. Veynelich, vainly. Vnwitty,
unskillful, untoward. Vnderlout, underling, subject, obedient. Vnfouled,
undefiled.
Winning, getting: Weanes, thinks. Withouten, without. Wood, mad. Writ,
Scripture. Witten, know.
Youen, given. Give, give. Yiftis, gifts.
FINIS.

