wycklyffes wycket: which he made in King Rycards day the second in the year
of our lord God M.CCC.XCV.

Ihon the.vi. chapter. I am the living bread which came down from heaven:
who so eteth of this bread shall live for ever. And the bread that I will give is
my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

A very brefe diffinition of these words. Hoc est corpus meum.
I Beseech ye brethren in the lord Christ Jesus, and for the love of his
spirit to pray with me, that we may be vessels to his laud and praise what
time so ever it pleases him to call upon us. Romans.xv. Chapter.

For as much as our savior Jesus Christ when that he walked here on earth
with the prophethes which were before him, and the apostles which were
presently with him, whom also he left after him, whose hertes were molyfyed
with the holy ghost, and warned us, and gave us knowledge that there was two
manner of ways, the one to life, the other to death as Christ says, Mat.
vii. Luke, xiii.
How straighte and narowe is the way that leadethe to life, and there be but
few that fyndeth it. But how large and broad is the way that leadethe to
dampnation, and there be many that go into it. Therefore pray we hertely to
God that he of his mere mercy will so strengthen us with the grace and
stedfastnes his holy spirit, to make us strong in spiritual living after
the evangelical Gospel so that the world, no not the very infydeles papists
and apostates can gather none occasion to speak evil, of us, whereby we may
enter into that strayte gate, as Christ our savior and all that folowes him
have done, that is not in idle living, but in dilygente labourynge, yea in
great sufferaunce of persecutyon even to the death, and that we find the way
of everlasting life, as he has promised where he says. Mat. vii.
He that seeks fyndeth, and that axeth receyuethe, and to him that knocks it
shall be openyde. Also Christ sayethe. If thy son axe the bread will thou
give him a stone, Luke. xi.
or if he axe the fyshe, will thou give him a serpent, if ye which are evil
can give good things to your children how much more shall your heuenlye
father give a good spirit to them that axe it of him. Saint James says.
Jacob. i.
If any man lack wisdom let him axe it of god which gives to all men if
they axe it in faith, and vpbraydethe none, for he that douteth is like to the
waves of the sea, that is borne about with every blaste of wind. Apoc. iii.
Think not that such shall receive any thing of the Lord. For a man double
in soul is unstable in all his ways, as it is written wherefore let us pray to
God that he keep us in the hour of temptation that is coming in all the
world. Dani. xi.
For as our savior christ says When ye see that abomination of desolation
that is spoken of by the prophet Daniel standing in the holy place, mat xxiiii.
as christ says he that redethe let him understand. But for because that
every man can not have the book of Daniell to know what is prophesye is.
Danyell said toward the last days the King of the north shall come, and
the arms of him shall stand, and shall defyle the sanctuarye, and he shall
take away the continual sacrifyce, and he shall give abhominatyon into
desolatyon and wicked men shall find a testamente gylfullye, but ye that know
your god shall hold and do, and vntaughte men in the people shall teach
full many men, and they shall fall on the swearde and in flame, and into
Captyuyte many days. And when they shall down they shall be araysed by a
little help, and full many shall be applied to them gylfullye, and of learned
men should fall to them that they build together. And the chosen shall be
together, and shall be made white till a time determined. For yet another time
shall be, and the king shall do by his will, and then he shall be raised and
magnifyed at each god. And against the god of gods shall speak great
things and he shall be raised till the wrathfulnes before determined is
perfectylye made, and he shall not inheryte the god of his fathers, and he
shall be in the companyes of women and he shall not change any thing of gods
for he shall raise again all things. Forsooth he shall honor god of Mason^ in
his place, and he shall worshipe a god whom his fathers know not, not with
Gold, Silver, precious stones, nor with precyoue things. But he shall do
make strong the god of Mason with thalyent or strange god which he knew
not, and he shall multyplye glory, and he shall give to hyme power in many
things, and he shall depart the lawde at his will, hitherto be they the
words of Danyell who may see a greater abhomynations then to see the people
to be led away from God and they be taught to worship for God that thing
that is not god nor savior of the world For though it be their God as it is
written by a Prophet saying. The Lords going shall make low the God of the
earth, for it is their Gods that they believe in them which may not make
them saffe as it is written whereas sayncte Paul sayethe.

ye men of Athens I perceive that in all things. I see you as vain
worshippers of Idols, Act. xvii.
for I passed by and saw your mawmetes and found an altar in the which was
written to te unknown God. Therefore the thing which you know not ye worship
as god. This thing show I unto you: God which made the world and all things
that be in it. This forsooth he is Lord of heaven and of earth and he dwells
not in the temple made with hands, neither has he need of any thing, for he
geuethe life to all men and breathe every where, and he made of one all kinds
of men to inhabyte on all the face of the earth. Determyninge times ordained
and terms of the dwellinge of them to seek out God. If peradventure they
might find him, although he be not far from each of you. And again he
sayethe ye shall not think that God living is not like to gold, silver,
either any graven thing, or painted by craft, either taught of man, for God
despisethe the time of the unknown things. And he shewethe every where that
all men should do penance, and hereof the clerks of the law have great
need which have been ever against God the Lord both in the old law and in
the new, to sley the Prophets that speak to them the word of God, mat. xviii.
ye see that they spared not the son of God when that the temporal judge
would have delivered him and so forth of the Apostels and martirs that has
spoken truly the word of God to them, and they say it is heresy to speak of
the holy scripture in English, and so they would condemn the holy ghost
that gave it in tongues to the apostles of Christ as it is written to speak
the word of God in all languages that were ordained of God under heaven as it
is written. Act. ii.
And the holy Gooste descended upon the Hethen as (...) the Apostles in
Jerusalem as it (...), Iohe^l. iii, Act. lxxxx.
and Christ were so merciful to send the holy ghost to the Hethen me^, and
he made them partakers of his blessed word, why should it then be taken away
from us in this land that be Christen men. Consider you whether it is not all
one to deny Christ's words for Heresye and Christ for an heretyke, for if my
word be a lie, then am I a liar that speaks the word. Therefore if my words
be heresye then am I an heretyke that speaks the word, therefore it is all one
to condemn the word of God in any language for Heresye and God for an
Heretyke that spoke the word, for he and his word is all ane and they may
not be separated, and if the word of him is the life of the world as it is
written. Mat. iiii.
Not only by bread lives man, but in every word that comes out of the
mouth of god, and every word of God is the life of the soul of man, as says
saint John^, that thou have an oyntynge of the holy gooste, and thou have no
need of any man but teach thou in all things which is his blessed word in
whom is all wisdom and conninge, and yet ye be always to learn as well as we
How may any Antechriste for dread of god take it away from us that be
christen me^ and thus to suffer the people to dye for hunger in hererye and
blaspheme of man's law that corrupts and sleyth the soul, as pestilence
sleth the body, as Dauyd hereth wytnes where he speaks of the Cheyre of
pestilence, and most of al they make us believe a false law that they have made
upon the secret hooste, for the most falsest belef is taught in it. For where
find ye that ever Christ or any of his disciples or apostels taught any man to
worshype it. For in the mass creed it is said I believe in one god only our
lord Jesus Christ the son of god only begotten and borne of the father
before all the world, he is God / of God, light of light, very god of very god,
begotten and not made and of a substance eue^ with the father by whom al
things be made and the psalm, Quicunque vult there it is said. God is the
father, God is the son, God is the holy Ghost. Unmade is the father unmade
is the son, and unmade is the holy ghost and thou the^ that art an earthely
man by what reason may thou say that thou make thy maker. whether may the
made thing say to the maker, why have thou made me thus? Or may it turn
again and make him that made it (God forbyde). Now answerest thou that say
every day that thou make of bread the body of the lord flesh and blood of
Jesus Christ god and man. Forsooth thou answerest greatly against reason by these
words that Christ spoke at his supper on Serethursday at night that Christ
took bread and blessed it and brake it and gave it to his disciples and
apostles, mat. xxvi. mark. xiiii
and said, take ye, and eat ye, this is my bodi which shall be given for you And
also he taki^g the cup and did thanks, and gave to the^ and said. drink ye
al hereof, this is my blod of the new testament which shall be shede out for
many into the remission of sins, as says Luke. when Jesus had taken bread,
he gave thanks and brake it to them and said, take ye, eat ye, this is my
body that shall be given for you do ye this in the remembrance of me. Now
understand ye the words of our savior christ as he spoke them one after
another as Christ spoke them. For he took bread and blessed, and yet what
blessed he. The scripture says not that Christ took bread and blessed it, or
that he blessed the bread which he hade taken.

Therefore it seems more that he blessed his disciples and apostels, whom he
hade ordained witnesses of his passion, and in them he left his blessed word
which is the bread of life, as it is written not only in bread lived man, but
in eurry word that procedith out of the mouth of god. Mate. iiii.
Also Christ says I am the bread of life that came down from heaven, Ioh.
vi.
and Christ says often in Matthew, the words that I have spoken to you be
spirit and life. Therefore it seems more that he blessed his disciples, and
also his apostels, in whom the bread of life was left more then in material
bread, for the material bread has an end, as it is written in the gospel
of Matthew. xv. Mat. xv.
that Christ said all things that a man eatethe goethe down into the womb,
and is sent down into the draughte away, and it has an end of roottynge,
but the blessing of Christ kept his discyples and apostels both bodily and
gostely. As it is written, Ioh. xiii.
that none of them perished but the sone of perdition that the scriptures might
be fulfilled, and often the scripture says that Jesus took bread and brake it
and gave it to his disciples, and said, take ye, eat ye. This is my body that
shall be given for you. But he said not this bread is my body or that the bred
should be given for the life of the world. For Christ says what and if ye
shall se the son of man asse^d up, John^. vi.
where as he was before. It is the spirit yt quyckeneth, the flesh profits
nothing Also Christ says in the gospel, verily verily I say unto you.
Except the whet corn fall in to the ground and dye. It bydeth alone. but if
it dye, it bryngethe forth much fruit. Here men may see by the words of
Christ that it behooved that he dyed in the flesh, and that in his death was
made the fruit of everlasting life for all them that believe on him, as it is
written. For as by Adam all dye, even so by Christ shall al live and every man
in his own order, for as one clerenes is in the son, another in the moon,
and a sterre in clerenes nothing in comparyson to the son. Even so is the
again rysynge of the ded men, for we be sowe^ in corrouption and shall rise
again incorruptible, we are sown in infyrmyte and shall rise again in
virtue, we are sown in natural bodies, and shall rise again spiritual
bodies. Then if Christ shall change thus our deadly bodies by death, Math.
Mark. Luke.
and god the father spared not his own son as it is written, but that death
should reyne in him as in us, and that he should be translated into a
spiritual body the first again rysynge of dead men. Then how says
Hypocrites that take on them to make our Lords body, Note here
loo whether make they the gloryfyed body either make they again the
spirytuall body which is risen from death to life either make they the
fleshely body as it was before he suffered death and if they say also that
they make the spirytuall body of Christ it may not be so, Math. xxviii.
for that thing that Christ said and did he did it as he was at supper
before he suffered his passion, as it is written that the spirytuall body of
Christ rose again from death to life Also he ascended up into heaven and that
he will abide there till he come to judge the quick and the dead? and if
theysaye that they make Christ's body as it was before he had suffered his
passion, then must they needs grant that Christ is to dye yet? for by all
holy scriptures he was promised to dye, and that he gave lordshyppe of
everlasting life.

Furthermore if they say that Christ made his body of bread? with what
words made he it, not with these words (Hoc est corpus meum) that is to say
in English, this is my body, for they be the words of gyuynge and not of
making which he said after that he brake the bread then departing it among
his disciples and apostles. Therefore if Christ had made of that bread his
body, had made it in his blessing or else in gyuynge of thanks and not in the
words of gyuynge for if Christ had spoken of the material bread that he had
in his hands as when he said, (Hoc est corpus meum) this is my body and it
was made before, or else the word had been a lie, for if ye say this in my
hand, and if it be not a hand then am I a liar, therefore seek it busely if ye
can find.ii. words of blessyng or of gyuynge of thanks the which Christ
did, and that the clerks of the earth knowethe not, for if ye might find or
know it those words, then should you wax great masters above Christ, and
then ye might be gyuers of his substance, and as father and maker of him and
that he should worship you, as it is written: Exodus, xii.
Thou shalt worship thy father and mother, of such as desire such
worship against gods law, speaks saint Paul of the man of sin that
enhaunsethe him self as he were God. And he is worshypped over all things as
God and shows him self as he were god, 1, Tessa. ii
where our charge be gylty in this deem ye or they, that known most for they
say that when ye have said: Hoc est corpus meum, that is to say this is my
body, the which ye call the words of consecration or else of making, and
when they be said over the bread, ye say that there is left no bread, but
it is the body of the Lord, but truly there is nothing but an hepe of
accydentes as whytnes, ruggednes, roundnes, sauery, touching, and tastynge and
such other accide^tes. Than if thon say that flesh and blood of Christ
that is to say his manhood is made more or increased be so much as the
mynystration of bread and wine is, the which ye mynystren, if ye say it is
so, then thou must needs consent that, that thing that is not God to day
shall be God to morrow, yea and that thing which is without spirit of life,
but growethe in the field by kind, shall be God an other time. Math. i. Luke. i.
psalm, clxix.
And we all ought to believe that he was without beginning, and without
ending, and in his manhood begotten and not made, for if the manhood of
Christ were increased every day by so much as the bread and wine draws
that ye mynistren, he should wax more in one day by carte lodes then he did
in xxxii. years when he was here in earth. And if thou make the body of our
lord in those words: Hoc est corpus meum, that is to say This is my body. And
if thou may make the body of the lord in those words, This is my body
thou thy self must be the person of Christ or else there is a false God, for if
it is thy body as thou sayeste, then it is the body of a false knave, or of a
dronken man, or of a thief, or of a lecheroure or full of other sins, and
then there is an unclean body for any man to worshype for god. For and Christ
had made there his body of material bread in the said words, as I know
they be not the words of making, what earthly man had power to do as he did,
for in all holy scripture from the beginnynge of Genesis to the end of the
Apocalips There be no words written of the making of Christ's body, but
there been written that Christ was the son of the father, and that he was
conceived of the holy ghost, and that he took flesh and blood of the virgin
Mary, and that he was dead, and that he rose again from death on the third
day, and that he ascended to heaven very god and man, and that we should
believe in all scripture that been written of him and that he is to come to judge
the quick and the dead, and that the same Christ Jesus king and savior,
Hebr. i.
was at the beginning with the father and the holy ghost, making all things
of naught, both heaven and earth and all things that been in it worchynge by
word of his virtue, for he said, be it do, and it was done, as whose works
never earthly man might co^prehende either make. Genesis.
And yet ye words of the making of these things by me written in the
beginning of gene. eue^ as god spoke the^ and if ye can not make the work yt
he made and have ye words by which he made it, how shall he make him that made
the works and you have no words of auctorite either power left you on earth
by which ye should do this, but as ye have feigned this craft of your false
errors, which some of you understand not, for it is prophesyed Esaye.vi.
and.xiii. chapter of Math. xiii. and Luke. viii. Mark. iiii. ye shall have
eyes and se not, and ears and hear not, and ye shall se prophesyes and ye
shall not understand lest they were converted, for I hyde them from the
hertes of those people, their hertes are greatly fatted and this thing is
done to you for the wyckednes of your errors in unbelieve, therefore be you
conueteed from the worste sin as it is written, when Moses was in the hill
with God. Exodus xx the people made a calfe and worshypped it as God. And God
spoke to Moses go, for the people have done the worste sin to make and
worship alyen gods. But now I shall ask you a word, answer you me,
whether is the body of the lord made at once or at twice, is both the flesh
and the blood in the host of the bread or else is the flesh made at one
time and the blood made at other time, that is to say the wine in the
chalyce? if thou wylt say it is full and hole the manhood of Christ in the
hooste of bread both flesh and blood, skin, here, and bones, then make
thou us to worship a false god in the chalyce, which is vnco^iured when ye
worship the bread, and if ye say the flesh is in the bread, and the blood
in the wine, then thou must grant, if thy craft be true as it is not in
deed, that the manhood of christ is departed and that he is made twoe times:
for first thou take the hooste of bread other a piece of bread and make it as
ye say, and the innocent people worship yt. And then thou take to the, the
chalyee and likewise marreste, make I would have said, the blood in it, and
then worshyppen it also, and if it be so as I am sured, that the flesh and
blood of Christ ascended, then be ye false harlottes to god and to us, for
when we shall be household ye bring to us the dry flesh and let the blood be
away for ye give us after the bread wine and water, and sometimes clean water
unblessed rather coniured by the virtue of your craft, and yet ye say under
the host of bread is the full manhood of Christ, then by your own
confession must it needs be that we worshyppen a fallse god in the chalyce
which is vnco^iured when we worship the bread, and worshype the one as the
other, but where find ye that, that ever Christ or any of his disciples taught
any man to worship this bread or wine.

Therefore what shall we say of the Apostles that were so much with Christ,
and were called by the goly ghost, had they forget it to set it in the creed
when they made it that is christian me^nes believe, or else we might say that they
knew no such God, for they believe in no more gods but in him that was at the
beginning, and made of naught all things. Hebr. the first, ps. xvi. visible
and unvisible which lord took flesh and blood being in the virgyn the same
god But ye have many false ways to begyle the innocente people and sleyghtes
of the find. For ye say that in every host either piece is the hole ma^hode of
Christ either full substance of him. For ye say as a man may take a glass,
and break the glass into many pieces and in every piece properly thou may
see thy face and thy face not parted. So ye say the lords body is in each
host either piece and his body not parted. And this is a fool subtyl question
to begyle an innocente fool, but will ye take heed of this subtle question,
how a man may take a glass and behold the very lyckenes of his own face
and yet is it not his face, but the lyckenes of his face, for and it were his
very face, the^ he must needs have two faces, one on his body and an other in
the glass. And if the glass were broken in many places, so there should be
many faces, more by the glass then by the body and each man shall make as
many faces to them as they would, but as ye may see the mind or lykenes of
your face and is not the very face, but the figure thereof. So the bread is
the figure or mind of Christ's body in earth, and therefore Christ said. As
often as ye do this thing do it in mind of me, Lu. xxii. Also ye say as a man
may light many candels at one candell and the light of that candle never ye
more nor never the less. So ye say that the manhood of Christ descendethe
into each part of every host, and the manhood of Christ never the more ne
lest, where then becomes your ministrations. For if a man light many
candels at one candle as long as they brenne there wylbe many candelles
lighted and as well, the last candle as the first, and so by this reason, if
ye shall fetch your word at god, of god make god, there must needs be many
gods and that is forbidden in the first commandment Exo. xx. And as for
making more either making less of Christ's manhood it lies not in your
power to come there, nyghe, neither touch it, for it is ascended into heaven in
a spiritual body, Math. xxviii. which he suffered not Mary Magdeleyne to
touch, when her sins were forgeuen to her. Therefore all the sacraments that
he left here in earth be but minds of the body of Christ for a sacrament is
no more to say, but a sign of mind of a thing passed or a thing to come, for
when Jesus spoke of the bread and said to his disciples Luke the.xxii. as ye
do this thing, Luke xxii
do it in mind of me, it was set for a mind of good things passed of Christ's
body, but when the Aungel showed to John Apocalips.xvii. Apo. xvii
the sacraments of the woman and of the beast that bare her, it was set for a
mind of evil things to come, on the face of the death, and great stroyeng of
the people of god. And in the old law there were many fygures or minds of
things to come. For the body of christ and circumcision was demanded unto
the law, and he that kept not the law was slain. And yet. S Paul says.
Roma. ii. And neither it is circumcision that is openly in the flesh but he
that is circumcised of heart in spirit, Roma. ii
not the letter whose perusynge is not of men, but of God. Peter says
the.iii. chapter. Peter. iii
And so baptism of like form makes not us safe, but the putting away of
fylthynes of the flesh, and the axynge of good conscience in god, by the again
rysynge of our Lord Jesus Christ from death that we should be made heirs of
everlasting life, he yeade into heaven, and Aungelles and powers and virtues,
been made subjects to him. And also the scryptures says of Johan Baptyste,
Mathewe the first chapter, Math.
that he preached in wyldernes and said: a stronger then I shall come after
me, and I am not worthy to knele down and unlace his shoe, and yet Christ
laid that he was more then a prophet. Mat. xi.
Esaias says the.vi. Chapter. Mathewe xi. how may ye say ye worthy to make
his body and yet your works bears wytnes yt ye be no less the^ prophets,
Math. xi.
for if ye did ye should not teach the people to worship the sacraments or
minds of Christ for Christ him self which sacraments or fygures ben lefull
that god taught them and left them unto us, as ye sacryfices other minds of
the old law was full good as it is written. They that keep the^ should live
in those, Romans x.
Paul Romans x. and so the breed that Christ brake was left to us for mind
of things passed for the body of Christ that we should believe he was a very
man in kind as we be as god in virtue, and that his manhood was sustained in
fode as ours be, for saint Paul says he was very man, and in habyte he was
found as man. And so we must believe that he was very god and man together and
that he styed up very god and man to heaven, and that he shall be there till he
come to deem the world. And yt we may not se him bodily being in this life,
as it is written pe. i. For he says, whom ye have not ye love, in to whom ye
now not seeing believe. And John says in the first gospel, no man saw god
no but the only begotten son that is in the bosom of the father he has
told out. And Ioh says in his epistle the.iii. chap. Every man yt synneth
sees not him neither know him, by what reason then say ye that be sinners
that ye make god, truly this must needs be ye worst sin, to say that ye
make god, and it is the abhominacion of dyscomforte that is said in Daniel the
prophet standing in the holy place, he that reads let him understand. Also
Luke says.xxii. that Christ took the cup after that he had supped and did
thanks and said This cup is the n^we testament in my blood that shall be
shed into the remission of sins for man, now what say ye, the cup which
he said is the new testament in my blood, was it a material cup in which
the wine was that he gave his dysciples wine of, or was it his most, blessed
body in which the blessed blood was kept till it were shed out for the sins
of them that should be made safe by his passion, needs we must say yt he spoke
of his holy body, as he did when he called his passion either suffrynge in
body a cup when he prayed to his father or he went to his passion. Math.
xxvi. And said if it be possible yt this cup pass from me, but if thou wylt yt
I drink it thy will be done. He spoke not here of the material cup in which
he had given his discyples drink for it troubled not him, but he prayed for
his great suffrau^ce and bitter the which he suffered for our sins and not
for his. And if he spoke of his holy body and passion when he said. This cup is
ye new testament in my blood, so he spoke of his holy body, when he said this
is my body that shall be given for you, and not of the material bread which he
had in his hand. Also in another place he calls his passion a cup, Math.
xx. where the mother of zebedeus sons came to him, and axed of him that her
two sons when he came to his kingdom might sit one of his right side and one
at his left side. And he answered and said, woman thou wotest not what thou
axest, then he said to them, may ye drink of the cup that I shall drink, and
they said yea lord And he said ye shall drink of my cup, but to sit on my
right hand or left hand it is not mine to give, but to the father it is
proper but in that that he said ye shall drink of my cup, he promised them to
suffer tribulacion of this world as he did, by the which they should enter into
life everlasting, and to be both on his right hand And thus ye may se yt
christ spoke not of the material cup neither of him self nor of his apostles
nether of material bred neither of material wine. Therefore let every man wisely
with meke prayers and great study and also charity read the words of god and
holy scryptures, but many of you be like the mother of zebedeus sons, to whom
christ said, thou wotest not what thou axest. So many of you wot not what ye
axe or what ye do, for if ye did, ye would not blaspheme god as ye do, to set
an alie^ god i^ sted of the living god. Also Christ says John. xv. I am a
very vine / wherefore worship ye not the vine for god, as ye do the bread.
wherein was Christ a very vine / or where in was the bread christ's body, in
fyguratyue speech, which is hyd in the understanding of sinners Then if
Christ became not a material either an early vine, neither material vine
became the body of Christ. So neither the bread material bread was not
changed from his substance to the flesh and blood of Christ.

Have ye not read John the.ii. when Christ came into the temple, they axed of
him what token he would show, that they might believe him. And he answered
unto them, cast down this temple and in three days I shall rayre it a gain,
which words were fulfilled in his rysynge again from death, but when he
said undo this temple, in that, that he said this, they were dyscende for
they understood it fleshlye, and had went that he had spoken of the temple of
Jerusalem, for because he stood in it. And hereof they accused him at his
passion full falsely Math. xxvi. for he spoke of the temple of his blessed
body, which rose again in the.iii day. And right so Christ syake of his
holy body when he said, this is my body which shall be given for you. Luke.
xxii. which was given to death, and into rysynge again to bless for all that
shall be saved by hi^, but like as they accused him falsely of the temple of
Jerusalem Right now a days they accusen falselye against Christ and say
that Christ spoke of the bread that he brake among his apostles, for in
that Christ said this, they ben deceived take it flesshly and turn it to the
material bread as the Jews did to the temple, and on this false
understanding they make abhominacion of dyscomfort that is said of Daniel the
prophet.xi. and Math. xxiiii, standing in the holy place, he that reads let
him understand. Now therefore pray we hertely to God that this evil time may
be made short, for the chosen men as he has promised in his blessed gospel
Math. xxiiii. And the large and broad way that leads to perdition may be
stopped, and the strayte and narowe way that leadethe to bless may be made
open by holy scryptures, that we may know which is ye will of god to serve
him in syckernes and holiness in the dread of God that we may find by him a
way of bless everlasting.

So be it.
The testament of master wylliam Tracie esquier, expounded by Wylliam Tyndall.
Wherein thou shall perceive with what charity the chaunceller of worceter Burned
when he took up the dead carcas and made ashes of it after it was buried.

M.D.xxxv.

To the reader.
THou shall understand most dear reder yt after Wyllyam Tyndall was so
Iudaslie betrayed by an Englysema^, a scoler of Louaine, whose name is Philips
there were certain things of his doing found which he had ente^ded to have
put forth to the furtheraunce of gods word amongst which was this testament
of master Tracie expounded by Wyllyam Tyndall which I have caused to be put in
Pryute, to the intent that all the world should see how earnestlye the
Cannonistes and spiritual lawyers (which be the chief rulers under bishops in
every dioces in somoch that to every cathedral church the deane chau^celler and
archdeken at co^^^nlye doctors or bachelors of law) do endeuer them selves
justly to judge and spirituallye to give sentence according to charity upon
all the acts and deeds done of their diosessanes, after the ensample of the
chau^celer of worceter, which after master Tracye was buried (of pure zeal
and love hardelye) took up the deed carcas and burnt it wherefore he did it, it
shall euidentlye appear to the reder in this little treatise, read it therefore,
I beseech the and judge the spirits of our spiritualte, and pray that the
spirit of him yt raised up Christ, may ones inhabit them, and mollyfye their
hearts, and so illumyne them, that they may both se and show true light, and
no longer to resyste God ner his truth Amen.

The Testament hit self.
In the name of God Amen.
I wylliam Tracie of Codyngto^ in the count of gloceter esquier, make my
testament and last will, as here after folowethe First, and before al other
thing, I commit me unto god, and to his mercy, trusting without any doubt or
mystrust, that by his grace and the merytes of Jesus Christ, and by the virtue
of his passion and of his resurre^yo^. I have and shall have remission of my
sins, and resurrection of body and soul, according as it is wryte^. Job.
xix. I believe yt my redemerlyueth and yt in ye last day I shall rise out of ye
earth, and i^ my flesse shall se my savior, this my hope is laid up in my
bosom.

And touching the wealth of my soul, the faith that I have taken and
rehearsed, is suffycie^t (as I suppose) with out any other man's work, or works,
My ground and my belefe is that there is but one god and one mediator between
god and man, which is Jesus christ So yt I do except none in heaven nor in
earth to be my mediator between me and god, but only Jesus christ, all other be
but peticyoners in receiuyng of grace, but one able to give influence of grace,
And therefore will I bestow no part of my goods for that intent yt any man
should say or do, to healpe my soul for therein I trust only to the promise
of god, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not
shall be damned, mark the last chapter.

And touching the buryeng of my body it avails me not what be done thereto,
where in saint Austine de cura age^da pro mortuis says that they are rather
the solace of, them that live tha^, weylthe or comfort of them that are
departed, and therefore I remyt it only to the dyscrecyon of mine executors.

And touching the distribution of my temporal goods, my purpose is by ye
grace of god to bestow the^ to be accepted, as fruits of faith so yt I do not
suppose yt my merit be, by good bestowed of them, but my merit is that faith
of Jesus Christ only, by which faith such works are good according to ye
words of our lord, Math. xxv. I was hungry, and thou gaueste me to eat, and
it follows, yt ye have done to the least of my brethren ye have done to me.
etc. and ever we should consider ye true sentence that a good work makes not a
good man, but a good man makes a good work, for faith makethe the man booth
good and ryghtwyse for a ryghtwyse man lives by faith. Romans i. and what so
ever spryngeth not out of faith, is sin, Romans. xiiii.

And all my temporal goods that I have not geuynge, or delivered, or not given
by writing of mine own hand berynge the date of this present writing I do
leave and give to margarete my wife, and to richard my son which I make mine
executours,

wytnes this mine own hand, the.x. day of October, in the.xxii. year of the
reygne of king Henry the.viii.
Tyndall.
Now let us examyne the parts of this Testament sentence by sentence. First to
commit our selves to god above all, is the first of all precepts, and the
first stone in the foundation of our faith, that is that we believe and put our
trust in one god, one all true, one almighty, all good and all merciful,
cleuyng fast to his truth: might mercy, and goodness, surely sertified and full
persuaded, that he is our God, ye ours, and to us all true, without all
falsshed and gyle and ca^ not fail in his promyses. And to us almyghtye that
his will can not be leat to fulfill all the truth that he has promised us, And
to us al good and all merciful what soever we have done, and how so ever
grievously we have trespassed so that we come to him the way that he has
appointed, which way is Jesus Christ only / as we shall see foloyngly this
first clause then is the first commanndement, or at the least the first
sentence in the first commandment and the first article of our creed.

And that this trust and confidence in the mercy of God is through Jesus Christ,
is the second article of our creed confirmed and testified through out al
scripture, That Christ bri^geth us into this grace. Paul proves. Romans v.
sayng Justified by faith we are at peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
by whom we have in e^tring in unto this grace in which we stand, and Ephe iii,
By whom says Paul we have a blood entryng in, through the faith yt is in
him, and i^ the second of ye said Epistle, By him we have an entryng in unto
the father, and a little before in the same chapter, he is our peace. And Johan
in the first chapter, Behold the La^be of god which takethe away the sin of
the world, which sin was the busshe that stoped the entering in, and kept
us out, and the sword wherewith was kept the entryng unto the tree of life from
Adam and all his ofsprynge.

And that the second of the first of Peter which bare our sins in his
body, and by whose stryppes we are made hole. By whom we have redemptyon
through his blood even the forgyuenes of our sins Collos. i. and Ephesians. i.
And Roma. iiii, He was delivered for our sins and rose again for our
iustifyeng.

And concerning the resurrectyo^, it is an article of our faith: and proved
there sufficie^tlye and that it shall be by the power of Christ, is also the
open scripture.

John. vi. This is the will of my father which sent me that I lose nothing of
all that he has given me, but that I raise it up again in the last day. and
again I am the resurrection Iho^. xi That this live faith is sufficient to
justification with out adding to of any more help, (...) this wise proved
the promyser is god of whom Paul says. Romans viii. If god be on our side what
matter makes it who be against us he is thereto al good, al merciful, at true
and al might, wherefore sufficient to be believed by his oath, more over Christ
in whom the promise is made has received all power in heaven and in earth Mat.
the last.

He has also a perpetual presthode, and therefore able perpetually to save.
Heb. vii.

And that there is but one mediator Christ is Paul. i. ad Timothe. ii. And by
that word understand an attonemaker, a peace maker and bringer in to grace
and favor, having full power so to do. And that Christ is so, is proved at the
full. It is written Ihon. iii. The father loves the son, and has given all
in to his hand.

And he that believes the son has everlasting life, and he that believes
not the son shall not se life, but the wrath of god byndethe upon him. All
things are given me of my father Luke. x: And all whosoever ever call on the name
of the Lord shall be saved. Act. ii. Of his fulness have we all received Ihon. i.
There is no another man in which we must be saved. Acts. iiii. And again,
unto his name bear all the prophets record, that by his name shall all that
believe in him receive remission Acts. x, In him dwells all the fulness of god
bodily. Coll. ii. Al what so ever my father has are mine, Io. xvi. what so
ever ye axe in my name. yt will I do for you Io xiiii. One lord, one faith, one
baptyme, one god and father of all which is above all through al and in you al
Ephesians. iiii. There is but one whose servant I am, to do his will. But one yt shall
pay me my wages: there is but one to whom I am bond, ergo but one that has
power over me to damn or save me, I will add to this Paul's argument Galat.
iii. God swear unto Abraam.cccc. year before the law was given, that we should
be saved by Christ: Ergo the law given.cccc. years after can not dysanull
that couenaunte, So dispute I Christ when he had suffered his passion, and was
risen again and entered in to his glory, was sufficient for his apostles,
without any other mean or help, ergo the holiness of no saint sense has
dimynisshed ought of that his power. But that he is as full sufficyent now, for
the promise is as deaply made in us as them, Moreover the tresure of his mercy
was laid up in Christ for all that should believe, yet the world was made ergo
nothing that has happened sense has changed the purpose of the in
unvariable god

Moreover to exclude the blind imagination falsely called faith, of them that
give them selves to vice with out resistance, affirminge, yt they have no power
to do otherwise, but that God has so made them, and therefore must save them,
they not entendynge or purposyng to mende their living, but synnynge with hole
consent and full lust, he declares what faith he means. ii. manner of ways:
First by that he says, who so ever believes and is baptized, shall be saved, By
which words he declares euydently, that he means that faith, that is in ye
promise made upon the apoyntme^t between god and us, that we should keep his
law to the uttermost of our power, yt is he that believes in Christ for ye
remission of sin, and is baptized to do the will of Christ, and to keep his
law, of love and to mortyfie the flesh, that man shall be saved, and so is the
imaginacio^ of these swyne yt will not leave wallowynge them selves in every
mire and podell, clean excluded, for God never made promise but apo^ an
appoyntme^t or covenant under which who soever will not come can be no partaker
of the promise. True faith in christ gives power to love ye law of god: for it
is written Iha^ ye first, he gave the^ power to be ye sons of god in that
they believe in his name Now to be ye son of god, is to love ryghteousnes, and
hate vnryghtwisnes and so to be like thy father. Have thou then no power to
love ye law? so have you no faith in Christ's blood. And To. iii. we set up or
maynteyne the law through faith why so for the preaching of faith
ministrethe the spirit, Galat, iii. and.ii. Cor. iii. and the spirit lowseth
the bands of Satan, and gyuethe power to love the law, and also to do it.

For says Paul. Romans viii. if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus dwell
in you, then will he that reared up Jesus quicken your mortal bodies by the
means of his spirit dwelynge in you.

A well wylt thou say, if I must profess the law and work, ergo faith alone
sauethe me not. Be not deceived with sophistrye, but withdraw thine ears from
words and consider ye thing in thine heart. Faith justifies the yt is bri^geth
remission of all sins, and sets the in the state of grace before al works
and gets ye power to work yer you coudest work, but if thou wylt not go
back again, but continewe i^ grace and come to ye salvation and glorious
resurrection of christ you must work and join works to thy faith in will and
deed to, if thou have time and leisure, and as often as thou fallest set the on
thy says again without healpe of works. And all though when thou art
reconcyled and restored to grace works be required yet is not that
reconsylynge and grace the benefyte of the works that follow: but clean
contrary that forgeuenes of the sins and restorynge to favor deserve the
works that follow. Though when the king (after that sentence of deethe is given
upon a murtherar) has pardoned him, at the request of some of his friends,
works be required of him that he hence forth keep the kings laws, if he
will continue in his graces favor in which he now stands, yet the benefit
of his life proceeds not of the deserving of the works that follow, but of
the kings goodness and favor of his friends, ye and that benefit and gift of
his life deserve the works that follow Though the father chastise the child,
yet is ye child no less bownd to obey, and to do the will of the father, if
when the father pardons it, the works that follow deserve the favor, tha^
must the work that followed the correction have deserved favor also. And than
was the father vnrigtwyse to chastise hit. All what soever thou art able to do,
to please God with all is thy duty to do, though thou haddeste never sinned,
if it be the duty how ca^ it than be the deseruyng of the mercy and grace that
went before? Now that mercy, was ye benefit of god thy father through ye
deserui^g of the lord christ which has bowght ye with ye prise of his blood.

And again when he sayethe yt he purposes to bestow his good, to be accepted
as fruits of faith it is evident that he means that living faith which
professes the law of god, and is the mother of all good works, ye and nursse
thereto.

Another cauillation which they might make in the second part, where he
admits no another mediator but Christ only, nor will give of his goods, to
bynd any man to any fained observance for the healp of his soul, when he were
hole in the kingdom of Christ clean delivered both body and soul from the
dominion of Satan (as the scripture testifiethe all that dye in Christ to be)
is this, they will say, that he held that none should pray for him save Christ,
and that we be not bound to pray one for another, ner ought to desire the
prayers of another man, that he excludes, in that he says all other be but
peticioners. By which words he plainly confesses that other may and ought for
to pray, and that we may and ought to desire other to pray, for us: but
means that we may not put our trust and confidence in their prayer, as
though they gave of the^ selves that which they desire for us in their
peticions, and so give the^ the thanks and ascribe to their mercies that which
is given us in the name of our master Christ, at the deseruinges of his blood.
Christ is my lord, and has deserved and also obtained power to give me all that can be desired for me. And all other desire for me: that is desired in
Christ's name and given at the merytes of his blood. All the honor than,
trust, co^fydence, and thanks, perteyne to him also.

Some will haplye say, how should I desire another to pray for me, and not
trust to his prayer ^e^^ly even as I desire my neyghbur to help me at my need,
and yet trust not to him, Christ has commanded us to love each other. Now I
will go to desire help, I put my trust in god and complain to god first, and
say, Loo father I go to my brother, to axe help in thy name, prepare the heart
of him against I come yt he may pity me and help me for thy sake. etc. Now if
my brother remember his duty and help me, I receive hit of god and give god
the thanks which moved the heart of my brother and gave my brother a courage to
help me and wherewith to do it, and so has holp me by my brother. And I love
my brother agane and say Loo father, I went to my brother, in thy name and he
has help me for thy sake: wherefore O father be thou as merciful to him at
his need as he has been to me for thy sake, at my need Lo now as my brother
did his duty wha^ he help me, so do I my duty when I pray for him again:
and as I might not have put my trust and confydence in my brothers help, so
may he not in my prayers. I am sure that god will help me by his promise, but
am not sure that my brother will help me, though it be his duty: so am I sure
that god will hear me whatsoever I axe in Christ's name by his promise, but am
not suer that my brother will pray for me, or that he has a good heart to god.

No but the saints of heaven can not but pray and be hard, no more can the
saints in earth, but pray and be heard neither. Moses Samuel, David, Noye,
Elyas, Elizeus, Esaias, Daniell, and all the Prophets prayed and were heard:
yet was none of those wicked yt would not put their trust in god, according to
their doctrine and preaching partaker of their prayers in the end. And as
damnable as it is for the pore to trust in the riches of the riches upon earth,
so damnable is it also to leave ye covenant made in Christ's blood. and to
trust in the saints of heaven They that be in heaven Know the elect that
trust in Christ's blood and profess the law of god and for the^ only pray
and these wicked Idolyters which have no trust in the couenante of god ner
serve god in the spirit ner in the gospel of Christ's blood. but after their
blind Imaginacyon choosing the^ every man a sundry saint to be their
mediator, to trust to, and to be saved by their merits, do the saints abhore
and belie. And their prayers and offerynges, ar to ye saints as acceptable and
pleasant, as was ye prayer and ye offering of Simon Magus to Peter. Act. viii.

More over the saints in their most combraunce are most conforted and most
able to comfort other, as Paul testifies.i Corin. In so much yt S. Steue^.
and S. James prayed for the^ yt slew them Saint Martyne preached and comforted
his, desperate brethren even unto the last breath, and likewise as stories
make mention) did innumerable mo, ye and I have known of simple unlearned
persons and that of some that were great sinners which at the hour of death
have fallen flat of the blood of Christ, and given no rowme to other menns
either prayers or preachinges: but have as stronglye trusted in Christ's blood,
as ever did Peter or Paul, and have thereto preached it to other, and exhorted
other so myghtelye that an angel of heaven could not mind the^, who then
should resist God that he might not give the same grace to master Tracye,
which was alerned man, and better seen in the works of Sai^cte Austen.xx. year
before he dyed tha^ ever I knew doctoure in England, but that he must tha^
fai^e and shrincke, when most neade is to be strong, and fear the popes
purgatory and trust to ye prayer of Pristes derely paid for I dare say that
he prayed for ye pristes when he dyed, that god would convert a great meny of
them, and if he had known of any good man among them yt had neded, he would
have given, and if he had known of any lack of Pristes he would have given to
maintain moo: But now sense there be moo then I now, and have more the^
every man a sufficient living, how should he have given the^ but to here their
prayers of pure mistrust in christ's blod? if robbing of wydous houses under
pretense of long prayers be damnable) Matthe. xxiii. Then is it damnaple also
for wydoowes to suffer them selves to be robbed by the long pattrynge of
hypocrites, through my trust in Christ's blood: ye and is it not damnable to
mayntene such abhominacio^? Now when this da^nacion is spread over al, how ca^
we give the^ that have enough already, or how can they yt have enough already
take more under ye name of prayenge and not harde^ the people more in this
damnable damnacion.

And concerning ye burienge of his body he allegeth S. Austen, nether is there
any man (think I (so mad to affirm yt ye outward pomp of ye body should help
ye soul, More over what greatter sign of infedilite is there, the^ to care al
ye time of death (...) what po^pe ye carkas shall be carried to ye graue^ He
denies not but yt a christen man should be honorably buried namelye for the
honor and hope of ye resuerectio^ and therefore committed that care to his
dear executours his sone and his wife, which he wist would in that part do
sufficient, and leave nothing of the use of ye contre undone, but the abuse.

And that bestowynge of a great part of his goods which he yet leued, upon
the pore, to be thanckful for ye mercy receued, with out bying and selling with
God, yt is, without bynding those pore unto any other appointed prayers tha^ god
has bound us already, one to pray for another one to help another, as he has
helped us, but patientlye adding for the blessings that god has appointed
unto all manner good works trusting faithfully to his promise, thankinge as ye
may se by his words, the blood of Christ for the reward promised to his
works and not the goodness of the works as though he had done more then his
duty, or all that: And assygned by wrytinge unto whom another part should be
distributed, and geuinge the rest to his executours, that no strife should be,
which executours where by right the heirs of all that was left to the^: These
things I say are signs evident not only of a good Christian man, but also of
a perfect Christen man, and of such a one as neded not to be aghast and
desperaet for fear of the paynful pains of purgatory, which who so fearith
as they feign it can not but utterly abhor deeth: seeing that Christ is
there no longer thy Lord, after he has brought the thither, but art excluded
from his satisfaction, and must satisfye for thy self alone, and that with
sufferinge pain only or else taryenge the satisfienge of them that shall
never satisfy enough for them selves or gapinge for the popes pardons, which
have to great dowers and dangers, what in the mind and intent of the graunter,
and what in the purchases, yet they can be treuly obtained with all due
cyrcu^stances, and much les certitude yt they have any autoryte at all Paul
trusted to be dissolved and to be with Christ: Steven desired Christ to take
his spirit the prophets desired god to take their souls from them and all the
saynctes went with a lustye courage to deeth nether fearing or teaching us to
fear any such crudelyte. where has the church then gotten authorytye to
bind us from being so perfyte from having any such faith in the goodness of god
our Father and Lord Christ, and to make such perfytnes and faith of al
heresies the greatest.

Solomon says in the.xxx. of his Proverbs iii. are insaciable and the forth
says never, It is enough. But there is a fyft called dame auaryce, with as
greadye a gut, as meltyng a mawe, as wyd a throat, as gapyng a mouth, and with
as reauenyng teeth as the best which the more she eats the hu^gryer she is An
unquiet evil never at rest a blind monster and a surmysyng be, fearing at
the fall of every leaf Quid no^ i^mortalia, pectora cogis, aurifacta fames?
what does not ye holy hongur compel the^ that love this world inordinatly, to
commytte might that deuyls belie be once full, truth should have audience, and
words be construed a right, and taken in the same sense as they be meant.

Thowghe hit seem not impossible haplye yt there might be a place, where the
souls might be kept for a space, to be taught and instruct: yet that there
should be such a Iayle as they Iangle. and soch fa^^ons as they feign is plain
impossible and repugnant to ye scripture: for when a man is translated utterly,
out of ye kyndome of Satan, and so confyrmed in grace that he can not sin,
so burning in love that his lust ca^ not be plucked from gods will, and
being partaker which us of all the promises of God and under the
commandments: what could be denied him in that deep innocence of his most
kind father, yt has leaft no mercy vnpromysed, and aringe it thereto in the
name of his son Jesus, the child of his hertis lust, which is our lord and
has lefe no mercy undeserved for us? namely when god has sworn that he
will put of ryghtwisnes, and be to us a father, and that of all mercy, and
has slain his most dear son Jesus to confyrme his oath.

Finally seeing that Christ's love takes all to the best, and nothing is here
that may not be well understood, (the cyrcu^staunces declarynge in what
sense al was meant (they ought to have interpreted hit charytablye, if ought
had been found doutfull or semynge to son^de amysse Moreover if any thing head
been theryn that could not have be taken well yet their part had been to have
interpret it as spoken of, ydelnesse of the heed, by the reason of syckenesse,
for as much as the man was vertuus wise, and well learned, and of good fame, and
report, and found in the faith while he was a live, but if they say he was
suspect when he was a live, then is their doing so much the worsse, and to be
thought that they fear his doctrine wha^ he was a live and mystrusted their
own part, their consciences testyfyenge to them that beheld no another doctrine
then that was true seeing then they nether spoke ner wrote against him ner
brought him to any examynacyon. Beside that some merry fellows will think, that
they owght first to have sent to him to wit whethrer he would have revoked, yet
they had so dispytefully burnt the deed body that could not answer for it
self, nor interpret his wordys, how he meant them, namely the man being of so
worshypfull and ancient a blood. But here will I make an end desyryng the
reader to look on this thing with indyferent eyes, and judge whether I have
expounded the words of this Testament as they should seame to signify, or not
Judge also whether ye maker thereof seame not by his work both virtuous and
glory: which if it so be think not yt he was the worsse because ye deed body
was burnt to ashes, but rather learn to know the great desire that hypocrytes
have to find one craft or other to dase ye truth with, and cause hit to be
counted for heresye of the simple and unlearned people which are so ignorant
that they can not spy their sotteltye, hit must neades be heresye that
towcheth any thing their ratten byle they will have hit who so ever say nay
only the eternal god must be prayed to night and day to amend them in whose
power it only lies, who also grant them ones ernestlye to trust his true
doctrine contained in the sweet and pure fou^taines of his scriptures and in
his paths to direct their ways.

Amen
Here ends the Exposicion of wyllyam Tyndall.
Inprynted at Norenburch, 1546.


