A Check or reproof of M. Howlets untimely shreeching in her Majesty's ears,
with an answer to the reasons alleged in a discourse thereunto annexed, why
Catholics (as they are called) refuse to go to church:

Wherein (among other things) the Papists traitorous and treacherous doctrine
and demeanor toward our Sovereign and the State, is somewhat at large upon
occasion unfolded: their devilish pretended conscience also examined, and the
foundation thereof undermined. And lastly shevved that it is the duty of all
true Christians and subjects to haunt public Church assemblies.

2. Cor. 4. 3.

If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. etc.

I Imprinted in London, at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson,
for Toby Smyth. 1581.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT is no marvel, though that Antichrist the Pope of Rome (seeing his kingdom
of darkness decay apace in these days, and fearing the utter overthrow of it
for ever) being rowzed, bestirre himself as he does. He is in high place, and
has of some years grown too mighty in this world by his own ambitious
pride, and the grace he has found in the eyes of great princes and their
people: God so justly punishing men's ingratitude, toward his majesty. This
lawless man therefore, of whom I speak, will no doubt leave no means
unattempted, so long as he may, to uphold this his pomp and estate, which
thing will not in these days be performed without much ado, especially when
he cannot be content to keep himself within bounds, that is, as a Roman at
home in his own City and Country, where he dwells, or as a Church man in
Church matters: but will needs roue over the world, sitting in Gods seat,
and having; an Oar in every man's boat (as they say) yea and ruffle, even
among Monarques and great Princes, and that in, and for their kingdoms: giving
the same, taking, placing, displacing, disposing, etc. at his will and pleasure.

But playing thus his part like himself, that is, so impudently and Godlesly,
in the sight now of all the world bewraying himself to be in deed that man
of sin that is prophesied of: Gods spirit on the other side, detecting and
revealing daily 2. These. 2.
unto us, by the clear light of the Gospel, the treachery and sleightes of
this son of perdition: some, possible, may marvel how he should find
favor grace, and good liking, with any that bear but a show of godliness
and honesty, saving that, we are sufficiently admonished before hand, that
the God of this world has blinded the minds of them that belesue Cor. 4. 4.
not, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, which is the
image of God, should not shine unto them. And again, because they that
perish, have not received the love of the truth that they might be saved,
therefore God will 2. These. 2. 10. 11. 12.
send them strong delusion to (...) lies, that al may be damned, which have
not believed the truth, etc. A necessary caveat, to stay us in these
troublesome days on Gods truth immovable, and a judgment of God with fear
and trembling to be reuerensed of all.

So then, such things as we see come to pass at this day, and set abrod for
the upholding of that beast the Pope of Rome and his rotten religion, ought so
little to seem strange unto the faithful, that being assured the Lord will
destroy that lawless 2. These. 2. 8.
man, with the spirit of his mouth, and take him away by the appearing of his
coming: We should take comfort and incourageme^t thereby, and manfully rather
oppose our selves against him and his ministers, every one in our calling, then
be any whit weakened by such accidents, and putting difference (as we are
taught) Jude. ver. 22. 23.
have compassion of some, and save other with fear, plucking them out of the
fire, and hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. The more stumbling
blocks we see Satan and his suppostes to cast before men, the more diligent
and paineful ought we again to be in setting our hands and shoulders to the
work for the remoouing thereof out of men's way, if God at any time will give
such, as are entangled in the snares of the Devil repentance to know the
truth, leaving ever in good hope the success to God and his blessing.

The consideration hereof, in confidence of Gods merciful (...), moved me,
though among his servants of a thousand the unfittest, while other be
otherwise occupied, to take in hand upon request of diverse godly and well
disposed, to answer a certain seditious book of late imprinted and set out
to the view of the world, by I. Howlet the title whereof is: A brief
discourse containing certain reasons, why Catholics (so he calls the
earnest and hot Papists here in England, reconciled of late years unto the
Pope) refuse to go to Church, written by a learned and virtuous man, (as he
says,) to a friend of his in England, Whom he names not, neither the one
nor the other. Why not to her Majesty: as these men use to suppose, (...). I.
Hovvlet the madge How let highly schritchith an makes an ill favored noise
to the Nightinghale whose melody and pleasant note is known.
and we must believe what they say. The whole (for the worthiness thereof
forsooth, with a long Epistle Dedicatorie) is offered by I. H. To the Queens
most excellent Majesty: and printed as is pretended, at Doway, By John Lion
with privilege. Though we know it was printed, not at Doway, but in
England, without privilege, or good leave: yet we may not say so, nor doubt
of the other, such suppositions be these Catholics principles, we may not
call them in question, nor judge of them, they be above our reach.

For the Authors name of these reasons, because they list not to utter the
same, I am not curious, whether the same proceed from him that wrote the
Dedicatory Epistle to her Majesty or no, it is not greatly material, saving,
if they did not; M. Howlet seems to do his fellow some injury, in taking
out of his hands that which he promises, in his book in the second place to
perform, and now omitteth, to wit: to show (...). 30. 68. (...).
the way and means that Catholics, (as he calls the^) have, to remedy or
ease themselves of this affliction now laid upon them for their consciences,
with reasons and motives to induce her Majesty the rather to tolerate them in
their religion, in respect of God, her self, and her whole Realm. This piece
of dealing with her Majesty should have come after the treatise, saving that
M. Howlet, either doubting of the performance, or seeking that glory, as one,
loath to tarry so long, or for some other respect gleaning as appears from his
friend, sets the same out before hand, and puts it in the forefronte.

For I. Howlets person, who has the chief dealing in publishing, and
delivering this whole matter unto us, as one supposed to be a good, faithful,
and stout proctour for the Popish Church, and a fit instrument to bring us such
an unto ward and like a shrich Owl, suddenly and untimely to make a great
noise in her Majesty's ears, or as he in his fellows names and unlucky
message utters it with his own words. We cry out of the riot, etc. He
may issue from Pope John the three and twentiethes spirit well enough, as one
of that brood for the agreement that is between both. As for us, we may not
dislike, nor marvel at this choice of these fathers ( like Pope, like spirit)
the rather, for that we read, that this foul and unlucky bird, I mean
madge Howlet, has aforetime waited upon the Pope, and served his unholy
holiness, even in counsel, as his familiar spirit, which is as worshipful
an office I tell you, as this carrier and letter bringer, serves in now,
howeuer the ill favored madge Howlet be wondered at among men, or other birds,
or be taken to be but an unlucky messenger.

Let me be bold with thee ((...) Reader) for the satisfaction of some here,
upon such resemblance and agreement between the parties, and other
circumstances: to set down the old story of the madge Howlet, not taken out
of new writers (...). Flac. (...), De testibus (...).
of these days, which yet have faithfully and truly delivered us the same in
writing: as to leave other, those reverend and learned fathers Master John
Bale in Latin, and Master John Fox in English our own Country men have
done: (...). Baleus. De illustr. (...). Britan. Acts and (...). Tome, 1.
(...). 705. and 706
Nevertheless, though I agree with them, and namely with Master Foxes story,
and allow the same, as fully agreeing herein with the first Author and
truth (wrangle the adversary against those worthy fathers worthy works,
as much as he list) yet have I thought good, to fetch this now, out of a
worthy Doctor and Archdeacon of our adversaries own Church, called Nicholas
de. Clamengiis, to whom master Fox honestly and truly sends us, and with
whom also I saw the book. This Nichol de Clamengiis, living in the time when
the thing happened wrote the same. His book also was since printed and
publishd in a Popish time, a popish place, etc. That I say nothing of Orthuinus
Gratius ce^sure thereon, who being a popish priest, yet in setting this forth,
among (...), (...), in fasciculo rerum expetendarum (...) fugiendarum.
other things denies not the truth hereof: So as the adversary cannot easily
cauil. After this Archdeacon had declared the notoriousnesse of the matter, and
the good testimony he had (...). De Clamengiis in collatione 2. (...) per
scriptum super materia Concilii Generalis, (...) Scholasticum (...).
thereof, thus sets he us down the story, above eight score years since:
Balthazar Cossa, says he, about four years since, called a Council at Rome
etc.

Now (at the entry or before the first session of the (...)) when Mass for
the holy Ghost, as the manner is, was done: and the Council now were set, and
Balthazar himself This was Pope John the 23.
in a chair provided for him on high above the rest, behold, a foul, unlucky
Owl, which is always a messenger of He wrote this in the (...) of the
Council of Constance about the year of our Lord. 1414 Mass of the holy Ghost,
at the beginning of the Council.
some corpse, or other misfortune, as they say, comes out of his hole, and
flickering about with his shreeching noise, stays himself upon the middle
beam of S. Martines temple, where they sat in the Council: casting his broad
eyes directly upon Balthazar. All there present, fell in a wonderment, that a
night bird which shunneth the light, came in the mids of the assembly at
broad day light, by which wonder and strange sight they did (not without cause)
think some mischief to be foreshewed. Behold, said they, one to another
softly, the spirit is come in the shape of an Owl. And when the rest looking
one on an other, and upon Balthazar, could scarsely forbear laugh ter,
Balthazar himself (upon whom alone this madge Howlet, casting his eyes,
steadfastly looked) did blushe for shame, sweat for anger, and fretted in his
mind: and at length, not knowing how to help otherwise this his so great
disgrace, breaking up the council, arose, and went his way. There followed
after another session wherein again after the same manner, the madge Howlet,
(though as I think not called) failed not to be present, casting still his
foul eyes upon Balthazar, which m. Howlet, he seeing to be returned, was not
without just cause, more troubled and stricken with shame than before, and not
being able to abide the sight of the madge Howlet any longer; he commanded him
to be beaten away with libbets and clubbes, and with crying noise, but M.
Howlet never a whit disquieted either with their shreeching noise or other
disturbaunce would not fly away, till with much cudgeling at him, being very
sore beaten, he fell. down dead before them all. These things (says our
Author) learned I of a certain faithful, and trusty friend, who, at that
time came straight and directly from Rome, of which I making doubt, by reason
of the strangeness thereof, my friend being very earnestly sworn; Assured
me, he told me that was most true, and added further, that all that were
present, were hereby brought into an utter contempt, disdain, and mocking of
that council, and the whole company by little and little falling away, he
affirmed there was nothing at all there done to any purpose. Thus far
Clamengius, cited very truly by master Fox.

For the Gentleman, the authors worshipful friend (as he speaks) if there
be any such, and he not too far gone, I wish him to be advised, and take
heed, what scholemaisters he betake his conscience to be framed by, the
matter is of no small importance, let him at leastwise without preiudicate
opinion hear and read both sides before he judge, or thruste himself too
far over the shoes: for our part (what ever opinion the adversaries be of,)
leaving the rest to him that is above, we desire no more at his hands: this
is it we have from the beginning, and many a day sought and requested. If he
will hear this counsel, he shall first see that we draw him not from the
Pope and Popish religion, to carry him to depend upon any mortal man in the
case of religion and conscience, be he never so high or mighty: but only
upon the true and immortal God of heaven, and his sacred mouth: Next, that
we propounde him not doctrines devised by man's brain, and after reco^mended
under title of the Church, to entangle his co^scienee, and without either
ground or good reason, make him perplexed and doubtful by subtle quidities
and questions, as these men do, but after we have brought him to feed in the
pleasant and sweet pasture, and to drink of the pure and lively fountain of
Gods holy word, which is the truth, he shall see, we endeavor to unwrap
and unfold his conscience from snares, to quiet the same with the true peace
of God, teaching him to make conscience where God and his word would, and no
where else, and to look well to these two points in the case of conscience. God
may and does make laws to bind conscience withal, and only God may deal
therein and no mortal man, much less that man of sin the Pope.

In sum, the more precisely in these matters pertaining to his souls health,
he shall cleave to God and his holy truth contained in the Scriptures,
renouncing all sects and parts of whomesoeuer, as well Pope as other, the
better shall he please, I will not say us, but first God, and next to God,
satissie her Majesty our dread sovereign and his, who pretends not by her
self, nor her laws, to make any of her subjects to be of her Religion, but
us altogether with her self, of Gods true, certain, and most holy Religion.
She sits in no man's conscience as does the Pope ywis, in doing this,
shortly to say, he shall show himself to be a faithful and good servant
to GOD, and her Majesty, bearing a duetifull mind, like a true subject, to
her godly laws in every respect, a profitable member also shall he show him
self to be in Church and common wealth, and most of all (which he has to
consider of) his own friend; all which benefits, he quite spoyleth himself
of, in following the course these men set him in who as blind guydes
conducte him in the darkness by bywayes of traditions, forefathers, custom,
multitude, good intentes, and meaning, as they call them, and all without the
light of Gods holy word, or any good warrant.

Now as there are two parts of this book, the Epistle dedicatorie to her
Majesty, and the treatise or reasons, where unto accordingly I have to
answer, so for the matter, the drift whereto this book tends, and the manner
of handling the whole, generally to speak, it so bewrays it self as the
indifferent Reader may and will (I doubt not) easily epsy out the treachery.
Poison to infect deadly, covered, and as it were sugured, that is: with fair
words glosed and reco^mended, is the whole matter: for what have we else to
iugde of reasons, not grounded on any art of reason, and of persuasion, without
all foundation. The whole that so great account is made of, was a letter from a
friend to a friend, shuffled up in have, as the writer confesses. Why then
did not the same rest in the friends hands, or in the writers custody, among
other common letters and papers: unless those of wisdom and authority
here; upon knowledge, sight, and perusing, it had been called for, and as
other things that pass abroad, it (...) been orderly allowed of; if it should
have been found meet. Forsooth, madge Howlet and his fellows opinion must rule
herein, to make a Treatise and discourse thereof, and at length to publish the
same in print, whereby besides the rest, they may show what great reasons they
stay their consciences upon (as they speak) to the condemning of others, yea
of their own side that think not and do not as they do, and what weighty
motives also they have to move her Majesty withal, and what invincible
Scholasticall arguments we must look for at these terrible fellows hands.
Of all which that I may here briefly and in sum, give a note, I say if their
store behind, be no better then this they now send us, for all their great
bragges, we may turn them over to Sophisters and laddes in the Schools to
answer them, so little need we surely fear their hie words and threats.
Well, what opinion and liking so ever master Howlet and his fellows have of
this work of theirs, and what fruit they may look for it to bring forth
among such as are wedded to (...), and thereby inclinable to move sedition and
rebellion in this state: which appears to be their meaning, what ever they
pretend, we once in considering thereof see their purpose and drift not to be
good, for in going about, to confirm and encourage such to go on forward in
their deuilishe and stubborn opinion, which abstain from public Church
assembles here (wherein to Gods glory are used the preaching of Christ's
Gospel, the administration of his sacraments, godly prayers, etct.) And
again, to refuse the oath of allegiance to her Majesty, alluring other to
the like: they draw men (as much as in them is) from the ordinary means
whereby God begins, aduaunceth, and continues faith and Religion in his,
they dishonor his Majesty, in swaruing from the rule of his holy word, they
pine away and slaye their own souls, and theirs that hearken unto them.
Besides this offense to God, and private hurt to the^ selves and others, they
induce them further to disobey in the highest degree, their gracious Sovereign
and ours, and to break her wholesome laws made for the advancement of Christ's
sincere Religion, and the suppressing of Idolatry and superstition, and for
the maintenance of her Royal estate and most lawful dignity among her
subjects, they offend moreover all the godly minded, and weak ones also, by
their evil example and dealing. That I speak nothing of utter enemies to the
truth, which can learn no good hereby. Finally, they seek to make a schism,
and to maintain heresy in this holy Congregation, and seditiously disturbing
the peace and quiet here, they make a way to a new rebellion, if it be
possible for them, infecting other with the same opinion and obstinacy, which
are not hitherto so hot and forward, or perverse and froward in this matter.

These and such like things are sought to be justified, maintained, and
defended, by colored reason and false persuasion, and all under pretense of
conscience, in this book. They must be tolerated in these doings, her
Majesty, and the state must be satisfied therewith, otherwise, they plain of
the state and public authority here, they devise and invent sclanders, they
challenge and threate, they brag and vaunt, they whine and repine, and what
not? They are loath to let go their hold, and to leese all their labor, being
come so far as from Rome, the poor help of Italian and Roman soldiers,
which our English Italianated Romanistes, had by suite procured from the Pope
traitorously, by force of late to invade her Majesty's dominions, thorough Gods
providence, now failyng and deceiving their expectation: these spiritual
doves of the Pope, I mean the Jesuits, birds once of the Popes Seminaries,
and other such sollicitors, and procters of Popery, as coming like posts
from beyond the seas, fly here up and down, among us, applying them selves to
the time, have thought good to hold another course, till they may be able to
make such head again, as in her Majesty's reign they did first in England,
and afterward of late in Irelande. For, least those of their company that are
left, after the suppressing of the rebels among us, should be dismaide and
discouraged, setting a good face on the matter, they comfort them with such
words and motives, as they may in so bad a matter, and least when they can not
openly in person go abroad, their well willers and friends, whereof they
brag of more here, then I trust they shall find, should want their aid in
aduauncing the proud prelate of Rome, and his religion against the eternal
God of heaven and her Majesty, our natural and dread sovereign and Prince:
here upon they print and cast abroad this and such like libels, full of
holownes and vauntes, containing little or no other matter, as such do easily
and at first fight perceive, which untaught by them, are none of their
disciples, but through Gods goodness under her Majesty's happy government,
have been now many years trained up in the school of the holy ghost, where
(if we have grace) we have learned enough to confirm and stablishe our
minds in the truth of God, and to repel and overthrow all devises of men.

Now, because they have by their evil deserts, justly brought themselves
far into hatred, least they should seem common enemies, all their cunning
of Rhetorique and persuasion must be applied for the avoiding of this blot,
hence comes the dedication of this treatise to her Majesty, and the
allegation of conscience. But if they can blushe, me thinks surely they
should have been ashamed for all their colors to have offered such stuff
to her highness. Princes would be reverenced, and their presence and ears
forborne and spared, especially such a Prince as her Majesty, our Queen and
Sovereign is, who is after a rare and singular manner, discreet, wise, and
learned, whereby she is able thoroughly to discern and judge of things: she is
godly also, and from her infancy, a favorer, pro fessor, and setter forth of
the Gospel of Christ in her dominions. A religion as contrary to Popery, as
God is to the Devil. Be al former attempts and practices against her Majesty,
and the state by Pope and Popelings forgotten now? Or will the bare name of
Conscience cover and blot out al? Or else be their stomachs at length come do
(...) when they have gone as far as they can with violence of sword, and
such mischievous dealing to prove if they can gain any thing by word and
fair speech in a colored supplication? May there not be thought like poison
to be offered therein as has been found in former usage? This parle with her
Majesty, if it had gone before violent attempts, and shameless and villainous
writings against her Majesty, might have carried some show or less fuspition,
which now is quite otherwise. Where is also submission and confession of
former misdemeanor, to move pity? Never a word of this, nay the whole must be
justified, and her Majesty (as I have said) must take these reasons for all
satisfaction, though she have never so great occasion offered her to plain of
unnatural and naughty usage of subjects, and their traiterous dealing. But how
ever things appear to M. Howlet, who is of the night and of darkness, yet may
he not in this clear light of the Gospel, to her Majesty and others, speak,
good Esaias. 5. 20.
of evil, and evil of good, put darkness for light, and light for darkness,
sour for sweet, and sweet for sour, and think so to prevail. We must not
believe every spirit, but we must try the spirits whether they be of GOD,
It is the light 1. John. 4. 1.
that makes all things manifest. And we be, the Ephesians. 5. 13.
children of light and the children of the day, etc. Great injury 1. These. 5.
5.
therefore does M. H. so untimely and out of season to shreche in her highness
ears, as though her Majesty were a meet patron for their naughty causes,
which common sense and reason, if he could harken thereto, would tell how
unfit she is for, or rather how greatly she is sought herein to be abused by
this lewd dealing. How the breach is made up again among the Papists
herewith, or how this salve and plaster serves to cure them. I wot not, but
after their reasons and persuasions have long flown among their companions, to
dedicate the same at second and third hand to her Majesty, and that with
such an impudent Epistle in so base and mean a subject as M. Howlet is, is
utterly intolerable: her Majesty can judge well enough, between entising
speeches of man's wisdom, and the plain evidence of 1. Cor. 2. 4.
the Spirit, whereof the Apostle speaks. These men's motives, reasons, and
persuasions being but a fardel of untruths, need not to be brought into her
highness presence, nor be opened to her majesty. That I write in answer
hereof, is for the simpler sort, that they may not be abused by colorable
deceit and only pretense of conscience, to whom I attempter my self so much
as I may. It has been an old policy of heretics to persuade before they
teach, whereas truth persuades by teaching, and teaches not by persuading,
as one of the ancient fathers reports. How they teach that Tertul.
aduersus (...).
they are led in this cause by conscience, and how lewdly and diuelishly they
and their Popish Authors, whom they follow herein, write of Conscience,
abusing themselves, and their readers, but most of al God, and his heavenly
doctrine, because this point is the ground of the whole discourse, and I
unfold the same at large, to avoid too tedious prolixitie. I here leave it,
and desire the Christian reader even for Gods sake, but to read and ponder well
this matter, and I greatly marvel if he afterward abhor not Popery for
ever.

An answer to M. Howlets Epistle Dedicatorie.
1 MY most exellent and sovereign dread Lady and Princes: two causes induced
me, to direct unto your royal person, and most gracious Majesty, this present
treatise, Two causes of dedication.
after I had read and considered the same. The one, for that it seemed to me,
both conceived and penned, with such modedestie and humilite of spirit
together with all dutiful respect to your Highness, to your honorable
Lords of the Counsel, and the whole estate of your noble Realm (contrary to
the spirit and proceedings of all sectaries:) as none might justly be offended
therewith, but only in respect of the writers zeal and opinion in religion,
which notwithstanding, having been from time to time, the common received
religion of universal Christendom: can not be so soon abandoned by the
disfavor of any one country, nor lack men to speak or write in defense of
the same, as long as there is, either head or hand remaining loose in the
world.

2 The other cause was for that it seemed to me, to contain matter of great
and weyghtie consideration, and much important, not only to the cause of God,
but also to your Majesty's soul, estate, and realm, and unto the state of
many a thousand of your graces most loving, faithful, and dutiful subjects:
who being now afflicted for their consciences, and brought to such extremity,
as never was hard of in England before: have no other means to redress and
ease their miseries, but only as confident children to run unto the mercy
and clemency of your Highness their Mother, and borne sovereign Princess:
before whom, as before the substitute and Angel of God, they lay down their
griefs, disclose their miseries, and unfold their pitiful afflicted sase,
brought into such distress at this time, as either they must renounce God by
doing that, which in judgment and conscience they do condemn: or else
sustain such intolerable molestations, as they cannot bear. Which your
Majesty by that which follows, more at large, may please to understand.

IN the two first sections and pages of your Epistle (M. Howlet) are two causes
alleged for the dedication of the whole treatise to her Majesty, taken from
the Authors person, and the matter, cunningly to get thereby good will, to
prepare and stir up attention, which together with the amplifications of your
pretended extremities, and the like necessity of complaint you are brought
unto, your exaggerations on the one side, and extenuations on the other, with
such ornaments and flowers to move pity, if they were true, and in a good and
just cause, might for their pretty handeling delight, and have some use, saving
Persuade not before you teach as heretics do, (...) Tertull.
they be somewhat too open. As school furniture to move with, they may be
kept for the exercise of youth, or to sport and refreshe men's minds withal.
This floorishing greatly beseems not the profession and persons of Divines.
In a word to say, every thing considered, there is no cause why you should have
troubled her Majesty with such paltrie, whereof let the Christian Reader after
examination judge. The Authors dutiful respect every way, and M. Howlets too,
to her Highness, her honorable Lords of the Council, and the whole state of
her noble Realm, might without vaunt, have been left to have been judged by
her Majesty's wisdom and theirs, and to have had commendation by other, when
it should have been found better then it is. These men seek by all means and
ways they can to disioyne her Majesty from her laws, and the Ministers
thereof, and from her loyal subjects to: they go about to withdraw with
themselves other her subjects from obedience to God and her Majesty, and when
this dealing is by order of law but somewhat crossed, then is outcrie and
complaint of tyranny and cruelty greater then ever In the second and xii.
section of his Epistle dedicatorie, etc. Or in the reasons of refusal.
has been heard of in England before, or is in any prince in Christendom,
or than is used among the Turks at this day. This comparison is not M. Howlet
ashamed to make, and therein agrees with his author. This is (...). 5. 57.
etc.
great dutifulness sure. Like is the modesty and humility of both your
spirits, saving that if there be any difference, M. Howlets in a diverse kind
of writing shows it self to be more shameless, as through the whole too
much appears, dealing especially with the Queens most excellent Majesty.
He may not think the Orators rule, (that an Epistle biusheth not) will serve
his turn here, it is Cicero.
out of place to excuse thereby impudent untruths, and slanders. In perusing
this writing let the Christian Reader still judge whether M. Howlet be not a
sectarie, if this be a note of a sectaries spirits proceeding, as he here tells
us, what modesty and humbleness of spirit may this be called in the Author
of this treatise, who is so highly in this respect commended here by M.
Howlet. When not contented through his whole discourse to compare and liken the
profession and professors of the Gospel to the Fol. 41. page 2.
Heretics both old and new, he charge Gods service here now used with
falsehood, and blasphemy also, and pronou^ceth us to be condemned yet alive,
but no marvel, when he charge some Catholics at this day in England of his
own Religion to sin even now against the holy Ghost and damneth the same in
Hell, being yet Fol. 4. and 5.
quick on the earth, etc. I give the Reader but a taste of this Luciferian
spirit, till we may come further into the examination of things: M. Howlet
excuses this with zeal and the writers opinion in religion, a hot and too
immoderate a zeal, destitute of knowledge, It may well be called his
discoursers opinion in religion, which carries with it neither religion nor
conscience. Such zeal might have regarded better and spared the Princes ears,
and might have been forborne in our Sovereigns presence. What want of
duetifull respect soever it carry toward other. You take your self by the
nose while you think to charge us to be sectaries; for the intemperate spirit
of sectaries rests in none more than in the hot sect of your puritan
Jesuits, and such as you are, who taking unto you men's names, and orders to be
called Religious men by, declare The foundation of our religion.
your selves to be sectaries in Christ's Church, whereas we for our Religion,
hold of God, Christ, and the holy Scriptures which al agree and go one way.
We divide not Christ, neither are we Franciscans, Augustines, Iacopines, no
Scotistes, Thomistes. etc. Nor yet Lutheranes, Caluinistes, etc. which names
you odiously put upon us, and we condemn and refuse the same. These be names
of sects, I leave the further consideration hereof to the discreet reader,
and proceed. It is to great a brag made of M. Howlet, when in praising his
writers private opinion in religion, he says: It has been from time to time
the common received religion of universal Christendom. This should have been
proved or let alone, more modesty of speech even here would have better
beseemed, til trial (...).
might have been taken thereof: but he tells us, but what seems to himself
in praising his fellow. We say it is a great untruth if he and his discourse
be of one opinion in religion, and as easily as it is spoken, so easily may it
be rejected, though as one of the principles of their Catholic Religion,
they would have all men suppose it. But we can suppose no such gross
absurdities in this clear light of the Gospel, nor admit the same. Besides
there be a great many Catholics, as they call them at this day in
Christendom, that be not of that opinion in Religion, that this discourse
sets us down in his lettre and treatise, as they that lift to read, may
understand, yea even those, for whom this treatise was made, dissent from the
Authors opinion in Religion, as he himself confesses: so as this writers
zeal and opinion (...) hardly be counted The common received religion of
vniuetsall Christendom. There be also as this Fol. 20. page 1.
man speaks, good Catholics, and bad Catholics: Fol. 6. page 1.
true Catholics, and false Catholics: cold Catholics, and hot
Catholics. And if among protestants Fol. 28. page. 1.
M. Howlet can make these terms (hot, and cold) etc. to sever religion, as
for his vauntage he does in the next Fol. 60. In this point whether it be
lawful for these Catholics to go to protestants Churches or no?
section of his epistle, let his Authors description and confession be judge
of the men and their profession there mentioned, called Protestants, and
Puritanes which his author says are the hotter sort of protestants: then let
them give us leave also to say their hot and cold Catholics. etc. be of diverse
religions, and by their own rule let us call that colder sort or the false and
the worser by the common name of Catholics: and ye hotter sort of Catholics
let us call Puri Sect. 3.
tanes, because they are precise in ye religion, and show themselves Fol. 39.
page 2. a Look the (...) discourse.
unspotted servants and irreprehensible, as this discourser spaketh. Fol. 65.


M. Howlet talks of speaking and writing in defense of their religion, how
ma^fully it shall be done, as long as there is either head or hand remaining
loosein the world: but let the^ leave fire and faggot, and their blooddy
laws, and they shall be written and talked with, well enough, I doubt not,
yea and easily enough entreated too, as God be thanked and her Majesty, their
hands be tied now, when they were loose they had shrewde arguments, such as
I even now spoke of, and yet God to his glory and their shame, gave them that
matched with them even then, received their arguments, and soluted them,
remaining themselves still by Gods power invincible. Since that time their
religion has gained but little by speaking and writing, and I hope shall every
day less then other, so mighty is the (...) of truth, and preuayleth. I see
not why we here may not make as great accoumpt of Christ's Religion professed
in this Church as you do of your friends private opinion, and think and say
as well of it and without brag tell you, (...) religion has been from time
to time, The common received religion of universal Christendom, and so can
(...) so soon be abandoned, for you and your fellows, (...), and disliking,
etc. We (who set no new religion abroch, nor confess and acknowledge any
other then the only true religion of (...) Christ, grounded on the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles, and taken thence) may better auow and prove our
religion, then you can your friendsopinio^, which upon brag without proof, you
so confide^tly boast of.

The matter your Author treats of, seems to you, great, weighty, and
important, to Godward, to her Majesty, and to many a thousand of her Majesty's
best subjects. This is the other and second cause of your dedication of this
piece of work to her Majesty; here want no words to amplify that withal,
which wants matter to uphold it, and is nothing but words. You tell us what
seems you, both of your freende and the matter, you can do little; if in
words you cannot commend them both, if that will serve the turn; you have
said your mind, and given them your good word, your opinion is not rested
upon; the colors of your Rethoricke carry show, but move not. One must try,
prove, and look into the thing, as into the man also, that you praise. First
we wish the matter were important to Gods cause, to her Majesty's soul,
estate, and Realm, and to the estate of her graces faithful subjects. Then
were it in deed a thing meet to be presented to such a Prince as is our dread
Sovereign, and to come into her royal presence. But al is clean contrary,
there is as much as you can perform in this discourse to hurt and hinder gods
cause, her Majesty's soul, estate, and Realm, and to poison and infect, and
thereby to alienate the minds of ye good subjects of this land, from their
dutiful obedience to God, and their lawful and most loving dread Sovereign
and ours, if you could do more hurt, we should be sure of it: but we (...) God
against you for our defense, whom we humbly beseech either to turn you; or to
prevent and overthrow all your wicked devises. For particular proof of things
we refer it to trial upon reading that both parts write, and in a word,
deny here still that you say, and but say in words.

In this second sectio^ of your Epistle, you increase ye troubles too much, ye
you imagine to be here, and therein too undutifully also use your self
toward our Sovereign, her laws, councellers, and ministers. After you have
once menxioned it only, you leave quite out (without prosecuting) gods cause,
her majesty's soul, estate, and realm, which were your principal
co^mendations of ye matter, before you follow and set out like an Orator for
your commodity, the pretended afflictions of your self, and other your friends
ye papists here. This matter you amplify, here you are carried with full
wind and sail, (as they speak) What: Such affliction and extremity of many a
thousand of her graces most loving, faithful, and duetiful subjects, as never
was heard of before in England, and that for their consciences. (Thus you too
often call Popish (...) and treason.) You write of a great matter now, if it
were true. There is no doubt, but you and your fellows give this forth in
speech and writing where ever you become, that dare so boldly avouch it in
printe and before her Majesty. I remember besides other, what your seditious
Sanders in an Epiftle before his visible Monarchy of the Church reports of
the cruelty of this his country, as though there were some mafsacre, or the
shedding of many martyrs blood, here in her Majesty's most mild government:
as I remember also his too vile, lewd, and slanderous report in ye same book,
for yt her Majesty has bin forced to execute some vile traitors for their too
just deserts, which I here only touch by the way: because I treat thereof at
large else where. You would make the world believe that all your stirs here
have not rise^ of nothing, as though you had had great occasion ministered for
your seditious and rebellious attempts, from time to time. I blame you not in
respect of your selves and your epistle that can not blush, but I blame you for
sclandering her Majesty, and the state, and realm, you would make many
think yt we are not our selves, or very fools yt can not see nor understand
of that at home, which you by here say, being so far off, can tell us upon
report: but fame and report, you must remember, going far gains in
carriage, and evil will was never given to say well, you would enduce other,
and her Majesty also to think there were yet some bloody and butcherly
Bishops, like (ye wot whom) yet in her Realm, unknown unto her highness
unless to the great rejoicing of her subjects hearts, she went often and
often among them both far and near, and had better intelligence of the
estate of her whole Realm and all her subjects, than you can give her, and
better opinion and liking also of the Ministers of her Majesty's laws, than
you would she had, massacres, and hot burning execution have been and are the
weapons of your side, know the Authors and make much of the executioners. You
should remember, me thinks in what you deal, and with whom, our sovereign
is merciful, mild, and pitiful, where she is not to much provoked, as (swelt
your hearts) you cannot deny, nay you grant it, though it be to your own
shames yt so far and so much provoke her gentle nature: but she is (you must
understand) with other qualities, godly, wise, and upright, way what that and
the royal estate and dignity of her crown and authority require at her
hands, your conceived griefs and necessity should not make you roue so far
without the compass of the truth, as impude^tly to suggest so manifest false
things, such Hyperboles, that is, excessive speeches are scarsely current, and
yet your writing is full of them. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings,
and the King loves him that speaks right Prou. 13. 16.
things, says the wise man.

Surely M. Howlet, if you mark your usage through your whole Epistle this way,
you may think your self very gently dealt withal, if you leese but your
(...): Theodor. and Vabentinian. con. (...). lib. 1. Tit 25.
request, and that you seek: for the law is that a lying petitioner or suitor
should be frustrate of the thing he had obtained, and thereupon another
says: That it is good right in plea of Court, that he that is found to
suggest a lie, should take no profit by that he gets that way, and you in
thus dealing deserve no better. Your matter is not only false: but a great
slander, her Majesty and her laws to afflict any for their consciences': If
it were any, (...) forensis est vt qui in precib. mentitus fuerit, non ills
prosit quod (...). Aug. in (...). (...). 7.
sure it were not you, when in your respect she is so far of, that many
insolences having been committed openly by your Catholics to the disturbance
of her quiet estate, and the Church and common wealth, have yet been pardoned
and let go. Except, you may lawfully and at pleasure do what you list,
without check or controlment, ye are afflicted. Alack their while: But look
into the former government, when they of your side commanded. The dealings of
your sect have of late been so violent, that her Majesty to her great charges
and trouble (we confess) has been enforced to look narrowlier unto you than
hitherto, as well to repress rebels that came from your holy father yt Pope, as
to cut the^ shorter, yt to confide^tly and openly go still about to kindle a
new fire, providing as much as conuenie^tly may be, yt they shall do no harm:
to tender moreover her simple poor subjects yt are sought to be poisoned with
the Roman and Popish religion. If there be any straightnes herein, who has
procured and enforced it? Look to that M. How. and on that side. Of il vsages
and doings spring many times good laws. Ye talk of many a thousand: but if
with your Author you auowe none but such as will not come to Church here, nor
take the oath of obedience to her Majesty conde^ning other, eue^ of your own
religion, some to hell, some other wise; ye may spare this exces sieve speech of:
Many a thousand: it may be and is likely, ye have infected some few, which
are to many, with your late reconciliation joined with subtle persuasion, which
was the end of your coming from the Pope into England, and for which
disturbance ye justly suffer. Rude, simple, and ignorant people, women
especially are easily seduced in Parishes where there is little or no preaching
of the Gospel, her Majesty's godliness and wisdom, and the States, will of
pity I doubt not, provide they may be better instructed, and submitting
themselves to God and her Majesty quietly, will not only generally send
abroad such as shall break unto the^ by doctrine and preaching the bread of
life for their souls confortably to feed on, and like good Pastors dwell
among the^, to help them in need, and to drive al Popish wolves and the like
away: But like a tender mother also, she will bear more with their
imperfections, than the Pope and you Catholics do, that send the^ quick to
hell. And in deed here, and with these and the conscience of such weakeones,
is the place and time of bearing, til they may be advanced, who (for coming to
church here, and simply and unfeignedly seeking the comfort of their souls,
though possibly, not so thoroughly yet and fully persuaded in all points of
religion, for lack of instruction, as were to be wished) are so hardly
handled by you false Catholics. A weak conscience in these, keeping quiet,
may be tendered and a time borne with, and by instruction further adua^ced. If
after so long preaching of the Gospel among us there be any such found, as in
out quarters of her Majesty's dominions, I fear there be to many. With you
fiery, stubborn, and rebellious Catholics, pretend what you will, you are so
gross, and your matter so open and plain, yea so violent and, unreasonable as
neither time, place nor reason can bear with you, except you repent and
amend. Remember this Church and state may answer you, with that holy father
cited and allowed by your D. Thomas. Who would not have you nor any heretics
perish, (...). Epist. 50. D. Thom. 2. 2. 9. 10. act. 8.
but the house of David (as he says) otherwise deserved not to have peace,
except his son Absolon had perished or been slain in the battle, that he
moved against his father, so the Catholic church (that is not you that will
needs take ye name, and have but ye bare name) but ye true church of Christ if
it gather ye rest, by destroying some, it heals ye sorrow of a motherly heart,
by delivering and saving so great and mighty a people. Of (...), how far your
corrupt and obstinate dealing is from it, I speak in place. Put case the^, of
ye worser sort for their naughty deserts, some few have been restrained of
liberty, or lice^tiousues rather, some committed to bishops and other church
men, or to good, wise, and godly Gentleme^s custody, some also imprisoned, as
ye case requires, they fare well commonly, and lie soft, only the loose
liberty of a few in respect, has been upon great consideration I am assured,
restrained: to foresee and prevent evil and dangerous attempts (as good
wisdom and a great blessing of God.) We have tasted but too much of the
bitter fruit that your late reconciltatio^ to the Pope brings forth.
Remember I pray you (as often as ye hot Catholics plain of hard dealing in these
days) the cruel usage of God his faithful servants in times past and of
late years, and yet still in many places among you: and ye shall see less
cause to make such tragical a do upon a little and gentle seueritte toward a
certain here, rather haled upon them selves, then offered, as all the world
may see. If further, some few traitors have felt any sharpnes and smart of
death, their traitorous and seditious dealing by rebelling against our dread
sovereign, and the state, has procured it, and some notorious traitors had
need to be made an example to terrify and stay others attempts, when they
grow perilous to the good and settled state. This is the great extremity that
you plain some endure, being justly and orderly proceeded withal by law, for
their offenses, and that very mercifully too, as (say the worst ye can) ye
must needs confess. There is a mild severity, as there is a cruel pity.
One might reckon how many things her Majesty, has borne and for (...), how
many matters she has put up, and pardoned both them and the persons. This it
might please you to consider of. You say: ye have no other means to redress
and ease your miseries, but only as confident children, to come to the mercy
and clemency of her highness your mother and borne sovereign Princes, etc.
Fair words and good. I would ye had in deed no other means, and would seek
and use no other: But why run ye so fast to Rome then: Why seek ye help at
stepfathers and stepmothers: why procure and bring you in strangers and Italian
soldiers: why be ye not ruled by your natural Mothers, and borne sovereign
Princes wisdom, bearing and abiding her gentle correction with a rod for your
demerites and insolences: Is not this, to take the rod out of her hand: nay,
the (...) and authority quite from her, to ease your selves if ye can: To be
plain, if the Popes unholiness be your father. If you be his children? Seek
your mother where ye can find her, her Majesty is none of your Mother, ye
are not her natural subjects and children. If ye be her Majesty's children and
subjects, renounce with her that vnholly father, yt most diuelishly seeks her
Majesty's overthrow, and ye destruction of this noble realm and all the
faithful subjects therein. Commit your selves unto God and her Majesty's holy
government: Stick not to swear obedience to your mother, against Pope, Turk,
and all foreign power whatsoever. If you stick at this, and will needs cleave
to this Antichrist your father, following the Pope and his beck, her Majesty
is so far off from being your mother, or accounting you her natural
subjects and children, that She and the State here denounce you, with him,
her, and their woorst enemies, ye wot what they he in plain English? and has
she not good cause if his doings and yours be considered: yours every body of
the meanest sort hear knows: and his, though first done in a corner, yet
has been published to all the world. I think you will call it worse then a
bill of diuorcement from mother Church here? I mean your Popes excommunication
and great curse with such like stuff, may not her Majesty justly complain with
that Psalm. 22, 12. 13.
heavenly Prophet and gods holy anointed, king David, and in resepect of your
Popes bellowing Bulls, say: Many young Bulls have compassed me, mighty Bulls of
Bashan have closed me about, They gape upon me with their mouths as a ramping
and roaring Lion. etc. Your greatest hope is in this father, in his deuilishe
bulls, and in your (...) 13. 17. (...). etc.
blooddy stepmother the Popish Church and Sea of Rome, who are lively described
by S. John in his Revelation. God, we dout not shall disapoint you of your
hope, as heretofore, and her Majesty by her lawful authority, shall I trust
from time to time be able to repress all unlawful, seditious, and rebellious
atte^pts. God, of his goodness indue her Royal mind and more more with goodly
wisdom and courage accordingly, and long preserve her Majesty against her
enemies, ye she may be an old mother in Israel. Practices of prelates and
other popelings, have long enough been known, they are no changelings, such
consciences they have. The subjects ye speak of, must either renounce God,
ye say, or sustain intolerable molestations. A hard Dilemma, or straight
that you are brought into: But you know M. Howlet the solution of yt argument,
by finding out a mean between those two extremities.

Wherefore mende your judgment, and that you pretend, and call conscience, as
right religion would, and all is helped: rather you renounce God, and being
obstinate will buie it with troubles, then by any godly means be removed from
that Diuelishe persuasion. All her Matesties travel has been and is with
mildness and gentleness to bring her Subects to God by such means as he
has appointed in his word. To this end labor the Preachers. To this end
tend her Majesty's wholesome laws, whereof ye so plain, as second means
and helps which have been a great while executed with great favor toward
those of your side. And yet this is the thanks ye give, as they had been
most extreemely laid upon you, which is false. It is possible her Majesty
sees her lenity abused, as in deed: hope to escape punishment, is a train
and Magna (...) illecebra (...) spes. (...).
bait alluring to do amiss. And being too much provoked she is enforced to
change her course, and in a manner her nature, and against violent and
disorderly dealings, to oppose just violence and punishment by the sword,
wherewith God has armed her royal Majesty.

You talk of conscience, as though ye endured for it. You do her Majesty,
and the honorable estate great wrong, it is false ye say. Tell us where and
how you ground your conscience, that try all may be taken whether it be
conscience in deed, or but a pretense and words. All have not conscience that
say so, your conscience is not well and rightly grounded, if you have any
herein. There is ye know a good conscience and a bad. Ignorance, the mother
of your superstitious devotion, (...), and obstinacy, are the greatest enemies
that conscience has, and quite overthrow ye same. A good conscience, is that
keeps us in God and with him, which must be always directed by God his holy
word. The Apostle joins: Faith and a (...). Tim. 1. 5. 19.
good conscience together, which he says, Some have put away, and as
concerning faith have made ship wrack. Words make not a good conscience,
there be more circumstances required in it then so: Is not this conscience,
you speak of, it, that set them a work in the North against her Majesty,
when it was. Is it not it, that does the like in Irelande, haled in by those of
the Popes Seminaries, Jesuits, and such like. Summa Summarum? Is not this the
Popes conscience expressed in his bull that he sent hither to discharge
English subjects of their bounden duty toward our liege Lady and most
dread sovereign, Noble Queen Elizabeth, our most lawful, natural, and godly
Prince, whom God, God (I say) long preserve, from such helllike consciences.
Uerily this is the conscience, you must all be ruled by, when it pleases your
unholy father. Naughty fruits of a noghtie conscience. Your conscience M.
Howlet, and your fellows too, was better (...) you liuid here as duetiful
subjects to her Majesty, before your reconciliation to the Pope. You have made
an evil change for the worse, if you can consider it well.

After this preamble. M. Howlet, you begin to disclose and lay down at large
to her Majesty, your griefs and grievous afflictions in particular; whereof
the first is, that the Catholic religion, as ye term it, that is which we
here call the Popish religion, has great wrong, in that it and the professors
thereof are no more favored. What favor would you have: ye claim that of
duty that ye never deserved, it would go hard with you Catholics if you
had that you deserve, but you are before hand, so as if there were a great
deal more severity used then now is toward those of your side, yet were it
hardly quit with you, as beneficial as you would seem to be to Gospellers
among other before time: But God forbid the Church of God should Sect. 9.
follow you in cruelty and sucking of blood. You love to revenge and to
quite, as you speak else where. It is the divinity you have learned out of
your Philosophers, and out of Aristotle's Rhetorique. Again, your other
proceedings Arist. lib. 1. (...).
by your own confession here, procure rather disfavor, (...).
the^ favor in being so beneficial to them that you account Heretics and
sectaries, as you here report. What favor I pray you deserves it at yt
Queen of Englands hands, if this be true to have filled her realm with
(...), and sectaries: You plain next of the good and wholesome laws here made
against popery, and of the execution thereof: great cause I trow, if that
were true ye falsely and sclanderously say, and more too. Hereto you adioine for
proof certain particular matters, auowing, the Loyalty and obedience of you
Catholics toward civil Princes, and sharply, yea leawdlie by sclander,
charging other with disobedience. This is the some of that you write, for the
most part in eight of your next leaves. A worthy matter to be treated of,
before her Majesty, when all is well waied. But I must somewhat examine, there
is no remedy, what you say a part and in order. First you compare diverse
religions together, and show that popery fares hardely and the woorst.
Hardly sure: can there be found a worse religion and more contrary to the
sincere Gospel of Christ here professed, or that so much troubles the good
and quiet estate of Christ's Church in this land and Realm, and therefore
needs most looking too.

3 THere are at this day in this your Majesty's Realm, Howlets third section.
four known religions, and the professors thereof, (...) religions.
distinct both in name, spirit, and doctrine: that is to say, the Catholics,
the Protestants, the Puritanes, and the householders of love. Besides all other
petie sects, newly borne, and yet groueling on the ground. Of these four
sorts of men, as the Catholics are the first, the auncientest, the more in
number, and the most beneficial to all the rest (having begotten and bred up
the other, and delivered to them this Realm, conserned by Catholic religion,
these thousand years and more:) so did they always hope to receive more favor
then the rest, or at leastwise, equal tolleration with other religions
disalowed by the state. But God knows, it has fallen out quite contrary. For
other religions, have been permitted to put out their heads, to grow, to
advance themselves in common speech, to mount to pulpits, with little or no
controulement. But the Catholic religion, has been so beaten in, with the
terror of laws, and the rigorous execution of the same, as the very suspicion
thereof has not escaped unpunished.

FIrst let me ask M. Howlet, where you were when (...). 3.
you wrote thus to her Majesty, you say in the beginning of these words, in
this your Majesty's Realm, and in the latter end again, this Realm. Were
you at Doway printing your book, or occupied in London, or else where in England
about it, the book possible might be sent to Doway, Sect. 16. and. 18.
or you be printing it there another time, shift it over I pray you. Here
your words importe you were in England when you wrote this preface, elsewhere
in the same preface, they import you were beyond Sea. Alyar had need have a
good memory, saving that you Catholics can work wonders, and by coniuring make
one, and the same humane body to be in many and diverse places at one time. A
man might make a doubt of this question, but let yt pass. When you would
perticularly recko^ up ye several known religions not all approved nor allowed
(nay all disallowed and condemned, saving that only one which is Jesus
Christ's) but being only in this Realm: ye bring them into four heads, as
for the petie sects that you are so privy of, as birds of your own hatching,
till they be fledge, and come abroad, that we may know them, we can say
little: But your Popish religion M. Howlet, were less unhappy, and both we
and the world should be less troubled with you now a days, (if to speak but
of religious men besides seculer priests, among regulars) it had but four
distinct religions and orders of beggarly friars, every one stoutly standing
against other in defense of his Patron and order of religion. These Domini,
Francis. Augusti. Carmel, Aposalip. 9. 3.
be to to many, and yet is the world troubled with a great many more: for
besides the great swarines of these Locustes, there be I wot not how many sects
or religions crept in, so as the Popes them selves have bin feign to restrain
from rashness in instituting mo or new religions, for bringing in confusion.
And yet observe (gentle reader) that the Pope has authority to institute new
(...), and none without his authority may do the same: observe also that
there be in Popery old religions, and new religions, etc. It were (...) long
to speak of Canonists, Schoolmen, Thomists, Scotistes, and such other and the
several and different opinions they hold: but in the late days of Popery
here, were there not, sir, as many religions and more to, besides your own
sects, Arrians, Anabaptists, Libertines, etc. Though none in effect were
persecuted but the poor Protestants as ye call them. These men's peculiar
heresies in examinatio^s were commonly never touched, peruse the records, of
these, there was little or no account made in those days of ignorance and
darkness, while men slept the enemy was busy in sowing his tares. As you (...)
give here names of sects, to bring these times into hatred, so all ambiguitie
and spitefulnes laid aside, first take to your selves and your religion some
fitter name, for true Catholics we btterly deny you to be. All are not
Catholics, that take the name of Catholics: for so should the Arrians, and
other herettques in their time have been Catholics, and true Catholics,
heretics and sectaries, as antiquity reports. Under the name of
Protestants, ye comprehend all those yt forsaking the Pope, and Popish
religion have betaken themselves to Christ and his holy Gospel, grounding their
religion upon Gods word and his heavenly truth, comprised in the Canonical
scriptures, of the old and new Testament, written by the Prophets and
Apostles, and thereuppon are called in these tyntes Gospellers, a fitter naine
than that you call them by Protestants: Of which religion and number we
acknowledge our selves to be, and thank God for the same. Cathari, Fol. 39.
page 2
or Puritan heretics, I know none here, God be thanked, but I guess whom
you mean. Your Author (...), the whotter sort of Protestants are called
Puritans. Now supposing their religion that you call the Protestants, to be
the truth of God, as it is indeed: and that you that will be called
Catholics, like not but condemn cold Catholics as badde ones, and require
zeal and feruentnesse, I pray you tell us even in your conscience if
Protestants be to be allowed: whether sort of (...) are to be liked, the
whotter or the colder, yet such still, (that ye abuse not your self) as with
their zeal carry and join godly knowledge. It is good to be zealous in a
good Galat. 4. 18.
thing, always says the holy Ghost. And you wot what is said to them of
Laodicea in the Reuelat. for that they were Apocal. 3. 16
luke warm and neither cold nor whot, that they should be spued out. We hope
that if you whot Catholics will allow any Protestants, ye poor Purita^s will
find grace with you. We once make but one religion of those yt you call
protestants and Purita^s (meaning yet such still, that ye abuse not your self
(I say) and others, as join godly knowledge with their zeal) except we may do
ye like with you whot and cold Catholics, as ye call them, and we are troubled
with so many sorts of you false Catholics already, that we are loathe to make
any more, except ye needs will your selves. Householders of love, as better
agreeing with your religion, tha^ with Christ's Gospel, we cast to your heap,
as we do al other false religions which we condemn, and acknowledge no other
than that I have (...) described you. Sum, The true religion, or the religion
of Christ, here professed, is but one, your religion is not only one, but many
distinct religions, says even your Angelical Doctor. Talk no more therefore
of four 2. 2. q. 188. Ar. 1.
religions, in this Realm, when but one is auowed here: and there be more
then four or five either, diverse religions, and distinct in name, (...), etc.
not in a Realine but in one City and Town with you: this is your glory. I
trust you will not charge yt religion I have shortly described, to be a sect,
nor the professors thereof to be Sectaries. I am sure (...) ye can not,
considering that neither it nor they, hold of men, nor of names by them
devised, or by you put upon them. That has been hitherto proper to you and
them of your religion. If you impugn this Religion, Take what name you will,
ye shall show your selves to be neither true Christians, nor good subjects.
Take heed unto it, it lies upon you. And let not that move you, because in
the day and clear light of the Gospel, when you M. Howlet are gone, Heresies
appear and be espted, that for the most part were sown in your time before,
and in the night, that is in the time of Ignorance and darkness: It is the
nature and property of the light to disclose and show things that otherwise
lie hid, It is a blessing of God.

Again, you know where G O D has a Church, the Devil will have a Chapel
hard by. And tares Matthew. 13.
in the night are sown in the same field, even among 1. Cor. (...). and. 9.
the good seed. Heresies also must be even among you, says the Scripture, etc.

You say: Of these four sorts of men, the Catholics are the first, the
auncientest, the more in number, and the most beneficial to all the rest,
(whom you account Heretics and Sectaries) having begotten and bred up the
other and delivered to them this Realm, conserved by Catholic religion these
thousand years and more, etc. Here, have I to ask you who then be the fathers
to all those supposed Sectaries, and men of diverse religions, that you say are
at this day in this Realm: Who? but you Catholics yt have begotten them?
Whose children be they, and of whose bringing up, that are accounted to be of
so diverse and naughty religions: whose? but yours yt will be Catholics, who
have begotten and bred them up. How come these ye account Sectaries, here,
and by this Realm, how you Catholics delivered it them, if all the sorts of
men ye reckon up were such Sectaries, and naughty men in deed as ye account
them to be, they might well be accounted your brood, but Mat. 23. 9.
first, sir, we must desire you to take out of your heap, those that you call
Protestants and Puritans. They will call no man their father, I tell you upon
earth, as they be taught by their only Master Christ: for there is but one
father which is in heaven, for the rest, the more we look upon the^ the better
we know them by the face, and confess them to be the Ghostly children of
you false Catholics, they be so like you: you be the first ye say, and the
auncientest: But the great Dragon (sir) that old Serpent called the Renela. 12.
9
Devil and Satan, as the holy Ghost speaks, is elder and before you, again.
You be the more in number, The (...). 3. 15.
serpents seed is greatly multiplied, but the womans seed, I doubt not, shall
match you well enough, not she, that is the woman herself, as your (...)
translation, to commonly corrupt, lewdly translateth the words, and so
overthrows the true sense. Of the battle, victory, and this whole matter
read the Revelation of S. John, namely: the 12. and 13. Chap. etc. In
Catholics and Sectaries we see the Ghostly fathers and their children. Go no
higher to Grandsire, and great Grandsire, stay your wisdom I advise you, for
opening your Pedegrue to much. Only as you Catholics have begotten and bred
up Sectaries, so I pray you at this time tell us of whom ye begat them? That
is, let us learn who was their mother and nurse whose breasts they sucked, and
under whom so untoward impes, were brought up: To save your honesties, and to
make all alike father, mother, and children, Babylon or Rome, in one word, I
think will serve all, if not, help me and teach me better, I speak as your
Doctors teach me. How beneficial you Catholics are to Protestants or
Gospellers, amongst others, your hot burning charity, where they stand to
your courtesy, shows: and the bloody days here in Christ's Martyrs, etc.
did sufficiently express. The more beneficial you are to all the rest that
are Sectaries, the worse ye deserve of this Church. You plain in another
place of lawless proceeding, and cry out of Riot: Section. 13.
here you say, you delivered the Realm, to them that (...) it. They took it
not then by violence nor against your wills, they did you no wrong.

How this Realm has been conserved by Catholic religion (...) thousand
years and more, that should you have showed and made plain; your words carry
an ambiguitie. Popery once, and your religion, as it is professed and
exercised at this day, is not (we tell you) so old. Again, Christians, as
we profess our selves to be, holding of Christ, and builte upon the
Prophets and Apostles, etc. Fetch the antiquity of their religion, not from a
thousand years ago, as you pretend to do: but from a very long tune before
your 1000. years, and so may iustlier then yours he called the old religion.
This Realm has from time to time been conserved by Gods merciful and
fatherly providence, and blessing, by wise and virtuous Princes, and their good
and wholesome laws, not by your blind superstition rather then religion. Gods
Church and true Christians sometime more, sometime fewer, not in this Realm,
but throughout the whole world, have received and conserved Christ's religion
here now professed, and by me more shortly described, these fifteen hundred
years and more, that I may go somewhat above your thousand years, even
since the Ascension of the Lord Jesus, though after a diverse manner, sometime
and most commonly shrouded under the cross, sometime otherwise, according to
the dispensation and wisdom of the immortal God. It is wisdom and safety
for you not to go above a thousand years, but to descend: for since that time
Antichrist and his corruptions have grown apace in the Church, showed
themselves and prevailed much, God so punishing men's ingratitude: But if ye
ascend from a thousand years, if ye list to the beginning of the world, and
let Gods book be judge (we shut out Aristotle, your Philosophers, and
profane men, in this case) you will find (...) vantage, not in Auncientnesse,
though without truth that were no great matter, yet you will still be found to
come after and behind, give us leave to say as he in old time said: christ is
my a^tiquity. Thus if you (...) of ye old and true Ignatius (...)
Philadelphiens.
religion, thus must ye think; thus must ye do. Thus for trial (...) antiquitas
Christus.
we wish you to do, ioining gods book ever with antiquity. And so, Let that
that is first be true: and let that that is afterward (...).
brought in, be false. As one speaks. Gods holy Fol. 16. page (...)
word is before al, is above al, and (...) than al, that ye allege or can do,
for proof of your religion, carrying any good show with it, and this is ye
touchstone yt we would have our religion, your religion, and al religions in
the world tried by. It is a loud lie and a vile slander to report and cry in
her Majesty's ears, yt such (...) and favor is here showed on ye one side, as
that other religions, tha^ Christ's, have been (...) to put out their heads, to
grow, to advance themselves in common speech, to mount to pulpits without
controulmet, and such extremity on the other side, that the very suspicion of
your religion, has not escaped unpunished by terror of Laws and rigorous
execution thereof. For one part: those of your side and godles men among us by
raising slanders have done what they can from time to time as you do, to bring
diverse godly men into discredit, and have but to much prevailed with some,
though God has always given (...) to the truth and cleared innocence. What
yt smart of some the whilst has been you dissemble, every body knows best
where their shoe pincheth them. I write not An Apology now, nor take not upon
me to enter into every man's particular cause, to maintain or defend yt same,
much less to diffame and accuse our Laws and the execution thereof by her
Majesty's Ministers (I owe more reverence to the state than so to do) I only
show the vanity of your report: you can for your vantage find out and tell
her Majesty in this epistle of, one whom Newgate possessed long time Section.
(...).
for his fantastical opinions, as you (...) and speak: wherefore soever the
matter were in deed: you utter your choler, nay your malice and spite, you
cannot find out one of your own side so brainesicke, that even now writing
an Apology, on your behalfs takes upon him by express terms, to confute her
Majesty's late proclamations etc. You cannot find one so brainesicke that even
now being obstinately given to popery, (...) one of his own fellows in his
heat or rage rather. Again (sir) may you not remember, if it please you, of
execution done by fire upon some in London and abroad not long since, for
heresy, which were no Papists, nor of your Catholic religion, as you define
and divide things? Was this little or no controlement? Little surely or none in
your opinion, so long as it is not upon your selves.

But what tragedies make you us of fleabitings upon any of your side, which yet
deserve worst both of church and common wealth? Ye think to win by
exclamatio^ and outcry. Never was there any of your side yet, that in her
Majesty's days, and happy reign ever suffered death, or was executed for this
religion, nor any other that I know for, but these few I have named, and yet
this is yt string ye here so much harp on, this is your argument, that your
religion has found less favor and tolleratio^ tha^ any other newer sect or
religion whatsoever, yea that the tempest has been so terrible, and your
persecution so universal, as the like was never felt nor heard of in England
before, etc,

4 THe law made by Protestants, prohibiting the practice of other religions
besides their own, allotteth out Straightness to Catholics
the same punishment to all them, that do any way vary from the public
communion book, or otherwise say service then is appointed there, as it does
to the Catholics for hearing or saying of a mass. And although the world
knows, that the order set down in that book, be commonly broken by every
Minister at his pleasure, and observed almost no where: yet small punishment
has ever insued thereof. But for hearing of a Mass, were it never so secret,
or uttered by never so weak means: what imprisoning, what arraigning, what
condemning has there been? The examples are lamentable, and many fresh in
memory and in diverse families will be to all posterity miserable.

5 To this now ifwee add the extreme penalties, laid upon the practice of
certain particulars in the Chatholike religion, as imprisonment perpetual,
loss of goods and lands, and life also, for refusal of an oath against my
religion: death for reconciling my self to God by my ghostly father: death,
for giving the supreme pastor supreme authority in causes of the Church:
death, for bringing in a Crucifix in remembrance of the crucified: death, for
bringing in a seely pair of beads, a medall, or an Agnus Dei, in devotion of
the Lamb that took away my sins: which penalties have not been laid upon
the practice of other religions: your Majesty shall easily find to be true,
so much as I have said, which is, that the Catholic religion, where in we
were borne, baptized, and breed up, and our forefathers lived and died most
holyly in the same, has found less favor and tolleration, then any other
newer sect, or religion what soever.

6 And albeit the world does know, how that the great mercy and clemency of
your Majesty, has stayed oftentimes, and restrained these penalties, from
their execution, and from the overthrowing of diverse men, whom otherwise they
might and would have oppressed: yet notwithstanding (as I have said) there
want not very pitiful examples abroad, which would move greatly, and make to
bleed that Princely and compassionable heart of your highness, if their
miseries in particular were known to the same: especially it being in such
subjects, as loved and do love most tenderly your Majesty: and for such a
cause, as lies not in them to remove, that is, for their conscience and
judgment in religion.

ANd because to verify your infamous, lie, and sclander in this behalf, you
adioyne hereafter particular examples of two learned Bishops that are
principal dealers in the high Commission for Ecclesiastical causes under her
Majesty: though they need not my clearing to her Majesty, and the state that
put them in trust, yet to open your impudent vanity, and to satisfy such as
be not to much affectionate to your side for the dealing both of the state and
them, let us hear what your Author and friend in this Treatise, ye present
to her Majesty, says hereof. When a Catholic does come before the
Commissioners, Fol. 16. page 2.
there is nothing asked of him, but when he was at Church? and if he will
promise to go to Church, commonly they account him a sufficient conformable
man, that is to have yielded sufficiently unto them. Here is rigorous
execution; Is there not I pray you? here is great extremity, and cause
hatefully, and contemptuously to quote in your marge^t M. Couper, and M, Elmer.
Ah M. Howlet, what should I say, God give you his grace, and make you an
honest man. Again, sediciously and deuilishly, comparing the high Priests and
Magistrates of Jury with this state, and likening their proceeding to a sweet
charm. Thus he writes in text and margent. What if the high Priests and
Magistrates should have said unto them: well, we are content that you live
with your conscience, so you keep it to your selves, and trouble not the state,
Mark this supposition and apply it to our time.
and so that you will (for obedience sake) some time come to our Synagogues
showing your selves, comformable men to our proceedings. Nay what if they should
have said: some of you The manner of disse^bling Schismatiks lively expressed.
also, for outward show, (keeping always your co^scie^ces to your selves) must
flee this odious name of Christians, and seem to communicate now and the^ with
us, in our sacrifices and ceremonies: we are co^te^t also, that some of you
shall be our officers and justices of peace, cou^sellers and the like, so that
you will sometimes (for orders sake) punish some of those indiscret fellows of
your religion, which can not be contented to keep their consciences to
themselves: so you will also give some pretty, sharp charge in O damnable
disse^bling this is done by many in england. Living to a ma^s own conscience,
by leaving him self (...) conscience.
your circuites, sessio^s, and asse^blies (alwais keeping your co^scie^ces to
your selves (and if some of you also will sometimes, step up into the pulpet, and
speak, three or four earnest words against this religion, it shall be very
gratful unto us, especially if you will affirm it with an oath which we have
devised for ye same purpose, and this doing we assure you that you shall live
quietly to your own co^scie^ces, and we shall account you for good subjects. If
I say, ye Magistrates of Jury at that time should have given to the apostls and
other christians this sweet charm, do you think that they cold have abide^ to
hear it al out, whose hearts did rise and swel at two words only that they
spoke, for the entreating of them to hold their peace.

Here is good and gentle stuff: But sweet charms, terrible tempests, and
such persecution as never was felt nor heard tell of in England before. Her
royal Majesty, her upright laws against popery, and other such false
religions, her grave, wise, and godly Counselors, and ye ministers of her
Majesty's Iaws, with other of the state here, neither fear nor regard your
false accusations, nor your impudent slanders, they can not reach to come nere
the^, they pity rather your want of discretto^ and modesty yt I say no more.
You can not accuse or charge her (...) Iaws or ye ministers thereof, but you
touch her honor too nere, who gives her royal assent to all laws here made:
her Majesty's Jaws, counselors, and ministers with better accord draw all in
one line, and one way then you seem to allow or like of. That her majesty in
yt sight of all ye world (as you confess) has showed you so great mercy and
clemency, that does but increase your debt and duty, and aggrauate your fault
ye more, who so unkindly and unnaturally recompense her highness great
goodness, by withdrawing your selves from ye alleagians and obedience which you
owe to God and her Majesty, which she requires also at your hands, and duty
binds you to perform: you pay and cover all with fair flattering words and
dissimulation, nothing else comes from you to her Majesty. It has bin of
her Majesty's godly inclination and good nature, not of your deserts, yt (...)
has so often pardoned and so long forborne you. She has not nor does not
overthrow, nor alter her good laws provided against popery and treason. If you
be not too too obstinate and miserable, let former clemency move you to amend,
else, take things as they fall out: her Majesty's laws and the penalties thereof
stand not for (...). Abuse not your self and other M. Howlet. To sean
pollitique laws and ye execution thereof is not our profession, yours I mean,
as I take it, and mine, Their godly wisdoms yt make and execute yt laws ye
now plain of, are above our reach: you take too much upon you, being a private
man and not of counsel of making these laws so undutifully to check and
co^troule ye same, you might like a good obedient subject, take heed of
incurring the penalty, and consider by ye execution thereof, yt the end was to
repress popery, massing, etc. If you will not hear my counsel, you might
hear your own fellow in his discourse, or your self in ye latter end of
the discourse: which, for ye most part thereof is twice set down for failing:
That the catholic Church has always taught her children that (how hardly so
ever their prince should deal with them) yet are they bound to bear it
patiently, and to obey him for conscience sake, as substitute of God, and
placed in that room for their punishment, if they rule not well, we (...) not
to the subject to judge of. You love to tell what ye catholic church (...), and
thereby show yt ye Popish church is not yt true catholic church: you come not
from the Pope of Rome hither with this lesson, you have another commission. There
was little space of time between the ariual of the Italian and Romish
soldiers in Ireland and the flight hither of such spiritual birds (...) the
Pope, as you are, your chalenges and books were (...), and this treatise, as
fast as mightbe, afterward published: iwis you might, if it so pleased you
aforde as much reverence in truth to her (...), and the civil Popish Vbi (...)
ibi and man dandi (...) caeteros manet (...) di nece (...)
state under God in governing ye common wealth outwardly, as you do in the
false Hier archie to your Popish (...) etc. with commanding authority, and
laying upon (...), obedience with necessity. Your malapert importunity has
drawn and (...) me of duty and zeal, to speak thus far for clearing and
defense of her majesty's wholesome jaws, and the execution thereof by her
ministers, rather then yt any need required the same, except it be in respect
of ye simpler sort. And yet M. Howlet, let me be bold to tell you that even in
this place where you so inueighe against the terreur of laws against your
religion, ye justify greatly the moderation and equity of her Majesty's
laws, and cannot deny but there has been to great mildness used toward
you in respect of the naughtines of your religion, thus you say: the Law made
by Protestants prohibiting the practice of other religions besides their own,
allotteth out the same punishment to al the^ that do any way vary from the
public Communion book, or otherwise say service than is appointed there: as
it does to the Catholics for hearing or saying of a Mass. What have you to
plain of in yt fauourablenes of this law toward you; Is this straightness to
Catholics; what more equity and bearing with? would you in these times have
an Immunitie, to be exempted from all laws and penalties? I blame you not, ye
so fast and so many ways endanger your selves by breach of laws, that ye
need this remedy greatly: but ye deserve it ill; the penalty and the
execution of the law is that ye plain of, and yet is no more done than law,
if always so much. It grieueth you, that other fare not as hardly as you. The
comparison is odious, the cause is not equal, your mind also is envious, your
opinion and affection parciall. An enuyous man, they say, pyneth away at
another man's welfare, Is your eye evil, because her Majesty is good? Murmr
not, you have no wrong. They that are justly punished, when other of grace and
favor are spared, cannot plain of Injustice, as though they had wrong. It is
a privilege that God in his matters, and Princes, States, and other civil
Magistrates, have in injuries done unto them, by justice to exact and execute
penalties where they be due, and by mercy sometime, to pardon and release
offenses done against their Persons, upon great consideration to some certain,
without doing any injustice. Justice and mercy, may go and stand together, and
both of them are severed from extremity and parcialitie. You might spare well
enough many of your exoruations and (...) figures; you need not make such
exclamation as you do. You think that saying, and hearing of Mass is too
hardly handled by our laws here. You weigh not the matter aright nor
indifferently. First, what is the Mass? Next, what mean you to buy such
Deuilishe tromperie so dear? Your Mass for both saying and hearing is justly
abrogated here, as a thing, that in respect of the sacrifice thereof
contains blasphemy against God, is injurious to Christ's death and Passion,
is an Idol, erected directly contrary to the institution of the Supper of the
Lord, and a mere profanation thereof, farced and stuffed full of gross
superstitions, to poison men's souls with, so far from edifying that it
destroieth: that I speak nothing of the Apishe toys therein containing great
mysteries with you, fitter indeed for a stage then for the holy house of GOD.
You hear briefly and in sum our opinion of your Mass. If you can say better
for it out of Gods book, let us hear that, and ye shall, God willing, hear
of us again. In the mean while for brevity, because you do but touch it in
passing, I surcease also, from doing that now which is so often and well done
already, and rest thereupon, and to answer you, I deny your suppositio^s, till
you bring us some proof, which you do not here. If ye cannot live without
saying and hearing this abominable Mass, plain no longer of the miseries
that ye willingly run headlong into, the punishment is very moderate and
gentle, nothing so hard as your desert is in this behalf. It is your honor,
as seems, you travel to recover your Helena, a rare perle, a precious
jewel, much good dite you with it, draffe is good enough for Swine. Refuse
neither heat nor cold. Run I pray you through fire and water, to come to
it, if ye needs will: but ye were better be admonished and advised: At
least all the godly wise will, if it be but for so hainously dishonouring God,
and deadly wounding their own souls.

Thus writes your Author in his book, the hearing In the (...).
of Mass is not only worth the ventering of a hundred Marks or six months
imprisonment, but also of an hundred The hearing of Mass how well worth a
hundred Marks.
thousand lives, if a man could loose every one for that cause six times: and
an hundred times miserable is that man which for any worldely respect does
deprive himself of so great a benefit, as the participation of this sacrifice
is.

The like to this I say of the practice of the other particulars, that ye
mention, and the penalties laid thereon, yet is it not hard to spy out your
cloaking and coloring of things in speech. It is unnatural, unreasonable,
unconscionable, undutiful: It is against the law of GOD and man, and namely
of this our Country, that an English man should refuse the oath of
allegiance and obedience to our most natural and dread Sovereign, and under
pretense of Religion give it to that proud Prelate of Rome. If you have any
thing to say to the contrary bring it forth, our answer you hear, our
grounds and proofs are so pregnant, as if ye considered them well, they might
shame or win you: but your religion possible hinders you from reading the
books on that side, as your Authors opinion is, least indeed that good
should come thereof, and therefore it avails little to write for you. What
mischiefs have been wrought by your devised eareshrifte? What is now sought
thereby in your reconciliation? what the foundation and use thereof has before
time been? What a (...) and slaughter house to men's consciences? Is to well
known at this day, to think it may be set out with colors to commend it,
the world waxes too wise, to be abused with such gross absurdities, ye
talk of a reconciling to God. I (...), to say in truth, to whom?

Yet in your reconcilement by your Ghostly father, your confiteor must go
before his Misereatur. In reconcileme^t of your selves to her Majesty and the
State, take (at leastwyse if ye will follow no better) the worldly wise man's
counsel, if your stomachs be come down, confess and submit your selves to
mercy.

Ye talk much of death, as though ye suffered pain Erranti, (...) medicina
(...). Cic.
of death here for your religion, ye repyne, are grieved, and offended that
other have not been put to death, for practice of their religion, and yet do
I not know any of your side that has suffered the same, as I said for his
Religion, in all her Majesty's most happy reign, unless there have been
found besides seditious and traiterous dealing in the party against her
Majesty's Royal Aristotel. Salus (...) sita est in (...).
dignity and person, and the State of this (...), which by wholesome laws
it behooves her Majesty to conserve as like a good mother of her Countries,
she has hithertoo done and still does.

Ye say among other things it is death here for giving the supreme Pastor,
supreme authority in causes of the Church, Speak plainly, we say it is for
giving away to the Pope, GOD his, and Christ his right and title, and for
denying under them her Majesty's souerainety in her dominions. We say ye say
untruely, as the words lie, It is so far of from being death to give to
the supreme Pastor, supreme authority in causes of the Church, that without
check of our Sovereign, yea with her Majesty's good lyking we doubt not, we
here maintain and defend the same by the scriptures and overthrow your
proud Prelates usurpation thereby. Ye should therefore have done that here,
dealing with her (...) at least, which you and your Author going by supposition
lightly never do, to wit: have showed who this supreme Pastor is, and have
proved the Pope to be he. In the mean while as we grant the supreme and
chief Pastor in Christ his Church, supreme and chief authority in causes of
the same; so insteede of your Romame Pope; we ascribe that title and office to
Jesus Christ alone, by the warrant of GOD his hospirite and word, which call
him Archpastor, or chief and Supreme Pastor, and find not that title
imparted in the new Testament, to any in Church Ministry, much less to the
Pope of Rome. If you now find as good warrant for your Pope in God his book,
lay it us down, and we will yield: But that neither have you hitherto done,
neither yet shall ye be able to do, wrangle as long, and as much as ye will,
your best days are past.

For the rest we report us to any indifferent body whether it be more to
God his glory, and beseeming God his people, the Church, to hold with the
Scriptures that Jesus Christ alone, the son of God is the Arche and chief
Shepherd, or without warrant of Scripture to give the same to the Pope.

Now Sir, and when the Laws of this Realm give to the Princes here their
Sovereignty, and require the subjects to acknowledge the same in this Church
and Realm, and the Kings and Queens from time to time, challenge and accept
the same, neither do the one profess to give, nor the other to take, Gods
place or Christ's from them, nor yet so much as to incroch upon the Church
ministry, in taking authority to Preach, administer Sacraments, and execute
other Church Ministeries and functions, yea by means of your malicious
interpretation, the contrary is protested, but according to duty from God, to
maintain and see those things done by Pastors, and such as to whom those
charges likewise from God do appertain, not admitting therewhilest, which is
your grief the immunities that the Popes aforetime have given Clergy men, in
exempting them from the civil authority and jurisdiction. What have faithful
subjects herein to repine at? What have they to plain of? Yield with us unto
it and ye shall find we have all great cause to praise God for her Majesty,
and for civil authority, we deny then that any foreign Prince and
Potentate, Ecclesiastical or Civil (if ye will) is above her Majesty and her
people, in these her dominions, in any manner of causes, or have to deal here,
but under her, and by her leave and liking. And to God his glory and our
co^forts, have we still with all tha^kfulnes to observe that her Majesty does
not sit in men's consciences, nor profess to make laws to bind the same, as
your supreme pastor does: but leaves conscience to God, Christ, his spirit
and word, to be ruled and framed thereby, without further pressing the same,
then the express word of God does, in so much that for her Majesty's own
respect, in matters (...) unto her soul and conscience, she yields her self
obediently, to hear, receive, and obey, as every other christian, the voice of
God and Christ speaking unto her in ye holy scriptures, by true pastors, and
other ministers mere Church governors, leaving to them there several charges
whole, without diminishing any part thereof, as reason is.

Now sir, if the Pope and Popelings, namely her Majesty's natural borne
subjects, especially by their unnatural styrres, to the danger of her Royal
person, and the state of the Church and Realm, have caused any laws to be
made that be prejudicial to their attempts, let them thank themselves and
leave their busy and perilous practices, and neither pretend conscience where
no good conscience ca^ be, nor think yt the Prince has to give over her Royal
prerogatives, or to altar the state for their pleasure, this is the very state
of this matter. If this can not call you home nor content you, we say further,
that the supreme pastor ye have made choice of (for it is not hard to guess
at your meaning, though your words be doubtful) is a woolfe, or worse then a
wolf. To give your Pope supreme authority in this Church, besides that it is
treason against her Majesty and the state, it is to commit the poor lambs to
no better then the ravening wolves keeping. How many good lambs, he and his
whelps devoured here in a very few years, when he had last to do with this
sheepefolde, the memory and smart is yet fresh, and before (...) eyes. The
more have we to praise God for our dread sovereign, ye in tender care of God
his sheep and lambs, and her majesty's, she has eased our necks and
shoulders of that yoke and hell like bondage. Besides this M. Howlet, where you
give to the Pope as supreme Pastor, supreme authority in causes of the
Church; ye had need to explayne this some what playner for your own
religions sake and those of your side: as whether the Pope be above the
Counsel, or the Counsel above the Pope; Also, what ye call Church causes;
and whether ye deny his supremacy above Emperors, Kings, and so forth in
other then Church causes, or ye subject him to them? Whether as Peter his
Successor ye give him all Peter his Patrimony and priueleges etc. and so
because, as one Pope says and your Cannon law approoueth, Christ committed
to blessed Peter (no where) in deed, the right both of worldly and heavenly
Empire, will ye abridge that or no?

What should I speak of your Relics, ye may say of all as ye do of one (a
seely pair of beads) seely and single stuff surely. Why make ye such
account of this seely ware, that is but tromperie and trashe, cast such baggage
from you, and there is an end of all troubles for that.

Ye talk of the Catholic religion, and of your own religion, saying: my
religion. Lies the Catholic religion and yours in these points, in deed M.
Howlet, ye here name; will ye needs lie in perpetual prison, leese goods,
lands, and life for the same; After by eareshrift to your Ghostly father, ye
be discharged of lawful and duetifull obedience to our Sovereign as vice
gerent in God his place, to whom ye owe obedience for conscience sake, as to
God him self, whose room she possesses, as the substitute and Angel of God
(thus speak ye some times) to yield the same to a Priest and proud prelate,
to a forrainer, and forerunner, to Antichrist, if not himself, rather to the
Pope of Rome that has nothing to do with English subjects (after this
inuerted and perverted oath and bow: You call it your reconciliation) Lies
your religion, I say, in a masking Mass, in a crucifixe, Medall, agnus Det,
and such other images; ye call them lay men's books, in a seely pair of beads
(so you speak your self) and such other relics? then would I surely have
all men consider well the daily exercises of our Religion which is Catechizing
and instructing of youth and the ruder sort in ye Articles of the belief, the
ten commandments, the Lord his prayer, and other the principles of christian
religion: preaching and hearing preached God his holy word, ministering and
receiving the Sacraments of Baptism, and ye Lord his supper, according to
Christ his holy institution in the Gospel; prayers to God for necessities, and
thanksgiving for benefits, with confession of sins, and of our faith also:
and singing of Psalms, etc. These are the usual and ordinary exercises, and
the principal of our religion in our daily meetings, kept among English men in
the English tongue. Now let these be compared with your exercises that you
set us here down, and with the other ceremonies of your Catholic Roman
Church, and their Latin service at this day, and then let judgment hardly
be given whether of the two be more to God his glory, the Churches, that is,
God his peoples edification to heauenwarde, and as God his religion best
grounded on his holy word, as comformable thereto, and so consequently to be
received and embraced with all thankfulness to God and our sovereign. I am
persuaded (M. Howlet) that as in your motives for alteration, in so bad and
corrupt a religion as yours is, you move very little her Majesty's resolute and
settled conscience on better grounds then yours, for all your cunning and
sugared speeches: so this well weighed and rightly, your friends reasons, and
your glosing will gain as little to your side.

I can not follow particularly all your impudent (...) and sla^ders without
using to much unseemly terms, in giving you that you deserve, I will but
touch so much as I shall think requisite, the things that seem needful
unto me, for the readers satisfaction and admonition. I cannot let pass that
ye say here, we were borne, baptized, and bred up etc. in the Catholic
Religion: still ambiguitie of speech: but I guess at your meaning, you mean
your self and your fellows I suppose: for we renounce and utterly deny, with
thanks to God, that we or any of us were baptized in Popish, or in any man
his religion. We were baptized, In the name of the Father, of the Son and of
the holy Ghost, in the name of Christ and into Christian religion: and
therefore is Baptism called Christening and Christendom, not Popening and
Popedom. I will not calculate your age M. Howlet, and yet it may be, you were
borne and bred up in the time of the Gospel, and profession of this religion,
many of your side I am sure were, and yet shall not need to be rebaptised, as
though ye had been baptized, in heretical religion, by your opinion. You were
baptized, we hope, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost: for every Popish Priests form in baptising, we have not to
answer, look you unto it.

We find in your own decrees, among other your corruptions of Gods holy
orders and his Institution recorded even in the ministering of this sacrament of
Baptism in the Latin tongue: that a Priest in Pope Zacharies time, baptized a
child, in too too barbarous, unto ward, and vile, a form, as is set down in
the margin: In nomine Patria, and Filia, and spiritua sancta.
Therefore not without De Consecrat.
cause, bid I you look to your Priests and their doings before Did. 4. ((...)
Baptizote.
time. One may judge there be many holy things evil fauouredly (...) up among
you. I have told you, the order of Baptizing in our Churches: for the
circumstance of time, when; it is no great matter in this case, look to the
substance. Antichrist with all his corruptions and mischief could never
overthrow the form and substance of Baptism hithertoo, not in the time of
Popery. Let your Antichrist take his corruptions, yt is his religion. Let us
thank God for the substance of our Baptism, that we need not be Baptized
again, reserved by God for us, and unto us, in spite of Antichriste and the
devil in all ages. To God greatly, yea wholly: To these we are nothing
beholding for the same, and as little or less for the corruptions they mingled
therewith. What ye mean when ye say: we were borne in the Catholic religion,
is somewhat dark, in a thing is diversely taken: consulte with your M. Aristot.
we were borne, and you too in iniquity, dead in trespasses and Psalm. 51.
sins, and are by nature the children of wrath as well as Ephe. 2.
others. Thus speak the Scriptures. If you mean as I think ye do, that we
were borne, your self and all, and Baptized in the time of Poperye, we grant
it. But in or into Popish religion, we deny it. It is one thing to be
Baptized in a Popish time, and another in Popish religion: keep the words
wherewith we were baptized. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost. This is neither Popery nor Popish religion. Here upon, we
say your argument and your fellows is taken from Sophistry, and is a
Sophistical and brabbling quarrel. You may easily find the fallacion. Thus
falls the Bulwark alone, and of it self, or is taken very easily, that ye
imagine impregnaable, till it be tried or assaulted, we see and hear well
enough what account ye make of this argument abroad, to deceive the simple.
Distinguishe, which is not hard to be done. Between God and the Devil,
Christ and Antichriste, Popery and True Religion, Gods holy word, Look
better to your abrenun. cio say ye, Credo say ye, and (...) lo say (...).
and men's Inventions. Let each one have that is proper to him, and it: And this
argument (of being Baptized in the Catholic Roman religion, as these men
speak, that is Popish religion, as we truly speak) will easily be
answered.

Her Majesty's clemency, that ye talk of, and great mercy, as it hangs
not on your commendation, as needing the same; so both it, and the cares
wherewith you disquiet her peaceable and quiet estate, and perce her tender
heart (so much as in you lies) should make your hearts to bleed in your
bellies, rather then hers, if they were not harder then flint: never praise
your love to her Majesty, you are little beholding to your neighbors, that
need to praise your selves: for no body else can. Say not, to excuse your
perverse wilfulness, that ye are not able to remove the cause, because it is
your conscience and judgment in religion. You have framed your selves a
conscience; ye may as well remove it. Ye have freewill (...), ye say, on both
sides. Ye could freely enough fall, arise as freely I pray you by reforming
your conscience and judgment. Lie not still in your own mire, and say ye be
perplexed, because some of your doctors talk, and teach perplixetie that men
are sometime brought into, which is but a foolish opinion. We will pray to
God, ye may remove it or come out of that devilish conscience, ye seem now
to pretend: but this therewhilest we warn you of, that ye take not the way,
by abstayning from holy Church assemblies, where the proper means to win you
to God, is to be had.

7 But now, these afflictions, how grievous and heavy so ever they were, yet
were they hitherto more tolerable, General cross ses of Catholics.
because they were not common, nor fell not out upon every man: and if there
were any common cross laid upon them, (as there wanted not) they bare it out
with patience: as their discredit in their countries, who were borne to
credit and countenance in the same: distrustful dealing with all of that
religion, notwithstanding their resolute readiness, to spend their lives in
your Majesty's service, and other the like afflictions, which they shifted out
with, as they might. But at this time present, and for certain months past,
the tempest has been so terrible upon these kind of men, and their
persecutions so universal, as the like was never felt, nor feared before. For
besides the general molestation, and casting Particular extremities.
into geales, both of men, women, and children, of that religion, throughout
all parts of your Majesty's Realms: there are certain perticulars reported
here, which make the matter more afflictiue. As the disioyning of man and wife
in sundry prisons: The compelling of such to die in prison, which As M.
Dimmocke was by M. Couper.
could not stand or go in their own houses: The sending of Virgins to
Bridewell for their consciences: The racking and tormenting of diverse, which
was never heard of before in any As young Maistrisse Tomson was by M. Elmer
country for religion. And that which above all other things is most grievous,
injurious, and intolerable, is, the giving out publicly, that all
Catholics are enemies and traitors to your Royal Majesty: and this not
only to utter in speech, but also to let it pass in print, to the vewe of the
world, and to the renting of Catholics hearts, which are privy of their
own truth and duetifull affection toward your highness, John Field in his
epistle dedicatorie of Phillip of Morneis book to the Earl of Leycester.
estate, and person. This was written and put in print this Summer past, to a
Noble man of your Majesty's privy Counsel, for the exciting of him to the
persecution of all Catholics, by a strange braynesike fellow, whom Newegate
possessed a long time, for his fantastical opinions: wherein he is so pregnant
(if men report truly,) as he can devise any new religion, upon a weeks
warning given him at any time. This fellow affirms there, that all Papists
(as he terms them) are enemies to God, and to your Royal Majesty. The which
in his meaning, touches so near, so many thousand good subjects in this
Land, as I marvel that either his audacitie served him to write it, or M.
Elmers officers would allow to print it. But it seems that Catholics at
this day, are made according to the Philosophers proverb. Praeda Mysorum. That
is, laid open to every Arist. li. l.
man's injury, a pray for every one to bayte upon: and a Rhetor.
common place for every rayler to ruffle on, and to rub his cankered tongue
in their slander. In all which great wrongs, they have no appeal but unto
God, and to your Majesty as Vicegerent in his place: before whom they desire,
above all other things, to clear themselves, from this grievous objected crime
of disloyalty, by protesting, and calling, the omnipotent knowledge of our
great God and Savior to witness, that they are deeply slaundered in this
point, and that they are as ready, to spend their goods, lands, livings,
and life, with all other worldly commodities whatsoever, in the service of your
Majesty and their Country, as their auncitours have been to your Noble
progenitors before this, and as duetifull subjects are bound to do unto
their Sovereign Princess and Queen: only craving pardon, for not yielding to
such conformity in matters of religion, as is demanded at their hands: which
they cannot do, but by offense of their consciences, indu ced by those reasons,
which more at large are declared in this Treatise following.

Now (leaving the brag you make of your resolute readiness to spend your
lives in her Majesty's service (which as hitherto she has not, so God grant
she never need to prove your fidilitie) and of your patience in your
troubles: dreamed of, rather then found) proceed I, M. Howlet, to your new
persecutions and extremities, as ye call them, in deed to your shameless
slanders, charging particular persons before her highness, whose chaste
ears, unwonted to such impudency, you should at least have spared, but ye
make no account of that; The other dealing beseems you well enough, whereupon
making your entrance upon generalles still, as true as the (...), you talk
of casting into Geales, both of men, women, and children of your religion
throughout all parts of her Majesty's Realms. Fie for shame, are ye not
ashamed; tell truth, and express the cause wherefore, or else peace, Lying
lips are abomination unto the Lord: but they that deal truly are his
delight. Prou. 12. 22. He that dissembleth hatred with lying lips, and he
that inuenteth slander, is a fool, etc. Prouer. 10. 18. It is possible to
bring some examples of imprisoning, whipping, and burning too, of some children
and infants of our men's in your kingdom, besides women and men, young and
old. Let Bonner that dead is go, and other his mates. Here I remember what
befell a woman in the Isle of Guernezey and her infant, in the late days of
persecution under Queen Marie, how both were cruelly burned, the story is to
be seen, the people of the Country testify of yt cruelty and the truth of
the matter, the deane and other that gave the sentence, alive very lately and I
think still, and diverse of the executioners in her Majesty's dominions, and
out of prison too. The profession of ye Gospel follows not your Roman
Catholics in thirsting after blood, her Majesty's royal breast and her people
and Realm; except it be a few that; grow out of kind, are free from such
barbarous and savage cruelty. Her Majesty's will is it should be so, God be
thanked therefore.

Leaving generals which ye plain of, but prove nothing, ye come with like
proof, that is none at al, to particulars, reported here, say you: but by
whom and upon what credit you say not, of you and upon your own credit
wholly. At first clap you charge two, not of the meanest bishops in this land:
what dare not you do to meaner personages? but the best is you show what you
are and what credit is to be given to you. Your reports are lies and too
shameless, yeedeclare at pleasure in your Epistle of disioyning of man and
wife in sundry prisons, etc. What were your, not disioynings in sundry
prisons; but violent diuorcements of man and wife, pronouncing the same without
all warrant of God his word to be whoredom and worse then whoredom, when it
was. Your hot burning, if not both the married couple, yet one leaving the
husband a widdower, the wife a widdowe, the children fatherless and motherles,
your killing diverse in prison, etc. This was nothing, it was worth neither the
noting nor the quoting: ye quote us. M. Dimmocke, in your margent and M.
Couper. But sir, the Bishop of Lincoln whom ye name, is alive, and able to
answer your slander, God be thanked, and has already openly done the same to
your shame. M. Dymmock, as I understand being orderly called before her
Matesties high Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical, whereof the B. of
Lincoln is one, was for his demerits restrained, not committed to any prison
or common iayle: but wild to choose him a house, as he did a friend of his, in
the Close at Lyncolne, where he was (during his restraint) well enough used,
his wife resorted to him, and he sundry times to the Bishops table; being
there, he might per adventure sometime be displeased at the Bishop his talk
after dinner, who carefully and painefully travailed to win him to Christ.
This was the hard usage ye make so Tragical ado about. I am ashamed to
rippe up your words of compelling such to dye in prison which could not stand
or go in their own houses. If not all, the one half of the sentence is a
Paradoxe, or strange kind of speech. From Lincoln, you leap or fly rather
to London, and talk of sending of virgins to Bridewel for their consciences,
ye quote us only one, as (say you) young Mistrisse Tomson by M. Elmer. Ye
heard by report, belyke, of some thing, whereof you make more, as is your
manner. The thing, as is reported is false and untrue as the rest: for neither
was she sent to that place by the B. of London, but by the Queens Majesty's
high Commissioners and the appointment of the whole benche, neither was it for
her conscience, but for her flering, mocking and such vnmaydenly usage toward
authority, that she was committed to Bridewel, and that to the end she might
thereby the rather, get by her hands and labor somewhat toward her
maintenance. How ever it were, we have to think reuere^tly of the proceedings
of authority, and to judge she well deserved the punishment laid upon her, and
that the Commisioners had reason and good cause to take that course with her
they did. The committing of her to Bridewel, why should it be thought so great
an offense as H, makes it, seeing the place is ordained not to make of honest
women Harlots, but of Harlots honest women, by punishment and repentance:
Therefore the Commisioners seeing the intolerable unshamefastness, the boulde
(...) countenance of the woman without blushing, the immodest speeches and
flowting laughters in the place of Majesty and Justice: suspected that
chastity could not be there entier, where so ill, so bold, and impudent
behavior was, in so open, and so honorable a place. Therefore they thought it
good to commit her to that place, where though not her chastity, yet her
modesty, and maydenly behavior might be recovered. The time was, when
Howlets brood thought it no fault to rack Anne Askue (a gentlewoman of a good
house) nor to burn the hands of maids before they burned their bodies, nor
to use other most hellishe torments against the servants of God: but now
(forsooth) the Papists being sufferers (as they think) and not dooers (as they
wish) can make of every molehill a mountain, and of every fillip a mortal and
deadly wound. Are they not ashamed to cry out against carrying to Bridewell,
where the offenders be kept alive, lie, and live well, and be made better (if
they have any grace) and not worse: where they carried the saints of God to
Smithfielde, to fire, and (as they themselves were not ashamed to say) from
that fire to hell fire: Such was their mercy. If God (...) account (...) to be
the most abominable (...) of the soul, and much fouler then the defiling of
the body: then what wrong had that idolatrous wench, who had prostituted her
self, and her soul to the worse sort of filthy fornication, if she were
carried to the house of reformation, where she could take no evil example,
neither of life, nor belief: If such as be sent to Bridewell returned thereby
defiled either in body or soul, or both, as those commonly be, whom Satan
sends on his errand to Rome: then were it a fault indeed to thrust them to
such a Prison. I take this an honester imprisonment, then your Canonical
intrusion into Monasteries was, where what they saw, what they heard and
learned, the world is not ignorant.

I have to crave pardon that upon this raylers slanders I make so bold as to
speak in their defenses, whose credit with her Majesty and the State is so
good, that it nothing needs my pleading or others such as I am, and that
makes me not to stand long in their purgation: but only to note the
adversaries crafty and naughty dealing. If he were here to answer it, the
parties be such and their cause, as by trial before other Judges, or in any
Court in England, it would (...) him dear if they should but pursue the
cause. You speak M. Howlet of racking, tormenting, etc. for Religion (all must
be cloaked under Religion forsooth) you might be ashamed, if ye had any,
writing to her Majesty, to touch her honor so near, and the highest
authority in this land, to whom these punishments are reserved, you will
never leave your common rule: An Epistle blusheth not, Pro. 24. 21. My son
(says the wise man) fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with the^ that
are seditious. I will not as you do, make my self more busy than needs
about her (...) affairs, and her honorable Counsels, whereof I am not
privy, no more are you: though impudently ye rushe into every thing, that I
may (...) charge you with your own phrase, they be things M. Howlet above
our reaches, they are to well handled to be stained by our reproaches, let us
deal wisely and let them alone, or else learn to speak more reverently of
authority as becomes us. Ye know who and what presumptuous (...) and false
teachers they be that standing in their own conceipte, despise government
and fear not to rail on 2. Pet. 2. 10.
them that are in dignity. Jude. verse. 8.


From public and great personages and such as have commission and authority
from her Majesty, whose names ye might have spared for your own honesties
sake, you come lower, ye care not where ye root, nor where ye byte. First
ye catch hold of one whom ye call a strange brainesicke fellow, whom
Newegate possessed a long time for his fantastical opinions (only Papists
then have not suffered for their Religion) wherein he is so pregnant if men
report truly (all goes upon report) as he can devise any new religion
upon a weeks (...) given him at any time. Gentle stuff, This (...) affirms
in printe, say you, that all Papists are Enemies to GOD and to your Royal
Majesty, and this is above all other things most grievous, injurious, and
intolerable that the crime of Disloyalty, is objected unto you, etc.
Heereuppon you puff and fume, or would seem to be angry: ye amplify the
matter, ye apeale, ye protest, ye bestirre you every way, here is praeda
Mysorum, expounded and set out with dog Rhetorike, and much ado: The thing
might have been (...) taken and uttered with more (...) and modesty; and your
deeds, if ye had any, might better clear you with wise men than words will.
Your judgment of the man in this passion and in your own case will hardly be
esteemed. This vpbrayding of imprisonment, this charging with fantastical
opinions and showing none, and saying that the man with whom ye are (...) can
devise any new Religion at any time upon (...) weeks warning given him;
grounded but upon this: if men report truly. This uncharitable and naughty
dealing I say, may savor of immoderat choler and heat: but of little truth or
honest modesty, you would scarsely be content to be so used your self.

Though it be no part of the matter, to stand in defense of particular men
and their (...), neither take I great delight in that course, yet if that be
the party ye quote in your margin (M. Howlet) I answer not by report and
hear say, as you too lightly do; but upon better knowledge: that it is very
untrue and a slander that you report of his devising of any new Religion
upon a weeks warning, etc. And that he has been known never to have
altered his judgment in Religion, since he first entered the profession
thereof, and at this day also, thanks be to God, keeps the true pattern of
the wholesome doctrine of salvation, and constantly trauaileth for the
mainteynance of the Faith against you and such other as fallen into Heresy
impugn the same. It makes no great matter what you report of him or such
other; when almost ye can say well of no good man, the worse he hears of
you in this case, the better will he be liked among the godly.

Touching the matter I would your deeds M. Howlet, and your fellows did not
plainly confirm and approve that he writes, if you be so stiffly addicted
unto Popish heresy, as ye seem to profess, and so obstinate in refusing by
oath to acknowledge her Majesty's Sovereignty given of GOD, and by law
propounded to her subjects here: Think not that it is this man his singular
opinion in writing and printing, but the common opinion here of the best, that
in the case you are ye be enemies to God and her Royal Majesty and the State,
and that worse terms also may beseem you and your deserts well enough. Be
not angry therefore at this, your to much stirring, will but increase the
opinion of you. Have you been all this while in laying down your griefs, in
disclosing your miseries, and unfolding (at large now) your pitiful
afflicted case, and such intolerable molestations as you cannot bear, brought
into such extremity as never was heard of in England before. And is all come
to this? that the giving out publicly in print of these words; that al
Papists are enemies to GOD and her Royal Majesty is above all things the most
grievous, injurious and intolerable? Is this the deepest wound, and the
greatest hurt ye have; Is this such extremity as was never heard of in
England before; Alas seely mouse that appears after the mountains great
travail, I would, when your side commanded, we had been persecuted but by
tongue and pen. Is that bloody persecution forgotten now; these (...) man,
but words, and in your own estimation but the words and opinion of a
strange brainsicke fellow, holding fantastical opinions, and vile in the
reputation of the world, what need you be so much moved thereat; Ye are of
a noble courage, file not your hands upon every one ye meet. I see (M.
Howlet) your choice and meaning herein, cunningly to seek to tread upon the
hedge where it is lowest, you are commonly in extremities, either with the
greatest, or the least: you can hardly keep the golden measure and mean in
any thing.

This renteth your Catholic hearts forsooth, which are priuey of your own
truth and duetifull affection toward her highness, estate and person,
would to God that that is so priuey to your selves and unknown to others, her
Majesty at least, to whom it appertains, might be made priuey to in deed;
by your submissions, to her authority renouncing all foreigne power. I would
ye would have made her Majesty priuey, before ye ran away and made your
selves slaves to that Beast of Rome, I would before you had thus dealt with
her Subjects and Printed your book without her leave and against her mind,
you would have made her Majesty priuey of ye matter, I would you would yet now
at the length return home upon her Majesty's commandment and intimation given
unto you of her pleasure, and do as some of your fellows and company do,
repent and stand to her Majesty's mercy. Ye need not be ashamed nor afraid,
you shall have examples here before your eyes, of honester men, I fear than
some of you will prove, except you do the like: This is good sooth and
truth, and the duetifull and bounden affection of subjects, this is good
plain English dealing man without Romish farded (...), or deep Italian
fetches: if ye be so desirous to clear your selves, as ye pretend, yield
to this motion in time, Otherwise your Rhetorique is but cold, it persuades
not, all that you say or can say for your selves, has been and is considered;
it is hardly worth the hearing. He that prayseth him self is not allowed, but
he whom the Lord prayseth. How if her Majesty reply and 1. Cor. 10. 18
rely (as you speak) upon her just interest: how if she say ye plain more
than ye need, or have cause for, if this man's words be the worst is done unto
you, that you make much ado of a little or nothing in comparison? how if her
Majesty tell you where the truth of the matter is to be tried, in deeds and
good evidence, words are in vain and prevail not, how if therefore she
(...) you leave flourishing, that is a vain praising and vaunting your
Loyalty in glorious words, set out with colors of petre Rhetorique, and (...)
you, for her satisfaction and assurance, go to the matter, and by taking the
oath of submission testify and approve your obedience, and shame your
adversaries that way. Let another man praise thee, says the wise man, and not
Prouer, 23. 2
thine own mouth, a stranger and not thine own lips. Namely, we are bidden
there, Not to boaste our Prouer. 25. 6
selves before the King. You keep no measure (...) M. Howlet. And in refusing
conformity to take the oath of obedience, and to go to Church, upon the
reasons of the treatise following. Ye maintain a very corrupt conscience, if it
may bear the name of conscience, which is so ill stayed: If words may be
received, your pay verily is good; if deeds be required your money is not
current.

That is a great block in your way, that you can never praise your
duetifulnesse to her Majesty, but you must ever with all, crave pardon for
your undutifulness in the greatest matters: as you here do for not leaving
Pope and Popery, and conforming your selves to religion etc. And yet ye do
the same cunningly, and under couerte of conscience forsooth grounded on the
reasons that are in the treatise, which must stand in stead of al
satisfaction to her Majesty: where-of in place, God willing we shall see. I
am sorry I am enforced to follow and examine your words: I would there had
been some grounded matter, for I am afraid as I weary my self, so do I some
wise and discreet readers, but I must crave pardon in respect of other that
are more simple and rude, who it were pit should be by glosing, seduced or
deceived.

8 ANd that the Catholic religion in general (for I meddle The Catholic
faith teaches obedience more then other religions.
with no man's particular fact,) is unjustly touched by any sect of our time,
for teaching disobedience, or rebellion against their princes: it may appear
plainly, by the different doctrine which each part delivers unto his
followers. First, John Wikliffe, one of their progenitors, teaches. That a
Prince if he rule evil, or fall into mortal sin, is no longer Con. Constable.
Sess. 8. Cocleus.
Prince, but that his subjects may rise against him and punish him at their
pleasures. Secondly, Mar. Luther following the same steps teaches. That
Chistians are free and exempted Lib. 1. and. 3. Hist. Huss. Wicklif. li. 4.
trial call. 3.
from all Princes laws. Whereof followed immediately that famous rebellion of
the country men against their Lords in Germanye in the year 1525. and in
the same two hundred thousand slain in one day. Thirdly, John (...) not
dissenting from the rest, teaches, That princes laws bind not subjects to
obedience in conscience, but only In Bulla Le on 10. and in asser. art. ibi
damnat.
for external and temporal respect. Whereof enseweth that if by any occasion,
this external fear, (for the which only the subject obeys,) be taken away:
as when he were able Cocleus in. vita. Luth. and Sur. in. hist. huius. anni.
to make his party so strong as he feared not his Prince: then he should not
sin in rebelling against him. And in another place, holding plainly the
doctrine of Luther, he says. That the consciences of the faithful are
exempted from the power Lib. 4. inst. cap. 10.
of all men, by reason of the liberty given them by Christ. Lastly the writing
against the regiment of women in Queen Lib. 3. insti. cap. 19.
Mary's time for that the government then, liked them not, all men can
remember. Which, errors all, the Catholic Goodman Gilbye.
Church utterly condemns: teaching her children, together with the Apostle,
true obedience to their Princes, for Conscience sake, even as unto God him
self, whose room they do Romans 13.
possess, and to whom they are bound, under the pain of mortal Vide om.
sin, and eternal damnation: patiently to obey, how hardly Doct. 2. 2. quest.
90. de Leg, 22, Aug. in ps. 70.
so ever they deal with them in their government otherwise. By the which your
Majesty may perceive, how falsely the Catholic religion is charged, by her
enemies, of the contrary crime.

9 Besides this, if your Highness wisdom shall but enter Crysost. and Ambro.
in. cap. 13. ad Romans
into a little consideration, of the demeanor of Catholics, and of other of
newer religions, toward their Princes, this day in Europe: it shall easyly
appear, which of them are of the quieter spirits, and milder in obedience. I
will not make mention of greater matters: but only, to quite this aforesaid
Puritan, which so falsely has infamed us, I will set down here certain
propositions, gathered out of two sermons of two, of his preachers, by a
minister present there, in Stamforde at the general fast this last Summer.
Which fast being prohibited, with the preachings at the same, by the express
letters of the Lord Superintendent of Lincoln, bearing date the 5. of
September, to the Alderman and Comburgeses of the said Town: the preachers
would not obey, but stepping up into the pulpit, uttered as follows.

1. In such actions as may further the public fast, flesh and The first
precher.
blood must not be called to counsel, to do the Lords commandment, but
they must be vndertake^ without such warrant. 2. The religion that Jonas
preached, did not (as ours now does) depend and hang upon Acts of Parliament.
For we, when we go about such actions, as God is to be glorified in, (...)
first inquire, whether there be any act of Parliament, to warrant our doings,
or no. 3 It is the manner of her officers and Counselors now (...) days, to
reform matters by acts of Parliament, and by pollices, and not by Jonas his
preachings. 4 Her Counselors never inquire, what news at Poules sermon, but
what reports are abroad, that if any disliking thing should come to the Kings
(...), they might stop it from thence.
1. He is of no spirit, that will not promote that which The second preacher.
God commands though all Edictes be contrary, for we must not obey flesh and
blood. 2. They that are ruled by the Edictes of men will change their religion
with the Prince, and they are of no conscience, though they be never so much
grounded in divinity. 3. What if nether the Queen, Counsel, nor Bishop,
have been present at the Fast, nor allowed thereof? yet we ought to undertake
it. Put case, it is not in the Queens chapel: what then? 4. This fast has
been hindered, by certain profane and carnal wretches.
10 Here lo, your Majesty may see, with what temperate spirit these men do
proceed, and what they would teach and do, if they should be contraried in
great matters, seeing they boult out such doctrine against their Magistrates
for crossing their appetites in so small a matter, as is a little fantastical
age of fasting suddenly come upon them, for a desire they have, to hear
themselves speak ten or twelve hours together, after their continual railing
against fasting for these twenty one years past.

But this is their spirit, to rushe into every thing with inordinate violence,
and to like of nothing that order and obedience lays down unto them. The
which your Majesty's great wisdom considering, together with the quiet and
modest proceedings of the Catholic part, shall, I doubt not, easily perceive,
what danger it were to permit much to such kind of spirits, and to bereave
this your Realm; of so important a stay as Catholics are in every of your
countries, against the perilous innouations of these and the like men, whose
final end is (as their doctrine declares) to have no governor or ruler at
all.

11 And this may be one great Motive unto your Majesty, A weighty motive.
in respect of the safety and quietness of your whole (...), to extend some
more mercy and favor, to your trusty and afflicted subjects the Catholics.
Who as they were most ready at the beginning (according to their bounden
duties) to place your highness in that Royal room, wherein now by the
favor of God you stand: So are they, and will be always in like sort
ready, with the uttermost drop of their blood, to defend the same in all
safety, peace and quietness unto the end. In consideration of which goodwil
and service, they can not imagine to ask of your Majesty, any so great gift,
recompense, or benefit in this world, as should be to them, some favorable
tolleration with their consciences in religion, the which consciences,
depending of iudegement and understanding, and not of affect and will: can not
be framed by them at their pleasures, nor consequently reduced always to such
conformity; as is prescribed to them by their Superiors: and yet this nothing
deminisheth their duetifull love toward the same Superiors, seeing conscience
(as I have said) depends of judgment, and not of will.

BEcause you Catholics are touched, and that justly with the crime of
disobedience and rebellion toward our sovereign, and that the whole fault
hereof proceeds from you that teach and lead the rest hereunto, ye take
some pains and seek here to clear Popery of that note, but ill fauoredly
and to little purpose; for when you have all said, the matter is where it was,
you neither clear your selves, nor satisfy other, you give us still fair
words, and make odious co^parisons besides the matter: taking occasion in the
most of this part, to slander and charge me^ at home, here and abroad, alive
and dead, one and other, and still to vaunt and praise your selves, and so make
all things to serve your turn. Herein spend you now six or seven pages in
this your Epistle to her Majesty: Whereof I must particularly speak some
thing. In the very entrye, ye say ye meddle with no man's particular fact, but
speak of the Catholic religion in general. So ye leave us a general, that
can be undermined and overthrown by no particulars. Take away particulars,
and whereof will your general consist. Thus provide you a salve for all the
trecheries and attempts, taught and committed by any person of your side in any
time: So you salve up the Popes bulls, if you account him a man among other,
and his doing a particular fact. So, to make an end, ye salve up all other
libelles and writings made by any of those, of your side, what treason so ever
they contain. So yevantage your self greatly (as ye ween) and no less seek
you to disadvantage us: for what bring you against us, and our religion in this
case, but particular men's writings, and particular, not factes, but words of
men. Thus can you to charge in general our religion, both in doctrine and
demeanor, conclude without all reason. A general affirmative against us, by
one or two particular examples: but no particulars (as. I have said) how
contrary so ever they be in doctrine and behavior, to your Catholic religion
in general, may overthrow that you generally deny, to fall into that
religion. Me thinks you should give us the same liberty ye take to your
selves, you meddle, you say, with no man's, particular fact, and yet you will
drive us to answer for particulars.

1 Your position has two parts: one to clear your selves, and your religion,
to wit, you say, that the Catholic religion in general is unjustly touched by
any sect of our time for teaching disobedience or rebellion against their
Princes, or as your note has: The Catholic faith, teaches obedience more
then other religions. This is for you. I well wot not what you mean by your
Catholic religion in general, nor how you may understand your note, to be
some way true, that your Catholic faith teaches slavish obedience, more then
any other religion. In that it makes Emperors, Kings, Potentates, of the
world, and civil Magistrates, so subject to the Pope; as to (...) on their
necks, to set them to hold his Stirrup, his bridle, to lead his Palfrey, to
kiss his foot, etc. Which al be but duties of obedience on their behalfes, to
set up his creatures, the Prelates of the Clergy, to be Lords over Gods
Church, whose servants they ought to be. As your very Pope also professes
himself to be, the servant of the servants of God: But as Solomon says.
When a Prou. 30. verse 21. 22.
servant reigns, or is Lord, it is one of the things of three or four for
the which the earth is moved, and can not sustain it self: So this, and such
like slauishe obedience, is nothing to the commendation of your Popish
religion: which in too vile speech and manner, subiecteth into it those that
ye call of the Laytte. For obedience of subjects to Princes, it teaches it
so far, as may serve the turn of that religion, and their ambitious minds
that I have spoken
of. 2. The other part of your position here, is, to charge us and our
religion, to wit, that the final end of our doctrine and doing, is to have no
governors or ruler at all; that all heretics and sectaries of our time (such
you call us) in every country where they are contraried, seek to disturb and
molest by rebellion their Lords and Princes, teaching the same to be lawful,
that they rushe into every thing with inordinate violence, and like of nothing
that order and obedience lays down unto them: which how Clarkelike you
prove, we shall, God willing, see in his place: for first have I to speak of
you, your faith, doctrine, religion and demeanor, touching obedience, and
disobedience with is yt mark you shoot at, or should be at least, if ye rightly
handled or performed that ye take in hand. Thus muft I still put you in
remembrance of, that where you should prove and show that your faith and your
religion, that is, the popish faith and religion at this day, is the Catholic
faith and religion, as you term it: there you fail in your proof. It must
needs be supposed you are, Catholics, and we Heretics and Sectaries,
because you say so without all proof: but the truth is far otherwise. False
Catholics or Catholics in name, may go in opinion of men for Catholics, but
true Catholics shall they never be. Leave this equivocation and ambiguitie of
words and speeches, and give us a sounder proof then hitherto, if ye have
it; that Papists be true Catholics, and we Heretics and Sectaries: else give
us leave to believe, that all ye say is not Gospel. Our controversy is not
with the Catholic religion in general, but with your Popish religion in
particular. The profession and fruits of your Popish religion, and
disobedience to our Sovereign, the State, and laws here: (if we go not
without the compass of these times) will always stop you from making a good
argument, to clear your religion from rebellion; namely, when you deal with
her Majesty, who is privy of your whole doctrine and practice. If you make a
perfect argument, either will one of your sentences be flat false, and so
must be denied, and you put to a hard prufe; or else there is no remedy but ye
must run, for a poor help to an Elench, and fallatio^ which is a bad kind of
reasoning: You yt can not be reduced to conformity prescribed by your
Superiors: Inducing you to your souls healthes, to godliness, and to the
common good and quiet of the country; had not need to brag of your obedience
toward your superiors. But while you frame a good scholasticall argument, to
maintain your Popish religion, that teaches and practices disobedience and
rebellion against our common Sovereign and Queen, which will be a good while
to: I having spoken thus much in general, will further and more particularly
therewhilest enter to speak of your doctrine and demeanor herein: Then will
I, (so much as shall be necessary) answer to those particulars ye object here
against us, and our religion. And yet here entering into a large field, to rip
up your corrupt doctrine and rebellious demeanor toward princes; there is so
much matter to treat of, that in such plenty, it is hard to keep measure,
to give over, and come out again, whereof notwithstanding I must have special
regard, and mind so to do. This have I to desire you not to be offended
with all: If I be any where found in the matter, to use the same law toward
you, that you do toward us. For your doctrine therefore of obedience, and
demeanor also: first I must admonish, without you were better, that we may
not call you that be the children of the Pope and Popish religion at this
day, to the Apostles doctrine and their rule and practice, set us down in the
scriptures at the beginning; the things be too unequal, and we may be no
bolder with you, then so far as your Church teaches you, and your supreme
Pastors voice, that is the Pope calls you herein, and yet here fall some good
words from you contrary to the rest of your doctrine, set us down in your
books, and your demeanor at this day toward our sovereign. I hear what
glorious show, your words have, and I see; you set us down in your margin.
Romans 13. Which heavenly doctrine we receive, we teach, we steadfast ly hold,
and practice. The Scriptures are the foundation and ground of our profession,
we can not, we may not, we will not refuse them: our books as public
records testify the same. Every soul must bring every mothers child of yours
to be subject to our Sovereign and Queen, as to the chief, it is not spoken
to lay men, as your gloss upon the decretals, expounds it*. But I see you
send us Extra decretal. de censibus. cap. 2 omnis anima.
further in your margin to Saint Thomas, and om. Doct. that is all your
doctors, and there is a Vide before it, that is a watch word to look upon the
matter.

As for Augustine, Chrysostom, and Ambros. that come after your D. Tho. and om.
Doct. They teach all one doctrine herein with the Apostles, and therefore
trying that they say by that rule, and finding it conformable, we receive it
with their just commendation. They are no Popish teachers, but better expou^ders
of the scriptures, and morefaithful and sound in this point, the your late
schole Doctors, because M. How. bidsvs look: I wish the reader that
understands Latin to look and see their Popish doctrine of the authority
of a Extra de Maioritat and obedient. Tit. 1. tit. 33 ca. 6. solite.
King or Emperor in the Decretalles, he shall see how the Pope plays
legerdemain, falsefieth the Scriptures, and does worse if worse may be,
showing what spirit he is led with. If that chapter and the gloss were in
English it would loathe any Christian ears. And again look Did. xcvi. And yet
many of that age are somewhat more indifferent teachers and dealers, than you
whot and bad Catholics be, for the most part now adays, that so grossly
follow the Pope, and Popery that by writings and doings ye stir him up, and
raise sedition against our natural Sovereign Prince, and yours, and this State
and Realm, too unnaturally, vnduetifully, and unchristianly Iwis. I have
looked sir, as your Author whom you follow wills Vide D. (...) q. 2. 2. a.
q. 90. and om. doct. ibid.
upon the place of your S. Tho. we are sent unto: In seeking I find never a
word of this matter of Magistrates and obedience there, as which divided into
three Articles treats of the using of Gods name, in adiuring: which belongs
to the third commandment, but you following your Author in citing and
quoting places, who, for his great haste in writing had not time to suruiew or
reed any part of his treatise over again, and is therefore according to his
request to be borne withal, it may be you were deceived also with him: But
let that go as a small matter. Tell us your selves, to what place of D. Thom.
you send us rather than to that you name. In the mean while, as you and your
Author say and set us down one and the self same thing, So your D. Thom. by
your leave where in his sum he treats of, that argument disagreeth from you
both: which, that the reader may some what perceive, (though I like not to be so
occupied) I will shortly set down both your words, and some part of his also.
Thus your Author whom you follow: The Catholyke church has always taught
her children that how hardly soever their Prince should deal with them, yet
are they bound to bear it patiently and obey him for conscience sake as
substitute of God and placed in that room for their punishment, if he rule
not well, which apertaineth not to the sub iect to judge of. Good words, how
comes it to pass that you Catholics use not your selves thus toward her
Majesty then: how comes it to pass, that your fellows in their books
printed abroad teach otherwise, and stir up sedition here then: Ye show
your selves to be another Baalams, or Cayphas. children, whose mouths must
serve the holy Ghost at this time, to utter ye truth, though the instrument
and means be very unfit, and the whole serve your side to (...) Balaam (...)
significa^tur. 2. 9. 7. Nos. Vide M. Hardings (...) to M. Iuel. Art. 4. Diuis.
22. De Anna and Caiapba. Vide Hot. lib. 2. contra (...) and Hard. confulat.
Apolo. par. 6 cap. 6. (...). 3. 1. 2. Q 96 Art. 4. in fine.
little purpose, who elsewhere teach and practice the contrary. Be not angry
at the comparison, your own side (...) Popish Prelates to Baalam and Cayphas.
But your D. Thom. to whom you send us, disputing whether man's law put
necessitte on us in the Court of conscience, and having objected to the
contrary (as his manner is) out of the tenth of Esaias: Woe be to them that make
unjust laws. etc. He answers and says, that that place speaks of a law
that lays an unjust burden upon subjects, whereunto the order of power
granted of God streacheth not it self. Wherefore in such cases man is not
bound to obey the law, if he be able to resist without Scandale (that I may
keep his word and your treatises) or greater detriment. And again, we must
say: that a man is bound so far to obey secular princes as the order of
Justice requires. And therefore if they have not just but usurped
principality, or if they command 2. 2. Q. 104. (...). 6.
unjust things, their subjects are not bound to obey them; except peradventure
by some accident, for the avoiding of scandale, or danger: and can ye make
that obedience for conscience sake? Again in another place, agreeing with the
Decrees, and alleging the authority of Pope Gregory the seventh, he writes
as perillously for her 2. 2. Q 12. Art. 2.
Majesty and this state, and all one with that which ye wicked Vide causa 15.
Q 6. cap Nos sanctorum, and in. cap. (...), etc
Pope in his wicked Bulls has at this day most wickedlie published and set
abroad, containing a most devilish Doctrine of Disobedience and a like
practice, what ever you now tell in fair words, to flatter withal, in
opinion you agree with these words of D. Thom. and apply all to and against
our noble Queen and this State, as (...). 26. 24. 25. 26.
your practices too much prove. The wise man says: He that hates will
counterfaict with his lips, but in his heart he lays up deceit. Though
he speak favorably believe him not: for there are seven abominations in his
heart. Hatred may be covered by deceit: but the malice thereof shall be
discovered in the Congregation. And that this, that I tell you of, is true
among you, hot Catholics, as you will be called. I will at this time wade no
farther in your S. Thomases sum, nor in your Popes Decrees and other writers
of your side in former times: But let me be bold as you do object unto us the
doctrine of one or two of our men: so for all, to set you down ye words at
least of one of your co^panio^s or great pillars and doctors rather of your
present Popish church, that is fled from his Country, Prince, and us here, to
Rome and abroad; there and thence, like a Popish Priest by practices and
wrytings seeking to stir up among other seditious rebellions and treasons
against her Majesty, and this State; which partly by writing, partly by
posting between, is according to Commission and trust performed by him so N.
Saunders opion and dealing.
far as he may to the uttermost. Saunders travail more laborious and (...),
then sound, Godly, or wise, in his huge piece of work of the visible
Monarchy of the Church; is against the present state of this Church and Realm
of England, there needs no He calls Moron the protector of England: he
was the Popes Legate, and chief President of the (...) Council of Trent.
other applier of the whole then himself; I suppose all you hot Roman
Catholics agree and be all of one mind in this behalf, and in the name of
you all, he speaks for the rest, especially seeing their voices being asked,
they disagree not, any I know for, but (...) ye same rather in their writing.
In Saunders Epistle therefore (To the most irreverent N. Sander. in Epist. Ad
Cardin. Moron.
Cardinals, John Moron and two other) before his visible Monarchy, not only
Iyingly and slanderously Lib. 7. De visib. Monarch. Eccles. Fol. 732. and ante
a fol. 688. ad. fol. 712' etc.
charge he the godly laws of this Realm with impiety and tyranny, and
that this I (...) almost alone at this day in all Christendom plentifully
yields forth Martyrs, (so he calls the Traitors that have been and a
little before the writing here of were, executed here for their traiterous
attempts, and other English Roman Catholics, whereof in (...) beaderoll he
reckeneth us up a rabble.) But furthermore also, (...) stirs up the said
Cardinals (as though it were very earnestly from hence sued for unto them) to
travail by such means as they can, to deliver the people here (he means
such as himself is) from this so great and cruel tyranny, so he calls the
most moderate and peaceable government of her Majesty: whereunto also, after
congratulation and commendation for his Sand. in Epist, dedicat. praefixa lib.
De visib. (...).
former late dealing with this Realm, her Majesty, and the State, he
exciteth the unholiness of the Pope in his Epistle Dedicatory to him,
co^forting himself, and feeding other, and namely his Pope, with vain hope
(this was about ten Pope (...) 5.
years since) that very shortly after, the runnegate Catholics, and their
fellows, should be restored to their Religion and places here again, he
dreamed of a dry summer: We may easily gather, how and whence all the
stirs here, since, arise and grow, and what the drifte of al is. If this be
not seditious doctrine and demeneanor rebellious and traiterous, what is I pray
you. God long bless and keep her Majesty among us. Proceeding further in his
visible Monarchy thus mryteth he among other things: It belongs vetily, to
the Bishops especially both to De visib. (...). Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 4. fol.
98. 79.
pronounce the king himself an Heretic, or an Apostata, and also to declare
that his subjects are afterward free from giving him any obedience, and that
they ought to do their endeavor, that another be out of hand put in his
place. Now if the subjects do not look to their office in this behalf, it
longs to the Pastors, to provide by any means they can, that he that sits
in the chair of Pestilence reign not in the Church of God: this is the true
obedience your Catholic Church teaches her children to yield to their
Princes for conscience sake. Is not says Saunders the matter so, etc? do not
the Pastors watch for the souls, as well of kings as of those which obey
kings. It is their duty therefore to omit nothing that they shall know to
be expedient for the souls health: and who sees not that it is clean
contrary to the souls health: that he should be suffered to reign over the
Faithful, which is himself unfaithful, etc? Shall he then be worthy the name
of a man that shall affirm that a wicked king ought not to be compelled, to
clear and put himself out of his public charge. If at al, surely he must
be put out for Heresy. How shall that controversy be judged without the
resolution of the Doctors of the church, etc. Now Pastors and Teachers of the
church can be no Judges of a king, except the king be in that thing less and
inferior unto the^: For neither has an equal power over an equal, nor an
inferior over his superior. We affirm therefore justly that al Christian kings
in matters appertayning to Faith are so subject to Bishops and Priests: that
obstinately continuing in offending against Christian religion; after one or
two admonitions for the same cause, they may and ought, by the sentence of the
Bishops to be put from other temporal government, which they have over
Christians. And yet again after in the same chapter, out of a great many, I
take but a few sentences. Since therefore the wisdom of Ibid. fol. 83.
God has not left his church (which is a City very well built and defensed)
without a medicine for such a disease, ne yet can any other medicine help,
than that may take away so evil a king from among the people, and give his
kingdom to a better man. We must believe that such power at least was
granted to the supreme pastor of the church (he comes now from meaner
Bishops to the Pope of Rome, whom he means by that title) in these words:
Feed my sheep, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth shall be bound also
in Heaven. (To foul and shameless (...) of the holy word of God) That the
supreme Pastor may not only excommunicate a wicked king, but also free and
set his subjects at liberty from all obedience unto him: For if so be
whatsoever Peter, or Peter's successor upon earth loose, be also loosed in
heaven, then truly when rightly and orderly he sets faithful subjects at
liberty from the obedience of a wicked king upon earth, the same subjects
also are freed in heaven from the obedience of the same king. Again, if
whatsoever peter, or Peter's successor, bind upon earth be also bound in
heaven, whenever Peter's successor of right and equity command any king
either to leave his Royal dignity which he (so affected) unjustly holds,
or to stop and hinder another king by all the means he can, which hinders
a faithful people from eternal life, least he perish in doing wickedly: I
think he would say: that the king proceed not in doing wickedly.
that king is also bound in heaven, that is before God and his Angels, to obey
the chief Pontifical bishops decree, except he will have his sins holden and
not forgiven before God, etc.

Here is in general terms your Catholic doctrine truly set down by
Sau^ders, who sent I trow, from ye Pope, took a long journey into Ireland,
where of late it is (...), he was and still is: to stir up like a
Captain, and encourage the Traiterous hearts that he might meet with, and to
see this doctrine of Pope holiness reverently obayed and put in practice so
far as he might, against this state: for the which purpose served also your
late flocking hither in sholes from beyond Sea, much about the same time, and
your more publishing of sedicious libelles than a good De visib. (...). Lib. 7.
fol. 730. 732. etc.
while before. As likewise in the year 1569. Nicholas Morton an English
rennegate Priest, the Popes Penitentiary at Rome, was sent (says Saunders) by
the Pope into England (where he deserved ywis to (...) cracked a rope) to
stir up the Nobility against our Sovereign, and to do such other most vile
offices, etc. Whose counsel they that followed in the North, felt the just
reward and smarte of rebels for their rebellion, as the Romish Irlanders did,
in following Saunders and his fellows cou^sailes of late. Here the Popish
obedience your Catholic Religion teaches and practices, comes in fitly and
has his proper place.

Now that this Popish merchants opinion and meaning toward her Majesty and
this state, in particular, may be ye better known out of his general doctrine
before delivered. Let us hear yet further himself in this one place only and no
more speak thereof: When the Apostolic sea saw that Elizabeth What had the
pope to do with this Realm. More busy than he had thanks for his labor.
What Legates talk you of, and who stopped them. A (...) medicine of the Pope of
Rome: to deprive princes of their king domes, and to discharge subjects of
obedience.
was fallen from the Church, and that the whole Realm of England was thereby
become Schismatical, it sent once or twice Legates into England to recall that
nation back again to their duty, but there was not so much as a way open
for those Legates to enter into the Island, so far were they of from
obtaining any thing, which being thus, after ten years amendment looked for,
and now almost despaired of: Pius the 5. the chief bishop turning to that only
medicine which could be applied to so great a disease. In the year of our
Lord 1569. he sent into England the reverend priest Nicholas Morton an
English man, a Doctor of Divinity, one of his Penitentiary priests, solemnly
by Apostolic authority, Like Pope.
to declare to certain noble and Catholic me^, Like (...).
that Elizabeth which then governed was an Heretic, and for that cause was by
the very law fallen from al superiority and power, which she then used over
Catholics, and that she might lawfully be taken of them as an heathen and
Publican, and that they were not he^ceforth More pomp and solemnity in the
Pope then good divinity or honesty.
bound to obey her laws or commandments. By which solemn declaration many
noble men were brought so far that they provided not only for themselves,
but The ground and cause of the insurrectio^ in the north truly described.
took upon the^ also to deliver their brethren from the tyra^nie of heretics.
May not we here iustlier charge M Howlets Catholic Religion, his Pope, and his
Bull. N. Morton, Saunders, and their doctrine, with teaching and practicing
rebellion, than he does Luther and his doctrine. Your flowers of Rhetorique (M.
Howlet) will hardly wash this geere away: read, mark, and judge of the whole
uprightly. Now they hoped (says Saunders) that al Catholics would with Godly
treason with great reason.
all their force have assisted so godly a purpose. But although the matter fell
out otherwise than they looked for, either Iure publico. For omnia (...), be
in scrinio pectoris Papae.
because all Catholics did not yet well know that Elizabeth was by public
Law declared to be an heretic, or else because God had decreed more sharply
to punish Well bold Tur pin, and well guest. Here is a right and true
confession of a Romain catholic or Popish faith.
so great a defection of that kingdom: yet not withstanding those noble men's
counsels or enterprises were to be commended, which wanted not their sure and
happy success: for although they could not bring al their brethrens souls
out of the pit of Schism, yet both they themselves Treason, a confession of
Catholic religion Gross abuse of Gods holy scriptures.
did notably confess the Catholic religion, and many of them did give their
lives for their brethren. (But very few noble men by your leave, and those
taken rather through Gods providence by force, than willingly yielding
themselves) which is the highest degree of love (to do as traitors) and the
rest rid themselves from the bondage both of heresy and sin into that liberty
wherewith Christ has freed us, (yt they are become Satan's and sins slaves all the days of A Fable of a (...) miracle
their life) In old time S. Bernard had exhorted the Christians to go to
Jerusalem: and yet was not the East Church delivered by that voyage, but they
rather which went about to deliver their brethren from the yoke of the
Saracenes died themselves a glorious death.

Now after he has rehearsed at large a Munkishe miracle out of Godfry, a
Munke, to show that that voyage to Jerusalem, was approved of God,
Antichrists new Gospel must, and needs to be confirmed by new miracles.
Thus he speaks of the rebels in the (...) against her Majesty and the
State. Who now, but he that is ignorant of Gods counselles (whereof belike
this good fellow is very privy) dare say that that confession of faith
proceeded not from God, which certain Noble Still a Popish traitorous
confession of a Popish faith.
men of England made in arms: He means the late Earls of Westmerland,
Northumberlande, and their adherentes. Surely that must needs be counted a
miracle, A popish miracle to confirm Popish religion, it needs it greatly.
says he, that being almost five hundred of them, which took arms for the
faith, (so reports he of the Northren traitors) which taken by the
heretics, and put to death (so calls he the State and her Majesty's
ministers of justice there.) None of them was found which either forsook the
Catholic faith: or accused the Authors of that war of any fault: They were
very innocent and blameless sure, under pretense of their popish faith and
religion, to take the sword in hand against their dread sovereign and ours,
they must be so supposed, though this be iu deed most lewd in the highest
degree. (And this man either was among them, and very privy to every one of
their deaths, or else which is most likely, he took the^ report at their
friends mouths and his, at second or third hand at least.) But many of
them, being a little before reconciled to the unity of the Church: were well
apayed, and greatly reioysed in themselves, that they should depart this life,
before they should with new wickedness, defile the peace (he means) their
reconcilement to the They are (...) gone, you may begin Placebo, and (...) a
(...) for their (...).
Romish Church, newely received, and they wished not to live any longer in
that kingdom, which now a good while had ceased to live in Christ. It had
been better you had been hanged with them. All of them at their death prayed
that the restitution of the Catholic faith begun, might be happily achieved.
They rejoiced by this tale in their own misery, and we in Gods blessing, and
the happiness of our country, delivered and eased of such traitors. So both
sides were pleased, and all was well. Let Saunders himself now in Irelande
do the like, and his accomplices, and if it like him: it shall not offend us.
But I think he, and they will rather trust to a pair of heels, when they have
kindled the fire of rebellion, if they see things prosper not, as N. Morton,
and the Captains in that rebellion, left the people, when they had thrust
them over the (...) in rebellion. This is their manhood, for all their great
bragges. A note of an evil conscience, and an evil cause. God send us
better, and more resolute Captains, in defense of Gods truth, our Prince and
Country; He has done it; Thanks be to his Majesty's therefore. I think the
poor people of the North, that were then seduced by N. Morton, and induced by
other that ran away, and left them in the briars when they had brought them
into rebellion, be sufficiently warned to take heed of such mates, a good
while again. I pray God they be; And he vouchsafe to give Somma Summarum.
all good subjects grace to be warned thereby. After he has 1 A new popish
Antichristian Gospel. Look Math. 24. 24. 2. These. 2. 9. 10. etc. 2 Lieng
miracles, and wonders, to confirm the same. 3 A strange traiterous confession
of a Popish catholic faith. 4 A bead roll of Popish confessors and Martyrs, al
traitors and rebels.
thus set us down a popish Gospel, and doctrine, confirmed by like miracle
or lying wonders etc. Told us also of a right confession of the Popish
Catholic faith and religion, indeed high Treason, and rebellion, and so was
punished: He reckeneth up near half a hundred by name, of the most famous
traitors, and rebels that were in the North, popish confessors and Martires
must we needs repute the^ as he does etc. I forbear to enter any further in
laying abroad the dirtie mire that this filthy varlet, made a priest at Rome
it self, forsooth, has cast us from him in his foresaid serpentine book,
woorthylie Dedicated to Pope Pius 5. He may be called Impius well enough, for
his dealing toward her Majesty, and this State, about that very time, even
as his Successor since, this very Pope, lately also, and still deals. They
can now a days tread in no other steps. M. Howlet commends the nuyete and
modest proceedinges of the Catholic part. But he that shall observe the
unquiet and immodest writing and proceeding but of this one English Roman
Catholic of his, which is a chief Ryngleader among them, shall easily in him
learn by the stamp and mark, to know an vncatholik, or rather to use M.
Howlets phrase a Popish catholic and Sectarye, even As a Lion is known by his
Claws, so lively shows he him self in his colors.

It seems they have of late taken a new course in wrytinge, differing from
the common sort of their predecessors before time, for their writings now a
days, besides the mingling of poison and diuilishe doctrine of Popery, are
farced full of sedition and treason, as which seems, to be their principal
intent and purpose, where unto they drive in their traitorous books which
they set abroad, and bring hither among us. All lightly draw in one line, all
agree in one, and with the Pope and his wicked Bulls iumpe, as the fit
foundation and meet matter to stay and feed all trecherye and Treason on.
We must needs have recourse to some men's wrytings and books at least, to
show that they of M. Howlets sect and religion, teach disobedience and
rebellion against their Princes. In some men likewise must we needs note
demeanor and behavior, else can we not perform that which he so greatly
here provoke us unto. Again, M. Howlet does the like in charging aforehand,
the professors and profession of our Religion particularly and by name. I trust
therefore I shall be borne with, in taking the like course here, whereas
otherwise I protest, I had rather in silence have passed over this matter, then
to have entered so far, and in particulars. The thing though abominable and
lothsom to all godly minds and to be (...) and spit at of all faithful
subjects in this Realm, is yet too too notorious. I omit here Bristowes
seditious motives approved by Doctor Allen forsooth, and such other Traitorous
books, all agreeing in one. The answers made unto them by Godly and learned
men, may be seen of them that list to understand more hereof. Let it suffice
for doctrine, by this taste out of their Popish writers, to have showed how
shamelesly M. Howlet here enters this common place of his Catholics teaching
obedience to their Princes, and their quiet and modest proceedings, and that to
and before her Majesty, whom of all other Christian Princes at this day, they
most vilainouslye, and spitefully deal with all, setting down in books thus
expressly their doctrine and mind, clean contrary to that they will here
seem to affirm. Yet, before I leave this place of doctrine, I wish the
reader among other the testimonies (M. Howlet) out of the old fathers, quoteth
here in the margin of his book, diligently to note and observe Chrysostoms
words; in this very place that he sends us unto, whereunto agree the words
of Theophylact. a later writer of their side, also upon these words Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers. etc. Although thou be an Apostle, Romans
13.
(says Chrysostom.) although thou be an Evangelist, although a Prophet, or
whatsoever thou be else: for this subjection overthrows not religion godliness.
etc. Why the^ should not your Pope himself be subject to the Magistrate, and
civil power: He is belike none of the children of the Catholic Church, or else
the Catholic Church teaches not all her children without exception, true
obedience with the Cpistle, etc. Which you yet affirm by this fathers
testimony, that you bring us forth. We hold to this doctrine of Saint Paul:
Let every soul. etc. And of Saint Peter also, who calls the king, the
Highest: and it is well and truly (...). (...). 2.
thus explayned by Chrysostom, without exempting any, and in this point, do
you and we disagree: you see whom we follow.

Now let us come to see somewhat more of your Popish demeanor toward
Princes. The practice of Prelates and Popelinges, and their whole study, and
life at this day is almost nothing else, but a putting in ure ofseditious
doctrine, and so hardly can the one be severed from the other. I will yet
shortly touch two or three home matters of former times, besides that I have
said, leaving foreign dealings abrod with Emperors, and kings, of other
countries etc. What but naughty demeanor of the Pope (...). (...) An. 1094.
made King William in his time allege: yt no Archbishop nor Bishop of his
Reahne should have respect to the Court of Rome, or to the Pope; what but that
moved the Emperor to reprove King Henry the third for suffering his
Country to be so impudently impouerished by the Pope as it was; Himself also
to plain of that matter by his Ambassador 1240.
in the Council at Lions, and to repress the Popes Legate in this land (...)
were the Popes exactions here then; What demeanor of Pope and popelinges 1215.
was that toward King Henry the second before: to take his Crown from his
head, and so villanously to use him in maintenance and defense of a villainous
traitors cause, as is reported; I do but occasion the Reader to consider of
the hurly burlies, of this false Catholic Church and Thomas (...).
religion. What was that demeanor, to excommunicate 1211.
King John, and to discharge his subjects; of the oath of allegiance He that
list to see hereof more particularly, besides the Acts and Monum e^tes, and
our English Chronicles, and stories, let him look on the Apology of the
Church of Eng land, the 6. part and last chapter and M. Jewels defense thereof.
to stir up war against him, and at lengthto bereave the King both of
kingdom and life, after he had given his wicked definitive sentence, that he
should be deposed from his estate, and had enjoined the execution thereof to
yt French King for remission of his sins, and tohaue for his reward, the
kingdom of England, he and his successors for ever. He called this king
John his Vassal or tenant: for yt after the Pope by his Legate (...) phus, had
taken the Kings Crown into his hand once, the good King could no other wise
after enjoy it, but that he must acknowledge that he and his heirs must
receive the same from the Pope. This dealing of Pope Innocentius against King
John, may not be thought strange: for that in a solemn Council. lateran. sub
Inno. 3. cap. 3 de (...).
Council held under him at Rome, we find it decreed, that if a Temporal
Lord being admonished by the Church, doeneglect, to purge his land from
heresy (we know what they called heresy then) he should be excommunicated
by the Metropolitan, and the other Bishops of his Province, and if he refused
to make satisfaction within a year, it should be signified to the Pope that
he from thence forth should pronounce his Subjects to be free from keeping
or yielding fidelity to such a temporal Lord, and should expose his land to
be invaded by Catholic es.

To come nearer home, and to speak of that most mighty Prince of famous
memory King Henry the eight, within man's remembrance, what demeanor and
proceeding was used in cursing, excommunicating, and such like stir keeping,
to disturb, that victorious King of England, and the State of the whole
Realm; For our liege Lady and dread Sovereign, most high and noble Queen
Elizabeth, what and how many things have been attempted, and how many ways
also, and yet still are, the thing is fresh and common, the rebellions so late
in memory, the daily practices, and attemptes by Gods Providence so revealed
and met withal, as I think ye can have no face to stand in the denial,
though your Epistle blushe not: Shortly to say, What Englishman soever, borne
in this Realm, shall deny the superiority (or refuse to submit him self,
upon the ground of his faith given to the Pope, and of his Popish or Roman
religion under the power, authority, and civil government) of our dread
Sovereign and Iawfull Queen Elizabeth, as Gods Lieuetenant or chief
minister, be he Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, or whosoever and howsoever else
ye list to call him: in resisting the order and ordinance of G O D, he is to
be reputed of all men Gods enemy, and no good Christian, but a very naughty
man in so doing, etc. But such are your English Roman or hot Catholics, as
her Majesty, and the State charge you, and all the world sees, and you
your selves dissemble not, in allowing your Popes Bulls, and other writings
therevppon grounded, and agreeable thereto, and in your ouuert and open
dealinges: whereof may easily be gathered, what manner of men, ye are to be
reputed toward God and the world, although I hope well in God that there be
not many such here in England.

If, because you be disputers ye ask Scholasticall arguments, and yet if
one argue with you out of the scriptures, you make little account thereof,
thinking the bare Scriptures (so can ye speak) too sclender stuff to
convince you withal: Therefore grounding upon your own doctrine, which is of
more weight with you, and upon the law of this Realm, which decideth cases
of Treason here, I purpose (God before) to prove some what further this way.
Albeit I must suppose that you be not ignorant of the points of your own
doctrine, and that true hearted Englishmen know the Sovereignty of our Prince
and Queen, and so their duties toward her Majesty, taught them first in
Gods word; and afterward expressed here further by the laws of this Realm
in Acts of Parliament etc: Yet having laid the one and the other as the
foundation of the arguments that I mind to make you: Let me, so much as
shall be necessary heereunto, note in sum the the words of your doctrine and
our law, and then from both see, if I can frame some few Scholasticall
arguments, that ye may thereby perceive, that it is not hard, for him that
list yt way to exercise himself, to bring many and substantial arguments
against you in this case of doctrine, and demeanor of disobedience, and Treason
toward superiors

Thus is it written in your popish decrees, and thence taken and repeated by
your D. Thomas in his sum, where he treats of subjects discharge from the
government of their princes, and from their oath, and fidelity toward them.
We holding the statutes of our holy predecessors by The places are quoted
before in your decrees and D. Thomas cause. 15. q. (...). cap. Iuratos vt supra.
and decretal. (...). de hereticis, ad abolendam. Vide (...). extra, in ca. cum
non ab homine Felin de rescript cap. Rodolpbus. Demaioritate and obedientia
vnam, sanctam. glos. ibidem.
Apostolic authority, do absolve them from their bond, which are bound by
fidelity or oath to them that be excommunicated, and by all means forbid that
they keep not fidelity to them till such time as they come to satisfaction.
Now add to this, your Popes late traitorous Bulls in her Maiestics case, and
this Realms, where with you are but too well acquainted: and forget not your
own profession and doing at this day. And so let the perpetual doctrine of
your supreme pastor and his supreme authority acknowledged, received, and in
practice followed by you, be for one part, the ground and proof of the
Arguments that I shall propounde unto you, Or if you (...) further: let N.
Saunders, a principal pillar of your Popish English Synagogue beyond Sea,
speak particularly for all. Of whose speech in this case I have given you a
taste before, out of his visible Monarchy. On the other part let those that
be presently of that state, here, (to go no further of) speak on the other
side, and report us whether you hot Catholics be traitors etc, or no? Fume
not, fret not, at my words nor at any other private man's: but examine ye
matter and your own conscience herein. And because ye talk of the renting of
your Catholic hearts at these words and the like: which being double, may
with murmuring and grudging possible be vexed to. little purpose and sone rent
a sunder. Therefore for your good, this way, here Gods counsel, rather by the
holy Prophet. (...). (...). 13.
Rent your hearts and not your clothes, and turn to the Lord your God: for
he is gracious and merciful, flow to anger, and of great kindness.

Now these are the words of the Act of Parliament that is not yet dissolved,
in the last Session holden at Westminster from the xvi. day of January last
past, until the xviii. of March following. I leave the former Statutes and
laws.

Be it declared and enacted by the authority of this present Anno. xxiii.
Reginae (...).
Parliament, that all persons whatsoever, which have An act to retain the
Queens Majesty's subjects in their due obedience.
or shall have, or shall pretend to have power, or shall by any ways or
means, put in practice to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any of the Queens
Majesty's subjects, or any within her Highness Realms and dominions, from
Cap. I.
their natural obedience to her Majesty, or to withdraw them for that intent,
from the religion, now by her highness authority, established within her
Highness Dominions, to the Romish religion, or to move them or any of them to
promise any obedience to any pretended authority of the Sea of Rome, or of any
other prince, State, or Potentate, to be had or used within her Dominions, or
shall do any oucrt Act, to that intent or purpose and every of them, shall be to
all intents adjudged to be traitors: and being thereof lawefully convicted,
shall have judgment, suffer and forfaite, as in case of high treason. And if
any person shall after the end of this Session of Parliament, by any means
be willingly absolved or withdrawn as aforesaid, or willingly be reconciled,
or shall promise any obedience to any such pretended authority, Prince, State,
and Potentate, as is aforesaid: that then every such person their procurers
and counselors there unto, being thereof lawfully convicted, shall be taken,
tried, and judged, and shall suffer and forfaire, as in cases of high treason.

Hereupon may one hardly and heavily, as me thinks reason against you is
this case of treason. And if I may be so bold, as to deal with so great
Clerks: thus after my rude manner make I my blunt arguments.

Whosoever at this day by profession hold, yt our dread sovereign Queen
Elizabeth is an excommunicate person, and the present state heretical or
schismatic, and so to be abhord, are reputed traitors, and so ought too be
taken.

But all English Romanistes that call themselves Catholics are such, that is:
at this day by profession hold, that our dread sovereign Queen Elizabeth, is
an excommunicate person, and the present state heretical or schismatic and
so to be abhord.

Ergo. All English Romanists that call themselves Catholics are reputed,
traitors and so ought to be taken.

No religion that approoueth the Popes authority, doctrine and practice in
excommunicating and depriving of Kings, Queens, etc, of their estate, whom he
calls heretics, is unjustly touched by us English men, to teach
disobedience and rebellion against their Princes.

But all Catholic Roman religion approoueth the Popes authority, doctrine,
and practice in excommunicating and depriving of Kings, Queens, etc. of their
estate whom he calls heretics.

Ergo No Catholic Roman religion, is unjustly touched by us English men, to
teach disobedience and rebellion against their Princes.

Al persons that by writing, or otherwise, persuade any within her Majesty's
Realms and Dominions from the religion now by her Highness authority
established, to the Romish religion, thereby withdrawing them from their
obedience to her Majesty to yield the same to the Sea of Rome: are by the law
here reputed traitors.

But you M. Howlet, your author, N. Mortone N. Saunders, Allen, Bristowe, with
other like do so, that is: by writing, or otherwise persuade within her
Majesty's Realms and Dominions from the religion now by her highness
authority established, to the Romish religion, thereby withdrawing them from
their obedience to her Majesty, to yield the same to the Sea of Rome.

Ergo M, Howlet, your author N. Saunders, Allen, Bristow, with other like, are
by the law here reputed traitors.

No religion that condemns Queen Elizabeth our Sovereign of heresy, and so
forth, to the great prejudice of her royal estate and person and so the
common hurt of us all, is unjustly touched for disobedience or rebellion
against her majesty.

But your pretended Catholic religion condemns Queen Elizabeth our
Sovereign, of heresy, and so forth, to the great prejudice of her royal
estate and person, and so the common hurt of us all.

Ergo Your pretended Catholic religion is not unjustly touched for
disobedience and rebellion against her Majesty,

If these arguments, in zeal and defense of our sovereign and the state
press you, or be thought sharp and to touch the quick, thank your self,
that by entering your common places and odious co^parisons, forcibly draw the
same from us. Once the Syllogismes or arguments be scholasticall, yt is: good
and perfect enough, in the perfectest moodes and perfectest figure. You hear
now the opinion yt is of you, here, not of one man, or spightfully uttered,
but commonly, and too well grounded for you to deal with: either repent, crave
pardon, come home, and live like dutiful Subjects, yt such violent arguments
proceed no further, which with all my heart I wish you to do) or else, if you
like that best, provide answer to solute such like arguments, which will be
very hard for you to do, I will say no more herein: but a parls Dilemma or
straight, are your Roman Catholics, brought into, if you be argued against
in the points of doctrine and demeanor for obedience to our dread Sovereign
Queen Elizabeth out of your own Popish schole doctrine, and practice of old
and at this present, and out of the laws of this Realm now in force, and
withal be put to make a direct answer thereunto. Press us no further in the
matter if you be wise; rather take heed that by your doctrine and demeanor
toward her Majesty, and the State, ye be not brought within the compass
of the law, and there an end: But that cannot be unless you alter the
course you have of late taken, and still do, or the whole state for your
pleasures only be altered. I wish and desire, for your own sake (M. Howlet)
though I know you not, that you be not of the opinion and usage of such
Catholics as I have set down, that ye take heed thereof, or leave the same
in some time, that ye may be (...) and taken in the number of good and
dutiful subjects you and your author with others. So as, yt which I have spoken
upon supposition only, of your agreement with the rest of your fellows at
Rome, Rhemes, etc. and namely, N. Saunders, may not be understood of your
own persons: but of those and such Catholics only as seditiously from
beyond Sea write, and accordingly practice against her Majesty, and the State
here, and further would I not have my words stretched to touch any
particular person unless his own Conscience tell him he agree with them, or
her Majesty, the State, and his own doings find him culpable. This may
serve to check the great and weighty Motives that you here make mention of,
and such as your Author or you seem to promise shall follow, and to show
that the proceedings of your Catholic part be not so quiet and modest as is
in words to her Majesty here pretended: neither they such important a stay
in every of her Majesty's Countries as is here iollily bragged. Though upon
occasion I have been round in this matter, and it may seem sharp that I
here utter: yet let the matter be well wayed, and I shall not be found I
trust to have exceeded the bounds, of truth and charity. I protest that I
mean not to excite, or stir up my Sovereign to any cruelty, or the State,
or any of authority here: though on the other side I be so far of from
disliking of justice and execution of wholesome laws, that though the same
turn to the hurt and mischief of some; yet I like that better, then that an
inconvenience should grow to the public state. Let me^ look to themselves:
but that it is not requisite or needful nor my part to deal in prescribing
nor yet in aduising the wisdom of those that rule this State. I am so far
of from hastening any particular man's undoing, that I would wish, which I am
assured is without me thought of, and sought: that all means might be used,
to the recalling of men home, conferrence and other, before execution
especially of death. And is it not so? I do but prevent the adversaries
cavil, and show my purpose and meaning. I need not, nor list not to wade any
further herein. The particular rebellions in the North, Irelande, and such
other sturs, from time to time, by your Catholic part, (as to well known to
all men) I here omit.

Further to diduct, and come now to answer, that which is objected in this
behalf to us by the adversary; which generally consists, as the former in
doctrine and demeanor. For our doctrine of Magistrates and obedience (as we As
the Apology of the Church of England. Articles, set forth by (...) authority.
Homilies, etc.
profess no other then that which is set us forth, and plainly laid us down
in the holy scriptures:) So I marvel again, that (M. Howlet,) being an
English man, leaves out those public testimonies and wrytinges of our (...)
in this matter: which to the view of the world are published by this Church,
both in Latin and English, to express their judgment herein; and charge
our doctrine with particular men's books, and teachings of late years, to bring
hatred and displeasure, or spitefully to wrecke and revenge himself upon some
one man, if he can do no more: where of though some be alive, yet others are
dead, and so can not answer for themselves: but their books must be their
clering to all yt world: If the godly doctrine, we profess here, had bin by
you read with a single heart, and (before rash judgment) well weighed, as in ye
books aforesaid is declared, you would have forborne, I take it, these words
yt: our final end is, as our doctrine declares: To have no governor or ruler
at all. Whence you took this doctrine, you yt are so full of quotatio^s, here
quote us nothing. And we tell you plainly, yt things devised by your brame, or
picked out of your fingers ends, be none of our doctrine, we say it is a great
and untrue slander ye charge this Church with. Her Majesty (though diverse
times disturbed in her State, by you false Catholics) has reigned in a
Gospelling time, now above twenty years, as chief governor by yt doctrine of
yt Gospel, and ruler over yt professors thereof, in much honor and great quiet,
highly to Gods glory, her Majesty's singular commendation, and yt exceeding
comfort of all true hearted english me^, her Majesty's natural and most bonden
subjects: and many more years may she reign we daily do beseech yt almighty,
to yt promoting of Christ's holy Gospel, yt benefit of his Church, and her own
comfort and honor: Though it be to yt regret and renting of all popish
Catholic hearts in Christendom. To charge our doctrine about Magistates
wtall, you set us down three or four sentences, taken out of three worthy
men. Christ's faithful soldiers, and servants in their time. The first is,
M. John Wickliffe, one of our progenitors, say you, one of the singular
instruments, that it pleased God, in his time to use, for the advancement of
his Gospel, say we: and so rare a one, that he might justly be counted among
the rest, a bright star, shining, and giving light to a great many, to their
inestimable comfort; he opened long since, such a wicket as greatly profited
the postetitie in Gods matters. The second whom you allege, is Doctor Martin
Luther, whose rare and excellent gifts every way, mightily, both astonished
the highest of your side in state Ecclesiastical and (...), and no less
furthered and profited Gods cause, and encouraged all the godly, by his godly
and learned writings, and otherwise. The third is, that odd and incomparable
man of our time: The reverend Father, and most painful and faithful Pastor
and Teacher in Christ's Church, M John Calvin; Whom, though your heart swelt,
you can not discredit among Gods servants,, nor justly stain his travails
and writings, left among us for the benefit of Gods Church, so has it pleased
his majesty, to bless this good man's labors: The Devil, I confess, as in
other, has been very busy in his instruments, to deface, and disgrace this
excellent man diverse ways, but ever their mischiefs returned upon their own
pates, and they, even as many as have risen and bent themselves against him,
have had the foil to their shame: Although, we highly praise God for these
men, and for his great gifts in them, as in others, giving them likewise their
due co^me^dation, as reason is, yet would I yt you M. Howlet, and your fellows
should know, we make none of them, nor them all, our Pope, to depend of them
and their authority, ne yet the Authors of our religion, as you do the man of
sin at Rome: But we reserve this privilege to Jesus Christ alone, without
being addicted to any man's doctrine or writings, for faith and religion,
further then he shall teach us by canonical scriptures. All these men are dead
and gone, and ye might have let them rest in peace without slanderously charging
them, if it had so pleased you, M. Howlet.

But it shall not be amiss to enter into particular examination of that ye
say: first therefore let us see, what it is ye charge M. Wickliffe withal,
and how you do it: John Wickliffe say you, one of their progenitors teaches:
that a Prince if he rule evil, or fall into mortal sin, is no longer prince,
but that his subjects may rise against him and punish him at their pleasures.

If Wyckliffe should have holden any error, the times wherein he lived
considered, it were not greatly to be marueyled at: God rather is highly to be
praised, that in so corrupt and blind times, he saw and held the truth in
many points. We are not, we may not, nor no reason why we should be ye
mainteiners of any men's errors. This article, as it is set us down here by
you, is (That I may say what seems to me) not only false, but also seditious,
and so is it reputed among us; and yt which ye father upon M. Wickliffe here,
agrees better with the Pope and your Popish religion, then with the Gospel
of Christ, and our religion. Does not your Pope and Popish religion disable,
and seek to dispossess any lawful prince: only supposed by those of your
side to fall into the mortal sin of heresy, and arm his subjects against
him; Your selves also must define both mortal sin and heresy too, full
evil fauouredly ywis, as al men may easily see. Did not Wickliffe in his life
time write that the Clergy, moved by the Friars, went about Wickliffe in his
Trialogue.
that matter here in Englnade; has not the Pope your father, claymed the right
of disposing all civil and earthly Kingdoms; has he not called the King of
England (to omit other) his vassal; as though he held his kingdom, but as his
tennant, and at his pleasure. I have showed you before, where you shall find
our doctrine and profession of Magistrates more sound, holy, and reverent then
yours, else would I be ashamed of it. But you will say you send us to the
places, where we shall find that this was Wickliffes doctrine; how say we to
that; I say you do it full ilfauouredly, you quote us in deed three places,
whereof two are pretended to be taken from the lying spirits and wrytings of
Gods adversary, and Wickliffes. The third untruly, as far as I can see, out
of his own works, which are very hardly come by now a days, and yet as I
could, recovered I (...) Trialogue. And I have read, and read again, the
third Chapter of the fourth book of Wickliffes Trialogue, where you send us
to seek, that ye impose upon Wickliffe, whereof I pray you entreats, he
there; for sooth this is the argument. To show in this speech of Christ: This
is my body. What is signified by this word, This. wherein (establishing the
truth) he mightily overthrows your Popish corrupt doctrine of this Sacrament.
Now for M. Wycklyff, to teach in that place the article you set us down, were
nothing to the purpose. And this I say: if any such word as ye report be in
this place ye send us unto, let me leese my credit for ever, if not, let ye
Christian reader take heed for ever how he trust your lying spirit in
quoting things. How can you report truth of us when your religion forbids
to read our wrytings, unless it be to reprove them: ye know your own
terms best. Ye take al one from another report, and being our sworn
enemies, how is it to be thought you will report truly of us, and of our
opinions and wrytings: but the fault may possibly be in the Printer; or you
taking this from your Authors second promised part, unperformed yet, might
be deceived; as indeed you or he set us down in another place this article
to be in the 36. chapter of the 4. book of Wycklyffs Trialogue. Thus your
Author and you lead Fol. 68. page 2.
about the reader uncertainly, not knowing where to seek yt you allege, There
is as much to be had of this article in the 36. chapter of that book, as in
the place before alleged, which is nothing at all. The matter he handles in
this 36. chapter is, how Friars so greatly poisoned kingdoms wherein they
dwelt, as in those days they did: So, we send you still to seek us a new
place for this article in Wycklyff. Mark your words, Cogge not, foyst not,
Tell us where the words, as you set them down be to be had? Tell us not what
begging and lying friars may have devised, or your enuyous Papisticall writers
of this man's doctrine: you set us the article down as though it were his own
words: I am not ignorant that in Wycklyffs life time, not much an unlike
slander (as the latter part of your article contains) was raised against the
profession of the Gospel by the wicked friars, that then lived.

Now come I to the two other places you send us unto in your marginall
quotation. I marvel you be not ashamed to send us for the report of
Wickliffes doctrine, to his so deadly enemies: one of the testimonies is
fetched but from a yesterdayes bird to speak of, who was unborn many years
after Wickliffe was dead, I mean that obstinate enemy to Christ's Gospel,
brawling and railing Cocleus, who is said to have died 1552. well toward 200.
years after Wickliffs days, whose books long before yt time, being condemned
to be burnt, were then hardly to be gotten and neither sought after but to
that end, nor regarded by those of your side; but let that enemies testimony
of Wickliffs doctrine go, as not worth the examining. The Council of
Constance remains as the third testimony herein. It seems ye make great
account of that, for you set it in the first place, you will say peradventure
it is a public testimony, and is grounded upon more testimonies also. I read
Wickliffes articles set down by diverse and confuted by some of your side, yet
do I not find by the former reporters, no not Popes and Papists that lived
about that time this article, as you set it us down, and in this Counsel of
Constance, you (...) not this article you charge him with here, so are you a
false reporter of the Council too. Which I say not, to (...) their spite and
hatred that were there assembled against poor Wickliffe, and such other:
Wickliffes books (...) then and before that time were condemned to be burnt,
so (...) no man might read, keep, have, or use any of them but to their
reproof: he also was before the assembly of that (...), many years dead, and
was by the unholy fathers (...) assembled, appointed to be taken up again,
and his bones to be burnt, so fervent and hot was their Popish charity or
rage rather according to their custom in these later times. Now when Wycklyff
was dead and his books thus consumed by fire, no mastrie for them that had all the world at will and commandment, to make men believe Wycklyff wrote that,
which they his mortal enemies listed to charge him with: but let the^ believe it
that list, we are not bound to their report. And yet sir, though that conncel,
set Wycklyffs articles down to malicioussy, we find not this article in yt
Sessio^ of yt counsel, ye (...). 8.
you set us down. If you refer us to ye 15. article there set down against
Wycklyff, you take away for your vau^tage; you spightfully add as good as
half in this article you set us down; other enemies to ye Gospel and to
Wycklyff before time have dealt less shamelesly in setting down this article
then you do: so does at this day Saunders your own man, which gathers all
he can, wherein Wycklyff may seem to disagree from other profefsours of the
Gospel, and writers of these times: your article I find not there. But let me
be bold M. Howlet to go a little further with you for your council of
Constance (whence one part of your article may seem to be derived) because
councels be of so great moment with you and carry a great show, and this is
your first and principal testimony here against Wycklyffs doctrine. I
demand of you how you like the resoiution of Constance council in
subiecting the Pope to a council: how their proceeding against Hus, and Ierom
of Prage, contrary to all equity, and the Emperors safe conduit then given?
To leave other matters, the council of Constance you will say, was a notable
and famous counsel and yet was it but a branche of Pysan council, (...) Pope
Alexander, and of the council, holden at Rome (...) John the 23. where one of
your predecessors, a foul Madge howlet presided, from whom possible by
tradition you received this article you charge M. Wycklyff withal here, as the
council of Constance it self sends us thither: but, to return to your
testimony out of the council of Constance, who I pray you called that
council? Who was then head of your Church and council when it was called; Who
was President in it? forsooth say they in the inscription and title of that
council in the very entrance: our most holy father in Christ and Lord, Lord
John, by Gods providence the 23. Pope. This holy father and Lord, this worthy
president in the same Council, was not supposed to be lawful Pope, his title
was not taken to be good: but Gregory the 12. rather as is by diverse of your
greater Clerks decided: if anyes title that then occupied that seat were good.
Again, he was condemned and deposed for heresy, symonie, incest, and a heap
of sins more, wherein he waltred Sessione. 11.
from his youth up, which are there charged and proved at large in above 50.
several articles: a meet president for such a counsel. Further, sir, this
counsel of Co^sta^ce and yt of Rome to, was kept, when there was a great and
horrible schism in your Popish Church: not as had now of many years
continued between 2. Popes, but between three: for there were then 3. Popes
at once: this John, one Benedict, and Gregory, and all three were put out, or
removed by this Joan. 23.
council of Constance as unlawful I trow, and the 4. Gregori. 12.
Martyn the 5. put in and made Pope for all. Besides, sir, Benedict. 13,
Martin. 5.
it is not unlikely that the same spirit co^ducted this council that had
begun to do the same at Rome before; For Remember the story of the (...)
Howlet.
this council was but a prorogation of the general council begun before at
Rome, as the Popes Bull, for the calling of this Constance Council does
witness. The council also and Cocleus refer to the Roman general council,
and at the entering of their council after their Hymn: Come holy Ghost, etc.
was soung; there was answer made to the unholy Fathers request, by whomesoeuer
it were, and publicly set up in the Temple, thus. BEING OTHERWISE OCCVPIED,
WE CANNOT NOW BE PRESENT WITH YOU. Lastly (sir) that I may at length come out
of this filthy puddle, Ask but even your own fellow N. Saunders, and he
will tell you, as I take it, as he writes, that the council can never well
be counted General, that was called of one only bishop of Rome of yt three yt
then were, and yt (...) Lib. 7. De Council. (...). (...). 539. and 538.
was kept by the Prelates of one part only, etc. These be Sau^ders own words:
And no man (says he further) denies that a council, which is not universal,
may err in decreeing any thing. And so (by your leave M. Howlet) does this
particular council of your diuelishe Pope, in condemning Wycklyff, and other
professors of the Gospel. Give us leave to be as bold with the decrees of it,
as your own men are. The sum of the answer to this article objected against
us, in M. Wycklyffs person is this, that the article it self whose soever it
be, is diuelishe and ungodly, and if Wyckliff should have held it, it had been
but the remnants of ye dregs of Popery that he had aforetime sucked, and was
not then yet well cleared of: which I may justly doubt of, and deny to be his,
til you bring more sufficient and sou^de testimony the^ here you do for proof
of it: and so turning yt doctrine and article home to you where it was first
bred: I leave it.

For yt worthy man of God M. Luther, whose words (to quarrel against him as
though he should condemn or co^te^ne Magistrates) out of Pope Leo his Bull,
Popish Cocleus, again and Surius a Charter house Monk of Coolen, are said to
be these: that Christians are free and exempted from all Princes laws, first,
though I be weary now in following you to examine your Authors, and false
allegatio^s, and these here brought, to report us Luthers doctrine, were all
Papists, and so his mortal enemies, and thereby not to be regarded what they say
of him and his doctrine, yet here somewhat to note your impudency still, I
tell you (M. How.) in fetching light at other men's candles, ye trust your
friends too much, and Tom. 4. Conciliorum. Bulla Apostolica Leonis (...).
aduersus (...).
are too often deceived; you send us here to Pope Leo the 10. Bull: it may be
some of the Popes vnwritte^ verities, whereunto you (M. How.) as his spirit
(being more priuey than we) may suggest us ye same by tradition: for I say
perusing his printed Bull, even as the same is set us down by your Primae
lutberi baereses.
selves: I find never an article there, like unto this, you here set us down.
There be I confess diverse articles imposed upon Luther, by the Pope and in the
margin noted: Luthers chief Heresies. Why did not you take some of them there
recited that it might have appeared you had looked at least upon the Bull that
was written by your Pope against Luthers errors, as he says, and that we might
have there found yt, where you sent us to seek it. Ye walk (M. Howlet) too
confidently, dealing especially with her Majesty, Now as this your article is
not found in the Popes Bull whether you send us: so, much less is the same
to be sought for or looked to be found, in the assertion of the articles
there condemned. But I must take another course; I will suppose the words to
be Luthers, leaving your credit and your Popish writers: And therefore I say
next, that he means touching matters of the soul, conscience, and the life
to come. And speaking thus, says he, I pray you, any more than the blessed
Apostle, when he says, There is neither Galat. 3. 28.
Jew, nor Grecian, neither bond nor free, neither male nor female: for ye
are all one in Christ Jesus, etc. And yet the Apostle means not thereby to
take away the distinction that God has put in man's nature, nor the states of
this present life, but speaks only in respect of Christ, and his spiritual
kingdom: even so does Luther, in some respect only, even touching their
souls, and things properly belonging to the heavenly kingdom and everlasting
life, teach that Christians are free and exempted from all Princes Laws, and
not simply and every way, or for this life and civil government. The
collection therefore that picked out of your fingers ends, you and your Pope, and
Popish writers, to whom you here send us, of your selves may and would
feign gather: as though Luthers doctrine Ab eo quod (...) est secundum Quid, ad
id quod est simpli. citer.
were the cause of the famous rebellion that followed in Germany, or such
like, is not worth a half penie: you may keep it to your selves. It is, as if
one should reason: A non causart (...), etc.
immediately after a storm follows fair weather: therefore the storm is cause
of the fair weather, etc. here in very few lines, besides forgery, are at the
least two gross deceyts or fallacions (as they call them in the schools) And
if ye thus gather: whose doctrine was the cause of the called: (...).
like famous rebellion of the countriemen there, above twenty years before?
and so some nombre of years ere Luther professed the Gospel: Luthers doctrine
was the cause of that rebellion: even as Christ; A stumbling stock, and a Rock
to make men fall, is cause of the destruction of the wicked: and he; and his
Gospel, of the sword, and division in the world. How Luther misliked their
sedicious proceeding, Can it better appear than by his godly and earnest
writing unto them and against them even at that very time? Whereof, see in the
beginning of the fifth book of Sleydans Commentaries at large, But let me be
bold, leaving other here, and matching one with one, to set down your gloses
words and the collection that is made therevppon in Commentary upon
Commentary, which at length corrupts the Text: As you do Luther and his
words by your (...) and false collection. In the Gospel after S, Matthewe,
where our Savior Christ, speaking of Mat. 17. 25. 26.
paying tribute to Civil Magistrates, says: to Peter: How seems it to thee
Peter: the kings of the earth of whom do they take tributs or custom, of
children, or of strangers? Then Peter says unto him, of strangers, then Jesus
says unto him, then the children are free, etc.

Your gloss taking the same from another has: If 2. 2. q. 104.
in every kingdom, the sons of that king which is * Seruitus qua bomo bomini
subiicitur ad corpus pertinet, now ad animam (...) libera manet, and paulo ante
ex (...) in 3. de beneficiis. Errat (...) quis (...)
over the same kingdom, be free: Then the sons of that king to whom all
kingdoms are subject, ought to be free in every kingdom, Hence is collected:
Because Christians be Gods sons. To whom all kingdoms be subject, that
therefore they are free from paying tribute to any Civil power? so seem the
words of the gloss literally expounded, to importe. Others expound the words
of the gloss of the childrens freedom, concerning yt soul, which abides free
as eue^ your S. * Tho. speaks, and not concerning the body and bodily
subiectio^n which is due to superiors. (...) in totu^ bomine^ desce^dere, pars
enim melior excepta est, Corpora obnoxia sunt and ascripta Dominis. Men's quidem
est sui iuris; and ideo in his quoe pertinent ad interiorem motu voluntatis
homo non tenetur homi ni obedire sed solum Deo, etc.


Give us then like liberty and leave, or Luther himself to expound how, and
how far, Christians are free and exempted from Princes laws, as you take
your selves, for to salve your gloss, and you nor any shall have just cause to
plain of his doctrine. D. Luthers words I am sure will better bear a good and
honest exposition for the souls and consciences of men than your gloses: and
sommes collection of your side upon the same will do, for your Popish
clergies immunities; he is no small one of your sort (to omit other at this
time) that in a third commentary, gathers thus upon the words of the gloss
before me^cioned, after he has cited Thomas his exposition. The gloss might
notwithstanding be othcrwise expounded (says he) in saying that by the sons
of the eternal king or kingdom, he understands not all Christians, but those
that rule in the kingdom as children or Thom. A Vio Caietan. Cardin. in summa
D. Thom. 2. 2. Q. 104. super. art. 6.
sons. And these are bishops, priests, and those yt forsaking al, follow
Christ which shall judge the world: for these in this world as the kings sons,
by their state must set forth and cherish the kingdom of God, and ought also
to be free, from yt bondage or service of temporal Lords. And this agrees
(says he) with the doctrine of our Savior, whilst he insinuates that Peter
the Apostle is free, adjoining least we offend the^; pay for thee. And with ye
gloss, speaking of freedom, in this life, while he says: the children of the
kingdom under which al kingdoms are, ought to be free in every earthly kingdom.
Here is much a do: for here is first the Gloss upon the text, somewhat
obscure, then here is Thomas expou^ding the gloss, to salve it, and hold it
upright, ye rather because it is taken out of Augustine, then here is yet
further Cardinal Caietan, commenting upon Doctor Thomas. who upon the gloss
still (for there is all the matter) pleads, for the immunitie of the Clergy,
and concludes full ill fauouredly: for by this Doctors exposition, both Christ
and the gloss, serve to exempt Bishops, Priests, Friars, and ye rest of the
Popish Clergy, from paying tributes, and from other bodily subjection to
civil Magistrates, according to the immunities given them by their Pope. Now
let the reader scanne, matching this Popish doctrine with Luthers, whether
teach more loosenes from obedience to civil Princes, this doctrine of the
Gospel thus delivered by Luther, or ye contrary delivered by your Pope and his
cha^pions. This may serve for the clering and opening of these words of Luther
here set down, and ye right exposition and taking thereof, according to ye
Authors meaning, especially, seeing they stand as words culd out of his books
upon ye report of yt Pope only and Papists. If any list to see more for D.
Luthers Defense of the Apology, 4. part, chap. 5. Diuis. 1. etc
clering, let him look upon other which answer Popish sclanders, wherewith
they go about to charge this holy man of God, and namely upon that worthy and
learned father M. Jewel, against Harding, even in this matter of Magistrates
and obedience.

Because M. Calvin is said by M. Howlet, to agree with the doctrine of M.
Luther, as in deed he does, whereupon he might have easily understood the
meaning of the sentence, taken out of M. Luther, (If it had so pleased him) and
with his Pope, have left it out of the number of Luthers heresies, as it
pleased them to call his doctrine: Therefore come I now to that divine and
learned father, M. Calvin. This I like, for M. Calvin in you, better than in
that is before, that ye send us to his own works: the first place ye charge
this godly man withal (Though ye bastard and corrupt the same by your gloss)
ye take out of the 10. Chapter of the fourth book of his Institution, the 2.
and last out of the 19. Chapter, of the 3, book of the same Institution: But
sir, in neither of both does he make any large or further discourse of
Princes, and Subjects: If ye would have known, or described to other his
judgment in that matter, ye should have repaired, and sent us to ye place
where at large, and of purpose he e^treateth thereof, which he does in the
twenty or last chapter of the fourth book of his Institution; expressly
handlyng there the heavenly authority of Magistrates, and the duty of good
and obedient subjects, which Chapter is written wholly of Politic
gouermnent: Wherein (M. Howlet) prove him, if you can, to have written
ungodly, seditiously, or untruly, No, as he writes very godly, and with
great authority of scriptures and reason, so does he very reverently and
modestly also, if any other writer old or new (as they say) do so; after
another manner and sort, then either you here do to her Majesty, for all your
flattering flowers, or then your sort have of late, or now do of Princes and
(...) else where. I would wish the godly and christian reader, to be well
acquainted with this M. Caluins writings, and I doubt not to affirm to be
true here, that was else where said. Let him think he has greatly (...) in
matters of religion: who is brought into a love and liking of Caluins writings.
And yet I make neither him my God, nor his writings my Bible, for all this
reverent thinking and speaking of him and his writings. Even in this matter of
Magistrates: I pray thee gentle reader, look but into that last Chapter, and
thou shall see, it shall be hard for thee to read else where, (...) or
profou^der judgment of a divine, for the excellent dignity of civil Princes
and Magistrates, or for subjects, and private men's obedience, to thy
satisfaction and contentme^t, and to be able with all, to confute, whateuer M.
Howlet, or his side can cavil against this servant of GOD, or Christ's
religion here (...). I will not now stand in diducting this matter but note
thus much by the way, and now come M. Howlet, to answer your glenings and
pyckings out of his writings. In the 10. Chapter of the 4. book of his
Institution, he treats of the authority of the Church in making laws, and
of the Popes and popish Prelates tyranny over men's consciences in that
behalf: and namely, handling this question, whether it be lawful for the
Church by her laws, to bind men's consciences, he freely inueigheth against
your popish Churches, licentiousnes in that behalf, without any whit
preiudicing politic order, only reserving men's souls and consciences free,
to be spiritually guided by God, Christ, and his holy word, in the matters
appertayning to the souls health and salvation Now, M. Howlet, if this
doctrine mislike you, that men's souls and consciences should be above the
compass of men's authority and laws, then condemn our (...) Christ, the
Prophets, and Apostles, with M. Calvin, who make one spiritual Judge, King,
Lord, and Lawgiuer over men's souls, that is able to save and destroy, willing
us so to give to Ceasar, those things that are Caesar's, that we give Esai. 33.
22.
to God the things that are Gods, to fear him that has Iam. 4. 12.
authority to cast into hell, and to destroy both soul and Math. 22. 2.
body there: Whereas men, what power soever they have Mat. 10. 28.
over the body, afterward can do nothing more, nor are Luke 12. 4. 5.
not able to kill the soul. Again, Ye are bought with 1. Cor. 7. 23.
a price, be not the servants of men. Stand in the liberty Gal. 5. 1.
wherewith Christ has made us free: and be not entangled Gal. 3. 28.
again with the yoke of bondage. In the kingdom Colo. 3. 11.
of God, there is neither Jew nor Grecian, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
bond nor free, male nor female, but ye are all one in Christ, and he is all in
all things. And yet in place, may this distinction be made and, must also be
as I noted before. Your fault herein is, that ye distinguishe not aright
between the civil and outward Court: and the Spiritual Court of
conscience, as they speak, and Master Calvin here notes, and else where
also, how ever your Fafather, and Church have taken upon them, to deal with
men's consctences, which is Gods seat, to sit and rule there, wherein they show
what they be, yet neither our (...); nor other civil Princes, usurp so much
over Gods right, that is proper to Antechrist, and your faction.

Concerning the first Article, your corruption, and false collection therein
are so shameless, that they may be easily espied. I wish the reader to have
but recourse to the place In the words is there that, which in the schools is
called: A fallation of the Accent.
ye quote, to find out your treachery or false allegatio^ in perverting the
authors words and sense to be able to answer the same. Excellently well
does M. Calvin in that place, defining and treating of conscience, reconcile
these two points togethcr. First, that men's consciences, for their spiritual
government, are above men's reaches reserved only to God, which also in time of
ignorance (as ye said M. Calvin, says) was seen and observed by your Popish
writers, though practice were to the contrary, as may name ly be seen in your
Saint Thomas. Next that, we must 2. 2. Q. 104. Art. 5. and. 6. etc.
be subject to our civil Magistrates, and that for conscience sake, according
to the doctrine of the Apostle, not so much respecting the things commanded
or forbidden by Romans 13. 5.
them, which of them selves touch not conscience: as the general end and
commandment of the eternal God, that has appointed this order, and willed us
by his commandment to be subject to authority. And this is it, the Apostle
tends to, in his epistle to the Romans: so as leaving your caueling in
words and syllables, if you could Romans 13. 1. etc.
and would distinguishe between the civil Court, and the Still a fallacio^
from that which Aristotle calls (...), to that which he calls (...).
court of conscience, and between general and particular, as M. Calvin
speaks; All scrupule avoided, this matter might be eased, and better matter
gathered from this godly writer: then you, too (...) pretend to be there. The
book being both in English and in Latin, let the reder judge of the whole,
you M. Howlet, and your fellows shall never be able to stayne M. Calvin and
his doctrine, nor clear your selves from malice etc. while you live, if you
deal plainly. Set us down the book, Chapter, Section and Caluins words:
for we have no cause other wise to trust you, as you do your fellows.

The second place or article that ye take out of Calvin is so plain and true,
as I marvel what ye meant to charge him therewith, for speaking of Christian
liberty, he says: That the consciences of the faithful are exempted from
(...) 3. Cap. 19. sect. 14. etc.
the power of all men, by reason of the liberty given the^ by Christ, so as
they are not to be entangled in the snares of constitutions, in those things
wherein the Lord would have them free: But add I pray you, as he does there,
That as the matter is very worthy and meet to be known, so needs it a
large and plain declaration by reason of the ado, that partly seditious
persons, partly quarrel pickers make, as though all obedience of men, which is
not meant, were thereby also taken away and overthrown. To prevent this
inconvenience, does master Calvin there a large entreat of Christian
liberty, and the consciences of the faithful, as he does in the other place
of master Calvin cited by you before, and by this your misdealing, do we see
how necessary it was, often and much to beat in that point. In sum, we say:
spiritual liberty in Christ, and Politic subjection to Magistrates and
Supertours, may and do very well agree, and both are taught us in the
Scriptures, and have their place of practice.

From slaundering of these men that are dead, comes M. Howlet to those that
are alive. Whose names he quoteth down in his margin, mentioning a writing
made in the days of Queen Marie, which he does but touch, and I think
needelesse to stay thereon, considering the thing being aforetime obtected by
M. Harding, has been Defense of the Apology I part Cap. 4. Diuis. 1 etc.
fully answered unto by ye reverend father of blessed memory. Master Jewel
late Bishop of Sarisburie, as is that of master Luther before: I perceive that
M. Howlet. goes all by report and hear say, and seeks to win. grace by
(...) other. And where wisemen are wont diligently, to respect circumstances in
all doings, he, such is his humor throughout his Epistle, cares neither what,
when, nor in whom he reprove, so he may find somewhat to carpe at, in any
professors of the Gospel. I would M. Howlet. for his own sake were but so
faithful a servant of God and her Majesty, and did but half so uprightly
walk in his calling, in zelously aduauncing the Gospel of Christ, and
dutifully obeying our Sovereign, as the men he names, to their great
commendation, in singular modesty, and upright conscience at this day travel
to do, with no small fruit to the Church and people of God among us, how
ever he object old matters to so worthy fathers, M. howlets conclusion of this
part, of charging master Wickliffe, mastar Luther, master Calvin, and the rest
is, that the Catholic Church utterly condemns all these errors, and
teaches her children otherwise and the contrary. Now I ask M. Howlet if he
exempt not the consciences of yt faithful from Princes laws, and the power of
all men with master Luther, and master Calvin, how it comes to pass, that he
and his fellows exempt themselves from her Majesty's obedience under pretense
only of conscience, as even in the leaf before this we have in hand, in the
name of yt (...) he craves pardon at her Majesty's hands, for not yielding to
such conformity in matters of religion as is demanded at their hands, which
they cannot do but by offense of their consciences, etc. And the end of all in
him and his author is, yt her Majesty must take their disobedience and
refusal of conformity for a full satisfaction: because they allege
conscience. Now if this among other be an error condemned by the Catholic
Church: that the consciences of yt faithful be exempted from the power of all
men, etc. Why do you being Catholics, as ye say, follow it; Why do you make
that your pretense; Why do you dwell therein; If Princes laws bind subjects
to obedience in conscience, so as they may not be exempted for their
consciences: but yt they must obey them, as God himself, whose room they
possess, and that under pain of mortal sin and eternal damnation, how
hardly soever their Princes deal with the^ in their government, etc. Why
learn you not that lesson; Why reform you not your consciences by Gods word,
that God and her Majesty may have due obedience of her Subjects: which she
requires and no more without complaining, murmuring, and this bitter accusing:
ye tell her Majesty of errors, and your selves run into the^ headlong; Ye will
by no means with Luther have Christians free and exempted from Princes laws;
no not in their conseiences, and yet by means of conscience you will exempt
your selves, what should I say: like not that in your selves, ye condemn in
other. The difference (gentle Reader) between us and them is, as thou may
perceive, that we exempt men's consciences from all mortal men to give them to
God above alone, to be guided by his holy word and no other wise, which in
deed her majesty allows well of, slander these fellows what they can
herein, for her title of supreme governor over her subjects. They without any
warrant of Gods word exempt, not conscience, but pretended, or that they call
conscience, from dutifulnes to God and their lawful Prince and Sovereign in
God, to give it to the Pope, induced thereto, because they see her Majesty to
leave men's consciences free and untouched, having a tender care and great
respect thereof. Where conscience is in deed, though it be but weak, according
to the doctrine of yt Scriptures and Gospel where she learned this: and not
from popery and Pope, to whose supreme authority grounded upon suppositio^s
and false principles, these cou^terfeited Catholics have by reconcilement and
oath betaken themselves according to their rotten religion, so defrauding God
and her Majesty of their due, abusing their Sovereign authority, and
themselves greatly. After this comes M. Howlet to note our demeanor, and
here passing other, as he says, he sets us down at large a matter done
the last Summer at Stamforde, and dwelling therein, he reprooueth both the
doctrine of certain Preachers there, and their demeanor also, whereof he
makes no small a do, seditious, pretends he, was the doctrine there taught,
seditious was the usage, and yet, I trow, nothing like to that of theirs in
the North, in Irelande, nor that which I have described before. It is happy,
God made not him the Prince of this land, nor any of the State, otherwise I
perceive the poor men had been trounced: he gives sentence as though the
matter were his own, when nothing was there done against him, and as for her
Majesty and the State, they call not for his help in the government here. But
I see M. Howlet is still like himself, that is past shame, else would he have
blushed to have spoken so untruly of a matter so lately done and so publicly
in the face of all the world: but let us see what he says: first he enters
into this matter, to quitte, as he speaks, the Puritan that has so infamed
the Catholics. Therefore he thinks good to diffame him again. He has
slaundered you M. Howlet, with a matter in troth, as we have seen: And you
cannot forget an injury, if it were one, ye must needs be quite with the
Puritan. Alas poor Puritan: but it is happy your hands be bound that ye
can do him no more harm, have you not powered out your spite enough against
him, before to be quitte with him. You play as the Dog does: that when a
stone is flung at him, runs after the stone, and for revenge, catches the
same in his mouth. When ye can find no more matter in the man to rail upon,
you immagine he sends out Preachers, ye call them at Stamforde his
Preachers. Preachers at this day, the more is the pity, are with you, and to
many such, Praeda Mysorum, it is your own Proverb taken out of Aristotle's
Rethoricke and Rethorically amplified and handeled, speaking against this man
that ye will now needs quite, but this man that you revenge your self upon:
First tells you those Preachers you talk of were none of his, he sends out
none. Next, that he is not bound to answer for them, though in so (...) a
cause, that be not hard to be done. This might M. Howlet easily think,
considering that evil will is not given to say well; That her Majesty, and
all other that should read that he sets forth in printe, would hardly
believe amongst so many untruths, this report of his proceeding from such a
revenging stomach as seeks thereby to quite his enemy, which doctrine he
takes out of Philosophy, and from his Master Aristotle's Rethoricke, rather
then from good divinity and the Scriptures; yet it may agree with his
Catholic religion, well enough. Again, he might think the ground and truth
of the matter would be looked into, which is not hard here to be done.

Next, he alleges a Minister to be his Author in the report of this matter:
but that is for his vantage, he names him not, neither think I, he can name
any such, he were too notorious an hypocrite and false brother, so lewdly to
belie and betray his brethren. Nevertheless that is possible: for among
Christ's Apostles, there was a Judas. This dealing might have much impaired his
credit with you, saving that you lie in awaite to trappe the innocent, with
all godly and honest men that list to understand hereof, if there were any
such man. Whereof give us leave to doubt, till we hear more, he will be
abhorde for his double dealing, and you for your impudent reporting of so
manifest a sclander. Did the Minister tell you the matter himself; Or did some
other that heard it of him, or some body else, tell it you from him; You were
not, we must suppose, at the exercise your self. Take heed of too light
crediting reports M. Howlet and especially of reporting them again, and that
to her Majesty, and of putting them (...) in print too the view of the
world, that is your foundation and entry. Proceeding, ye object disobedience
to the Preachers that would not obey the Bishops letters prohibiting the fast
at Stamforde. There are but too many such as you be, that by sinister
informations and sclaunders, go about to hinder godly and holy attempts,
fishing out some thing whereby to stay yt same, by all means they can: But God
be praised such false and light reports, such naughty dealings, have turned
and do commonly turn to the beginners shames, and to Gods glory the more, and
his peoples good and comfort, as in deed this did: for though this godly
exercise were a time stayed, by misreportes, yet at length was it taken in
hand, with the good countenance and liking of authority, whereof you and such
might learn, to give over such rustie cankered practices, and to take a new
and better course; if ye had any grace.

It fares now adays (gentle Reader) in the building of Gods spiritual house
and City, which is his Church here upon earth even as it did in old time
(which conformity and likelihood may serve greatly to our instruction,
admonition and comfort) when at Gods appointment, the house and temple of God,
and the City Jerusalem were to be reedified, God stirring up for that purpose
King Cyrus, and Darius, and preparing the hearts of other of his people to
further and advance that work, as we may see in the holy stories of Ezra, and
Nehemiah, the thing (...) well begun, was greatly hindered, sometime by
colorable undermining after a politik manner, and by false accusation, making
complaint eue^ to the king, sometime by conspiracy and open force and violence;
yet notwithstanding (all preparatio^s and subtle devises coming to naught)
the work, though with much a do, by gods meruellous providence; went lustily
and luckely forward, and was at ye last happily finished. There was on the one
and better side, though lesser and weaker in the sight of man Zerubbabell,
Ieshua, Ezra, Nehemiah, yt prophets, Haggai, and Zechariah etc. as chiefmen
among the people of God with their band and company. There were on yt other side.
Rheu^, Shimshai, Tatnay, Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem, and their co^panio^s in
Samaria, and the people beyond the river mighty and envious Cheeneth, Arabians,
Ammonites, Ashdodims, and other, with Shemaiah, Noadiah. etc. false Prophets,
hirelings, and hypocrites, many and great ones. The kings, with whom both
parties had to deal, being Heathen men, were sometime, no marvel, against the
matter, especially being stirred up by the malice of the adversaries to this
building, and their often and many complaints, handeled with great cunning and
policy, which more troubled and hurt the servants of God, and hindered their
godly proceeding, as hypocrites always do, than any open violence: but which
was to be marvelled at, even those Heathen kings were sometime favorable,
forward, and with the matter, Gods providence and blessing so ordering the
whole work till it were achieved, as namely we see under the good kings
Cyrus and Darius. Now to leave the state of the Church in other Realms, by
Gods marvelous goodness, we have at this day raised up unto us for one and a
principal part not a heathen king, or a Cyrus, and Darius: To favor and set
forward yt building of gods house among us: but a Christian Sovereign and
Prince, herself professing yt Gospel of Christ Jesus, who does not stand by
and look on yt builders: but bending her royal authority and wisdom to yt
defense and maintenance of ye truth, and repressing of error and falsehood; so
moderateth the whole, that she greatly encourages all gods people her obedient
subjects, and terrifieth the adversaries: her majesty's Counselors, the
Nobility, the spiritual Pastors, and the other officers and Ministers of yt
laws are likewise professors and setters forward of this business in their
degree and calling, to the great comfort of the common people, and those of the
lower sort: whereupon the adversaries, how many and how mighty soever they be,
may be the less able to do hurt. Yet to waken us, and to keep us from
security; we shall not lack (neither have we to marvel thereat, or be
discouraged) enemies as long says M. Howlet, as there is either head or hand
remaining loose in the world. We shall not lack hypocrites, false accusers,
conspirers, violent dealers, seditious persons, etc. we shall not lack
stinging Hornets, like the Horonites, Ammonites and Arabians, we shall not lack
a Rehum, a Shimshai, a Tatnai, a Tobiah, a Schemaiah, etc. that in a rout will
undermine, and oppose themselves to the Gospel: But, God be thanked, we need
little fear them, having that mighty God, so mightily standing on our side,
and blessing us with such a Sovereign, and state as he does. Wherefore; let us
now M. Howlet be bold to unfold and lay abroad your false accusations and
slanders and to answer the same.

Ye say, that the Preachers would not obey the prohibition but stepped up into
the Pulpit, etc. As though they ran before they were called. First, I answer,
that both the first and second Preacher whom ye charge, were by public
authority licenced, both were by the Magistrates and Assistants of ye town
requested thither, both their doctrines and vsages, in that solemn and notable
assembly are not on ly cleared from your uncharitable slanders M. Howlet, but
very well reported of by those of honorable and worshipful calling that were
present, and have given testimony thereof under their hands to be seen of
any that list. It is supposed by some M. Howlet, that if you be not a husband
man's son of yt quarters, Ye are some night bird, whose hauntes may possibly
be spied out, they were best look to it in whose barnes or out houses ye
lodge, if ye chance to be spied, men love an Owl so ill, I will say no more,
you wot what befell one of your ancestors at Rome aforetime? This (being in
those quarters) is likely enough to be your grief, to see or hear, that this
assembly was so assisted, and things therein so well performed: but you fret
and are angry without cause, it quites your Puritan never awhit, it slanders
The Alderman of Stamford, the Comburgesses and the Recorder of the town, and
ministers and other of the country such as I have (...).
Stamford, the assembly, and those that had dealing therein, etc. You take the
report of the matter, as you would have us believe at least, at one man's
hands, a minister present there. I, as you see oppose to this vain report,
for the truth of ye matter, many to one, and that those of calling, honorable,
and worshipful, magistrates, and other in the town and abrod, besides diverse
godly, and learned ministers and Preachers whose hands and marks I have seen,
which carry great credit, and have talked with diverse therein, to the
reproouing of that you so rashly affirm, and falsely, and slanderously here
inform her. Majesty of, and to the testifiyng of the contrary, and the just
commendation both of the exercise, and the godly Preachers every way: who there
present writing diligently took the notes, and are ready to auow the same,
upon oath if need be, to your discredit and shame. The credit of these me^, as
those that had cause, best to understand of the whole matter, will weigh down
the single credit of the single sowld Minister you talk of, without any
indifferent men, to show that the eight articles set down by you are not true,
but most falsely and maliciously devised by your self, or by some other enemy
no better then your self, and that the doctrine and other usage at that
exercise was godly and comfortable. In the mean while it is neither new, nor
to be wondered at, that Preachers and professors of Gods truth be evil spoken
of for well doing, it is the reward our Master had when he was here, it is yt
he has willed us to look for. For the dealing in that godly exercise of
preaching, praying, and fasting joined with alms, authority, and proceeding,
The Alderman and Co^burgesses were peticioners therein, both for allowance at
the Bishop of Lincolns hand, and also for assistance of preachers as their
letters therein declare, to their great commendation, for their Godly
forwardness in so good a matter, being the chief of that corporation, wherein
they stayed and forbear, till they had both allowaunce and direction also for
the form and order of proceeding, set them down in writing particularly, as
the said Bishop of Lincolnes letters of the fifth of August, in answer to the
letters of the Town of Stamforde of the xxx. of July before, do declare: But
he and his letters will carry no credit with you, and yet in this matter,
being by you alleged, must and justly does, and ought to do: Besides this
they had the good and favorable allowance of one, not of the meanest of the
Lords of her majesty's honorable privy Counsel, to whom under her Majesty,
yt Borough appertains, as three of his honorable letters of the xxv. of July
to the Bishop of Linclone, the Alderman, and Burgesses of Stamforde, and to one
of the preachers, that you here charge, do v^eare witness: that I speak
nothing of the public order set down by authority, to move us all generally
to repentance, joined with fasting, prayer, and relieuing of the poor The
Camets and strange sights that were seen in the heauenes, the Earthquakes
here beneath among us, the disturbances and disquietnes of neighbors round
about this Realm, the monstrous and unnatural dealings of those of your side
with her Majesty, and this peaceable State, the great miseries of God his
faithful congregation and people almost every where, and the like miseries:
whereby God as it were shakes his rod over men's heads, seemed sufficient
occasions to her (...), the grave, wise, and godly here; to call to these
extraordinary exercises of fasting, prayer, etc. the practice whereof also was
seen in diverse places of this Realm, and namely in the Diocese of Lincoln
to give example, and stir up the godly mind of them of Stamforde, which
example they very well followed and performed the like, the fourteenth of
September last, highly to Gods glory, their due praise, and the joy and
comfort of ye godly, that were present, and such as hear of the same abroad.
This that had such approbation, and proceeding with consent of all, to whom
the same under God and her Majesty, does any way appertain, can not justly be
charged by you: Turning therefore your standerous report for the doctrine in
your eight propositions set down, and for other behavior, home unto you again
where it was first bredde, as utterly false, and not to be found either in
preachers or people at the public fast at Stamforde, I have set down the
truth of the whole.

But what sir, if all these circumstances had not bin precisely kept, no
contempt toward superior authority being, the godliness and reverence of the
matter of it self, would sufficiently have excused and commended it in these
days of the profession of the Gospel under so godly and virtuous a Prince,
and other Magistrates. The more godly the exercise was, the more it seems to
offend you: the more it misliketh you, the better is it to be esteemed of the
godly; rail, revile, and fret, till your heart ache, yet shall this godly order
of public and extraordinary fasting, upon occasion incident joined with
preaching, meditation, prayers, and charitable relief of the poor and
miserable, practiced and used in this Church, and recommended by her Majesty,
and other of the State long ago in the great plague here, and since, and yet
still in these days, as very necessary: this I say, is so far of from
disorderly, or seditious dealing, as it shall never be justly found fault with
by you, grounded sufficiently upon Gods book, and better ten thousand times
(if such comparison may be) than either your blasphemous precessions, your
running to Church to toll a bell, your casting of coniured water, etc. to fray
away spirits, or than your Popish fast, consisting in superstitious choice of
meats and days, joined with hypocrisy, opinion of merit, etc. It is happy
ye can find out fasting at the length in the Gospelling Churchs, among those
that ye call Protestants, you might have done it sooner if it had pleased you.
You were wont to say: we quite overthrow all fasting and prayer, because we
went about to correct and take away the abuses that Popery had brought into
both: even as we see our Master Christ in his time to have done the like.
And here you say there has been continual railing against fasting for these
xxi. years paste. Math. 6.
Untrueth still: It has been but against your superstition and abuse, which
we take not, I tell you still to be Gospel, we have commended, and
recommended always in place, true fasting, we have practiced, and used the
same according to the pure use delivered us in the Scriptures, and of late,
more upon occasions then aforetime and more generally with doctrine adjoined,
from which doing your corruptions, wherewith you had filled ye Church a long
time, held us: but we hope well, it shall daily more and more be purged, and
such dust swept away out of Gods house here, and both this and other godly
orders also grow from good to better, among the faithful people of this
English Church, with the furtherance, good liking, and delight of her Majesty,
our Sovereign, we doubt not in beholding her people and subjects, to profit
daily in all godliness, how ever you (...) and repine thereat: Here Mat. 11.
16. 17. 18. 19.
ye call this godly exercise a little fantastical rage of fasting, etc. You
rave and rage too. But whereunto shall we liken this generation, but with our
savior Christ to little children sitting in the marketts, etc. For as John
came neither eating nor drinking and they said, he had a devil: and the son
of man came eating and drinking, and they say de: Behold a glutton, and
drinker of wine, a friend unto Publicanes and Sinners. Even so do our
Pharisaicall Papists deal, and say now: No way can please and content them,
neither using the liberty of Gods good creatures, sanctified by the word of
God, and prayer, as ye Apostle speaks, neither yet absteyning therefrom. But
we answer with our good Master and Savior, Luke. 7. 35.
wisdom is justified of all her children.

Ye talk at pleasure of speaking ten or twelve hours together, with all a lie
a: Although the corruptions that your Popish and Pharisaicall leaven has many
years infected fasting withal, sticking fast, require sometimes to purge the
same before it can be well and profitably taken in hand: And again, the right
use and end thereof, and of prayer, humility, faith, repentance, newenesse of
life, liberality also to the poor etc. to be treated of, ask time, that this
Christian exercise of fasting may be Christianly kept: among the ruder sort
especially, yet M. Howlet, neither be so many hours prescribed, the preacher
to talk, neither know or heard I it ever, any where so used. For time sir
herein, we use it and leave it as an indifferent thing, to take more or less,
according as occasion and necessity of matter require, and in this and like
circumstances say, as our (...) Christ said of the Sabbath in his time, the
Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath. Let Mark. 2. 27.
time serve us, and we in time, and therewith, serve God. Both the Sermons at
Stamford, forenoone and afternoon too, mounted not much above half the time
of the least of your two numbers: but I will leave this matter, and the quiting
of your Puritan, because I understand ye hear thereof another way.

After this, you tell her Majesty, of a weighty motive, so you set it down
in your margin. The effect you note a little before, when you make Catholics so
important a stay in every of her Majesty's countries: As though the safety and
quietness of the whole realm rested on you Catholics, that refuse to come to
Church here, to renounce the Pope, and betake your selves as true English
men to God and her Majesty's government, etc. Of which number you take your
self. M Howlet, to be one. Though you for your part should seem to be
better acquainted with the barn, and the rude husbandmans cotage in the
country, where your neste may also be found, then with any good Town or
City, much less with a Princes Palace, whereby you should be meet to
stay up her Majesty, and this common wealth with your shoulders: But are you or
your fellow Catholics, the safety of this whole Realm? God forbid man,
yet these are those that are here so commended, these are those ye whole suite
is for, that it would please her Majesty to grant that which it seems
they will have whether she will or no: Obstinating themselves, and cloking all
under unconscionable conscience before they make her highness priute of their
suite and dealing. A worthy manner of suing, to abase and bring her Majesty
to their bend, that they may altogether (...) the roste here. Because your
framed consciences, be some what too weak reasons, to move her Majesty
withal alone. You bring forth your weighty motive, where although at the
first ye speak of mercy and favor, yet so soon as ye seem to have given
some soap of milk, by and by, ye throw ye whole down again with your heel. For
ye have no sooner spoken of mercy and favor, but straightway with a
commemoration, as it were an vpbrayding, etc. ye fall a clayming the thing ye
would have, in recompense of your service. I greatly marvel not to see you
deal thus with her Majesty here upon earth, as though ye deserved, that can
challenge merits at Gods hands in heaven: but say and think what ye will for
that: Grace and merits can not stand together. Her Majesty of her self,
belike; can not conceive, nor see what you and your fellows have deserved and
deserve at her highness hands: Ye are little beholding to your neighbors, that
need thus to praise say, and speak for your selves. If you have done nothing
but your bounden duties, nor in deed half that neither, as better subjects
and more duetifull do, unfeignedly acknowledge from the heart, and needs must
in respect of her Majesty, and the manifold and great benefits that we all
daily receive from and by her Majesty's means (whom God long preserve among
us); why then claim you recompense for your service? What is it I pray you,
you have done;

First, forsooth you, (you know what catholics you mean) were most ready at
the beginning, to place her Highness in her Royal Throne. I leave to speak of
her Majesty's disfavor, procured by you hot Catholics in Queen Mary's days,
of the straightness, and hard usage that her Majesty found, among your
Jaylors her highness keepers then. We, to our inestimable joy and comfort,
know by whose power and providence alone, her Majesty was delivered out of
the Lions mouth, and placed in her Royal seat too well to ascribe yt praise
unto you hot Catholics; Were you most ready to place her highness in that royal
room, wherein now by the favor of God she stands? Indeed by the favor of
God, yt ye say well and truly, more than by your wills and help, else were it
hard with us all. You were so great helps at yt beginning yt not being able
to keep in any longer the cankered poyso^ lurkinge in the heart, but opening yt
hidden malice, eue^ (in honorable and open meetinge, after her Majesty was
placed in her royal Throne, when the barbarous cruelty toward her Majesty
and other, used in the former days was objected) one amongst other answered in
ye name of ye rest: that there was John Story in the first Parliament of Queen
Elizabeth.
no other fault but that leaving the root standing, the branches only were
hakt of, when rather the mightiest tares (so it pleased a champio^ of yours to
speak, of ye profession and This is reported even by N. Saunders in Sto ries
life devisibili Monarchia eccles.
some professors of the Gospel) should have been pulled up by the roots, which
if it had been done, we should not now see so many and so great wicked stocks
(said this stout Catholic) remain every where and flourishe. This was it
that happelye grieved you, that by your wicked and traiterous dealinge, her
Majesty was not before that time made away: But if her Majesty, and we all,
were so beholding unto you for this service, why did not you and your fellows
make this suit, when the matter was fresh in memory, the thing was not then
ripe, have you now first gotten heart of grace. It is but of late M. Howlet,
that most of you have pulled your necks out of the collar of obedience to God
and her majesty, and therefore the recompense of that service that ye brag
of, if there were any such, longs little to you young men Jesuits, and other
late Birds of Rome: that which follows perhaps, you will say does: for ye
reckon not up only what ye have done, which in truth ye never did, but
what proper men ye presentlye be and will be; to spend the uttermost drop
of your blood to defend her Majesty in all safety, peace and quietness to
the end, if it like her Highness to believe pour tale, or trust to the
broken reed of your defense, Your dealinges heretofore, in both her Majesty's
Realms of England and Irelande, to leave old practices, and to remember but
her days; confirm this promise of yours. The stirs ye now afreshe go
about to make, continuing the old rebellions till ye may join them to new,
utter your good meaning hearts, remember whence you come? from whom? and in
whose name? This service to her Majesty, and the State, had need be
recompensed, it were pity else. I think certainly your affections at the
beginning toward her Majesty were even such as ye now show them, and will
hereafter to the end approve them, while her Majesty lives. Can the black
Moore Iere. 13. 23.
change his skin or hue, or the Leoparde his spots. Then may ye also do
good that are accustomed to evil. Your great fathers stomachs in the
beginning, were to high, to become Petitioners; popish Prelates could not, or
would not submit them selves to her highness. One White, in his rochet, after
Queen Mary's death at Paul's cross, speaking of alteration of religion from
Popery to the Gospel etc. openly said: It can not be, it may not be, it
shall not be; ye hold one course, ye are I perceive no changelings.

But there is, sir, an odds between doing a thing in deed, and pretending to
do a thing, between doing of conscience, affection, duty, and love,
heartily; and between rhetorically doing, (that I may so speak) that is:
Italian and Romanlike, with color and great cunuing, or if you will, (...) of
our English men's doing now, that come thence: if her Majesty therefore spy
your drift, and reward you with forty stripes, as the french king once did,
(in not much an unlike case) a dissembler, for pretending in hope of Jews. 11.
reward, (with terms and (...) of great reverence) to take a (...) from him,
after another (...) of his had received reward, for a very like service and
office done to the king his M. before: Are ye not well enough served: Or at
least, if her Majesty, comparing you with other, consider her faithful
subjects in deed, which ask nothing, nor brage of their service, but
acknowledge they have received more then they have deserved, and desire nothing
more, then that they may in all thankful duty, answer their Sovereigns
bounty toward them, as the Chancellor, to the said French king sometime
did, standing amongst such gaping and ravening Crows, Cormorantes, or Owls,
call the^ what ye will. As you in words set out your (...) birds here to be,
if I say she shall in the end reward those good Subjects, as King Jews did
his Chancellor, and send you empty away that gape so fast afterward and
answer you: that you must wait for an other occasion as yt King did, etc. What
have you to plain of; It is said that yt king took a delight to mock the
gaping bird, were it Crow or Daw. Is this your weighty motive, ye so gloss in
the margin of Pulcbru^ est (...) deludere Hyantes.
your book; If your Author have no better in store to come hereafter, as in
this your treatise promised shall come, both he and you may put up your pypes
for ought I see. It is a pretty sport to mock the gaping Chaugh.


But ye run back to your starting hole, and allege conscience, this is a
poor help. And yet this must be a satisfaction for all if the rest fail:
how hollow soever your consciences be, if there remain any at all, the bare
name of conscience, must be your defense, when you have nothing else to say.
Here make ye now a Rampeere. Conscience, you say, depends of judgment, and
understanding and not of affect and will. It cannot be framed at pleasure, nor
consequently reduced to such conformity, as is prescribed by Superiors.
Conscience, no doubt, where it is in deed, and not in fancy and words
pretended only, is a great matter, and would by any means be respected and
tendered of all. And so does her Majesty here, God be praised, why did ye not
here M. Howlet set down the ground of your understanding and judgment, or
forbear this brag of conscience, till we had seen and examined the ground
thereof, yt which, without all proof, ye here bring forth in words only, that
do we return unto you again, as a thing unproven, and therefore reproueable,
to wit, yt the persuasio^ you are entered into, of not coming to the Church
among us at this day and refusing the oath of allegiance to her Majesty; is
not only not grounded on the scriptures, but is contrary thereunto, and
thereupon depends altogether of affect and will and not of judgment and
understanding; is framed at your pleasures, without good warrant or ground, and
so may be reduced to co^formitie prescribed by superiors. Your own S. Thomas
in his sum says, Q. 79. art 13. that conscience is no special faculty or
power of the soul, because it may be laid away, which the other cannot: but
be that as it will be: A corrupt conscience such as yours is, may and ought to
be laid away. The reasons in your treatise as in place we find, deal little
or nothing to prove the contrary to this I tell you or deal (as you do) very
hollowly, being grounded altogether upon supposition, which not grounded on
Gods truth in matters of Religion, is a rotten post, for conscience, to lean
upon. Try your consciences in religion by right judgment and good
understanding, taken out of Gods book: run not upon false suppositions, and
we shall be soon at an end. I still marvel M. Howlet how you can exempt your
consciences from (...), and so from her (...), that before condemned these
sentences as errors That the consciences of the faithful are exempted from
the power of all men, that Chistians are fre and exempted from all Princes
laws, as touching their consciences, etc. For you admit this exposition of the
former sentence, in saying: that Calvin and Luther, hold therein one doctrine,
whereof I have spoken in his place. The matter is, that your Secondary faith,
and allegiance sworn unto her Highness, as to the sub stitute of God (thus
ye speak) is at the Popes pleasure broken, and now discharged of that faith
by his warrant, and the same bestowed upon him, and such as he will appoint
without good warrant from God or her Majesty. In the mean while we will take,
as granted by you this Maxim, or supposition: That conscience depends of
judgment and understanding, and not of affect and will, albeit in your case
this wholly raignethin you, and therefore seems not be conscience.

But because pretended conscience is the ground of these men's whole matter and
the only shift of excuse that both M Howlet and his author have to cloak their
disobedience, withal, let me be bold with thee gentle Reader somewhat at large
to unfold some part of their Popish (...) in this case of conscience, which
that I may the better do, I will first set down some of both their words
agreeing in this point together. Then examining in general the popish doctrine
whereon they ground themselves without all Scripture, yea contrary to
Scripture, common reason, and hon estie also, as the same is delivered unto us
in their books, by the principal (...) of their religion, I will show how
godlesly and how hollowly they may be found to speak, write, and think in
the whole: enough in my opinion, to bring their religion into utter (...)
detestation, and hatred: for broching us such abominable abominations.
Afterward, God willing (returning to M. Howlets words again, and comparing
them with the doctrine of the Scripture) will I, so much as I shall think
needful answer the same particularly. Thus writes M. Howlet of this matter
here at large.

12 Now because as the Philosopher says, that is only good unto every man,
which each man's understanding tell. Ari st. lib. 1. The.
leth him to be good: unto the which the Scripture and (...) agree, when they
say: that we shall be judged at the last day, according to the testimony of
our conscience: 2. Cor. 1.
(...) follows, that what soever we do contrary to our 1. Joan. 5.
judgment and conscience, is (according to the Apostle) damnable. Aug. li. de
do. chri. ca. 10. etc lib. 1. ca. 40. Romans 14.
Because we decerne it (to be evil) and yet do it. So that, how good
soever the action in it self were, (as for example, if a Gentile should for
fear, say or swear that there were a Messiah,) yet unto the doer, it should
be a damnable sin, because it seemed naught in his judgment and conscience:
and therefore to him, it shall be so accounted at the last day. Which thing,
has made all good men from time to time, to stand very scrupulously in
defense of their conscience, and not to commit any thing, against the sentence
Acts of religion not to be enforced.
and approbation of the same. All Princes also, and Potentates of the woorlde,
have abstained from the beginning, for the very same consideration, from
enforcing men to Acts against their consciences, especially in religion: as
the histories both before Christ and since, do declare. And amongst the very
Turks at this day, no man is compelled to do any act of their religion,
except he renonuce first his own. And in the Indies and other far parts of
the world, where infinite Infidels are under the gouernemente of Christian
Princes, it was never yet practiced, nor ever thought lawful by the Catholic
Church, that such men should be enforced to any one act of our religion.
And the reason is: for that, if the doing of such acts should (...) Vide di.
Tho. and om. doc. 2.
sin unto the doers: because they do them against their conscience, then
must needs the inforcement of such Acts be 2. q. de side.
much more grievous and damnable sin, to the inforcers. Heretics may be in
forced.
Mary notwithstanding this, when a man has received once Cy. de Ex.
the Christian Catholic religion, and will by new devises and Mart. cap. 5.
singularity, corrupt the same, by running out and making Ieron. ca. 5. ad
Ephe.
dissension in Christ his body, (as all Heretics do:) then, for the
conservation of unity in the Church, and sor restraint Optat. lib. 3.
of this man's furye and pride, the Church has always contra Dona.
from the beginning allowed, that the Civil Magistrate Aug. li. I. con.
should recalle such a fellow, by temporal punishment, Parm. cap. 7.
to the unity of the whole body again, as all the holy Fathers Leo ep. 67.
and 91.
write to be most necessary, especially such, as had most to do with
such men, as Cyprian, Jerome, Optatus, Greg. li. ep. 32
Augustine, Leo, Gregory, and Bernarde. And Saint Austin in diverse places,
recalleth back again his opinion, Ber. ser. 66. (...) Cant.
which he sometimes held to the contrary. So that we keeping still our old
religion, and having not gone out from Aug. lib. 2. retract. ca. 5. and epist.
48. and. 50.
the Protestants, but they from us: we cannot be enforced by any justice, to
do any act of their religion.

HEnce ye gather yt because ye allege your conscience, in this cause of
yours. Therefore neither may ye do there against under pain of damnation,
neither be enforced to do otherwise then you do under like pain to the
enforcers, and because ye saw you should be excepted upon two ways, ye
provide answer for the same first. If it be alleged against you, as is by
us very truly alleged, that the thing ye are called unto is, godly, honest,
and good, and seemly to be yielded unto, and therefore no reason you should
in this case be left to your pretended conscience, to follow that which is
evil, but that you should give over and take a new course: Ye affirm, how
good soever the action in it self be, whereunto ye are called, yet the
yielding is damnable sin to the doer, because it seems naught in his
judgment and conscience, and therefore to him it shall be so accounted at the
last day. So he must be left to his pretended consicence in very bad things.
Heereto ye bring (so had ye need, and yet all will not serve) the examples
of all Princes and Potentates of the world before Christ and since, and of
the very Turks themselves and other Infidels. To show that her Majesty, and
the State deal more cruelly by Law here, with you then any other State, be
they never so barbarous, do with their people, and that this will be damnable
unto them. You are in great and high matters, you had need remember your
self, and you need to have been beter acquainted with Kings and Princes,
Estates and their affairs, then may be thought you be, or else have let this
far fet stuff alone. This gear beseems you and your spirit well; M. Howlet,
and that to and with her Majesty her self, does it not; Next, if any
testimonies and examples of practice be alleged against you of temporal
punishment, you turn them all over, in saying such proceeding was against
Heretics only, which make dissension in Christ his body. And although you
prove not the Papists to be out of that number, but that they may justly be
counted Heretics, as they be in deed, and therefore by your own doctrine of
the Princes and States that justly so take them, to be recalled and enforced by
temporal punishment, or restrained at the least, yet to help your self as
you may, as though popery were the true and right Christian religion, ye
suppose that you have no whit swarued from the truth: but that we whom ye call
Protestants, have gone from you and set up a new religion as though we, what
should I say we; her Majesty and the state, professed or called you to any
other than to Jesus Christ only true and most ancient religion, comprised
and expressed in the holy scriptures; or from that. The end of all (...), yt
you must still do as ye now do in abstayning from the Church assemblies, etc.
And by no justice be enforced to the contrary. For that if your (...)
conscience be persuaded herein, ye may not do against that, though it be evil.

Now thus writes M. Howlets author hereof in Fol. 17.
the latter end of the nienth reason of his treatise: Neither suffices it to
say: Those suppositions are false and that there are not such things committed
against God at the Protestants Churches and services: for howsoever that be
(whereof I dispute not now) yet I being in my heart of another religion, must
needs think not only them but also all other religions what soever, to commit
same, as I know they also think of mine. (...), how good and holy soever they
were, yea if they were angels Heinous sin to enforce another man to do against
his conscience.
yet should I be condemned for going amongst them: for that in my sight,
judgment, and conscience (by which only I must be judged) they must needs
seem enemies to God being of the contrary religion. By this it may appear How
they did in Q. M. time compel men.
how grievously they sin daily in England and cause other to sin with
them, which compel men by Look Fol. 54. 58.
terror to do acts of religion against their consciences. As to take oaths,
receive Sacraments, go to Churches, and the like, which being done (as I have
said), with repugnant consciences, is horrible mortal sin, as has been
already proved, and consequently damnable both to the doers and inforcers
there of. And again, in the same ix. reason, speaking of the consciences of
Infidels, and Heretics amongst many things, he thus writes generally of
all sorts of men. If there be no man either so foolish or impious in the
world, but must needs think that one only religion amongst Christians is
true, and all other false. And if every man which has any religion and is
resolved One only (...) true, and all other (...).
therein, must needs presuppose this only truth, to be in his own religion,
then it follows necessarily that he must likewise persuade him self that
all other religions besides his own are false and erroneous, and consequently
all assemblies, Conuenticles, and public Acts, of the same to be wicked,
damnable, dishonorable to God, contumelious to Christ, and therefore to his
conscience (which thinks so) detestable. And in another place before, his
reasons, agreeing yet more fully and plain Fol. (...).
ly with M. How let: Surely as I am now minded I would not for ten thousand
worlds, compel a Jew to swear that there were a blessed Trinity: For albeit
the thing be never so true, yet should he be damned for swearing against
his conscience and for compelling him to commit so heinous and grievous a
sin, etc.

I may here charge these men that they speak of conscience very doubtfully
and diversely, yea wickedly and dangerously: in that they make no better
distinction between truth and falsehood: good, and bad: a right and a wrong
conscience, or erroneous, as these men speak: the resolution of God in men,
for their doings, and men's false persuasions, reasons, and resolution, to
common lower, and men's fancies and imaginations.

Conscience, as the very word imports, is a knowledge in us with an addition,
or to speak plainer if I can, it is an (...).
God her testimony concurring with ma^s knowledge makes conscience.
inward sense or feeling of god his judgment co^curring with our knowledge:
Whereof arises this, the testimony of conscience, or our conscience bearing
us witness, etc. Of which conscience, what force it has, to take away all
excuse from men, before God, the Apostle disputes, Rom 2. If ye like not
this, I say, ye shall find that some of your own writers take conscience
doubly or two ways, Called (...).
sometime for that part or power of the mind that is always One father caleth
conscience, the light of our understanding: (...). other otherwise.
contrary to vice and evil, or always accompaning that part, and then it is
ever right. Sometime is conscience, taken for an applying of our knowledge to
some action, and so is it not a quality but an action, And thus is it not
always good or right say they. But for the purpose and matter we have in
hand, and for our instruction and guiding, Besides that the very word and the
Etymology or description thereof, teaches us that conscience differs from
opinion, immagination, fancy, vain conceit, etc. As being a more high and
heavenly gift especial when it is directed by God his holy word and Spirit.
We have further to mark, the general doctrine of the holy Ghost, set us
down in the scriptures, in using to our benefit or abusing to our hurt, even
Gods good creatures, and the note he gives of the force of conscience therein:
unto the pure, al things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure: But even their minds and consciences are
defiled, Tit. 1. (...).
says the Apostle, and in particular, he says further. That in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of
errors, and doctrines of diuelles, which speak lies through hypocrisy, and
have 1. Tim. 4. 2.
their consciences burned with an hot iron, or be past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19.
as he says elsewhere. And in an other place yet: some 1. Tim. 1. 19.
having put away good conscience as concerning faith, have made Shipwreck. And
yet further concerning naughty men, andtheir pretended naughty consciences, as
they speak, not to be flattered or borne with in dealing naughtily, the doctrine
and practice of our Savior Christ, is notable Look (...). 15. 2. 3. 12. etc.
for us to follow: as is expressed in the Evangelists. For our Savior Christ
themaccuseth, and takes up the Scribes and Pharisees very short, who would
seem to make conscience of the traditions of the Elders, defends or excuses
his disciples in breaking thereof, and regards not the offense taken at his
doctrine, and doing therein by the Pharisees, read the place, and mark the
whole. Now for the Conscience of the faithful, we hold with the holy Ghost,
that it is purged by the blood of Christ from dead works, to serve the living
God: and the hearts are purified, by faith, etc. And that phrase of the holy
Apostle, Heb. 9. 14.
myconscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, and the like would
diligently be observed of Christians, not Act. 15. 9.
to sever in them selves the testimony of conscience, from Romans 9. 1.
that heavenly testimonte of Gods spirit, as in deed not a conscience, but a
good conscience is required of us by God. Herevppon say I to these men, and to
their like, and to all such evil consciences of Infidelles, and other, as they
bring us in, that whereupon so ever they gounde their pretended Consciences and
what course soever they be entered into: for religion and spiritual exercises
in gods service, that as this doctrine of the scriptures is sound, true and
safe so theirs is hollow and untrue and the thing is not godly nor good. Great
is the judgment of God among them that perish, because they received not the
love of the truth, that they might be saved: Therefore to send them strong
delusion that they should believe lies, that all they might be damned which
believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Ye did run well,
says s. Paul to the Galat. who did let you that you did not obey Gala. 5. 7.
8. 9. 10.
the truth. It is not the persuasion of him that calls you. A little leaven
does leaven the whole lump. I have trust in you through the Lord, that you
will be none otherwise minded, but he that troubles you shall bear his
condemnation, whosoever he be, etc. I would to God the very first words of
this Apostolic sentence might be verified in all that call themselves Roman
Catholics, and continued still in us, and that with the Apostle in the last
sentence we might trust well of them, as we are assured the middle part may
too truly be applied unto M. howlets persuasion and such like.

Where they hold both (M. Howlet) and his Author this general doctrine: how
good soever the action in it self be, or how true soever yt thing yt is
affirmed be, as for example in case of religion, etc, that which is done
affirmed by a Jew, an Infidel, or such like, yet if it be otherwise thought of
in his sight, or if it be agaiust his understanding, judgment, and conscience,
as they speak, the doer, affirmer, and inforcer thereto, shall be damned for
committing a deadly, heinous, and grievous sin.` This as it is deducted
seems to me a strange Paradoxe in divinity, grounded (gentle Reader) possible
on some man's devilish wisdom, and reason: but surely upon a very false and
dangerous Catholic principle of Popery, and sauouring altogether of ye
stinking puddle of that devilish religion, yea of the Devil of Hell himself
the father and author of that religion, which thus I represent unto thee out
of the writings of the greatest doctors of that side: And yet saving that they
have opened this filthy cave, or styrred the (...), for the diuelishe
wickedness and filthiness thereof, would I have spared thy Christian ears:
but that necessity and the indignity of the matter, to utter their shame and
villainy wherewith they stain both heaven and earth, enforces, seeing the
matter is thus far brought, to speak thereof,

There be two cases of conscience, or conclusions of their Popish writers: the
one of an erroneous or naughty conscience, and the bond thereof: the other of
perplexity, wherinto men as into a straight are driven by this doctrine and
religion, whilst of necessity they must do evil and cannot Look (...). 13..
Item, Council. Toletan.
choose: whereupon (M. Howlet and his Author ground their Paradoxe, or
strange opinion, of which the one depends on the other. And both upon that
sentence of Gratian 28. 91. par. 1. and par. Ex (...) quod contra (...) fit,
(...) ad (...).
in his golden decree: All that is done against conscience builds to hell
fire: which being well expounded, might stand though: but by the Popish
doctrine, for some to abstain from evil be it never so villainous, to do good
be it never so precious, is or may be against conscience, in them or against
their erroneous and lying conscience, this position is theirs and utterly false.

Therefore for some say they to abstain from evil be it never so villainous,
to do good, be it never so precious builds to hell fire. Again the law of
nature may be dispensed with (if two evils so press as of necessity yt one
must be chosen:) for such cases their perplexity makes, etc. Popery can
entangle and snare men's consciences, it can trouble, disquiet, yea provide a
slaughter house for them, relieve and quiet them it cannot. Though it be not so
hard to enter this perplexed Labyrinth or Maze, as to get out of it again when
one is once entered, so deep are the quiddities I tell you, and the questions
greatly doubtful, the examples also many and strange, that in this case are
brought to hold men occupied with all, yet get out or help other therein as I
may, by Gods goodness, I will enter by the Angelical doctor D. Thomas, whose
doctrine and Commentaries have the allowance of the highest and greatest of
that side, as a truth falling from heaven, confirmed also by heavenly visions,
as approved above; Upon the Epistle to the Romans, and the fourteenth Chapter,
which place (M. Howlet,) and his fellow would seem to ground upon, and to
whose writings herein we are sent, the willinglier do I propounde him, thus
writteth, D. Thomas, under questions propounding after his manner, his subtle
doctrine by obiecting, answering, and resolving: D. Tho. in Comentar. in 14 ad
To.
It may be doubted (says he) whether if a man have an erroneous or naughty
conscience that he believe that yt which is mortal sin, is necessary to
salvation, whether such a conscience bind him: So as if he do against the
same, he commit damnable sin: He resolves not only upon the Epistle to the
Romans, but also in his Sum or common Places, and elsewhere: that an
erroneous or lying conscience in things of themselves simply evil binds a
man; so that he that does against it highly displeases God, or as they
speak, sins mortally or deadly, or to use our men's words: it is to the
doer and enforcer, a damnable sin, or horrible mortal sin, and the one and
the other shall be damned therefore. Hereupon rises yt second doubt or question
of perplexity in this case, whereinto men are brought of sinning damnably
every way, in following their erroneous conscience, or in doing against the
same, and by implication at length, the Magistrates and civil Authority,
Kings and Princes themselves are wrapped in like perplexity and damnation,
for dealing with such by enforcement to do against their wicked and diuelishe
conscience.

These are the perplexed questions and resolutions in the case of conscience
whereinto these profane questionists and schoolmen tumble such men's
consciences as believe and follow them, without ever being hable well to help
them out again. They make of the sacred scriptures. A tennis ball to toss,
and to play withal, they greatly disgrace and obscure the same in troubling the
pure fountains thereof: And having entangled, troubled, and snared men's
consciences with their quidities, by abusinge gods gifts, they highly please and
pleasure the Devil, and highlye displease and dishonor Gods majesty, leaving
a testimony and example to all posterity of Gods heavy judgment, against all
such as with unwashed hands (as they speak) that is irreverently handle the
holy word of the eternal God: But let us prosecute their question, and answer
whether an erroneous conscience in things simply and of themselves evil do
bind a man, so as if he do against the same he commit damnable sin: be it
in commaundinge to do evil or forbidding to do good, all is one. D. Thomas
his answer you hear, is always one and like him self affirmative and yea:
The reason why, is rendered in his sum: 1. 2. (...) 19 Art. 5.
because will follow the direction of reason and understanding, or conscience,
as he speaks: for he makes conscience the prescriptio^ of reason, be it
right or wrong, Omnis voluntas discordans a ratione siuerecta sieve errante
semper est mala.
which reason when it does err propou^deth to the will good for bad, and bad
for good, or tells under a show that that which is good is naught, and that
which is naught is good: and so will accepts, allows, and follows the
same, and thereafter is the will good or bad: for the goodness and badnes of the
will depends on the object yt is on yt which is propounded unto it of reason:
whereupon he concludes that we must say that every will is simplye or utterly
evil always, which disagreeth from reason: be reason right, be it wrong, be
that it propundeth true, be it Arist. (...). lib. 7
false. And all this is grounded forsooth by D. Thomas upon Aristole, who
says that, simply to speak: he is incontinent that follows not right
reason: but accedentally or after a manner, he that follows not false reason.
Here is false and lying reason, under title of good and truth, prescribing
evil and falshod, and contrarilye under title of evil and falshod forbidding
good and truth: Here is will following false reason accordingly in accepting or
refusing that yt is thus offered. Here is lastly man himself bound under
pain of damnation neither to will, nor to do against yt which is by this
false reason or conscience thus prescribed. What usually now follows but
execution, or action, and doing thereafter: we may here iustlier cry out I trow
with the holy Ghost and Gods word, than M. Howlet, and his Catholics do of
his pretended Riot: woe be unto you that say, evil is good and good is evil:
Woe be to that conscience, woe be unto that man that thus is guided, yea, that
is bound under paineof damnation, not to do against the evil that false
reason, propounds him under the show of good, but to reject that good, that
it propou^deth him under the show of evil: Or which is all one, not to leave
in this case that which is evil, not to accept that which is good. Such blind
leaders of the blind, must needs at the length fall both into the ditche.

But for better explanation of this whole matter, let us see some of their
examples given us in this case, of an erroneous or lying conscience that
binds. There want not I warrant you in these men's examples taken from men's
doings, according to this erroneous conscience against both the Tables of Gods
commandments, the first, and the second. M. Howlet, and his fellow gave us
two examples, against the first Table, of a Jew and an Infidel in denying the
Trinity, and the Messiah, or Savior of the world. Look upon their words
before set down, and there may you find the same: Add to them another example
set down in their Popish decrees, in the margin in great letters, (...) is
called the marrowe of the gloss: The Jews had sinned mortally or deadly, if
they had not crucified Christ, which rises upon this question, whether the
Jews were bound in conscience to crucify Christ, yea, or no; a deep and
worthy question among these men. And because (...). 13.
D. Thomas is so great a man in their books, to make even with them, join to
this, one example more of him against the first Table in his Sum in the place
before alleged. If to believe in Christ be propounded to a man as an evil
thing by false reason, the man that will believe in Christ does naughtily, or
the will accepting to believe in Christ is naught, because the thing is evil
in the apprehension of Reason, albeit simply and in deed it be good: clarkely
resolved, and like an Angelical Doctor. Now if you will have a Corollarium,
or a conclusion, for a Surplusage in this first Table: Take the questions, that
upon this error of faith and conscience in matters Lib. 4. did. 30. Cause. 29.
9. (...). glos. ibidem.
of the first Table are moved, and determined in other subtle school
writers, as namely this is one, in ye Master of the Sentences, and repeated in
the golden decree, and allowed. If the devil transfiguring him self into an
Angel of light be believed to be good, when he faigneth him self to be
good, it is no dangerous error, and if the devil should then demand of
some simple body: whether he would be partaker of his blessedness, and he
should answer that he would pass into the devils fellowship whether
should he being thus deceived, be said to have consented into the
fellowshippe of devilish damnation, and not rather into the fellowship of
eternal brightness: It is true, that this man sins not (says the gloss)
whereupon going yet further, it is demanded by Friar Holcot, Holcot. May.
(...). super. lib. 3. (...). 1. Art. 5.
whether one worshipping the diuill transfigured into the shape of Christ,
being deceived by inuinsible error or ignorance, as he speaks, be excused
from Idolatry; Answering, he says: I said that not only he is excused
from sin, but he meriteth as much as he should merit if he should
worship Christ, if he did that lay in him to discern whether he were
Christ or no; proof and reason why, one among the rest is, because the
prescription of Conscience, when it is erroneous byndeth as much as when it is
true. But John (under whose name this case is put) has the prescriptio^ of
conscience though erroneous that that which appears unto him is to be
worshipped as God: ergo, if he worship not, he sins mortally. In sum
John's worshipping of the devil as God in this case: as not sinning in
following his erroneous cso^cience and sinning if he do not according to the
same, is besides reason warra^ted of this man by ye M. of ye Sentences, by
Austin and the common gloss. In the next article is demanded again by M
Holcot (...). 6 (...).
whether any man may merit by a false faith; In this article he answers and
says shortly that one may merit by a false faith in many cases. It is a
common case among the people: he puts many cases to prove his saying, and
that some taken out of the Scripture, very clarkly you must suppose, among
other he says: Put case that some old wife hear her prelare (a great
matter I tell Dc quo ipsa (...) habere (...).
you) preach some heretical article whereof she is not bound to have any
faith perticularlye, I express his word as well and as plainly as I can:
yet she for the obedience she bears and good will to believe whatsoever the
Church believes, agrees willinglye to that he says, (which is heresy)
thinking that the Church believes it, the case being thus, we must say, says
this Robert Holcot, that this old woman in believing heresy does merit or
do a meritorious work, as they speak in Schools, because she believes an
error which by no means can be imputed unto her, that that is to be believed
which is condemned, and therefore by implication she believes the contrary,
because she believes that this is the true faith: Nothing is true but that
which the Church believes to be true, And therefore because the implicate
faith is true, although the explicate be (...). Implicita.
not true whereunto she is not bound, but she is deceived (...). Explicita.
by simplycitie, therefore is there no danger to her of error. Not much unlike
to this, has Peter Lumbarde the M. of ye Sentences a question and answer,
which also is repeated with approbation by Gratian, which possible gave
occasion to Holcot, to move and decide his. If an heretic (says the M.)
should under the name of Austin or Ambrose etc. offer himself to some
Catholic, and Lib. 4. (...). distinct. 30 29. (...).
call him to the following of his faith, if he should agree: into whose faith
should he be said to have consented? Not into the Sect of her etikes, but into
the sound vprightnes of the Catholic faith, which the heretic lyingly said
he had. Much more I trow if a Catholic prelate propound heresy. Here is
heresy propounded by a Catholic teacher, and by an heretic, here is the same
heard, received, believed, and consented unto, without danger, here is the
party excused, nay defended to do well, and to merit, or to do a
meritorious work. What can be said more in commendation of the best works
that men can do, the best works that men do, come in deed short of this
degree. In this diffuse and intricate disputation of Erroneous conscience, in
matters of Faith, religion, and doings of men, in the first table of Gods
commandments, moved and resolved by questions and answers have thou, in these
men, a view (gentle reader) of some of the deep mysteries of the popish
religion, which, what sound matter of godly edification they contain, I
refer to thy godly (...) and judgment further to examine: and (...) to
examples in the Second Table, wherein their veastly (...) in this case of
erroneous conscience is yet better and more easily seen; in cloking, and
excusing (...) sin.

Let us take but the seventh commandment only: Thou shall not commit
adultery. To note how the breach thereof, under ye pretense of error and
conscience, is (...), which example is common, and comes often with these
virginlike Friars. Thus says your Master: if a man leaving in his country
his wife, and going into a far country matrie another, and afterward
repenting would leave her, affirming that he had another which is alive: and
the Church suffer him not, being ignorant of that he affirms: Here is
demanded whether in this second knot there be marriage; Surely it may be
said; that it is not marriage, and that the woman is excused of crime by
ignorance but that the man has committed adultery: It is well, thus much is
confessed, mark that well: But that, Lib. 4. Senten. distinct. 38.
since the time, that being willing and not able to return to his first wife)
he is compelled by the Discipline of the Hug. 4. se^tent. cap. 4.
Church to retain and keep this second woman: he begins to be excused
(mark this stuff) by obedience and fear, for this, that he, if this second
woman require it, lie with her, of whom he never ought to demand the same:
And so have we to judge of other like cases, thus far the Master. Here
where the parties conscience moves him to leave sin and evil and to do
well, must he sin and do against his conscience being good; and ye see why
and how, the authority of the Church, and the Popish discipline is great, I
tell you, and in perplexity he may be dispensed withal. If his conscience be
naught he may not do against it under pain of damnation. Again, here is
whoredom confessed, and yet mark how the party that commits it, is
excused. Thus is the man's conscience in perplexity for the sin of whoredom
clarkly relieved in excusing his continuance therein. But the Lib 4. senten.
distinct. 30. cause. 29. q. 1. and 34.
Master is some where holden, some where not of all, which though in this
case, wherein I show what he holds it make no great matter, if some follow
as hugo or who ye will; some follow not: yet (...) will they (...) C. Si
Virgo. Ignorantia excusat eum qui nesciens dormiuit cu^ sorore vxotis suae.
swear for him in another place, wherein he is holden and followed: That a man
lying with his wives (...) by ignorance is excused, if she come to his bed at
unawares, it is called the ignorance of the person, for he took her for his
wife, and lay with her with an husbandly affection as with his wife. It is made
Jacobs case with Lea forsooth etc. But with what conscience shall he be
excused herein; 1. 2. q. 19. Art. 6.
with the very same I trow that the master, the Council, and the Cannon law,
and pronounces him to be excused, yt (...) with a naughty and erroneous
conscience, as they speak: For I am sure by a right conscience, he never
shall be excused before God, from committing incest. The Similes that they go
about to prove this matter by there, are even like stuff, and the same we
have heard before. The gloss and the marrowe set down more: If a Q c. Illud
relarum. par. par ex vtraque.
married wife be lain withal ignorantly, there is no whooredome committed.
And again, whooredome is not committed without guile, etc, And yet a little
before, If a woman's husband be dead, and she believe he be alive, if she
marry she is guilty of whoordome though she have not committed whooredome,
says the gloss, such I tell you is the force of an erroneous and lying
conscience upon this excuse of Whoredom, and the dentall yt it is any, is
grounded on that which Gratian elsewhere tells us: That if a blind man
believing he lies with his wife, defile another woman he is not guilty of
whooredome, because blindness is like ignorance: but if casting a Darte, or
shutting, he hap in play, etc. to kill any man, he is guilty (says he) of
murder. This is good Divinity among our English Roman Catholics See the
defense of the Apology, part. 4. cap. 1. divis. 1.
at this day, as besides those that now write may be seen in M. Harding a
Proctor even for the Stews, and a mainteiner and enlarger of that filthy
common saying: If Harding in his detection.
ye live not chastely. do it charily, which he ralleth good counsel, and
pertaining to layefolke as well as to Clerks, Si non cast tamcu caute.
Oh gentle companion. But to keep me to the Angelical Doctor Friar Thomas
our men's great Author, Thus in this matter of an erroneous conscience not
disagreeing from the rest writes he in his sum, If reason or conscience err
in this, that a man think some woman coming unto him in his bed, is his wife,
and she demaundyng it, he will ye with her, his will is excused, and is not
will, because this error proceeds of a circumstaunce which excuses and
causes the thing to be inuoluntary, In these examples; may a man lively
behold, as in a (...), the foundation and ground of M. How lets doctrine, and
his fellows in this matter of conscience, which is even by their doctrine,
profession, and religion, to thrust forward their Catholics or Scholars and
followers, for want of help, that way belike headlong into hell fire: I am
weerie and ashamed of these beasts villainies, I will therefore conclude, and
end this diuelishe doctrine, for this point, where I began it with D. Thomas,
upon that text of Scripture, that these men use to prove this matter by, even
the +. to the Romans, that we may see their faithful and holy expositions,
the abusing of the text it self, I examine in his place. For the Question and
resolution of an erroneous conscience binding, let the reader remember what I
have before set down out of D. Thomas. His examples (...) be: If a man think
he sin mortally, except he steal, or commit fornication, whether he may do
against that he thinks, or against this his erroneous conscience, (as he
names it) without mortally sinning or no? He obiecteth after his manner,
first, the Law of GOD, which forbidding fornication and (...), binds
strenglyer then conscience: next he (...) perplexity in sinning every way, in
committing fornication against Gods law, and in not committing fornication
against his conscience: But he resolves generally even like him (...), as ye
(...) before, and for fornication particularly (...): If a man believe that not
to commit fornication is mortal sin, or to abstain from that vice: whilst
he choseth not to commit fornication, or to abstain from it, he choseth
(they be his words) to sin mortally, or deadly, and so does he finne
mortally. And hereto makes that ((...) he) which the Apostle here speaks.
(...) lying spirit.

No we (...) that which is objected to the contrary (...) out of the law of
God, he (...) up the matter and cuttes it of very shortly thus: that hinders
not, that is first objected of the law of God, because there is one, S. Paul
(being demanded we must suppose whether this Thomas had attained to his
meaning in his Commentaries) in vision answered him, yea, as much as man's sight
can conceive, the Crucifixe also answe red, thou have writtten well of me
Thomas: the church believes and says so. It is as true as the Gospel with
Papists.
and the same bond of a conscience, even erroneous, and of the law of God:
for conscience does not appoint any thing to be done or avoided, but that it
believes, the same is the law of God: for the law is not applied to our
doings, but by means of our conscience. And yet gentle D. Thomas, as little
account as ye make of the law of God the authority thereof, and bond over
men's consciences, here equalling the bond of a noughtie and lying conscience
therewith: if it be the commandment of your Church, of Prelate, it binds,
though conscience be to the contrary. Besides, if a Prelate command any
thing that your Subjects conscience tells him to be contrary to the law of
God. It is answered according to Bonauenture, that he is bound to lay away his
conscience. etc. and obey, yea, if he have probable, and discreet, though not
manifest and evident belief: for obedience, let him do that which is
commanded him, because he is bound in such a doubt so to do, and is excused
for obedience sake, but let him by no means do it of his own will, because
he may not for that he should sin mortally etc. As for perplexity of
sinning, every way whereinto we are brought by this doctrine, which (as they
teach) is while men be in the briars: sometime between two mortal sins,
sometime between two venial, sometime between a mortal and a venial sin,
thus they speak. D. Thomas says, that also is no hinderance to this doctrine:
for it is no matter though one be perplexed by some suppositio^, though no man
be simply perplexed: that is upon condition unless he put away that erroneous
conscience, or he is perplexed while that conscience remains. But here is
plain contradiction and falling out between these doctors, as there is not
sound agreement, in that they write of an erroneous, or lying conscience
binding: for the case being thus supposed that they may not do against their
conscience though it be Erroneous and evil upon pain of damnation. Then
comes in M. Howlet, who (...) with his author, sometime says of him self
and other such Catholics here, yt either they must renounce God by doing that
which in judgment and conscieuce they condemn: be their conscience right or
wrong it is no matter: all is one: or else sustain such intolerable
molestations as they cannot bear. A hard strait, especially seeing, as he
says elsewhere Conscience depends of judgment and not of will, and so cannot
be framed and reduced to conformimitie, etc.

Here is a diverse and doubtful speech of conscience, and a great extremity
that men be now brought into, as seems by this doctriue, what shall they
do; shall they, to burst out or come forth of this maze, choose the less
evil as they are willed in their canon, and by Gregory, which is Distinct. 13.
contrary to that: we may not do evil that good may come Bonauentur. Summa
Angelica. etc.
thereof: or shall they change their pretended consciences, yt surely is the
best, and so are they willed to do, enen by some of their own writers: As for
that bond of erroneous conscience Augustine. D. Thomas. 1. 2. Q. 19. Art. 5.
that they pretend it is none at all, nor of conscience simply, other wise
then with God, and under him: Augustine says well (as D. Thomas, can allege)
that the commandment of the inferior power binds not, if it be contrary to
the commandment of the superior power, as if (...) under governor of a
Province, etc. bid that which his Emperor or head governor forbid: why did
he not answer that objection so, where the Law of God, and conscience
command contraries: For I pray you in all reason, is not God, and our bond
of duette to him expressed in his word written, above our conscience, and all
duty to man, if comparison be made, namely the same being confessed (...)
erroneous and lying; But ( M. Howlet says) that can not be in him, and his
fellows, without (...) of God, but that say we is false, we utterly deny it:
as that also is, that such a conscience depends of judgment and not of will,
when it is their own mere wilfulness, and a foolish, and false opinion and
persuasion, or else if they needs will refuse counsel, under hope to deceive
the Prince and State here, and by their Rhetorical and cunning lying, to
bring them to their bend at last, where they she we themselves very confident
and bold. Let them stick still in their supposed and condition all
perplexity, that is, in their filthy mire, which is but a vain opinion of
their own, as their own writers alsosay: So we may be free from such
Gloss. in did. 13. etc.
naughty, vain, and diuelishe doctrine: Let them call unto them a heap of
Heretics, Idolatours, blasphemers, fleshly men, drunkardes, villains, tagge
and ragge, yea, the devils of hell, themselves, to acknowledge and embrace this
doctrine of theirs, and to profess this religion. Let them, if they needs
will, join hearts and hands together. Let them carry with them multitude,
antiquity, consent, their well meaning minds, as they call them, and what
they will besides, Let us cry: Hear o heaven, hear o earth, and be
astonished: Hear o Christians, Princes, and people, high and low, detest and
abhor this religion, and such Saints and Masters. Let us follow Christ
Jesus, the Prophets, and Apostles, their doctrine, and the profession of the
Gospel. I speak (...) this while but of Popish profession, religion, and
doctrine: I speak not of their life, behavior, and conversation, as fruits
of their doctrine. There remain in men infirmities: but such profession and
doctrine, or teaching in religion and life, I cry out upon, I defy this
religion, as most abominable abomination before GOD and man, and crying for
vengeance from heaven. And yet touch I but one part, and one branch that
these men pull me into, taking but their own examples in the first Table,
and in one commandment of the second Table only. I assure thee, ((...) reader)
that I loathe, and forspring thy ears (...) in this argume^tto enter into some
cases of conscience, so they entitle and crown their beastly filthynes, that
these religious, maydenly Friars, and saints, as they must be called,
propounde and set us down in their books, under questions and answears. Thine
ears would glowe, if in this point, thou should hear some of the
meditations and stuff, even of a book entitled, the Angelical Sum, of
Summa Angelica, de casibus conscienciae.
the cases of conscience, written by Friar Angelus in deed and name, as he is
reported: But away with this Popish religion, Fie on the Devil and his
doctrine and impes. Our English Romanists have at this day, as they tell us
three 1 Pet. 2. 2.
readers among them in the cases of Conscience beyond (...)
Sea; But if that great Romish Harlots breasts, yield her children such
sustenance, in stead of the sincere milk of Erasmus in vita August.
the word of God, or as Saint Peter's very words are reasonable milk, and
without guyle: for all their great braggs, for all their baits to catch
simple souls; we wish all men as they tender their own salvation, to take
heed of these Masters and their religion. It is written (gentle reader) of
Augustine, that he opened and set abroad the (...) of the Manichee Heretics,
because the very opening thereof, was enough to (...) and foil them. This I
hope will serve the reader both for his profit to this end, and for any just
defense upon the occasion ministered here.

Yet some what more for the matter, and our Sovereign, and this States just
defense in the execution of the wholesome laws here established for the abrog
(...) of (...), superstition, treason, rebession, etc. and the good (...) of
Christ's true religion, godliness, and honesty. Against these quarrel (...)
let me say in general, first to you Papists, whilst that under pretense of
conscience, ye thus provide for your selves in this per (...), imagining that
no justice can enforce you to do any act of our Religion: ye provide in the
mean while very selenderly, and very evil for the common (...), and for her
Majesty: for if this doctrine whereon your (...) examples are grounded be
generally true, That not in the doer only, but in the inforcer also nothing may
be attempted under pain of deadly sin, and damnation, against any man's
conscience, though it be erroneous, judging that which is mortal sin, to be
good and necessary: as infidelite, heresy, theft, whooredome, etc. Why not
murder also with the rest: How then shall her Matestie and the State make and
execute laws, to restrain lewdness; If they say: It is against their
conscience, not to do the things by law forbidden them, or to abstain from
the same as you do, they may not in justice be enforced to do against their
conscience, that is, leave robbing and other villainy: they may not be hanged,
punished, or so forth, for the same. Will you have the^ punished that under
pain of deadly sin and damnation are bound not too do otherwise then they
do, or contrary thereunto at least. A great burden lies upon them, and will
cannot be forced, nor they may not be enforced to do against their
conscience, though it be naught, Again, sir, necessity De consecra. distinct.
5. discipulosin glosa.
excuses both a thief, and a murderer by your Canon law and Doctrine, and
that more then for Whooredome, because necessity has no law. Again, in
necessity all things ought to be common, etc. Thus seems her Majesty, and
the State likewise to be brought into perplexity, by these men's doctrine,
that either they must leave of making and executing wholesome civil laws: or
else be found enforcers of some men, to do against their conscience: Whereof,
as this is by them accounted wicked and damnable, so the other must needs be to
the State and common wealth at least very dangerous. But this with them is no
great matter, where perplexity is, they must choose ye less evil, they well
deserve, these gentlemen, and the religion of God and his people; of Kings,
Princes, Civil Magistrates, and common wealths also. There is talk of
Libertines, Anabaptists, Householders of Love, and I wot not who else: But
Popery surely is a hotchpotche of all wickedness, the mother of all sectcs and
heresies, and the nurcerie of all mischief: Thus do they seem to reason, who
so enforce men to do against their erroneous conscience, commit herein
horrible mortal sin, and are in a damnable case: But Magistrates by making
and executing penal laws upon traitors, thieves, murderers etc. pretending
conscience enforce me^ to do against their erroneous conscience: therefore
magistrates by making and executing penal laws upon traitors, thieves and
murderers, etc. pretending conscience commit horrible mortal sin, and are in
a damnable case.

Thus as in teaching that he falls and faulteth horribly that does against
that which his understanding, reason, or erroneous conscience, as they speak,
tells him to be good, though it be mortal sin: M. Howlet, and the
Papists open a window by their doctrine to the Libertines, and them that are
lead by inspiration, and pretend the motion of the spirit altogether to
cloak their filthy sin, and wickedness under, if they yet yt say; they may
not resift the motions of ye spirit, have not a better or not so bad a
pretense, but more religious then they that say: they may not under pain of
damnation do against reason, be it right, be (...) wrong, which is
Philosophical, and seems to be profane: So again by their doctrine of
inforcement, and their threat of damnation against the enforcers of naughty
men to do against their naughty conscience; they under. mine the lawful
authority of Civil Magistrates and their wholesome laws, made and executed
against sin and wickedness, and agree too well with the Anabaptists, and
such other as allow not of Magistrates: but as we highly thank God for her
Majesty and this Gospelling state, of whom we receive this double benefit,
first of heavenly doctrine and religion; whereby men's consciences out of Gods
word are rightly instructed and informed, and these vices and transgressions
reproved, and they enforced to haunt public assemblies, and hear their duty
there showed them that either are ignorant or wilful: Next, of public
honesty and peace, maintained among us by laws, and the (...) of the same,
pretend they conscience or whatsoever, condignely restrained, and by severity
punished: So again, do I tell them in a word that Christ's religion taken
out of Gods book, if they have grace to enter the profession thereof, will
ease all this matter, and void and clear that which they defusedly, and
darkely, and dangerously teach, of an erroneous conscience and the bond
thereof, and of perplexity: for in Gods book, they shall (...) no such
stuff. But the matter being well and duly examined their persuasion will be
found by that book, to be nothing less then conscience, and there we are
commanded to do that only that is good, and forbidden to do that is evil,
we may not do evil, no not that good may come thereof. Or if that like them
best, let it bear the name of adiuelishe conscience, and so to be reformed,
or otherwise to abide the smart which such wickedness justly deserves, (...)
out especially, to the hurt of Church and common wealth. Ground therefore
gentle (M. Howlet) your conscience hence forth upon Christ the true rock,
and his heavenly doctrine, and let Popery go: Or else be content to reform
the same by that rule, wheresoever you have grounded it before time. Hear (if
not me in this case) yet some of your own side, to induce you heereto. Be
not too much addicted to your D. Thomas, and your own conceit, stay not
obstinately on the text of your Canon Law. Be content to hear the gloss, if
he mend the text and say better. Though there be of your side that say: An
erroneous conscience binds as strongly as a good Rob. Holcot. super senten.
lib. 3. q. 1. art. 5.00.
conscience, and that in the worst degree it binds a man to do according
unto it, So as if he do contrary to it, he sins, so as his conscience
abiding such, the man is perplexed, till he put it away, and an other way his
erroneous 1. Doing contrary to (...) conscience is sum. 2. Doing according to
erroneous conscience is not (...).
conscience binds him so, as if he do not accor ding unto it, he sins,
If he do according unto it, he sins not, which is John's case of
worshipping the Devil: Yet is there again some even of your side that say
(...): Where a man's conscience bids him, that is contrary to the law of
God, it binds him not to do it, but binds him to lay away his conscience,
which if (M. Howlet) and his authors, and other our Roman Catholics at this
day would have consulted withal, or hearkened unto, they would I suppose,
not have made so evil a choice as they do, but have written otherwise then
they usually now do, following herein the worser sort of their Doctors. The
words of their own gloss in Commentary upon the text of their Canon, not
bearing the untruth thereof in the matter of perplexity, corrects ye same, so
forcible is Gods truth in some, even in most popish days: the words of your
gloss contrary to the text are these.

But we must say no man, can be perplexed between Gloss. in distinct. 13.
two evils: because thence it would follow that some man of necessity
should be bound to do evil: but the Canon says, that God would never
render destruction: except a man were found willingly to have sinned, as 23.
q. 4. Nabuchodonosor ver. vasis irae. Moreover if, of necessity we were
bound to do any thing: the law that forbids it should be impossible,
where as notwithstanding every law ought to be possible, as before distinct.
4. erit. Perplexity therefore as touching the thing it self is nothing but as
touching the mind and foolish opinion of some man, there is some perplexity.
Wherefore the Jews were not perplexed unless in mind, and therefore should
have asked counsel of the wiser and better learned: as of the Apostles or
holy scriptures, etc.

Now return I. M. Howlet, to the particular examination of your words,
which that I be not driven to repeat, I desire the reader to peruse a part as
I have before set ye same down: You make your entrance into this great and
religious matter of conscience, by a profane sentence taken out af Aristotle's
Rhetorique, but how ever this may serve Philosophical, and your School
divinity: wherewith the (...) of Christ's Gospel has of some time been too
much bastarded, yet thanks be to God, he has opened our eyes to see and
discern between man's wisdom, (...) are Heretics, Patriarchs: says
Tertussian, against Her, mogenes, (...) rome, etc.
and the heavenly truth, so as being forewarned by the holy Ghost, to beware
least any man spoil us through Philosophy and vain deceit, according to the
tradition of men, according to the rudimentes of the world, and not according
to Christ, etc: We mean to take as good heed of your vain speculations, as
God shall give grace: that is only good to every man (say you out of your
Philosopher) which each man's understanding tells him to be good, unto which
the Scriptures and divines (...). How then, are the counselles and ways of
the Lord, and those of men so opposed in the scriptures: the one approved and
allowed, the other rejected; How is it so much and so often cried out upon
in the Scriptures, and men severely forbidden to follow their own ways, or to
do that which seems good in their own eyes: but that always, and alonely,
which is agreeable unto the Lord, upon whose direction, if we be his, we
wholly depend. There is hardly any thing more dangerous and hurtful for men
to follow, then that which is here made the fountain of all good unto the^:
Did not God, to draw from following ye direction of man's understanding in this
life, give his people holy laws and commandementes, to distinguishe between
good and evil, and continually to direct them by, that they might serve him in
holiness and righteousness, in his presence, Luke 1. 74. 75.
in his sight, or before him all the days of their life, that is: so, and in
such order as he in his holy word appoynteth and auoweth; If any be in
Christ, he is a new creature: Says the Apostle, etc. How far differs this
holy doctrine 2. Cor. 5. 17.
of God, (as meeter and better for Christians to receive) from that profane
sentence of M. Howlet; that is only good to every man which each man's
understanding tells him to be good, etc. Is it even so in deed; fie of that
divinity: the holy Ghostes divinity, you see is clean contrary; It is yet
further written. There is none that understands, Romans 3. 11, 12. etc.
there is none that seeks God, all are gone 1. Cor. 1. 19.
out of the way, etc. And again, I will destroy the wisdom Esai. 29. 14.
of the wise, and will cast away the understanding of the prudent. Has not God
made the wisdom of the world foolishness; etc. The wisdom of the flesh is
enimitic agianst Romans 8. 6. 7.
God: death, etc. O Lord I know (says the Prophet) that the way of man is
not in him self, neither is it Iere. 10. 23.
in man to walk, and to direct his steps. And therefore the heavenly wise
man says further also: All the Prou. 16. 2. and 21. 2.
ways of a man are clean or right in his own eyes: But the Lord pondereth
the Spirits. And this made the heavenly Prophet and king, though he were very
wise, yet leaving his own understanding to have recourse herein to GOD by
prayer: Thy hands have made me, and Psalm. 119.
fashioned me, give me understanding that I may learn Iud. 7. 3.
thy commandments, the steps of a man are ruled by the Lord: how can a man
then understand his own Prou. 20. 24.
way; says Solomon. And the reason is rendered elsewhere: All the imaginations,
or devices of the thoughts of man's heart (says God in Moses) are only evil
continually. And again, The Lord knows the thoughts Genesis 6. 5.
of man, that they are vanity. And the Apostle yet further: and. 8. 21.
The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise be Psalm. 94, 11.
vain: The heart is deceitful and evil above all things, who can know it?
etc.

Better a great deal and more consonant to the doctrine of the scriptures than
you, spoke that old father of the 1. Cor. 3. 20.
Greek Church when comparing man's understanding Ierem. 17. 9.
with divinity and divine matters, he said. There can be nothing (...). in 2.
worse than to go about to discern and measure Gods Tim. 1. bom. 2.
matters with man's reason: for so falls every one from (...). in 1. Tim 1.
(...) 5.
the foundation of faith, and is carried far, wandering about with error and
is forsaken of the light. etc. You see it is blasphemy (says he in another
place) to go about to discuss divine matters with reason, so has man's reason
compared to Gods matters, nothing common or agreeable, If we shall finally
consider (says he in yt former places) Idem (...). 5. (...). 1. Tim. in (...)
verba: (...) Satana vt (...) non (...).
that Marcio^, Manes, Vale^tinus and other that brought in wicked heresies and
pernicious doctrins into the church measured divine things with humane reason
(look upon your own fathers M. Howlet and take them by the hand) We shall
find that so at length they became ashamed Chrisost. in. 12. Joan, Hom. 65.
of the mystery of the holy incarnation, etc. Whose heresies also elsewhere he
fathereth for their beginning upon the Gentiles and Philosophers. Augustine
also a latin doctor retracting that which he had aforetime too philosophically
written hereof against the Academikes says lib. 1. (...). (...) 1.
thus: as touching man's nature there is nothing better in him then
understanding and reason, but he that will live a blessed life must not live
according to that, for so lives he after the manner of a man, where he should
live agreablie to God, to attain to happiness; to come whereunto the
understanding or mind may not be contented with it self, but must be subject
to God. etc, Amongst many other, let this here suffice, to show generally how
well man's reason or understanding agrees with God, good divinity and religion.

For your Philosophers sentence, taken out of Aristotle's Aristo. li. 1. (...)
Rhetorique, which you make so great account of in divinity. Let us examine it
yet a little more. First M. Howlet which has been and is your common fault,
you cite not your sentence truly out of the Philosopher, if ye read it not
there your self, be better advised another time: if you knew the matter and
willingly perverted it, your fault is the greater. Leave therefore both these
faults, or else give us leave to reprove both in you. Look upon your place
in Aristotle, (...)
consider his purpose, which is to show whence a man may take his proofs in
consultation, referring the same to profit, which is his drift, and this
profit he calls good. Then let the reader hardly examine and confer
Aristotle's words with M. Howlets. Thus find I Aristotle in this matter:
amongst diverse other things that profit and help in doing matters whereof me
consult, some simply and acknowledged amongst all, some in part for certain
respect and allowed of some men, al which he calls good, as with him; good is
divided, into honest, profitable and pleasant things. Whatsoever things
(says he) understanding would deliver to every one and whatsoever things the
understanding, of, in, or about, every thing, delivers, that is to every man,
or to every thing good, he does notsay, that only is good, which reckons up
a great sort of marks to know good by. Besides neither does he say, each man's
understanding, and so include corrupt men's understanding, how bad soever it be,
as in religion, you do here Heathen men, Turks, Infidels and your selves
Papists, etc. In civil Recta ratio, men's (...). Orandum vt sit men's sana in
corpore sano. etc.
things understanding needs to be civil, and you know Aristotle in the
matter of virtue and good, speaks often and much of right and good reason:
and ye hear of a sound mind in a sound body among the very heathen. Neither
yet does he confound a man's understanding with the testimony of Conscience.
Furthermore, Aristotle, can distinguishe this word good, as ye know, not into
honest, pleasant, and profitable things only, but into things good indeed
and apparently good, simply and generally, and of it self good, and sometime
particularly, and good to us, etc, these things and such other circumstances
are necessary to be known, to understand rightly even in philosophy the
sentence ye fetch out of Aristotle's Rhetorique. Again, we must know he
speaks of good in his rhetorique as it is the subject or matter of an
Orator. And what is that, to speak of good, as it belongs to divinity and
a Divine, or to a Christian, who for his actions or doings must fetch from
God, and his will and approbation, that that is good, and try it by the Touch
of his word and Law, which is our only rule to know good and bad by, and not
our own understanding. It were not to be marvelled at then though Aristotle,
as a philosopher and wise heathen man, making understanding and reason as it
were a Queen or Prince in this little world man, to sit in his mind for doing
civil things to rule, prescribe, command, order and make lawee, to the
inferior parts as the will and affections should speak thus, and more too
in moral philosophy. And yet ywis this Prince is many times but ill
fauouredly sighted, and worse followed and obeyed: the truth and experience
also tells us farther yt men's minds are corrupted, their understanding
blinded, and become so weak and dull, in heavenly things in deed, to speak
no more; that too (...) now, can they or will they tell what is good and
godly: one that is pooreblinde, has but an evil eye: to direct and guide a
man's body aright. A blind eye guides yet worse or nothing at all: and yet
this is of it self man's reason and understanding to lead him in good and
godly things. I think your self will grant me, for the most part; unless
the eyes of our understanding be lightened by Gods holy spirit; and framed from
above. The light of the body is the eye, (says our Savior Christ) if the^
thine eye be single thy whole Mat. 6. 22 23.
body shall be light: But if thine eye be evil the^ thy body is dark. Wherefore if
the light which is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness; If
therefore thy whole body shall be light having no part dark, says he, in S.
Luke) then Luke. 11. 36.
shall all be light, even as when a candel does light thee with the brightness.
Your D. Thomas half a Philosopher, and half a Divine could yet decide the
matter thus out Psalm. 4. 7.
of the Psalm. Many say who shall show us good things; the light of thy
countenance Lord is marked upon us; as though he should say: the light of
reason that is in us, can so far show us good things and rule our will, as
1. 2. q. 19. art 4.
it is the light of thy countenance, that is, taken from thy countenance: the
natural man is not capable of the 1. Cor 2. 9. 10
things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishnes unto him; neither can he
know the^ because they are spiritually descerned (says the Apostle.) And
again: the things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard,
neither came into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him:
but God has revealed the^ unto us by his spirit, etc. Do not the contrary
opinions that be in men's minds, not of the common sort only, where as the
common saying is verified. So many men so many minds, but even in the wisest
and grauest Philosophers Quot capita tot sensus. Quot bomines tot (...).
themselves, declare the defect that is in man's understanding to guide him by.
What Philosopher ever knew himself aright; not knowing the corruption of man's
nature. Did not one of the greatest of them profess that he knew this
Stoikes, Peripatetikes.
only: that he knew nothing: was not the name of wisdom and wise men
refused among the wisest of them. And Academikes, Epicures. etc.
they content to be called but philosophers, that is lovers of wisdom only,
Did not the Academikes confess and profess the uncertainty and weakness of
man's mind (...)
and understanding; What understanding of man ever conceived the mystery of
Christ's incarnation: that the word was made flesh, or that one should be borne
of a virgin, and such other mysteries of our religion; In deed they were no
Mysteries, if man's understanding could reach and attain unto them. Flesh
and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven,
says our Savior Christ unto Peter confessing Mat. 16. 17.
him. Is that only good to every man which each man's understanding tells him
to be good? then farewell in effect all goodness in Christ's religion, Did not
the imagination and opinion that there are many Gods, greater and lesser. etc
proceed from this puddle of man's understanding; whiles he would thereby
measure the nature of God: Whence grew all the superstitions yt ever were in the
world: but from yt vanity of men's minds, their understanding, Romans 1. 21. 22.
and reason. Well says the Apostle that men became vain in their reasonings
and their folish heart was darkened when (...)
they professed themselves to be wise they became fools etc. Is that only
good unto every man, which each man's understanding tells him to be good: How
if man's understanding and the word of God disagree as they do too too often,
shall that only be good for him, that his understanding tells him to be
good. In the Infidels judgment and conscience, it seems good to say: there
is no Messiah, it must be good for him, by your doctrine to hold that, and to
yield (...) do thereafter is not wicked. The doctrine of the Libertines and
such as hold and teach that hand over head, men should follow the motions of
the spirit, less absurd then yours herein; you say that is only good to
every man which each man's understanding tells him to be good: they say the
spirit moves me to this or that therefore I must do it: goodly words of
youres in Aristotle's philosophy and so forth, theirs in divinity, with
better show then youres, which yet you would make us believe, that scriptures
and divines agree. But leaving the rule of the scriptures and Gods law, both
are very dangerous and evil to rule men by. How far are ye of, from that
pernicious doctrine: that every one shall be saved by his own religion, unless
possible you will have all men saved without any religion, if that only be
good to every man, which each man's understanding tells him to be good. The
Idolaters understanding tells him that idolatry is good, the blasphemers that
blasphemy. etc. here is a confusion of good in deed The wiseman says that the
way of a fool is right in his own eyes, is that and that only good to him;
neither of both surely: for he adds. But he that hears counsel Pro. 12.
15.
is wise. What is to say: evil is good and good evil: If this be not; to say,
that is only good unto every man which each man's understanding tells him to
be good.

But let me give you an example out of the same book of your Master
Aristotle, that you here allege, because that possible may more prevail with
you, speaking of many honest and commendable things, in praising as he does
in your place alleged of many good and profitable; in counsailing he
teaches, that to be revenged of ones enemies, rather then to be reconciled is
commendable, and renders the reason: for (says he) to render evil for evil,
or to requite, is a just thing, and every just thing is commendable. The
Doctrine I ween, learned out of this your Master Aristotle the Philosopher,
made you to invent Vim vi repellere. you know what it means.
lies of the faft at Stamforde, to quite, as you say the Puritan, and to write
many such like things, as we read in this your Epistle dedicatorie. To be
even with one, is a just and a commendable thing: but how ever this quite the
(...), it is quite contrary to the Scriptures and heavenly doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles. Your Master Aristotle, also in the same place you cite,
says: those things are good and profitable, which every man is most affected
and dilighted withal, as the Warrior with victory, Math. 5. 38. 39. 40. 41.
44. etc.
the ambitious with honor, the covetous with money, etc. scripture and divines
to agree with this hellike doctrine; God forbid: We have better School
masters then so, Romans 12. 17. 19. etc.
thanks be to God. Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Iam. 1. 17.
Father of lyghts, etc. even to this father of glory must we pray for this gift
of wisdom, and revelation, through the knowledge of him, that the eyes of our
understanding may be lightened, that we may know what the hope is of his
calling, etc. It is a second grace and gift, that I may so speak, above and
beyond nature, and the light thereof, or each man's understanding? Your Saint
Thomas, if you would have consulted but with him, would have told you as
much. Search the Scriptures: Are ye not therefore deceived, because ye know
not the Scriptures, John 5. 39.
etc. says our Savior Christ, hear him. As all Mar. 12. 14.
points of Divinity and Religion would be grounded on Gods book, and the
Scriptures, not upon the Philosophers, and Rhetorique: so especially, when
there is question of conscience, or of doing or not doing thereafter, in
matters of religion, should we have recourse unto that heavenly (...): but
ye say, The Scripture and Divines agree to this sentence of the Philosopher,
when they say: That we shall be judged at the last day according to the
testimony our of conscience. Make this sentence playner, and expound it not by
the first, least both fall out to be very false, and very pernicious; the
better of the two, make of it what you can, is very perplexed, dark, and
doubtful, at least as you set it down and follow it. This may be propounded
in lecture among you by him, that is your public reader in the cases of
conscience, but we have seen to much of your School divinity and diuelishe
doctrine in conscience, to haunte your Romish lectures, or receive that is
therein taught, and professed. Our senses are better acquainted with the
phrases of the Scriptures. If this latter sentence be all one with the other,
and first cited out of Aristotle, the^ might you have spared your Philosophers
Rhetorical sentence, and rested upon this which ye pretend, to take out of
the Scripture and Divines. The heavenly Scripture has no need of man's
wisdom, to be understood says one, but (...) yt revelation of yt spirit:
but first I tell you, I find not yt words Christom. in Genesis cap. 5.
ye set us down in those Scriptures, which ye quote us in the margin, ye
tell us of being judged at the last day, Hom. 2.
according to the testimony of our conscience, ye send us to 2. Cor. 1. and
to 1. John 3. The Apostle in the place ye point us, speaks more particularly,
of the testimony of a good conscience, only, and of his own that he had in
this world, his words be these: Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience: that in simplicity and godly pureness, not by fleshly wisdom, but
by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, etc. Mark
here, that Saint Paul had his conversation in the world, not directed by his
own understanding, As your Philosophical sentence pretends, not by fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God in simplicity, and godly pureness. 2 Cor. 1.
3. 3.
The testimony of such a conscience, is a goodly matter, and to be rejoiced
in, in deed let it be, if you will a (...) feast, etc. And this is the odds
here, between a heathen and a Christian life, yet does not the Apostle in this
place say generally: that we shall be judged at the last day, according to
the testimony of our conscience, neither yet of him self says he so much,
speaking of the testimony of his own conscience. Though I deuy not, but yt
faithful being received (...) by gods mercy, and ingraffed into Christ by
faith, shall have matter of (...) in a good conscience, and in well doing, even
at the last day, But you carry it further. The Apostle, in another place,
speaking of his fidelity in his Ministry, and of a better conscience still,
then you seem hereto note, shows yet a higher Judge rather and more sharper
of sight, who will judge him more thoroughly, then according to his own
understanding and conscience: Nay, as one that durst not justify him self,
though his conscience charged him with nothing in his function, he rejects
that judgment from himself, and from all men also, as unfit and
insufficient: unto the Lord himself, who at his coming (...). Cor. 4. 3.
(...). 5.
will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of
the hearts manifest. The other place ye cite, to show we shall be judged at
the last day, according to our conscience, is, out of Saint John's Epistle,
where thus it is written: (I must guess, because ye neither set down the
words, nor the verse) For thereby (...). Ioh. 3. 19. 20. 21.
(that is by loving in deed and truth) we know that we are of the truth, and
shall before him assure our hearts: For if our heart condemn us, God is
greater then our heart, and knows all things. Beloved if our heart condemn
us not, then have we boldness toward GOD. Here the Apostle speaks of that
boldness, and entrance with confidence, that the faithful here have toward
God, by Christ Jesus, and by faith in him, and of the benefit thereof: look
S. Paul. Ephe. 3. 12.
which, as by a certain mark is expressed by true and vnfaygned love, and of
the lack of this full persuasion, again, what a loss it is: here is nothing
spoken of our being judged at the last day, according to our conscience. And
this is all I find of this matter, in the places of Scripture here alleged.
De doct. chri. lib. cap. 10. and lib. 1. cap. 40.


For the Divines that ye talk of, because ye quote us Augustine alone for all,
and send us to two places (...) him, and the matter is not great what is there
said, I refer it to the learned Readers judgment, that is disposed to
examine the places. You report here and bring in Austin for proof that we
shall be judged at the last day according to the testimony of our conscience.
Where Austin speaks not of the judgment of the last day, in neither of both
the Chapters. Consult therefore with them, from whom ye took these places,
that they may appoint you fitter for the purpose; or you better follow the
simplicity and sincerity of the sacred Scriptures. If ye say Austin, name
conscience, or speak a word thereof in both the Chapters. I grant you: (...)
you must remember with all: that every thing may not be gathered of every
word: The two places much agree, and the first ye recite has relation to the
latter; he says not that which you speak here. Again, speaking very
briefly, as for a conclusion of his first book of Christian doctrine Of this
sentence of S. Paul, The end (...). Tit. 15.
of the commandment is love, out of a pure heart and of a good conscience,
and of faith unfeigned; he shows wherefore the Apostle put in that clause, of
a good conscience Aug. de. doct. chri. lib. 1. cap. 40.
which he puts for hope says, Austin. Learn you also says M. Howlet to
add this word good to conscience: join it with faith, and keep that bond
or knot that the Apostle makes in this sentence. And so if you can apply it to
your self, ye shall not only have great matter of rejoicing: but her
Majesty, and the laws also I doubt not, to bear with your conscience, and to
tender the same as reason and equity would: and besides because the same
shall be found to agree with Gods word, and to be grounded thereon, we shall be
as ready to auowe and allow thereof, as we now are to (...) the same, for yt it
is so directly contrary to the word, and therefore neither for you to flatter
your selves in, nor meet for the State to allow or bear withal. We doubt
nothing but that the testimony of a good and upright conscience is of great
weight and force and to be respected and hearkened unto: So that we remember
still (...) a pure heart therewith, and an unfeigned faith, which must ever have
the light of Gods word go before or accompany the fame, in the faithful,
that under the color of conscience, other persuation, or the rule of reason
deceive us not. The (...) of all is: I would have you know conscience a right,
and distinguish well between a good and a naughty conscience by the
Scriptures. For the accord or agreement between your two sentences, one, and
the first, taken out of Aristotle's Rhethorike: that is only good unto every
man, which each man's understanding tells him to be good. The other, as is
supposed out of divinity: that we shall be judged at the last day according
to the testimony of our conscience. Make them you agree, as you can, I cannot
see the agreement between them. Understanding is one thing, and the testimony
of our conscience is another thing, good to every man now, and (...) at the
last day be two: Finally, the two sentences, as in words, so in substance and
meaning, seem utterly to disagree, I would therefore, whereas you say: the
scriptures and divines agree unto the Philosophers saying: you would or could
have made the Philosophers saying agree with the scriptures rather, which
though ye shall travel, as ye do, by enticing speech of man's wisdom, to
perform: Yet all is but in D. Thom. 1. 2 q. 19. arr. 4.
vain, the thing will never come about. Let Philosophy go therefore, and the
Philosopher in testing the fountain and rule of good (...) us Christians. Let
Gods word and law, or the holy Scriptures be our rule there in alone:
according to that: there is one rule and measure for one thing: let reason
Vnius vna est regula and me^sura.
in (...), and with your S. Thomas if ye will be the (...) of (...) actions:
let yt spirit of god be yt beginning of all good in us that be (...), (...),
and other. Augustine, a Divine whom ye (...) in this matter, Tomo. 3. Senten.
excerpt. ex August.
says very well against your first sentence of Philosophy in this sentence of
his: Faith opens the way to understanding, and (...) it. And again, as is
alleged in your own decrees: All the life of the unfaithful is sin:
neither can it be good, that is done 28. q. 1. (...)
without God: for where there lacks the knowledge of the enternall,
unchangeable truth, there is false virtue even in the best behavior and
manners. And concerning the phrases and manner of speaking of Philosophers and
divines how different they ought to be, thus says Austin: Philosophers
speak with words at will, and in matters very hard to understand, fear not
the offense of religious ears: but we that are Christians and (...) have Augu.
de Ciuitate Dei. (...) 10. cap. 23.
a law to speak after a certain rule, least liberty of speech or words,
breed wicked opinion of those things which are signified thereby. And thus
much concerning your two sentences and the agreement thereof, whereupon all
the rest, that follows here of this matter seems to be grounded.

Of your propositions thus taken from Philosophers and Divines, ye say it
follows that whatsoever we do contrary to our judgment and conscience, is
according to the apostle, damnable, because we decerne it to be evil and yet
do it, But that which the Apostle here says, for all your whatsoever and
false gloss, must be understood in those things, which are lawful, says your
own D. Thomas in yt very next sentence and verse before yt last; upon these
words, which are yt ground of that that follows, Blessed is he that
condemns not himself in that he allows. That moderation should ye have
kept, but ye do not: for ye say, be the action in it self never so good,
and the man that does it never so bad (as seems) for you name us a Gentile or
Heathen man, and to confess there is messiah, yet because it seemed naught in
his judgment and conscience, therefore to him shall it be accounted a damnable
sin at the last day. Hereby it appears ye hold: that at the last day the
testimony of a (...) judgment and naughty conscience; even of an Heathen
shall be admitted to clear him from evil, and to condemn him for doing good,
or that any man shall be damned at the day for acknowledging there is a Messiah,
against his wicked judgment and conscience at least; will there not be other
matters sufficient and I now think you, to condemn such men for: but that
such cases and causes as these unwonted and unmentioned in the Scriptures,
should after they be by your heads devised and moved, then also be
alleged; This is profane and vain babbling and brawling which breeds
questions, rather then godly edifiyng which is by faith: which thing the holy
Apostle S. Paul so carefully warns his scholars Timothy and 1. Tim. I. 4.
7. and 6. 4. 5. 20. 2. Tim. 2. 16. 23.
Titus in many places to take heed of, and to avoid, they may beseem your
scholding disputes, your subttle schools and readinges, they beseem not her
majesty's ears, they agree not with the divinity schools of the holy Ghost.
Did Tit. 3. 9. and ep.
your testimonies of Scriptures and Divines you set us down, teathe you this;
or whence had you it; shall we be judged at the last day according to the
testimony of our Treatise Fol. 57. page 2.
conscience be it good, be it bad, must we be judged by that only? Shall it
be now good, and then good and so always good, to the Gentile to deny the
Messiah; because his understanding, judgment and conscience tells it him to
be good? etc. This is a marvelous and strange Paradoxe, the foundation and
building thereon are much alike. Is there no difference nor odds; Before I
further examine the matter you tell us: Let me a little consider how you
handle the holy Scripture with your foul hands, or our evil favored claws,
and how untowardly you allege your testimonies still; because we decerne it,
to be evil, and yet do it: Ye quote us for it: Romans 14. though ye name no
verse, yet your words seem to send us to the last verse of the Chapter, which
hangs on the words before, and are a reason rendered. Ye cite the words
falsely and corrupt the sense: Which that it may the better be perceived, I
will set down both your words and also the Apostles. Thus you: Whatsoever we
do contrary to our judgment and conscience, is according to the Apostle,
damnable, because we decerne it to be (...) and yet do it. The Apostle thus:
He that doubts, Romans 14. 23.
if he eat, is condemned, because he (...) not of faith. And whatsoever, is
not of faith is sin. The Apostle speaks particularly, and of a certain
matter which restrains his note of universality: You generally without any
restraint or observation of the circumstance of the text, and matter treated
of: he of a faithful man and of faith: You give us an example of a Heathen
man, and talk at random of our own judgment and conscience, he speaks of
eating, which is an outward action, and of it self as they speak,
indifferent: You in a far otherkind of things of their own nature good or
evil. We acknowledge, in sum the holy Apostles words and sense, we find not
yours in the text ye send us too. And it is an ill commentary that corrupts
the text. The Apostle says, because not of faith.

Now because you have set down, in stead thereof, judgment and conscience,
you foyst also into the text, the word: decerne, Because we decerne it to
be evil, and yet do it. If you say you follow the Author of this your
discourse, with whom yet in citing this text, ye altogether Quod. enim exfide
non est. peccatum est That according to his conscience, hoc est secundum
conscientiam.
agree not, though ye both corrupt the same foully: As of him I speak in his
place, so let me here tell you (what opinion soever, greater then reason you
have, of your Master) we are not bound I tell you, to follow neither him
nor you in corrupting of the holy Scriptures, ye both put in the word
decerne, of your own, and ye put our judgment, conscience, or knowledge for
faith: which it seems, As S. (...) expounds it, etc. says, Gregory
Martin, whence possible all, or the most of this stuff was fetched by your
Author and you.
ye take out of your School men's Commentaries: But I would you would not
change the words of holy scripture, into your Scholasticall writers
expositions, and terms, and set us the same down for scripture still: If your
parenthesis here, (according to the Apostle) were thus, (according to our D.
Thomas, or School Doctors, etc. or according to our notes, taken at the
Lecture in cases of conscience, then might it paraduenture stand right: but
the Apostle and your D. Thomas, or School doctors, etc. not 1. 2. q. 19. Art.
5.
being one, you take to much upon you, and we can give you no such licentious
liberty, to use the ones name for the other, I see (...) you drive: It is a
principle with you that Birds of one feather, must fly and hold together.
Error agrees very well (commonly) with error and falsehood: Your common
translation of the Bible, (like as your Scholemen) must be kept and followed
inuiolably, not to be checked nor corrected by the (...) or Greek text under
pain of the Popes great curse, hence belike you and your fellow, would seem
to take your word: decerne, But sir, there is falsehood in fellowshippe,
though your eyes, M, Howlet, could not possibly discern, neither by day nor
by night, every letter and syllable, and therefore might easily be deceived, in
taking one word for another, yt were somewhat like; yet ye Author of your
treatise, me thinks, might have looked better to ye matter, if it had bin but
for deceiving of you herein, and many other yt follow him. Where both of you
have it decerne, even your common translation, if ye look well on it, has
discern, Now Gramarians yt show yt etymology Discernere, Verbum forense.
of words will tell you, yt discern, and decerne, be two words different in
signification: discern: is to put difference beetweene things: decerne, is a
higher word of judgment and authority, whereof we call A decree, etc. And
your Pope decernimus statuimus, etc. They that leave both your word of
decerning or judging, devised by your selves, and discerning, which the word
of your vulgar latin Translation, in this last verse of the 14. chapter to the
Romans, and translate it by the word of doubting, as both in Latin and
English is done, have both better, and (...) rendered it, and expressed by a
fit word, the meaning of the holy Ghost also. Cauell not here at, nor bark
not at our translation, for leauiug here your vulgar, and common translation,
he leaves himself in another place, and translateth this very word, as our
men do here. But dogs will bark, even at the Moon. You must be content
to (...) your own law, and to give us leave to deal Iam. (...). 6.
with you truly in that, wherein you untruly take to your selves liberty
against us, you so pry into our translations, and translating of the
Scriptures, that the least fault must be espied, yea, where there is none,
fault must be imagined and devised, and we roundly taken up, and compared to a
Trea. Fol. 40. Page. 2.
boy in a Grammar School, that should be brecht, so ye speak, and further,
and worse to, whereof in his place. Leave your decerning, judging, and
discerning: leave (for shame) your corrupting of the holy Scriptures, in word
and sense: leave your caueling, and carping at our translations of the Bible:
use in all, a better, and more upright conscience, then hitherto.

For the matter of an action good in it self, and the example ye bring us in,
devised of a Gentile, that should for fear, say or swear that there were a
Messiah, it is altogether impertinent, and besides the Apostles purpose, who as
I said, treats not in that place of things simply good, or evil, or of
bearing with a thing evil in it self, and of the own nature, much less
with impiety or superstition, he speaks but of outward things, he
speaks not of Gentiles, or Infidels, nor yet of obstinate Christians, that
walk stubburnely, utterly condemning the profession of the Gospel: but of a
brother, a faithful man, and one that has received and embraced the
profession of the Gospel, and is weak through ignorance of some one point,
partaining to Christian liberty, in the outward use of Gods creatures, wherein
he is not yet thoroughly instructed: of bearing with such a one, by those whom
God has called to more plentiful knowledge of his heavenly truth, speaks
he. Again, the manner and the end of bearing must be considered, which is not
to nourish error, or to obstinate and harden the weak in their opinion and
doing: but rather to draw them by all means we may from error, and to
advance them more and more in the knowledge of the truth. The Apostle calls
it before in this chapter edification when he bids us follow the things
which concern peace and wherewith one may edify another, or as he speaks in
ye beginning of ye next chap. Let every man please his neighbor in that which
is good to edificatio^. Lastly, the matters ye Apostle here speaks of
particularly, would be considered, which are not al outward things, but such
as God himself was author of in his Law. As distinction of meats and days,
which while the Jews, being won to the Gospel did in those days retain,
though they did it ignorantly not knowing the liberty of the Gospel, yet (till
they might be fully persuaded therein by faith, which is grounded on doctrine
and the word, they were vounde to keep by the commandment of God himself.

These circumstances considered, it will not be hard to spy out M. Howlets and
his fellows ill dealing in this place, and to have the true sense and meaning,
which if it be not wrapped and obscured with subtle quidities taken out of
school questions, will plainly enough fall out of it felfe thus: that the
faithful for his particular regard being in doubt or lacking the full
persuasion of Faith (which is given by measure, and has his time of growing
and increasing) can not without danger, nor should not attempt to do that
wherein he is not by the word of God and faith, yet thoroughly resolved, when he
may without danger of offending, abstain from the outward action, not
stiffely standing nor flatering himself in his opinion: but moderating his
doing by the gift and measure of faith, which he has, ready upon further
instruction and knowledge to grow forward and to profit. A thing verily in
his kind much to be commended, and greatly to be borne with, is this respect
of conscience, not to rushe into the doing of every thing without all sense or
remorce of conscience, not to attempt things, or presume to do the same,
except the mind be thoroughly persuaded that God is therewith pleased, which it
cannot be but by faith, and faith is grounded on the word of God. Christ
shall not break a bruised read, nor quench the smoking flax, says the holy
Ghost. I would we all considered this point better then we commonly do, both
in our Esaias. 42. 3.
selves, and in those with whom we daily and usually live, Math. 12. 20


But what makes all this doctrine of the Apostle either for Gentiles and Dogs,
that never were in the church or for papists, and other obstinate and wilful
heretics that break out of Christ's true church; do flatter themselves in
there follyes; unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure
(says the Apostle,) but even their minds and consciences are defiled. etc.
What makes Tit. 1. 15.
it against her Majesty and her upright and equal laws to stay the execution
thereof; against superstitious and sedicious persons bursting forth into
violent acts and attempts against her Majesty's royal person and the state,
and her most peaceable and quiet government, to follow that man of sin, the
Pope of Rome, it makes greatly. Against you M. Howlet and your fellows that
abuse so great lenity, much to the clearing of her Majesty, and the state in
meeting with your obstinacy makes it greatly. M. How let tells us here of an
Insidell that should say there were a Messiah. etc. And his fellow in his
discourse of a Jew too swear that there were a blessed Trinity against their
consciences. What a sin it were to the doer and to the inforcer. But this is
none of their case, nor her Majesty or her laws in dealing with the^. They
have had now above these twenty years the preaching of the Gospel. And I
trust, if not they that too unchristianly and unnaturally of late have
withdrawn themselves from God and prince, to betake themselves to the Pope,
yet those that live under her Majesty's government, and in her dominions, shall
more and more (which God also grant) have the same daily to inform and direct
their consciences aright in all godliness and honesty Such is her highness
godly and tender care over us al. She like our good Prince forces nones
consciences, but very mildely proceeds by order and law, as she needs must,
to restrain the fury and pride only of such as make dissension in Christ his
body, corrupt his sincere religion, and grow perillousto her royal estate
and the realms. If this touch you M. Howlet, or your fellow hot catholics,
thank your selves, you teach here that it is lawful to restrain by temporal
punishment such fellows, and her Majesty takes it so to, Not as allowed by
the church (which is your popish opinion) but as given of God and warranted by
his word. For herein also I tell you, we differ from you, that you make the
civil magistrates authority; to hang of the churches allowance, as you here
insinuate, so to bring princes under the popes check. We go higher and say
that the authority is immediately given them of God, and from him over every
soul within their government, and so depends on the ordinance of the eternal
God and his word. We say your church challenges too much and haleth things
too fast to it. Magistrates wax every day more godly wise than other, and will
not be easily abused as before time.

Ye speak of recalling home by temporal punishment such as you account
heretics to ye unity of Christ his body, again, Your doctrine herein, and your
violent practice scarcely agree; when you get the temporal swoorde on your
side. Is that to recall them home; By fire and faggot to con sum them to
ashes, which is your manner: These are two diverse ends ye know, learned,
unlearned, young, old, men, women, no sort and degree spared. If her majesty
and her laws repute you papists for heretics (as justly ye may be reputed)
what have ye to say for your selves; A bare denial only: retaining still
popery and heresy in opinion, and broching the same still among us, will
hardly serve your turn, if you be put to it Be more equal and mild toward
other unless ye look to have the same measure measured to you that ye meat
to others and that with a great deal more vprightnes and better conscience.
But I am in doubt your, Catholic Church will never leave the tricks of a
Stepmother or a strumpet rather. Ye know ye story of ye two women's pleading
before king Salomo^, for a child, either alleging her self to be the
mother: but when the living child should have been killed and divided at the
Kings commandment, the true mothers heart was moved with compassion: and
could by no means yield or abide 1. King. 3. 26
to have the child killed, but the other that pretended only and was not
indeed the mother, was very forward to have it killed and divided. I will
say no more: but I would you hot Catholics and your popish church, had but
half that compassion, and tenderness of heart, and respect to men's lives, that
the profession and the professors of the Gospel have. But it is not in you,
there is a contrary nature and a contrary dealing in the wolf, and in the
shepherd and the sheep, Your hands have been too long imbrued in the. blood of
Gods saints, and it is the proper mark of your bloodte Antichristian church.
It is that, ye glory in; God, amend you, if it be his blessed will, or else
cut you shorter, Be your self judge herein, M. Howlet. If you tell us your
conscience in deed: or let the world tell. To whom you refer us, in comparing
her majesty our most dread sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and her peaceable and
mild government (having been so greatly disturbed and provoked to the
contrary) and other princes, and the former times, that have not been
acquainted with the profession of the gospel. And again you say, and truly
that her majesty's noble and Sect. 6.
merciful disposition is known and renowned, through out the world, The
world (you say) does know how that the great mercy and clemency of her
Majesty, has stayed oftentimes and restrained penalties from their execution
and from the overthrowing of diverse men etc. It does so indeed, and so does it
by experience of the sharp executions done aforetime by your procurements, and
the overthrow of diverse both men and families, which feel the smarte, at this
day. As you call your selves Catholics and us protestants, yea heretics at
pleasure, so in like manner say you, and say only; your religion is the old and
so ours must be the new religion, we are gone out from you, and not you from
us. etc. But leave these (enuiously devised) doubtful and rackt terms of
yours and us. etc, and have recourse to the scriptures: Let us there and thence
make our plea, and then you shall be found to be that ye call us, and we to be
that you would so fain chale^g to your selves, to beautify your evil cause: as
it needs. Else let the word of God be judge between us: and look who be found
to have swarued from the Prophets and Apostles doctrine; or (...) have gone and
fallen from that and them, let those be heretics, Spare not, In the mean
while, in our just defense let our denial suffice to answer the unjust (...)
and accusations bringing only words without any proof.

Concerning the comparison ye make of her (...) and this state, with other
princes and states, not Christian only, but Turks and Infidels, your meaning
and drifte therein may easily be espied. It deserves another answer than my
words, and yet to clear herein both our sovereign and the state toward the
world, I told you before that your case is not like to Turks and Infidels:
Besides, her majesty and this state, are not bound to follow other Princes
examples, she being as free as they are, in ye government of her people; when
doubt may be made: First whether that be true you tell us of Princes and their
order of governing Infidels: Have you been brought up among the Turks: have
you travailed into the Indies and far parts of the world that you tell us
of, to know this you report us of the Infidelles etc? Know you of your self
that this was never yet practiced; Or go you by report only, I think you take
it at other. Next doubt may be made by Princes and states, whether they you
talk of, use those Infidels that be under their government well and
uprightly, and whether even in this point they do well or no; that being
supposed which you affirm of them, which thing they had need and will
understand too, before they (...) bound to follow their example in governing
the people subject unto them. This is reason, and princes over other princes
and states, challenge no such superiority of prescribing, in order of
government as you here too unadvisedly do. Neither are princes too curious to
enquire, examine and judge, how the rest order their subjects in such cases,
but content themselves with ruling their own people in ye fear of God,
according to their own duty and Gods word. I add yet further, that whereas
you allege, It was never yet practiced, nor ever thought lawful by the
Catholic church, that Infidelles should be enforced to any one act of our
religion. And running still to your D. Thomas, say vide D. Thomas. etc. I answer
2. 2. q. 10. (...). 8.
and say, that Thomas his question is, Whether Infidelles are to be compelled
to faith or to believe. Which because it is above man's power to do, as being
the gift of God, or as he speaks, To receive faith, pertains to the will,
and the will cannot be forced. Therefore no mortal man may as seems, take
upon him to force that which he cannot perform: But your question is of
perfourming any act of Christian religion, and coming to Church, the one,
that is faith is a heavenly inward gift, and is in the heart, the other, that
is coming to church etc. is an external and outward act, and a profession
of religion, or an inducement and outward exercise and means to bring us to
faith, and to increase and continue the same in us. Now we say that the civil
magistrate has not only authority from God, but is of duty bound to
maintain Gods honor, and as a principal part of his charge, to see the
commandments of the first Table of Gods law outwardly kept and performed by all his subjects, without exception, so much as he may: punishing the
tra^sgressors also: unto which honor of God, and first Table of his
commandementes pertain the acts and outward exercises of Gods true service
and christian religion. As then we highlye praise G O D daily for her majesty
in this behalf, and for the singular care she has over us her poor
subjects, to provide us of preaching, and other means to bring us to God, and
to further us in all godliness: So do we tell you plainly, that her Majesty by
authority may (and does therein, but her duty) enforce you to haunt Church
Asse^blies, to hear the preaching of the Gospel, etc. Which be the proper
means to begin, increase and continue faith and godliness in you and us. Her
part, her care, and charge it is, to provide and take heed nothing be put
upon her people in Gods matters, and his service, but yt which is warranted by
his holy word, which whilst her majesty is occupied in, you disturb her Godly
proceeding too much out of season and time, and too undutifully, D. Thomas eue^
in his question of Infidelles, says. They are to be compelled yet, of the
faithful if they have power, not to hinder Chtistes faith or religion either
by blasphemies and railing, or by naughty persuasions, or else by open
persecution and violence, etc, Mark well your D. Thomas his points. Now if
Infidelles, which were never Christened, may be compelled in these things by
your Thomas his judgment, much more may you be restrained in your rages, and
violente and unreasonable dealings: punished for your disturbances, and
printing and spreading of seditious libels and books, to the hinderance of the
course of Christ's Gospel amongst us, and the perverting and poisoning of
diverse; especially such as are of the simpler sort, and therefore easily
seduced. And this is not disagreeing from Thomas his words, though you cannot
abide, to have the same appli ed to you, be it never so true, in you, This is
your fault, D. Thomas tells expressly. Ye may be compelled to AdVincen.
sium contra epistola^ Parmeniani ad Bonifacium. episto. 50.
perform that ye have promised, and hold that ye have once received,. And
brings good testimonies against you out of Augustine. You I say, that have
been baptized into the faith of Christ, not of Rome nor the Popish church, and
hardely any one of you found, within this Realm or among you English
Romanistes, that being of age now leave this Realm, that have not in the time
of the profession of the Gospel here, gone to Church, and done other acts of
our religion at one time or other in blessed king Edwards days, now, or both.
Again ye know that your D. Thomas his manner in his sum, commonly is after
he has objected against the truth, to set on the contra ry side, that he
takes to be the truth, and in this question, after he has out of other men
objected: That Infidelles are by no means to be compelled to the faith, he
adds as it were of his own. But of the contrary side is yt which is said in
the. 14. of Luke, Go out, into the ways and hedges and compel them to come
in, that my house may be filled: But men enter into the house of God: that is
into the holy church by faith, Therefore some says he, are to be com pelled to
the faith. This have I set down that you may see what va^tage you have by
sending us to your S. Thomas and your other doctors, for indeed sir, to show
you might here have spared well enough in your margin Omnes doct. I could
further allege to the contrary your subtle Doctor. In. 4. distinct. 4. quest.
9. vltim.
John Scot, who had great followers. He holds herein, that it were godly and
well done: If Infidels were compelled of their Princes with threats and fear,
to faith and religion: Even against your D. Thomas, and that you here set us
down; You know or may know, how common a thing it is in your religion (not
in this Article only) to find the Scotists against the Thomists: Doctor
against Doctor etc. But I had rather unfold my self and the reader out of
these contradictions and braules of your Popish writers, then stick therein.
Her Majesty, besides that she simply and utterly takes not upon her by force
and violence, to compel to faith, as though she could give and imprint the
same in men's hearts, though she set forth, maynteine, and bind all her
subjects to outward means and exercises of religion, as I have said,
thereby showing what she wishes and drives unto, which she also uses her
self, neither sits she in the conscience of any, which is proper to your
Pope, his laws, and your religion: besides that her Majesty is free herein I
say: She moreover uses her self in this case so godly, so wisely, so
uprightly, and so moderately toward you, that deserve so ill, as if any
fault, may justly be found, it is in this: that some of you are not Conc.
Tolet. John. Scot. vt super.
straightlier looked unto, and more roundlier proceeded withal: But her
Majesty is wise enough. Zizebutus a prince, is commended in one of the
councelles, and in your own Distin. 45. ca. de Iudaeis.
Decrees, and counted very religious, in compelling to Christianity.

This is that in sum I would say unto you, for answer in this matter: For
as much as there is no society of people, so barbarous lightly, that live
without some outward exercise of Religion, and God has beautified and
commended Civil Magistrates in kingdoms, Common wealths, and Cities under
the title of Gods, and has ordained them as his Ministers for our good, that
we may receive praise from autortie in doing well, and in doing Romans 13.
otherwise, stand in fear, as who bears not the swoorde in vain: for he
is the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. Again,
forasmuch as this Image of God, is in nothing more seen, namely, in public
persons, and those of Authority then in procuring, promoting, and advancing
daily of Gods honor and service, by their power, and by giving and showing
good example to others: for which cause principally they are advanced, and as
on a mountain placed in Royal chair, that therefore I say, those Christian
Kings and Queens, who^ God has called to this honor, to be Foster Fathers and
Nurses to his Church and people, do Esai. 49. 23.
well, and very acceptable service to GOD, (and are highly and highly, to be
commended, and heartily and continually to be prayed for of all, for that the
adversary on the other side, is mighty and subtle, not only for ranging them
selves to Gods holy and true Religion, taken out of the sacred Scriptures, and
the outward exercises of the same, but for inducing also by the wisdom and
power given them of GOD, all people and persons subject to them unto the
like, by making good and wholesome laws, by encouragement, and by fear,
according as the quality and circumstance of place, time, and person, require
without all tyranny, and usurpation of the room, and place of the most high
God of heaven, over men's consciences on the one side; and yet without all
looseness on the other side, in omitting such opportunity and means, as God
offers for the benefit of the holy people, the Saints of the most High. I
speak of these, and of such as are by office called to public and high
charge among them, in Church and common wealth, even christian Kings, Queens
etc. Of who^ thus it is prophesied: The kingdom and dominion, Daniel. 7. 27
and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the
holy people, of the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
all powers shall serve and obey him. This seems to be spoken of Christ his
kingdom, and the time of the Gospel. etc. Now this consecrating of her self,
and her authority wholly to GOD and his service, to the benefit of his Church
is it, and it alone which her Majesty, in this case, of many years has, and
still does, to Gods glory, and her singular commendation, put in execution among
us her people, growing, I hope, daily from good to better: And this is that
also, which no honest, faithful, good man, can justly be offended withal.
This have I, if not overthrown, in your opinion perhaps, your bulwarks: yet
sufficiently for this matter cleared the truth, I trust her Majesty also, and
the state against your unjust quarrels and slanders.

13 Now proceed I with your words: Besides this, (say you) as no wise Noble
man, after many Ages of quiet possession, would suffer another to recover his
Barronie, without shewinge of very good evidence: So we in reason are not to
be blamed, if we ((...) held the possession of the Catholic Church in
England for these thousand years, by our aduer saries confession): do stand
with them yet, and require some evidence, before we consent to give up the
same, Hereto they have showed us none, but only words and forgerie: Lawless
proceeding.
they entered into possession, without trial of the title: they thrust us out
before sentence or proof: we cry out of the riot, and complain of the
wrong, and desire still that the matter may come to lawful pleading. And even
now os late since our new persecution began, we have made unto them diverse
offers with great odds, not pretending thereby any recovery of our losses (for
that we suppose to be impossible) but only for the iustifiyng of our cause,
whereupon the honor of God depends, and wherein we know we can not be
vanquished.

THus you amplify iolilie, with similitude and example, your long possession; as
ye say, of the Catholic Church here in England, our riot also, and violent
intrusion, and unjust, as you pretend, which you call: Law less proceeding.
You will by process, seem to call us afresh into the kings Bench, when we
appear, your action will bear no lawefull plea against us, you accuse us
hotly (M. Howlet) but as good an Attorney, or proctor, and solicitor, or man of
law, and counselor, as you are taken to be in the Popes cause, you show and
prove nothing against us in Gods or the Princes court, we thank God. Ye
suppose altogether: for you say, by our adversaries confession, that is for one
part: But we say, you say as ye are wont, that is untruly, for your Church
and religion, as they be at this day, are not of a thousand years
antiquity. Some part of your corruptions may be so old, we deny it not, some
part again are of later time. And heresies, we tell you out of Tertullian,
does not Newness so much argue, as Truth: whatsoever Tertullia^ de virginibus
velandis.
sauoureth against the truth, that shall be heresy, even old Custom, (says
he.) Again, your Jesuits, a new order of Religion, instituted about forty
years ago, or such such a thing, seem among us at this day, to be your
greatest pillars and stays, in this your new and strange proceeding, and we
here can scarcely yet well tell, what their religion is, nor where it is
grounded, so lately, though sudde^ly come they among us: but upon an obscure
fellow, and your Pope, Paul the third, you tell us is their foundation. And in
deed your Popish religion is such a confused Chaos, and heap, or a hotche
potche, that we can not tell certainly what to make of it, nor where to fetch
a proper and full sum of the Popish doctrine at this day, and a confession
of your faith: For, leaving the Scriptures to be the rule of your faith, and
coining us still so many new Articles, under the name of unwritten verities,
traditions, the Church, etc. Which the first and ancient Apostolic Church
was ignorant of; and referring us for all to your Popes breast. To be plain,
we can find no footing.

You take a similitude from a wise noble man, and quiet possession of his
Baronie many ages. Be as wise as ye may be, yet a similitude and example of
a meaner and a more base and vile person than a Noble man, of a Barn (M.
Howlet) rather than a Baronie, might fitlier serve to compare so corrupt a
Church, and rotten religion withal, as is Popery and the Popish Church: But
we must take such as you offer us. Your Prelates of the Clergy that rule
the Church, are Lords even over Gods heritage, they are Barons, they must
needs have a Baronie. No marvel, therefore though in respect of the^ and
their using of the Church, ye liken it to a Baronie of a Noble man that has
many ages held the same in quiet possession: Extrav. Joan, 22 Cum inter, in
(...) Credere Dominum Deum (...) Papam, non potuisse statuere prout statuit
(...) censeretur, etc.
Or if you speak of the whole Catholic Church, in respect of the unholy
holiness of the Pope of Romes fatherhood, the matter is brought to a higher
degree then a Noble man: he is called our Lord God the Pope. For quiet
possession, in deed I grant ye held that ye had in possession very
quietly, and made as sure as you could, not to be unquieted in your Palaces.
But a stronger, thanks Luke. 11. 21. 22
be to god, came upon you, and your god and Prince to, I mean the Pope and
Satan, and overcame you, and took away your armor, wherein you trusted, etc.
For the unfitness of your similitude, I tell you first, that if you liken your
selves to a Noble man, you must then liken the true Church to another, and not
to the Noble man's own Baronie: for that we hold agreeable to the Scriptures,
that the Church so likened, can be called no man's, but Gods or Christ's
Baronie only. In title of land Sir, etc. where prescription of time bears
great sway; many ages of quiet possession, be a great stay to Noble men's
Baronies, or others holds, especially where evidence and writings by sundry
casualities may be missing. In religion, (that I may give a further taste of
your unlikely likelihood, and Arnob. taduersus Gent. lib. 2. religionis
autoritas non est tempore estimanda, sed nu mine, nec colere qua die, sed quid
(...) intueri. etc. Aug. in quest. Vet and Nov. Test. quest. 114.
improper example) the case is nothing like: For, authority of religion, is
not to be esteemed by time, says one, That which is true, is not too late.
And yt good father again says: ye heathen say, That that is first, cannot be
false. As though antiquity and old custom may prejudice the truth: But (M.
Howlet) in going no higher for the age of your religion the^ a 1000. years,
and talking to us of quiet possession of many ages since that time, we answer
you first that our religion was above 500. year old before yours came into
the world, or your Pope were hatched, supposing you kept quiet possession, as
you pretend now a 1000. years. For we fetch ours from Christ and his
Apostles, who had lawful possession of the Baronie ye talk of, above half a
1000. years before you came to possession thereof. And if you will mark well:
those half thousand years before, were the beter, and more free from forgerie
and corruption, and therefore would be more regarded.

But now I pray you tell us how you entered into possession of ye Catholic
Church, a thousand years ago. For by inheritance once, we deny that it
came unto you or by descent. If there may be any lawful conueighance thought
of; the best (...) I see ye can with any probability allege, for the
possession that your Clergy ever had of this Baronie, meaning thereby the
true Church of Christ, was, that they held the same but as Tenaunts, and that
tenants at will too, standing upon their good behavior, to continue, or to be
cast out. The Noble man himself. the only Lord and Baron, that I may so
speak of this Baronie: is alive, and his Baronie only may the true Church be
called. If you mean that, in this similitude: neither yours nor any mortal
man's besides. Howeuer therefore you have holden the Catholic Church that way,
you have been but too long unjust possessors, and so lost you nothing that was
your own, when upon misbehauiour you were by Gods lawful Minister our dreead
Sovereign therein, thrust out of possession of this true Church here: as you
were once before within man's remembrance about xl. years since. So then, this
Baronie the Church here, is now the second time, to Gods glory, and our
inestimable benefit, lawefully taken from you: and you being dispossessed
thereof, it is restored or returned home to Jesus Christ the only true owner,
Noble man, heir, and (...) if ye will, of this Baronie. The same, through the
just judgment of God, upon you for your too too intolerable usage, is taken
from you, and by his infinite wisdom let out to other (...), who upon their
good behavior also, and no otherwise hold the same of him, who is bound
herein, to no men's persons, place, Sea, etc. You are the first I confess, the
more to your reproach, that infeaffed the Pope and his Clergy, into the
titles and right that are proper to God and Jesus Christ in his spiritual
kingdom, City, House, Uineyard, or Baronie, if you like yt best. Yea you have
proceeded thus far, that the Pope having taken possession, seems to
challenge the bestowing of this Baronie, on whom it pleases him, to hold of
himself in capite. Is it not much that you write that the Pope and Christ
make one Consistory, so as (sin except) the Pope may as it were, do all
things yt god can do, he and he alone, (...). de Tractat. Prelat. Cap. quarto,
Abbas. Clemens. de Sent: and reiudicat. Past oralis. 2. Q. 6. Decreto.
Decretal. lib. primo De translat Episc. (...). 7. Ca. 2 and 3. and in Gloss.
etc.
has fullness of power, he can dispense above the law who bears the person
not of a pure man, but of the true God upon earth: so that what is done by the
authority of the Pope, is said to be done by the authority of God, etc.

I leave here to put you in remembrance of Shilo, the temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord, Jerusalem, etc. in the old Testament. May it please you
to remember the parable of the wicked husbandmen in the Gospel, to whom the
Vineyarde was let out, and what Christ pronounced Look Ierem. 7.
against them to their hurt, for taking the inheritance into their own hands,
keeping possession thereof as it had been theirs, without yelding fruit to the
owner. To be plain, this is fearful for both you and us to remember, they to
whom Christ spoke, being builders, refused the head corner stone. What came
there of yt: What gained they by it: Put case your privileges and titles were
as good as theirs, and ye had the highest offices in Christ's Church in deed:
He by his eternal providence taking from you this Vineyarde or baronie, and
letting it forth to other Mat. 21. 33. etc.
Husbandmen, does you heerin no injury. Again, (M. Howlet) because you talk
of a Noble man and his baronie, remember well what befell those Citizens, that
after the Noble man was gone into a far country, yet to come Luke. 19. 12. 14.
15. 27.
again, sent an Embassage after him, saying: We will not have this man to
reign over us. But he again said, at his return, which surely will be: Those
mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither
and slay them before me. These words are so plain, as it booteth you not for
the avoiding thereof, and your excuse to allege: that you say not so. He
speaks of the will and deed. Again you know what the Psalm says, The
fool has said in his heart, there is no GOD. Psalm. 14.
No cauil will serve, al excuse and pretense is put to silence, before this
Noble man, of whom I talk. This way may you more (...), and with better
religion and conscience, yea, and more profit also apply your Simile. I pray
God give both you and us grace by these examples to be warned, and in time to
take heed to our selves.

But leaving the general account thereof to God and to Christ's return
thereto: further then, yt you are as we all, bound to render account here to
gods substitute, as ye call the Prince and civil Magistrate, if ye or we be
in the mean while called. Let us stand upon this point now that you say: you
have held the possession of the Catholic Church in England for this thousand
years, etc. In calculating ye time, I perceive partly what you mean, you hold
from Pope Gregory the great, a Roman Monk, who sent hither Austen a Monk
also, called of some the Apostle of England, as also Gregory is of some,
applying this Apostolic sentence to him. If he be not an Apostle to other,
yet is he to us English men, etc. According to this computation M. Harding
some where writteth: Thus the faith has continued in this land among the
English people, from the fourteenth year of the reign of Mauritius the
Emperor, almost these thousand years. Here is the foundation of your thousand
years possession, and of the English Catholic Church, ye talk of. Now what
titles soever be ascribed to these Monks, and in what price soever they be
with the Papists, we deny them to have been the first planters of the true
Christian faith in this land, and utterly unworthy to be therefore called the
Apostles of England: Of one and the greater it is said, he was the last of
the good, and the first of the bad Popes. The others entrance was with such
pride and disdain, and his usage such as made the Bishops of this land, not
to doubt only whether to receive him, but upon trial to refuse him as no man
of God. Superstitions might here be much advanced by this Pope, and his
Archbishop, and so might they be fit pillars for the Popish Church to stay
upon. But Christ's true, and sincere religion gained nothing by that. Briefly,
if by the Catholic Church, which you say you held possession of, so long and
many years here, as of your Baronie, you mean Christ's true Church and
spouse, because the same is his Baronie and not yours: for your injurious
sacrilege you are (...) thrust out of possession. If you mean yt Church to
be like a Baronie, so many years here possessed of you, that we call at this
day the Popish Church: then, as we have taken no possession thereof, so
because there is no good and sufficient warrant in our heavenly kings records,
for the erecting of any such Baronie as holds of the Pope of Rome in capite,
as this your Baronie does. And this Baronic besides has been found greatly
prejudicial and hurtful not only in spiritual matters to our heavenly king
and his spiritualkingdom, but in civil policy also to our dread Sovereigns;
the Noble Kings and Queens of this land: good and great cause both for yt one
respect and the other has there been, and is, of the dissoluing of this Popish
Baronie in this Realm. There can no such Tenure be justly borne in this
land, that holds of the Pope in Capite. There is of your side (M. Howlet)
that writes you hold in capite of the Pope: Whereupon you are justly retected
hence, this is none of his kingdom. If you will needs have such a Baronie so
holding in Capite, you must avoid hence, and go dwell in his kingdom and
Dominions. And so you do, and as seems are agreed and at a point: for the
Pope has now of late erected Nurceries to bring up his English fugitive
wards in, you call them Seminaries: In that court have you your Officers
accordingly, and your rules and orders to be guided by, you have made a very
evil change, if ye can consider it well: heereuppon possible, being weary
you would feign come home again into this land: But you would not change
the Tenure of the Pope in Capite, which you must do, or else the other is not
granted you, advise better of the matter.

You plain of our intrusion upon you without evidence. Our evidence is better
then ever you (...) to show, or well to avoid: we, and all the world see,
your evidence is little worth, as which is grounded on man, and mayntayned with
violence, and force, or with entising speech of man's wisdom, where that
fails, as now here, thanks be to God therefore. Our evidence are The
Scriptures, and the written word of God, say you as long as you will, It is
the Heretics evidence: We are assured that in Gods matters, it is the best
evidence that can be showed, and the evidence of the Spirit, or, of the holy
Ghost, who is the Author of the Scriptures, We follow not deceiuable fables
cunningly and colourably set out, but a most sure word of the Prophets,
whereunto we take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until
2. Pet. 1. 19.
the day dawne, and the day star arise in our hearts, etc. As blessed Peter
speaks: you need not therefore cry out of Riot. This word Riot, you think
serves your allusion pretily: But you need not shritch and cry out so loud,
especially in her Majesty's ears, quieter dealing might serve: Ye complain
of the wrong, which is none, you call for trial of the title: After you have
let fall your Action, and your matter is come to A Non Suit, you tell of
lawful pleading, and paint out your margin with Lawelesse proceeding, which is
all and wholly of your side. All these be but your Rhetorical flowers: Your
Similitude, and example, for all this flourishe and a do, proves little or
nothing. The Plea has been lawfully entered, even here a great while since,
your title has been not only seen and perused, but well weighed and tried,
and after all your wrytings seen, and what ever else you can say for your
selves, even till you were weary, and gave over the other part also, being
indifferently heard, their proofs alleged, seen, and weighed, Definitive
sentence', has upon great deliberation been given against you, of God by his
word, and the same ratified by the highest authority, and in the highest
Court upon Earth in this land, and there Inrould (...) Possession here quietly
delivered and taken: which, thanks be to God and her Majesty, we likewise
peaceably hold at this day, so that you may leave your tragical crying out of
the matter. Disputation, when it was offered and required, was of your part
refused, what would you more; It seems they remain the same men still, else
would they be heard of. In another place of your Epistle Dedicatorie before,
commending your selves, and seeking to get grace at the States hands you say,
you delivered us this Realm, that is no violent taking, whether only words
and forgerie be of our side or yours, let the word of God be judge, and so
many as can and list to judge thereby, between us both. And thus much of your
Similitude or example, taken from A Noble man and his Baronie, your long
possession of the Catholic Church, and your title, and right pretended thereto.

You brag after this of diverse offers, of late, since your new persecution,
as it pleases you to write, made unto us with great ods. Ye charge us that
we are entered into possession without trial of the title, that we have
thrust you out before sentence or proof, and yet both (as I say) have past:
You cry out of the riot, you complain of the wrong, ye desire that the
matter may come to lawful pleading. etc. And yet here again you say: ye
pretend not thereby any recovery of your losses: for that you suppose to be
impossible. Wherefore make you such stir and busy ado then; why cry you
out so loud in her Majesty's ears; why plain you; I take it that the loss
of your Baronie, your Catholic Church in England, as you call it, that ye so
many years quietly possessed, is your greatest loss, and yt which greeueth you
most, and makes you to houle and scriche. If you suppose it be impossible to
recover it: If you pretend not any recovery of your losses, make then less a
do, about that which ye take to be in so desperate a case: but it is hard
trusting of you: for the conceit ye have of the recovery of your losses,
makes you so importune and forward; say and pretend what ye will; you
pretend the justifying of your cause: But if you recover not your Baronie, and
other your losses, before you be able to justify your cause, it will be a
great while to that day: And we shall be sure to hold a long term. Because
your side found the State and people very desirous of alteration of religion
at her Majesty's first enteraunce to the crown, and that swaied mightily
against you, in so much as upon disputation, and conference of those of both
religions, by the marvelous providence of almighty God, and her Majesty's
godly affection, singular wisdom, and dexterity, to whom over and above the
rest, we are in this case, passingly beholding; your religion (...) out of the
doors, was sent packing, and the true religion of Christ restored. You think
that, after long profession now of the Gospel here, they will likewise loathe
the heavenly Manna, and wax weary thereof, and be desirous to go back
again to the flesh potts of Egypt, etc that I may so speak. It is possible
that in your trotting up and down, here upon your Popes messages, ye may
have found some bent but too much that way, and thereby coniecturing, ye set
down in your books of accomptes, thousands: But ye may, and I trust well in
GOD, shall be deceived, in your expectation and reckening as ye hitherto have
been. And because Allen, one of your mates, in his Apology, even now sent
over, still calling for Disputation, seems to ground much upon this
Philosophical Thucidides. (...).
hope or guess rather, that is, taken from worldly wisdom, and experience
only: I will give this short answer to you both herein: Though you may find
the common people, The present state, ever lightly mistiked.
but to moveable and inconstant, commonly to speak: Yet is not the case then,
and now alike: for first, sir: As truth and falsehood be contrary, so be the
operations of them, both in men far different; and mighty and effectual is
the force of the Holy Ghost, in his heavenly truth, and in their hearts in whom
he stirs up a love, and liking thereof, so that man's nature it self is
quite altered thereby, rather then any lothsomnesse, or wearines is gathered.
Again, sir, the greatest stay of your religion here, was the^ taken away by
the change of the prince: Her Majesty, yt the^ first restored yt public
exercise of religion here, lives, God be thanked, and long may she live. None
of you have seen any such in clination to Alteration, in her Majesty's
constant settled mind, as you in fancte imagine: besides this, her Majesty's
(...), most mild, and quiet government, in the time of ye Gospel (to all our
great comfortes) does not procure nor deserve any such thing at her faithful
subjects hands, nay besides duty, this dealing purchases the contrary, and
keeps the subjects in merueylous contentment commonly, and liking; where as
the intolerable yoke and insupportable burden, that you put upon this land,
more then haled wertsomnesse, and desire of alteration, in the time of
superstition. When you talk of your new persecution, if you mean thereby the
committing of such to ward, as of late came from the Pope, and Rome, for their
seditious attempts here in England, or the repressing of the violent
rebellion against her Maiestte, and the State in Ireland, we answer yt ye
might better have sit still like good Christians, and true hearted Englishmen
and subjects, or have chosen an honester course, then by rebellion and
treason, so to have troubled the peaceable state of (...) Church and Realm,
provoking and enforcing her Majesty, (who bears not the swoorde for naught)
to draw out the same, to cross and stay your violent disorders. You offer to
enter by sedirion, her Majesty's dominions violently: You offer to poison and
corrupt, the minds of the good and simple subjects. This, and such offers of
yours, we are too well acquainted withal, other your offers, and odds, we
commonly know no more of, then you report unto us: you pretend not by your
offers, any recovery of lofses, etc. (If they be any) who put you to them,
but your selves; that will needs run into them headlong. You tell what you
pretended not, I would you had in time, as well told what your pretense and
meaning was, that it might have been with less ado prevented; you have long
hoped after a day, ye thought it had been now come: But as God would, you
hope without your hope, your end is to justify your cause. Whereupon the honor
of god depends. If Gods honor depe^ded on the iustifiyng of your cause, it
should hang but upon a weak twined thread, but he has not put it into your
hands sirs, it is better grounded and stayed than so. There is no profession at
this day in Christendom, wherein God is more dishonored the^ in yours: Ye
tell us, ye know ye can not be vanquished, ye tell us also of our weakness,
a (...), showing greater pride the^ modest wisdom; You know more of your
selves then all the world does besides; ye are deeply seen in your own
cause: Either you never felt, or never well considered the forces of your
adversaries, at least you are blind, and thereby cannot well judge of them: As
God be thanked you gain little now a days, where upon usurpation you
violently invade lawful princes countries, with sword, upon confidence of the
Popes authority that way; God so mightily defending and maintaining his
servants and ministers, Princes and civil Magistrates, and looking with a
watchful eye to his Institution and ordinance. So gain you as little 2. Cor.
10. 2.
or less the other way because you stay altogether upon Sand, upon flesh,
worldely policy, man, etc. And the weapons of our warfare; are not carnal
but mighty, Yet Ephesians. 6. 17.
through God to cast down holds, etc, Ours is the sword of the spirit, which is
the word of God: lively and mighty in operation, and sharper than any two edged
sword (...) Hebru. 4. 12.
through, even to the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the
joints and the marrowe, and is a descerner of the thoughts and the entents of
the heart. etc. Your Fortes are not imprennable, nay they fall of themselves
and moulder away. They are weak, They are rotten, your walls be but of Broune
paper, The best and surest fort in this that ye call your new persecution, was
in Ireland, wherein (after rebellion there stirred up by you) ye much trusted.
That, God be thanked through his blessing was by her Majesty's provident care
and forces, soon destroyed, etc. If the secular arm, and forces fail you, if
fire and faggot be taken out of your hands, or your co^suming flames quenched,
ye can long hold in no place, God have the glory, for both taking those
weapons, from you, and so gloriously by his heavenly Gospel triumphing over
you in these latter days, and among other princes: let her majesty our dread
sovereign have her singular and due commendation in this work, as Gods
special minister to al true englishmens unspeakable comfort, we have had
good trial of you by experience, and that makes you to bring the authority
of Kings, and other under the pope, to be at his devotion, but all in vain:
for ye resist against God and his eternal truth; you should do well not to
boaste nor triumph before the victory, you know how the king of Israel
answered ye proud 1. King. 20. I (...).
threat of Benhadad ye king sometime of the Syrians. Let not him (says he)
that girdeth his harnes boast, himself, as he that puts it off.

14 AND to tell your Majesty more in particular, there has been diverse
earnest means made, and most humble petitions exhibited by the Catholics:
that, seeing those men, which first challenged at Poules Cross, all the learned
of our side that might be found, either to writing, or disputing: afterward
procured your Majesty's prohibition by proclae mation, that no books should be
written or read of that part in England: their petition was (I say) that at
the least, there might some public disputation be admitted, whereby (...)
doubts might be resolved. This petition, has been exhibited by diverse men,
in the name of the whole, both in writing and in print, and they have been
urged by sundry means, by all kind of friendship that we could make, by humble
request, by earnest letters to diverse preachers to further the matter: and (if
I be not deceived) to my Lord of London himself, for the bringing of the
matter to your Majesty's understanding, and to the consideration of the Lords
of your highness privy counsel. And if by any mischaunce, these former
supplications, came not to light, or expressed not fully the Catholics plain
and simple meaning es: I beseech your most gracious Majesty, An humble demand
of disputation.
that this may serve, either for a replication, or explanation of the same:
wherein I, in their names, most humblye on my knees, even for Gods cause, and
the love of his truth, ask at your Majesty's hands, that some such
indifferent trial may be had, by public disputation or otherwise.

YOU tell further of means made, of challenges, petitio^s, writing, disputing,
prohibitio^, and I wot not what, neither truly nor to purpose greatly (writing
upon the occasion of challenge at Paul's Cross, that ye mention) has since
given your side such a wou^d as I think you will never be able to recover it.
Notwithstanding any prohibition of her majesty's by proclamation etc, ye can
and do write. print, publishe, and scatter your books and sedicious libels
still although with little vantage, and I hope shall with less still every day
then other, for now you begin to take in hand not so much to improve our
religion, or to prove your own, as to inueigh against the civil state, to
confute her Majesty's laws, Acts of Parliament, proclamations etc. These be
fit arguments for your wise politic head to treat of. Such is the respect ye
have to her majesty, ye state and your duty of obedience herein. Think not
(M, Howlet) they be afraid of you without all cause now, that when the time
was, if ever, offered your side disputation, which your men then refused, as I
said how and upon what occasion not they only but her Majesty, the state,
and honorable here, can very well tell, the thing was not done in hucker
mucker. It seems now above twenty years after that time out of season to
crave disputation: yet tell me I pray you (M. Howlet) one thing, whether, if
your request and your fellows were granted of Disputation before her
Majesty, or such as her highness should please to appointe thereto, if it
should so fall out, by Gods providence, that ye should take a fair fall in
the wrestle at your adversaries hands, her majesty or the other appointed,
giving sentence against you, would ye acknowledge ye had a fall, no nor yet
that ye were foiled, would ye yield and give over your romish profession; it
is no part of your meaning, I fear me you would plain of disorder, and want
of indifferency and competent judges, etc. Some thing or other you would find
to shift of the matter, as ye did in the former conference, would ye, or
would ye not; What gained you by that; you say, You know you cannot be
vanquished herein, you make no doubt but that Gods truth is clear on your side.
Indeed there is the matter; it is easier to cast you down than to stop your
mouths: If ye cannot dispute, yet can you braule and wrangle; that is not
hard to be done, it is an art easily learned among you, For disputation,
Almar.
sirs, to leave the disputation in the happy days of Philpot.
her majesty's reign and other: long ago, to note only one Haddon.
time, were they not of our side, that in convocation in queen Elmer, etc.
Mary's days disputed with the greatest clerks of your side, when your men
ruffled and ruled the roast; was not the like again done at Oxenford by those
reverend fathers Cranmer.
of our side which never came thence after, but sealed in your Ridley.
university, after disputation that truth with their bloodes, Latimer.
which they had before preached and taught, why set you us not out these
disputations truly, that the world may see them; You are ashamed, as
seems, Seeing you write and printe daily, If Gods truth be so clear on your
side, Why have ye not all this while, set it us down in steed of your seditious
pa^phlets; Or why do ye not yet set it us down in your books ye se^d so fast
over among us? co^taining in manner now a days nothing but braules, gre^ning,
groining and snarring against the state, and her (...) wholesome laws,
proclamations etc, for repressing of popery, superstition, sedicious and
rebellious usage and dealing, that we might have some fit matter for our
profession to answer more than has been already seen, wayed and answered,
furbushing now and then up as ha^dsomely as you can your rusty stuff, you
give us but words only without matter, your coin that carries the Popes
mark being brought to the touch and waightes, is by long and often trial
found to be a counterfaited coin, in steed of good silver it is known to be
baser than copper, when we weigh and try by Gods truth, that you would have us
takefor good gold, in all the offers ye make us, we find nothing but dross.
Let us not bring guilefull balances (says your cannon Law out of Jerome)
where to weigh that we will after our own pleasure, saying this is heavy, this
is light, but let us bring gods balance of holy scriptures as out of the
Lords treasures, and let us therein weigh what is heavier. etc. Your reasons,
24. Q. 1. Non afferamus ex Hiero.
in sumine thus waied, are nothing but colorable words and show, which in
this clear light of the Gospel, will not satisfy nor serve. In vain
therefore seems to be your petition, your replication, explanation,
supplication, your earnest urging by friendship, by request, by letters to
diverse preachers, etc. which I think is as false as that you report here, of
the dealing therein, with the Bishop of London, and thereupon you did well to
put it in that parenthesis (Ifye be not deceived) As in little or nothing ye
be otherwise. You forget greatly M. Howlet with whom you deal, and to whom
you write: You make great vauntes, and in words offer much, you perform in
deed nothing. In your margin is quoted An humble demand of disputation. You
bring us that forth often; we know this gear so well at the first sight now,
as we cannot easily be deceived. It is not the setting on of a fair gloss or
glosing the matter, that will now serve. Is the truth clear on your side;
Why call you it in controversy then; why so earnestly demand and seek you for
disputation for resolution of men's doubts, etc. If ye demand conference for
your satisfaction, or to resolve your doubts; you have not been refused, nay
you have been and are still offered it, ye are sought upon, and the best of
your side here refuse it. That may be privately done, if that be your end, and
some good come thereof.

But ye demand public disputation, ye are earnest therein ye demand it
again and again: what is the reason; Why would you so feign have public
disputation; There must be some honest and necessary end alleged, there must
be also by her (...) appointmente, some Moderators, and some order lawefully to
proceed therein First, have you talked with the rest of your side; are ye all
ageed upon the suit to her Majesty, humbly to desire public disputations;
Next, if this be the end of disputation (as you say) for the trial of Gods
truth, that men's doubts may be resolved, most necessary for you all, to your
eternal salvation? Will ye then being required: yield to Gods truth when your
doubts shall be resolved, and sufficiently resolved by the Scriptures, and yt
in the judgment of her (...), who by Gods appointment has the moderating of
the whole in this realm. And in the judgment of the State here: will you of
that side, not stand any longer obstinat in your former opinions, but give over
as Gods faithful servants to his truth and become professors of the Gospel of
Christ, abiuring all erroneous, and Popish fancies; Rearing your religion out
of Gods holy book, the sacred scriptures, directing and ruling your
consciences thereby; On the other side again, will you, as honest dutiful
Subjects, renouncing all foreign power of Prelate, Prince, or Potentate
whatsoever, betake your selves hence forward to be governed by her Majesty,
and the temporal laws of this land, and such Statutes, as for the good and
peaceable guiding thereof be by her Majesty, and the State, made and agreed
upon in the high court of (...), according to the order of this Realm? What
say you to this condition; I ask you because I am in doubt, whether you will
in the end stand to the resolution and judgment of her Majesty, and the
State herein. Nor to any in deed but unto your Pope, and your selves, and yet
had ye need I tell you, resolve and be resolved in this point before you make
suit to her majesty, and so earnest suit to have public disputation, as
whereupon your eternal salvation depends, etc. And to this point answer
hardly in your next writing: for in this Epistle DEDICATORIE, your words
hitherto, seem to employ some co^tradictio^ in this matter, or else your suit
seems, if not hollowly, yet cunningly made to your vantage, but prejudicial,
and perilous to this quiet and peaceable state, settled now above these xxii.
years together in this kind of government, of rejecting the authority of the
Pope of Rome, and Popish religion, and receiving the profession of the Gospel,
and acknowledging her Majesty's Royal sovereignty over all States and
degrees: All which is well and sufficiently warranted, and maintained, by the
express testimony of Gods holy word, and the wholesome laws of this Realm,
as has been and is still both for the one and the other by proof published
to the view of all the world. You (M. Howlet) and your late start up
Jesuits, and other English Romanistes, or Rhemistes, to be plain with you,
are too weak in the shoulders (God have the glory) to take in hand by
disputation, or otherwise to undermine or shake this Godly State, or to prove
your own cause good. Ye are but princockes and babes for the most part, in
comparison of those of your side aforetime, that stood in the front of the
battle, whose force yet God be thanked, have been well tried and met with
all. It is unto you a hard (...) of the decay, and utter ruin shortly to fall
upon your huge Antichristian kingdom, as that was an after demonstration
Cicero in (...) Mayor. Proueniebant Oratores noui, (...), (...).
in the Poet Naeuius, that Tullie mencioneth: when new Orators, foolish young
men arise and take in hand the administration of the common wealth, who were
wont so to brag of gray hairs, old men, etc. Yea, (...) is that, that has
already been a great part of the undoing ofit on your behalfes. Young men (I
speak not to reproach age, nor to touch towardly youth) may have good heads,
fresh memory, quick sight, sharp wit, ioly art, and prompt and ready
tongues, and words at will: which things if they be well applied, wherein is
all, have their commendation as in young men: But in heavenly matters Gods
truth revealed in his written word, his fear, a settled understanding and
judgment, framed by Gods holy spirit, joined with simplicity and sincerity
in Christ's religion, and a reverent humble mind to Godwarde, directed always
by the sacred Scriptures, in young or old, are a great deal more worth, and
yet by your vaunt, you seem to trust much to the other, and thereupon are you
so earnest for disputation. Of your vain Scholasticall disputations and
arguments pro and contra, that can make quidlibet ex quolibet, or as we speak
Make men believe that the Moon is made of green cheese: or that the Crow is
white by your sophistry. The Church of God, to the hurt thereof has had too
great experience before time, and the faithful at this day see but too much of
this stuff in your subtle Doctor Scotus, your Angelical Doctors Quodlibetal
questions, and in numbers of books of that stamp.

We have been faithfully warned by the holy ghost to take heed of admitting
that kind of dealing, a great while since, 1. Tim. 1. 4. and 6. 4. 5. and 4. 7.
2. Tim. 2. 16. 23. etc.
namely in Saint Paul's Epistles to Timothy. And in deed by trial we find
daily that by wrangling, iangling, and vain disputiug, the truth commonly
goes to wrack and is lost, besides other inconveniences that arise thereby:
There be other means to try out the truth by, then this: This kind of
exercise, unless it be very soberly kept, and used with great moderation is
very dangerous in matters of divinity. And yet God be thanked for his gifts
you may be and are even in this exercise matcheable, and to be matched, if
need were, with your equals here at home. You that make these great bragges,
were but yesterday to talk of in Oxeford, you have left your fellows and your
betters too, behind you in Oxeford, Ca^brige, and abrod also; if you will give
other, besides your selves, leave to judge: but let us hear what you tell us
more of ye particulars: for you offer also of your liberality two other ways
of dealing besides public disputation. These are your words.

15 ANd as for the particulars, we shall easily agree with Three ways (...)
conference.
them. For we, offer all these three ways, both jointly and severally: that
is, either by trying out the truth by brief scholasticall arguments: or by
continual speech for a certain space to be allotted out, and the other part
presently, or upon study, to answer the same: or finally, by preaching before
your Majesty, or where else your Majesty shall appoint. And for our safeties
we ask nothing else, but only your Majesty's word set down unto us, in no
ampler manner, then the Council of Trent made the safe conduct to our
adversaries, which they notwithstanding refused to accept. But I hope they
shall see, that we will not refuse or mistrust your Majesty's word, if we may
once see it set down by proclamation, or otherwise by letters pattents, for
our safety, but that within 80. days after, by the grace of God, we shall
appear before your highness, with what danger soever to our lives otherwise
for the try all of Gods truth, which we make no doubt but to be clear on our
side.

16 If our adversaries refuse this offer, they shall show too much distrust
in their own case: for it is with great labor, peril, and disadvantage on
our parts, and on their sides nothing at all. I would they durst make but
half the like offer, for their coming hither on this side the Seas, it
should be most thankefully taken, and they with great safety and all gentle
entreaty disputed withal, and made to see as I presume their own weakness.
But seeing this is not to be hoped for, we rely upon the other: beseeching
your Majesty most humbly and instantly, that our just demand may be granted,
for the trial of Gods truth most necessary for us all too our eternal
salvation.

YE talk unto us of three ways of conference both jointly and severally, as
ye speak, but all must be had in words and speech. Flying and flowing
words are rife, with Dratours, and Logicians, there profession requires it:
but how well soever you have heretofore sped by words in dispute or persuasion,
ye are not yet come to that value, that with Caesar ye may say: veni, vidi,
vici, as though all were in your hands, and your own. Ye talk of brief
scholasticall arguments, where may a man seek them, where shall we find them:
Your authors reasons that you make so great account of, show very little skill
in Logic, what ever the matter be, and yet there seems to have been the
proper place where that cunning, if there had been any, should have be
showed. We wonder in what School you or he learned to frame the maimed
arguments, ye weak and sclender reasons ye set us down, which leave out
necessary proofs of things in controversy, and unnecessarily (...) in
proouing things not in controversy. This argues poor skill in the art of
disputing. Strengthen your weak arguments, that are set down in this
discourse whereof ye make so great account. Of his nine reasons, make us of
all but one good, sound, and substantial brief scholasticall argument, to
make us see our own weakness, etc. as you speak. It is an easy matter to
convince them ye are your own men alredie: But reprove our doctrine, or
prove your own, to our shame and confusion once. Let it be your labor (M.
Howlet) to ease your friend, if you will, that brag us so greatly of disputation
and scholasticall arguments: But sir, leave out I pray you Paralogismes, leave
captious arguments, that is, (...) not you (...) Catholics, set us down
counterfeit principles agreeing with your name and matter, and so reason (...)
supposittons, quite false, and (...) grounded: do not when you make an
argument, occupy your self in prouyng, that we deny not, and passing over
without proof, that we deny, which I admonish you of before hand, because it
is your Authors common manner, in his unreasonable Reasons, set us down in his
discourse: how Scholasticallie, or like a Disputer, if you know not: Let
Aristotle's Elenchs tell you: But I say, mende these faules, or brag not of
your Scholasticall arguments, which are full of faults.

2 Your second way of conference, is continual speech, wherein like a babbling
Orator, you will seem so to excel, thinking that you have marvelous great
vauntage of all the world besides, that ye dare give your adversaries leave
to answer you either presently, or upon study: But sir, ye had not need to
stay upon your three places, taken out of the first book of Aristotle's
Rhetorique, wherewith, as with flowers, ye deck this your Epistle dedicatorie
to her Majesty. You may be better seen in Aristotle's Rhetorique, that is (as
seems) you make of it in cunning of pretty words and sentences, to delight and
perswad withal, then in Gods book, that is: in heavenly matters and things
appertayning to conscience. But if you will look no further of, look at least
on your foul talons, and be not proud of a Peacocks tail. A man would have
thought, that your dainty or quaize stomach, should not well digest long
speech, that could so evil brook the godly Sermons made at the public fast
at Stamforde, the last Summer: that ye lothed the length of them, only upon a
hearsay, insomuch, that ye imagine, the continual speech, to have lasted
ten or twelve hours together. Whereas the longest Sermon then made, was (as
I understand) two hours and a half, or somewhat above, in an extraordinary
Exercise. You say of them with a disliking and untruly also, that they have a
desire to hear themselves speak, ten or twelve hours together. These are
your Rhetoric terms, I could use an other word, as you deserve, but I
forbear. Here now, like a Declaymer, or an Orator, you would have a
continual speech, to be allotted out, tell how many hours together you
desire to hear your selves speak, or how long ye will declame, that the
certain space may be considered of them, to whom it does appertain. In the
mean space: Thus marking things with your chalk and cole, as they say, you
allow, and condemn as pleases you, sometimes as it were Chilo, or as
Menelaus in Homer. The Lacedaemonians short speech, seems to like you:
sometimes like the Ionians or Battus, you love to have your tongue run at
randon pleasurably: You are the New Orators, etc. that I spoke of before.

3 From Rhetorique, and Logique, you come at length to the holy exercise of
religion: For the last of your three ways, not of writing, but of talk still,
is preaching. That usual and ordinary exercise, is taken up but of late, as
newly begun among you, by your new religious Jesuits: As I take it, or else
taken from the beggarly Friars. I pray you (...) often, and how usually do
seculare Priests use to preach beyond the Seas, that for being to bold over
you, I ask you nothing of the matter ye preach of, wherein you are too
profane; As you measure other men, so to measure your selves, by your own
foot, shall we say that when you would dispute, use continual speech, or
preach before her Majesty, etc. It is for a desire you have to hear your
selves speak, etc A dumme masking Mass secretly said, as your Priests
occupation, to blaspheme God in, is a meeter exercise for you and your
fellows: If you be (...) and shaven, as it may be, you be but some
Schoolemaister: But for preaching sir, pulpittes serve not for Orators here
now a days, neither be her Majesty's ears, acquainted to hear blasphemies
out of pulpits, nor yet inuectiues. What we have to hope, or look for from
you; if you may get into pulpits, is not hard to guess. Your Sorbonne, or the
like, is a fitter place for scoulding (...). Pulpits, thanks be to God, are
appointed to better, and more religious uses among us: which have been, and are
too badly profaned, by those of your side.

But forward; as boasters and braggers, be not always the greatest doers,
when it comes to the pushe: so (...). Howlet, you show your self a very
cowardly Thraso, that even in the beginning, after so great bragges and suit
for combat, before you perform any thing, you take so great care for your
person and safety, and for your fellows also: for you will needs condition
with your dread and liege Sovereign, and gracious Prince, and ours, before you
will appear before her highness, you will not come hither I perceive upon the
gage of your heads, if ye be vanquished, ye will not give them for washing,
and yet our men were brought to your disputation, as Prisoners, and knew
before what should become of the^ after: What; are all your fair flattering
speches. etc. come to this now; eue^ now you were most humbly on your knees,
asking at her Majesty's hands, disputation. All I perceive is but Crocodyles
tears, as the proverb is. You brage before of your patient obedience in
doctrine and demeamour, where is that now; here you demand a safe conduct,
before you will come into your Princes power and presence, A token of an evil
conscience: What have you done man; that you are so afraid of her Majesty,
that you dare not come home into your native Country, to your natural Prince,
and Mother, as ye pretend in speech, without good warrant for your safety.
This is a strange and unwonted kind of dealing, of good and honest subjects,
with their Sovereigns and Princes. Her Majesty is upright, she will do you
no wrong, she is compassionable, and merciful also: you confess it, why do
you not put your self into her gracious (...) hands; Is this a loving and
dutiful childs dealing, with his natural Mother; Is this your Catholic
obedience in deed; toward our Queen and Prince, when she commands you to
come home; who when you list your selves, can not by any prohibition be keept
hence: Here here M. Howlet, comes in fitly the trial of conscience, you
talked of before. Here comes in the place of scripture, for you to consider
of, yt I take you cited out of S. John before: If our heart condemn us, God
is greater then our heart, and knows all things. Here in sum comes in the
doctrine of Obedience to Princes, for conscience sake, as to God himself etc.
That you before said your Mother, the Catholic Church together with the
Apostle, teaches her children. If you be a natural child and not a bastard,
show your self now, and hear when you are called: For a child honors
Father and Mother: where is this honor, reverence, love, duty; etc. All is
to seek: you mind not to come before her Majesty, but upon sure ground
once. You can provide for one, I perceive, to keep your self out of gunne
shot, you will be a right Thraso, and set your self behind rather, then be
in the front, or forewarde, when there is any danger to your person, you will
abide no brunt by your will: you love to talk of the matter, but it shall be
a loofe, and with condition: What I say; Be not too cowardely, and too
fearful, do somewhat like to that ye talk, Some deal answer your hie
words, else all the world will cry shame on you, that so instantly crave
disputation, as a Suter for it, and then will not vouchsafe to come to it, but
upon further warraunt from your Prince. Her Majesty has pardoned as great
faults as you have committed. Be sorry in deed for former offense, and put
your self at least into her merciful hands to whom you so smoothely write. I
pray God I spend not words upon you in vain, I am in doubt it is no part of
your meaning, openly to come home, except you may have proclamation or letters
pate^ts or some such stay for your safety. This is ye testimony and terror of
an evil conscience, you must for your safety have her majesty's safe conduct in
as ample manner as it was offered to those of our side by the council of Trent.
A high point wherein there is great reason and wisdom sure, that the Pope and
Popish Bishops being strangers and our mortal enemies, who not themselves
only break all faith and promise, but teach and persuade princes and all other
to do the like, with those of contrary religion, who^ they call heretics;
that these men I say, should have as great credit with englishmen in her
majesty's dominions, as her self (who is our natural and most honorable
loving Princess and Queen) shall have with her english subjects? where at can
you blush. M. Howlet. yt dare thus impudently write to our dread sovereign. Me
thinks it should have made pen, ynck, paper and al, to have blushed, if
there had been any blushing in them; we refused to accept that offer from the
Pope and his council of Trent. Great reason M. Howlet and answered why, a good
while since: But you will not refuse her majesty's warrant for your saftie. I
am ashamed, though you be not, of your ouergrosse comparison. Is the case
alike; you say you would have her majesty's only word set down unto you, in
no ampler manner, then the Council of Trent made the safe conduct to your
adversaries. Those that you call your adversaries; to whom your Popes bull or
safe conduct, as you call it, was directed by name, or with whom it had
principally to deal, were protestant or Gospelling Kings, Princes, states, or
public persons, commonly if any of that profession, rather then private and
obscure persons, such as you and we are; who without leave of superiors,
could not go thither, namely out of England. It is said your Popes safe
conducte was that the liberty of coming to that council, pertained but to
them only of our men, that would repent and return to the boosome of your
church, whereof he that in english 1. part. cap. 6. division. 1.
list to see more, let him read the Defense of the Apology will you now accept
her majesty's offer in like manner 6. part. cap. 8. division. 2.
on this churches behalf; ye say you desire it in no ampler manner than the
counsel of Trent made the safe conduct to your adversaries. Whether it were the
councels safe conduct, and the Popes Legates, or the Pope of Romes himself, who
summoned the council, or which of the 3. Popes it was, under whom that
council was, Al is one, He was, and needs must be the judge in the Council,
who is the adversary part, and has himself to answer and yet the Law is,
that he that is chief in jurisdiction, ought not to give judgment to or for
himself. Lastly, sir, upon whose safe conduct soever our side had come to
Trent Council, they had been required, either to have yielded when they F. De
iurisdi. omnium iudicum.
had come and conformed themselves, or to have been excom municated, accursed,
and condemned for their labor. Tell us whether you list to come hither on like
condition. Thus writes Harding your own man of going to the Council Non ab re
quoque puta uimus esse omnes qui in hereses quas cunque lapsi sunt, and adhuc
irretiti sunt ad penitenti am inuitare, cum salui conductus ampla concessione
ac promissione magnae and sin gularis cleme^ tiae and benigni tatis, modo re
deant ad cor, and sanctae Ec (...) catholi cae (...) agnoscant. Council. (...).
sessio. xvii. prima sub Pio. (...).
of Trent. In deed (says he) had ye gone thither your heresies had been
confuted, your selves required to yield, and to conform you, to the Catholic
church, or else you had been Anathematized, accursed and condemned. For that
was the foundation and condition of the safe conduct, which was never willingly
granted as seems, but extorted by the Germans importunity, the fathers of
(...) Council hoping as they pretended their recovery and return to their
Catholic religion; wherein they were deceived. And this safe conduct was first
granted not by the Council under Pope Paul the third, but under Julius the
third, his successor after many sessions and years passed too, as seems:
and repeated by the Council under Pius the fourth many years after again. Now
that the foundation and purport and meaning of this safe conduct, that. M.
Howlet here mencioneth may appear and be the better known to the Reader; I
set down these words following as they were propounded in the first session
under Pius the fourth, immediately before the safe conduct granted to the
Germans in the general congregation: We have not thought it also to be
amiss to call to repe^ta^ce al those that are fallen into any heresies and are
yet entangled therein, with a large grant of a safe conduct and promise of
great and singular clemency and Gentleness; so that they return to heart, or
repent and acknowledge the power of the holy Catholic church. If you desire so
greatly to be solemnly called home, Construe of this condition then by your
own rule.

Ye talk of her Majesty's word, and you say, you will ask only her
Majesty's word. And yet to go further, by your leave, you being subjects,
will see her Majesty's word set down by Proclamation, yt al yt world may be
witnesses of it: such trust you repose in her majesty's word, or letters
Pattents. Her Majesty's beck might serve such as you be well enough in this
case: ye seem too distrustful to be plain meaning and dealing men. It is a
hard case when her majesty's commandment cannot serve with those, that will
pretend to be subjects; with whom the least signification of her highness
pleasure should be enough and enough again, without prescribing an order for
her majesty to deal by, in a mere civil case too, as this is, to command her
people to carry at home or to return home being abroad. And yet more you must
appoint your selves yt time to, of coming home before you will stir. Four
score days just, no less will serve you. You are honorable men and long a
making ready, and many things to take order in, before you can set your selves
into your voyage, and yet your best and surest pillars that of englishmen ye
have to trust in; be here in england among us. If need were, and it were for
your vantage three or four days would serve your turn to (...) before her
majesty. Her majesty has nothing else to do, you think: but to attend and
hearken after you and your suits, cunningly made for your advantage. Unless
you carried better and more duetifull minds, ye may tarry where ye be still.
Your room is better then your company: When you have before hand provided for
the safety of your persons, more then reason and honesty can ask, being
subjects. Then you tell us what danger you will put your selves into for the
trial of Gods truth, etc, Babbling and vain folly as all the rest. This is the
matter, either you would have a further ouverture to do more hurt then you now
do, or can do, while you crave disputation. etc. not for to have your own
doubtful consciences satisfied, but to bring more into perplexity with you, and to
more confirm such as be too obstinate already in error, or else it may be,
you are weary of being beyond the Seas and would fain come home, and after
many attemptes you think at last you have found out a way whereby you may be
honorably called home. Ah craft: But peace for shame, no more of this. Is all
the labor, peril and disadvantage on your parts as ye say, on the other part
nothing at all, let her majesty the state and other here say for themselves
and not you. It is enough for you to speak for your own side, leave the rest
to be waied by them whom it touches nearer then you, you are but in a dream.
The best and enowe of your side to take this matter in hand, be here in
england, that there needs no sending over sea for help to be had at
englishmens hands thence, You M. Howlet and your companions for the most
part, have your sires and dammes here, of whom you sucked your popery.

From this you come to show, If your offer be refused by us, that is: with
your so great labor, peril, and disadvantage, we shall show our selves too
much distrustful in our own cause, etc. Of your peril and safety, we have
seen before: for your so great labor. Take no more pains to leese your labor
I pray you, the^ you need. When there is any use thereof, it will be called
for, proffered service, etc. If ye find disadvantage, thank your selves that
make the match, we have not to regard that, Ye make many offers we see, and
hide you in corners when you have (...), or like proper fellows betake you to
your heels, and run away, that one cannot tell where to have you, nor where
to seek you, saving that some of you by Gods providence are sometime overtaken
ere ye be aware, and taken napping as they say. You have always some let, or
some excuse or other, why you keep not touch when your matters go not
forward according to your expectation and mind. This is plain double
dealing: you cast us the glove of defiance, I am not disposed to contend with
you in bragging and vaunting: yet let me warn you M. Howlet, and the proudest
of your fellows, that ye take heed if you be wise: Little David's bag has
a stone in it, that flung at you before you come to hand strokes, will make
you grouel on the ground, if ye abide it, were ye as 1. Sam. 17.
stout as ever was great Goliath. Ye dare us, and would have us come over the
Sea, to make offer to you. It is not in our hands, neither convenient to
accept offers made by you at pleasure, nor to go over Sea unto you to make you
offers. Have ye not enough beyond the Seas to dispute withal: Is all the
world there one your side: Ywis, there be more M. Howlet, and yt singular men
the^ you well would there were, and then while you live, you shall be able to
deal withal, but to your shames. Never cry hoo hoo, at the matter like an
Owl, there will be no lack of them I tell you, whose faces ye dare not
abide, neither are ye able to stand in their hands, let it without brag
be spoken to Gods glory: either you dissemble egregiously, or Audax Inscitia.
ye know not the great power and gifts of God in the learned professors of
the Gospel, beyond the Seas: but who is more bold then blind Bayard: As
though there were not here to be talked daily withal, as profound learned
English men of your side, as any of you that (having for the most part been of
late young men in Oxeforde and some in Cambridge) have since fled beyond Sea.
Does the very name and sight of Rome, and those quarters make now a days so
great Clarks: I ween not, A cock I'perceiue on his dounghill. The not
accepting of your proud bragges is no distrust in our cause, but a great pride
in you, joined with a dastardly cowardlinesse, who putting fire into yt house
runaway (as they say) by the light, plucking your necks out of the collor,
most of all of obedience to her majesty. No dealing with you, except you may
have your own offers, your own odds, and your own laws. You say that our
coming over unto you is not to be hoped: and therefore you rely upon
disputation to be granted; Which you very instantly seem to demand, but with
your after parle and conditional indenting with her majesty, ye seem again
to fly touch: that I say nothing here of the untimely asking of disputation
at her majesty's hands, after you have a little before, twice done the same:
When we see greater cause than hitherto, or any good to be gotten by going
over Sea, then may that voyage be thought of, or soon enough taken in hand,
of us English Subjects at her Majesty's appointment. When ye have overthrown
those of our side in the low Countries Germany, France, etc. that they
should need help in the cause of the Gospel, which will never be while
you live. Then were soon enough, to make your bragges and to call us, to
combat. In the mean while what should I say: but whether you lie or rely,
it is all but upon words and talk, shifting of things by cunning. This you
have Rethoricke enough to enforce: But alack where truth and matter fail,
there are words and Rethorick little worth. You that can handle an ill cause
so handsomely, Athenaeus.
would I wish to try what you can do in a good, but (...).
that in deed needs not so much a do: speaking well one may soon persuade
wise men, says one, which opinion (M. Howlet) it might have beseemed you to
have had of her majesty at least.

17 AND now to leave all these things to the holy providence of God, and to
the high wisdom of your most excellent Majesty to consider of: we are
humbly to crave at this time, and most instantly to request, that your
Highness will not take in evil part, this our bold recourse unto your Royal
person, in these our afflictions, and passing great calamites. You are borne
our Sovereign Princes and mother, and we your natural Subjects and
children. whether then should children run in their afflictions, but Great
cause of recourse to (...) Majesty.
unto the love and tender care of their dear mother, especially she being
such a mother, as her power is sufficient to relieve them in all points, her
goodwill testified by infinite benefits, and her noble and merciful
disposition known and renouned through out the world?

18 If your Majesty were abrod in many parts of your Realm to understand
the miseries, hear the cries, see the lifting up of hands to heaven for the
present afflictions, which this persecution has brought: I know your Majesty
would be much moved, as all men are here by the only report of the same: I
could touch certain particulars of importance to that effect. But I will
keep the law of Areopagus: I will The law of (...).
say nothing to move my Judge, whose wisdom I well know, and whose goodness
I nothing at all mistrust. Arist. lib. 1. Rheto.


19 If your highness were of that disposition (from which you are most far
of) as to take pleasure in our afflictions, delight and comfort in our
calamities: we could be content for to bear this, and ten times more in so
good a cause as we suffer for, And if there be any other of such cruel
appetite, whom your Majesty should think good to be satisfied with blood:
there want no Catholics both there and here, which would most willingly offer
themselves, to purchase (...) unto the rest. Diverse are in bonds there, most
ready (I am sure) to accept such an offer: and if that number will not suffice,
let the word be but spoken, and many more shall most joyfully present
themselves from hence, having reserved our selves to none other end, if God
would make us worthy of that: and that by our deaths, we might give
testimony to the Catholic cause, and redeem the pitiful vexation, of so
many thousand afflicted people at this day in England.

20 JESUS Christ, in abundance of mercy bless your The conclusion.
Majesty, to whom (as he knows) I wish as much good as to mine own
soul: persuading my self, that all good Catholics in England do the same.
And they which go about to insinuate the Contrary, are in mine opinion, but
appointed instruments by the common enemy, to dispoyle your Majesty of your
strongest pillar and best right hand, as (soon after their purpose had) it
would appear, and shall be more manifest before the last tribunal seat, where
we al shall be presented shortly, without difference of persons, and where the
cogitations of all hearts shall be revealed and examined, and in justice of
judgment, rightfully rewarded. Now matters are craftily clowded up, and false
visards put on, upon every action. Then all shall appear in sincerity and
truth, and nothing avail but only the testimony of a good conscience. The
which Catholics by suffering, do seek to retain, and which God of his
infinite goodness, inspire your Majesty, graciously without enforcement, to
permit unto them still.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subject. I. Howlet.


After all this a do, you will seem at length to crave pardon at her
Majesty's hands, or rather because you will seem to be in no fault, but to
excuse your presumption, you request that her Highness will not take in evil
part, this your bold attempt, Clarkely spoken, and like an Drator: where upon
you allege reason, that has induced you hereto, taken partly from the bond
and knot, whereby her Majesty, and her subjects are narrowly linked together,
partly from necessity, and extreme miseries, that ye pretend, you are
brought into. This is the (...) of your long, boasting withal, how ready you
and other of your side are, to spend your bloodes in defense of your religion,
and Church. This is in sum, the effect of the three next Sections, and that
which remains for a Conclusion of your Dedicatorie Epistle. your over rash
boldenes, in thus dealing with her Majesty, needs greatly of craving pardon:
Howeuer you craftily cloud it up, and put a false vizarde thereon, that I may
turn to you, your own phrase, not so much for having recourse to her
highness, in your pretended miseries, which either are not so great, or else
easily relieved, if ye so will your selves: but in respect of your double
dealing, rather in pretending one thing, and doing the clean contrary, not
containing your self within the bounds ye talk of. You might with good leave
of her Majesty, have propounded your case, and have had recourse unto her
Highness, if her Majesty had been ignorant thereof, as I think none in the
land knows it now better, such is her wisdom, and godly, and great care ower
her Subjects: wherein, you do her highness the more wrong, in supposing she
lives here among her Subjects, as a stranger without understanding, and
pitiyug the hard case, of any of her Majesty's natural, honest, and dutiful
subjects: bearing, or forbearing your untrue persuasion. It may please her
majesty to pardon that folly: but to feed her highness ears, with bare words,
without deeds, (nay your deeds being clean contrary and very naught) how
should her Majesty take this in good part: for you are a Proctor for your
self, and other that you call Catholics, that have given your faith to the
Pope, and Sea of Rome, her Majesty's sworn enemy, and the Realines: you go
about with slander, to sever and make dissension, between her Majesty, her
Laws, and the Ministers thereof: beetweene her, and her faithful people and
subjects: Ye (...) and report tales, to impeche the credit of particular
persons. In sum, ye take too much upon you, ye would be credited in every
thing with her Majesty, as though your saying were some heavenly Oracle.
Wilfully funne not headlong into more, and greater afflictions, and calamities,
then her Majesty, and laws will lay upon you, and you shall have little, or
no cause to complain; such is her Majesty's plentiful wisdom, and goodness,
and the great moderation, that is used in making of laws in this realm.
Great, and narrow is the knot, thanks be to God, and hard and fast tied
between her Majesty, and her good and faithful subjects, as your Pope, and
you to your regret, have tried, in seeking many ways to dissolve that band,
and yet hitherto never could prevail, nor never I trust shall. If her
Majesty be borne your Sovereign Princess, and Mother, and you be her
natural Subjects, and Children: As in deed, she is all true hearted
Englishmens, and we all her Majesty's more bound, if more may be, in respect
of the Gospel among us, then ever to any Princes or Kings before. If your
case be common with ours, why then do you hot Catholics, grow more out of
kind, then the rest ofher Majesty's natural subjects do? Why before you
need, run you so fast, and so hastily to Rome, and to the Pope, and thence
seek to make head, to disquiet this State, and your brethren, and country men
at home. This is not only no part of a Loyal subject, toward his Prince and
Country, but hardly the part of a true hearted Englishman: so unnatural is
the dealing.

The better her Majesty's noble disposition, and virtues are known, and
renoumed throughout the world, the moremonstrous a great deal, is this your
wicked dealing, with so gracious a Sovereign, and most natural, godly, and
careful a Prince. You can have no greater condemnation, or testimony against
you, then your diuelishe betaking of your selves to the Stepmother, that you
have chosen, leaving her that God had appointed you: whither ye list to take
it of conscience, or policy. Run whither ye shall, seek (...) and near,
you are not like to find such a mother again abroad: Your stepmothers
affection, that you have chosen, lift her up to the sky, if you can with your
praises, is in no comparison like: she is too hard hearted, and too bloodye,
we know her well enough, and but to well: Leave her therefore, leave her.
Come out from that Babylon, etc. And like natural and obedient children,
return home to your own dear Mother and Country, whom ye have so
unkindly, and so undutifully forsaken. Put your selves again with submission
into her hands, so it seems you will: but when you can not otherwise chose,
and yet hardly then too, your fault here in is such, as I hardely find words,
to express the indignity thereof. If all be well considered, you have very
great cause of recourse, and submission to her Majesty: and from her, to
forrainers and other, no cause at all: Leave it therefore in time, leave it and
come home. At least for your part, M. Howlet, do so, if you be abroad and
beyond Sea, without her Majesty's leave: But come with a single heart and a
good conscience, that is, a changed man. Put your self in deed without all
dissimulation, to her Majesty's mercy, and to us you shall be most welcome.
If misery press you, with the prodigal Son, hearken to this advise the
rather: Better to learn by affliction, and in it; then never; If your State be
other, by your return let it appear, with how frank a heart, and well
meaning mind you come home, which will be, when God shall first touch your
hearts, to return unfeignedly and in deed, from Popery and superstition, to
that most merciful heavenly father, or else never. This is the best Counsel I
can at this time give you.

For her Maisties being abroad among her Subjects, in many parts of her
Realm. It is, thanks be to God, and long may it continue, much and often, to
our great joy. She needs not be told of the State of her subjects by you,
or go by here say only, and receive the report thereof, from beyond Sea.
Besides, reports gather, and go much by men's affections; This that you report
of such hurly burley, and disquietnesse to be in this Realm, is as true as
other reports, that come to you of things done here, and all a like, you are
too light of credit: Your representation of the miseries, is but words, ye
make more a do then ye need a great deal: If her Majesty's most moderate
laws against Popery and Treason, if her mild proceeding in the just defense
of her self, her royal estate, and the Realms press you: will you do well:
Give over that dealing then, that has procured all this, and live quietly at
home as Gods true servants, in the profession of the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
and in duetifull obedience to our Sovereign: Pray for her Matestie, and the
State with us, as we are willed, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty, and all former quarrelles between you and
us in religion, forgotten and forgiven, we will live in peace and charity
with you, how ever you think otherwise of us. You make an If, and do well so
to do, When you talk of her Majesty's disposition, to delight in your
calamities, and of others cruel appetite to desire blood: which is as far from
her majesty, and those of yt side; as ye same is familiar unto your popish
religion: It is happy, how ever ye think of other that ye clear her
Majesty herein, which testimony from the enemy has some force. But how
ever ye brag of A readiness to accept the offer of suffering death for your
religion: yet thank God, if ye be wise, and her Majesty that that offer
hitherto has not been made you, nor them that ye be assured to be so ready
to accept thereof. This I tell you for all; your troubles are not delighted in
here, much less be they or your blood sought after. These (...) but your
dreams, You might well enough have spared therefore that brag either of your
self bing beyond sea, or of your fellows readiness to suffer and to die in so
evil a cause especially, how ever you call it Catholic. It is a question of
(...) (man) and of treason, (...), and rebellion, and not other, that you call
the Catholic cause, Again you can at the most, but warrant for your self. Let
other men alone hardely in this case. And yet talking of suffering death, you
do wisely (in my opinion) when ye join those few that be here of your side
in prison with your self, and those that are fled beyond Sea, and put them
first in the forewarde, and follow your selves aloof and a far of, (...)
this condition: that if yt number will not suffice, where by seeing how they
speed, and will stand to their tackling as sta^ders by, and out of danger ye
may after they be gone, consult what is best for you: whether to come home and
take such part as they, which even now ye are not very hasty to do, or to
tarry there still, unless you may come in safety, for which ye meetely well
provide, as we have seen a little before. I pray God make both you and us al
ready to bear the cross, and whatsoever affliction here for Christ's sake
and his Gospel, when it shall please him to call us to that trial. And let the
catholic cause go, of which you so much talk, all without book. For the
other I mean the profession of Christ's gospel, our brethren in Queen mary's
days (to keep home, and to go no farther of) being in the hands of those of
your side, have to Gods glory already given ample and sufficient testimony
of the truth. And yet I am in doubt that the blood then shed, would not
satisfy your bloody church, if you had the sword in your hands which God
keep you from if it please him.

Here I find now cited the third time, the first book of Aristotle's
Rhetorique, to adorn this your Epistle withal and you note, both in your text
and margin the Law of Areopagus, It had been more wisdom for you M. Howler
to have set that rule or law before your eyes in the beginning, At your entry
into your Epistle, as you found it at the beginning of the first book of
Aristotle's Rhetorique, that ye might still have been put in remembrance, to
have kept the same better than you now have done, or to left it quite out,
when you have used all your skill, to move h^er majesty's to the affections of
pity, hatred, and so forth, and have told a great deal more than troth.
You say now out of place in the end that you will keep the Law of
Areopagus. The learned reader in perusing the very first leaf of Aristotle's
Rhetorique and comparing it with this your manner of writing, will by and by
see your vanity and what credit there is in your word, how well you keep the
rules of your profession. You (...).
have taken an evil cause in hand: Aristotle in his Rhetorique says, you
should persuade no such matter though you could. It is an abuse of your art,
supposition deceived you. Aristotle would have you pithie, or bring matter and
stuff for (...).
proof and not be occupied in cunningly stirring up affections with words,
which is the substance of your writing. For that (says he) an argument or
reason is a Rhetorical demonstration, (...).
and the chief in persuasion. Concerning the Law of Areopagus at Athens in
Greece. There were certain judges of capital matters of great authority and
fame called Areopagites, of ye place where they sat in judgment. In this court
were there diverse good laws and civil orders to keep the court and judgment
therein from (...) dealing, and other corruptions as to such cases apertaineth,
some concerning the judges themselves, some concerning those that had to deal
there: Among which this was one, that M. Howlet alleges here out of
Aristotle's Rhetorique, to wit, that none that pleaded in that court should
speak any thing out of the matter, or from the purpose, to stir (...).
up the affection of the judges, and thereby to seduce them and to pervert
judgment. This is commended of Aristotle in his Rhetorique, as an order to be
followed of Orators and was practiced in Athens, as a good and wholesome law,
the crier forwarning and forbidding him that was publicly to speak to use
any preface, or to stir affecttio^s only to propound his matter. And I would
M. Howlet, as be here professes, had in time better regarded and observed
the fame, than he does through his epistle dedicatotorie, so should we have
had less cause to have plained of corrupt dealing, and her majesty and this
church also have been less troubled. Aristotle (finding fault with
Rhetoricians before his tune, for treating in artificial speech, but of a
little portion of that art, and that the lesser and worse to stir up
affections, where in they were most occupied (as M. Howlets practice is in this
his Epistle to her majesty) omitting there whilst matter, substance, and
sound proofs, which is either all or the principal) writes thus:
Arguments or reasons to prove withal, pertain only to art, other things
are accessarie but these Rhetoritians speak nothing of arguments which is the
body of proof and persuasion, but busy themselves most in things that are
without the compass of the matter for tantes or reproach, pity, anger, and
perturbation of the mind, be not of the matter it self: but pertain to the
judge so as if it were in all judgments as it is in some Cities now, and in
such as have good Laws, they should have nothing to speak: For all men
partly think that the Laws ought so to provide, partly use it, and forbid
any to speak out, or from the matter; as it is also in Areopagus judging
rightly hereof: For we may not peruerte the judge or carry him out of the way
by drawing him into anger hatred or compassion: For it were even as if one
should make the measure or rule, that he were to use, crooked to deceive
withal. Thus far Aristotle, enough for this matter, that the reader may see
what dealing we may look for at M. Howlets hands in other things, when we
find him so hollow in his own faculty, and so ill to keep the Law that
he professes to keep, taken out of his master Aristotle, He that list to
see more let him look in the Author him self who declaimeth at large against
this abuse of Rhetorique.

The rest of your Hyperbolicall, that is rauing and rouing speeches without all
truth I omit, and come to touch Interp. Hermogen.
shortly your Epilogus or conclusion. One says that in Areopagus, there was
neither preface nor Epilogus, but as in (...)
your preface at ye beginning likewise so here in the end you freely break the
law of Areopagus, that even a little before Statuimus, id est abrogamus.
ye so promised to keep; so that your keeping is every where a breaking, as we
decree; is we abrogate; you know with who^, and by whose exposition, if not
worse. Your Epilogus or conclusion is mixed with wishes, fawning, false
persuasion condemnation of other and clearing of your self and your fellows.
Good M. Howlet, let words and deeds go once together, do not tell us (while
ye serve in the rampe of Gods, her Majesty's, and the realms enemy under the
Pope of Rome) of ye affection you bear to her (...). She believes you not,
neither can we believe you. You have broken the after oath given to her
majesty before time, and have taken a new oath to the Pope, the banner being
now displayed on both sides and the field pitched. Ye are seen and found
coming in the fight with weapon in hand from under ye enemies standerd, and to
press as hard as ye can against the religion her majesty professes, and the
state. What would ye have her majesty or the state that lead the contrary
Camp judge of you: ye carry a wrong cognizance, and that bewrays you. God in
abundance of mercy long bless her majesty, with all kind of blessings
spiritual and temporal to Gods glory daily more and more, her majesty's
honor, the benifite of Gods church, and the conversion or confusion of al her
enemies, and specially to the confusion of that Antichrist of Rome, that has
and still does, so maliciously and spightfully, seek the subversion of Gods
holy Gospel, and her majesty, and this state the professors thereof: God again
of his goodness long continue with increase the sincere profession of Christ's
holy Gospel and religion among us under her majesty, and in all make us
thankful for so great benefits.

Amen,
An answer to the book, that of a letter, is made a Treatise, or discourse by
M. Howlet.
BEfore the Reasons of the Papists refusal to go to Church, there is a Preface
in this book of theirs, as there is a recapitulation and Epilogus with
addition in the latter end: But the whole body of the work is comprised in
the ix. Reasons. Generally and in sum, in the writers preface, there are two
points contained, whereof the first is, the sorrow and comfort, Gentleman his
friends letters, with the matter and cause thereof: The A division of
Catholics, and a necessary supposition, as he calls it. This is that he
handeleth for the most part in the six first leaves: After follow in order the
reasons of refusal, whereof we shall see (God willing) in their place. In the
mean while, for this part I say, that the pitiful description of England at
this day, which he makes the cause of his sorrow, is a counterfaited matter
between these two Papists, devised to give better color and show to the
whole Tragedy, They have here raised and still seek to do: least this five
kindled by them, should seem to be upon none or small occasion. God be
thanked for the great peace and quiet, that this Realm has long under her
Majesty's happy government enjoyed, to the admiration of Forrayners, and those
abroad, while great troubles have risen round about us elsewhere. And though it
be hard to find among many such rest in any former Princes days, as we have
in this peaceable government under her Majesty hitherto enjoyed, which God
long continue, and give us grace to see and consider the same accordingly: yet
if a certain of these sturring and unnatural Subjects abrod were not more
busily headded then needs a great deal: both they and we all might have
lived in some more rest here at home, to Gods glory, our dread Sovereigns
comfort, and the benefit of the whole common wealth. Thus have we all to
thank them, and they themselves alone, as the authors of all: if by sturres
there have grown any disquietnesse and hurt, either to them or to us here. And
yt sooner they leave this course, ye sooner will there be an end of troubles. To
move commiseration and pity by Rhetorical figure, they guilefully imagine
greater miseries than in truth be found here among us. Thanks be to God,
and her Majesty therefore; they attain not their with and desired purpose in
this behalf.

The rare matter of comfort, that the discourser sporteth himself withal, is
the obstinacy of a few Papists, which show their undutifulness, first to
God, his holy Gospel and word: Next to her Majesty, and her good and
wholesome laws made against superstition and idolatry: All which
undutifulness is covered under the cloak of conscience, when in deed it is
nothing less; as in place we show. So as with some altering of this man's
words we may say: The Devil or common enemy laugheth thereat, the example
is very evil to those abroad that shall hear thereof, and perilous to the
state at home, while other like themselves may seem to be encouraged in
naughty usage, the good and dutiful subjects are offended and molested with
this treacher ous dealing, the Prince also and the state more troubled then
otherwise needed, in preventing and repressing the seditions that are hereby
attempted and moved, neither taking comfort in such Mates presently, nor
hoping any good at their hands in time to come, unless God give the^ better
minds, then they yet show themselue to have: For how can her Majesty trust
them that ungodly breaking God his testament, and the oath made unto his
Majesty in Baptism; (as this man calls it) betake themselves, not to
Christ and Christian religion comprised in holy scriptures, but to Rome and
Romish religion devised by men, that I say not, by the Devil of Hell
himself, and withal, leaving their natural borne Sovereign and Prince,
follow the Pope and foreign power, to her Graces great prejudice, and the
impayring, so much as they may, of her royal dignity and title, which, also
to the uttermost of their power, they impugn, and would bring into hazard:
And as for those of contrary religion unto them, that is such as here stick
to the Gospel and the sincere profession thereof, how can they like of such, as
make no conscience to roue without the bounds of Gods book in his matters,
choosing to themselves a religion at pleasure (if will worship may rather be
called religion, then by the own proper name of superstition) so this whole
part might have been spared well enough, if it had liked the author.

Where the Author makes the lawful and just punishments laid upon certain
of late in England to be for different opinions in religion only, as though
they were otherwise quiet men and good Subjects, besides the public
testimonies of the laws and state here to the contrary, what ever they say or
pretend, all the world that have any eyes may see that they justly suffer in
respect of sedicious and rebellious attemptes, and the busy sturres they make
in disquieting at home and abroad this peaceable state. And albeit; it please
the author to call it Constancy and faithfulness to God, yet they that list
to examine, shall find it an inconstant turning from yt dutiful obedience,
which they had once sworn to their sovereign and prince, joined with
unconscionable and great unfaithfulness to God and her Majesty. M. Howlet, and
his fellow, to make show and only to make show; talk of Nobility and Noble
men, great worship, and Worshipful men, many Gentlemen, men of countenance and
credit in their countries, important stays to her Majesty and state here,
etc. They are all in amplifications, in great matters and personages: Mean
personages be no fit matter for their high style; and yet, God be thanked,
among them of countenance and great calling, there are not so many so unwise in
this case, as they would make men believe, that abstain from coming to
Church and refuse the oath of Allegiance. It is a sort of Runneagates of very
mean calling, that live for most part on exhibitio^ and alms of other me^ at
Rome, Rhemes, etc. Say this man here what he will, and as long as he will,
they shall be judged at the last day with a more indifferent and upright
judgment at Gods hands, the^ by their own corrupt consciences, or vain
opinions and fancies. False also is yt he says: that these men stick to their
faith, sworn unto God in their oath of Baptism, which, because I treat of
elsewhere, I refer the Reader to yt place. Near only I note that this man
makes but two degrees of a public faith or oath, and that truly: one to God;
the other to the civil magistrate under God, which he calls English
Subjects secondarie faith and allegiance, sworn unto her highness as to the
substitute of God: according to the distribution of our Savior Christ in the
Gospel. Give Mat. 22. 22.
to Caesar the things which are Caesar's: and give unto God those that are
Gods. I would he and his fellows would have kept them to this simplicity
and honest dealing still: Then should they not upon a late reconcilement to
the Pope and Popery, by a third faith and oath, contrary to both these, have
so unnaturally and unchristianly shaken of obedience to God and her Majesty.
First her Majesty in Gods name commands that they should haunt Church
assemblies, and hear the preaching of the Gospel, pray with the congregation,
and receive Christ's Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, make public
confession of the christian faith, etc. according to order here taken by her
Majesty and ye State after the rule of the Gospel. In refusing to do this,
they break their first oath and promise of Baptism, if they there made any to
God, as seems they confess they did: Next, her Majesty requires that they
should by oath acknowledge her sovereignty as Gods substitute over them, that
they should return home into their Native country, and live under their and
our most natural and gracious Queen, with other true hearted English
Subieets. She cannot be yielded unto, nor obeyed herein by them: They make
another substitute unto god here over English subjects, besides her majesty in
matters of obedience to their prince and her laws. They do offer her Majesty
great wrong, who by their own confession, give unto her the second place, the
second oath; may not she justly require at their hands to keep their
secondarie faith, and Allegiance sworn unto her highness, as to the
Substitute of God: Let them never talk of their obedient and well meaning
minds, that voluntarily and violently, so freely run to the breaking of
their secondarie faith and alleagiance, sworn unto their civil Magistrate;
call it they as they list. It can be adjudged in deed and truth, no less then
Perjury; and they in taking this wrong course, perjured and forsworn men. It
is a great word and a high with these men, to talk of their obedient and well
meaning minds; Let them leave their good intentes, and well meaning minds,
without all warrant of Gods book, yea commonly contrary thereunto; and let her
Majesty have them obedient, according to the words, and well meaning of the
Scriptures, and she will be content to quite their well meaning minds
otherwise: If neither the scripture, nor her majesty's laws, according to the
Scriptures, nor I, that at this time put the^ in mind of their duties toward
both, can avail; At least, with them that delight in ancient fathers, let the
testimony of that most ancient father among other, teaching them their duty,
according to the doctrine of the Scriptures, prevail with them herein, who
speaking of the chief Civil Maiestrate in his time, and of the Christians
usage in obedience, and duetifulnesse toward him, being an enemy to the
Gospel, and a persecutour in those days, writes Tertullian. ad Scapulam.
thus: we reverence or honor the Emperor as a man next unto God, and
inferior or less then God only. For so is he greater then all men, whilst
he is less the^ the only true God. Let Papists embrace and follow this
heavenly truth, uttered by our Savior Christ, under the name of God and Caesar
(which are but two: this being likewise repeated afterward by the Apostle,
under 1. Pet. 2. 17.
the name of God and the king, and here by this father of God and the Emperor
kept still:) keep this moderation and rule and stick thereto: without talking
of God, the Pope, and then the Emperor, the King, Prince, and Civil
Magistrate, for that is but an ill Commentary, that corrupts the text. In
that which remains, is the Argument of this Discoursing letter, expressed
etc. The Author promises most briefly to touch three things in this letter
to his friend. First, what cause or reason the Catholics so he terms their
stubburnesse.

Thirdely, if that way or means do not prevail,

We see the ground of the whole letter that is now published, and made a
Treatise, or Discourse; As it well may be so called: for in deed, he that even
now promised most briefly to touch three things in this letter, has so
amply discoursed, trotting up and down in his first course, that wearying
himself: partly by evil disposition of body, as he said elsewhere, partly
by other sudden business falling upon him, he was both enforced to leave the
place, and the matter, and time failing him, and he saying more of the first
point, then he purposed at the beginning: the Messe^ger also, that brought
that that was written away, being, as seems in post haste, he forgate
likewise, belike, what he had promised at the beginning, and thereupon either
himself, or some other for him, rather as appears, is forced to excuse the
omission of the second and third part, promised at the beginning. Thus have
we a treatise hereof, borne out of time, maimed, and more then half a
Monster. You that are so great schoolmen and Orators, should have learned, at
the least out of Tullie, that: to omit any thing in dividing is a very great
fault: Yet two things are here clean omitted, or two parts of your own
division, etc. It helps you not if you Scholasticall men, be Scholastically,
or Schoolelike followed, to say: you have reckened us up all three parts
that you purposed to treat of: for we reply, that you promised to treat of
all three. Now, to run such a course in one part, that you quite leave out
the two other: I wot not well how it will agree with the Rhetorike Schools
about you, nor what liberty you Orators, now a days take to your selves: and
therefore I will leave it, saving that me thinks your friend M. Howlet, who
is most like to be the Post or Messenger ye talk of, might have forborne the
printing of an imperfect work, or have been better advised, then to have
Dedicated the same, at least to such a Personage as is her Majesty: But we
might stay well enough for the other two parts, this point to confirm, or
obstinate and poison rather, her Maicsties subjects, was so necessary, that
it was to be hastened: This was the Resolution of your wise heads; Ye are a
Society, I must suppose all is done by consent: Besides, I see M. Howlet in
his Epistle Dedicatorie, to her Majesty, has entered into the second part of
his fellows Division, as the same is reported unto us, in the excuse that is
made in the latter end of the book: for though he have omitted to treat of
Instant and fervent Prayer to Almighty God, very necessary for all Christians
and namely for him and his fellows, that they may do better then they do: he
takes upon him bold recourse unto the Queens Majesty for tolleration in
their corrupt religion, and he is busy with his Authors Motives, etc. which
is the second promised part: It had been better he had been more occupied in
that he has left out of this second part of the Division, and to have
exhorted his Catholics to obedience to her majesty, our most dread sovereign.
This had been a very necessary point in deed, for such of his sect, as are
here given to sedition and rebellion among us. Once, while it is said that the
Author means, to this point to exhort; many mischiefs by that u^de there
while, are among us wrought. God amend them, or cut them more short. I will
not charge M. Howlet here with injury doing, in preventing his fellow:
because it is likely, all is done by compact and agreement among them. It may
seem as things fall out, that all this excuse of omitting the two latter
parts, is but a flourishe, and the promise but a mere pretense: If health and
leisure shall permit, he promises to finishe the rest: but I am hardely
persuaded, that his health and leisure, will in these days serve him to
perform so good an office, being so directly contrary to the profession of
their Popish religion, seeing especially it has lost so good a place, as to
have gone first, or to have been the foundation of the Supplication to her
Majesty. A great opportunity and occasion lost: But least I seem to despair
of them, I pray God this piece of true obedience to her Majesty, may be
thought of, and wrote of by these hot Catholics: But yt it may be done with
better conscience, and more stedfastnes, then he that in Latin wrote Steven
Gardener.
of true obedience in her majesty's fathers days, the most famous and renoumed
prince of blessed memory, K. Henrye the Edmond (...).
eight, or he yt set the preface before it: who both of the^ when time
afterward served, shamelessy revoked that they had done, and returning to
their vomit, most cruelly persecuted Gods people their brethren, for and in yt
matter yt they had before professed them selves, and published to the world,
they showed themselves without all conscience, time seruers only, etc. If to
seek to disturb and molest by Rebellion their Lords and Princes, be the
custom of Heretics, and Sectaries of our time, then with us are the Papists
such here, who follow that trade with her Majesty and this State right. If
Subjects be bound patiently to bear, and to obey, how hardely so ever
their Princes shall deal with them, under pain of deadly sin and damnation,
as these men in fair words will seem to profess, how co^mes it then to
pass they take up the sword against their and our noble Queen Elizabeth.
Again, if English men owe true obedience to her Majesty, for conscience sake,
even as to God himself, why do not papists render it then; If it appertain
not to subjects to judge whether their Princes rule well or not, (as they say)
why judge they the whole matter so violently against her Majesty; Why do other
justify the same by writing; yea, why procure they their Popes most traitorous
bulls to be published and sent over hither; why come they not home, and live
like quiet Subjects; words are wind, and all is but words and wind. Let the^
declame as long and as loudlie as they will, hardly will they be ever able to
wash away this blot.

Now come I to the authors necessary supposition, as he calls it, and the
two sorts of Catholics that he names, where he deuideth badly still, for he
tells us, There are to sorts of Catholics in England. And when he has
done, makes us three before he come to his Reasons. One Treatise. Another
Catholics, whom he accounts damned men in this life. So where he tells us
there are here two sorts of Catholics, we find three, as we find but one
part, of his treatise, where he promised three: this is scholasticall and
Orator like with these men. Let us hear what he says: But first of all is to
be noted that my reasons to the end they may convince, are to be supposed to
proceed from a catholic mind, that is from a man which in his conscience is
thoroughly petsuaded: that only the catholic Roman religion is truth; and
that all other new doctrines and religions are false religions: as all new
Gods are false Gods. etc. First your supposition is ambiguous, doubtful and
captious, by reason you do not plainly and particularly enough express in the
first part what the Catholic Roman religion is, which you say is only
truth: when you oppose all other doctrines and religions which you say are
false, to the Roman religion, you call them new. So as some man might think,
ye talked in the first part of ye true christian religion grounded upon the
doctrine of the prophets and Apostles, and comprised in the canonical
Scriptures of Gods holy Bible which indeed is the only Truth and the old
religion. And this is the very same her majesty and we her subjects here
profess in the church of england, and is elsewhere professed by those that are
termed Gospellers, Protestants etc, whom you yet account and call heretics and
their religion A new doctrine and religion. We call this our religion, not in
captious and doubtefull term the Catholic Roman religion, or which we might
with as much right as you do; the Catholic English religion: but simply and
plainly of the Authors, Gods and Christ's true religion: Or if you will,
insteede of Rome and Roman, which be particular words restraining the word
Catholic, we are content to call it with your fellow M. Howlet in his
EPISTLE DEDICATORIE, the Christian Catholic Religion, or the holy catholic
and Apostolic Religion, of the first Instruments and Planters thereof, as we
see set us down in their writings, or such like speech, for the knowledge,
distinction, and trial of our religion, we refuse not. We are not wedded to
one form of words in that that may be diuersely expressed: as in time and with
time terms and speeches, that for a time serve men, vary; but we would
avoid cloudie ambiguitie in speech: if this I have now spoken of, be the true
religion, ye receive, embrace, and beeleeue, we do so with you, and you with
us, that is we agree; But understand withal, that hereby we overthrow all
Popery and Popish religion, as we do Anabaptistrie, and all other false
religions whatsoever devised and erected by men, not warranted by Gods holy
written word call ye the same Roman, Italian, Germane, French, Spanish,
English, Scottish, or what else you will, where and of whom soever it be
professed, all is one; either it is that I have here shortly described, or else
it is false and naught: The true and Christian catholic religion, is not tied
to any certain place, person, or time; but belongs indifferently to all the
Faithful, in all ages and in all places: either therefore tell us whether you
mean by the catho like Roman religion, that Religion which the faithful
people dwelling at Rome held in the time of the Apostles, To whom S. Paul the
Apostle of us Gentiles, and so of the Romans; wrote the epistle extant and
entitled to the Romans: as he did diverse other to particular churches of ye
Gentiles, as yt the^ was, having yet believing Jews among them. Or if you take
it other wise, make ye religion you mean first agree with that religion which
those Romans then held and were instructed in, which was all one with that of
the Ephesians Phillipians Thessalonians and other Churches planted by the
Apostles, and with ours now, or ours rather is one with theirs, the which is
expressed unto us in their writings, whereto we stick, and not to the places
and people or persons that have succeeded, which all have greatly swarued since
from yt they then were. Or else, if you like not to call your religion to this
trial keep your supposition to your self as false, til you have proved the
matter, for we cannot, to be plain with you, nor we may not receive the Roman
religion as it is at this day and has been now some hundreths of years, for
the Truth, much less for ye only truth; unless we mind withal, to quite and
abando^ God and his eternal Truth, expressed unto us as his revealed will, that
is in the canonical Scriptures of the old and new Testament, which is
commonly called The holy bible, as directly contrary to your Roman and Popish
religion at this day, as white, is to black, Truth, to Falsehood, Christ, to
Antichrist, God, to the Devil, whereof, let that book be the judge between
us. Look whose religion that book will justify, look whose it will
condemn, that do we likewise justify or condemn, by what name soever it be
called, what color or show soever be set upon it, we must bring it to
that trial. It is not the name of traditions, It is not unwritten verities, It
is not multitude. etc, which be the props and pillars of your Roman church and
religion, that can call us from the infallible written Truth of God: howeuer
therefore your glosed and false supposition may satisfy your side or serve a
glosed and false religion, it cannot serve this church and state, you may not
look to have it by and by received of the Queens most excellent majesty, of
the honorable Lords of her privy counsel, and other the godly, learned,
and wise of england. You might think yt could not nor would not persuade, so
godly and honorable personages; that is meeter for the ignorant sort and
fools: you (...)
must lay a better foundation, you must bring better evidence before your
Reasons can convince. Suppositions should be certain principles and evident
truths, not so manifest falshoode as this is, to be received without proof,
we can Aristot. lib. 1. ca. 2.
not suppose, at least we cannot know, that is not. I wish therefore ye had
travailed in proouing this captious and false supposition, that after, your
reasons might have come the better to their effect and end of co^uincing; or we
seen your feeble weakness in your cause: But that you were not able to
perform, you thought best to suppose, and occupy your self in flourishing
with show of (...) reasons, grounded on false principles, rather then forciblye
to prove or to reason soundly. But Aristotle could have told you that
Aristot. (...). lib. 1. cap. 1. and. in Elenchis etc.
in Art of reasoning, thus to do, is to make a Paralogisme, or in plainer
english to speak; it is a kind of iugling and of false and naughty dealing.
Suppose not that the Roman religion, as it is at this day, is the only old
religion, and all other new. The religion we profess, is (as truer) so older
than your new Roman religion, As Christ, his Apostles, and their writings are
before those, upon whom and whose writings you would have us to depend. It may
be in some kind, that your old vessels be not fit to receive this new
(...): If the vessels break, though the wine be spilt, yet the vessels perish.
I counsel you therefore to bring new vessels Luke. 5. 33.
and new hearts, that the new wine being put into new vessels both may be
preserved, rather then that you abhor and reject the new wine, because it
agrees not with your old leaking vessels. An old ragged coat, An old
rotten tree, An old decayed house, etc. If you will needs stick upon old and
new, are not the best and most to be commended you know: Please not your
self therefore so much in these terms: But leave them and go to the matter.
Let Gods book, still I say, be judge between us, for the things you bring
forth, and the things we bring, and there an end. We purpose and hope for
religion to live and dye with that book.

For your Catholics, you say there are two sorts, and yet if I can judge
ought, ye make three: first you tell us of such as be so wicked, and their
case so damnable, as ye mind not to entreat of them: then you tell us of
another sort of Catholics, for whom this Treatise was made to reform their
persuasion, builded as you say, only upon their own fantasy. Ye might as
well have used your own phrase of Conscience, if it had pleased you, though
indeed for abusing the good word of conscience, false persuasio^ or fancy
were every where fitter for you all in your profession. Thirdly, you make yet
an other sort of catholics besides these two: and them you call the only true
Catholics, which altogether refuse to conform themselves to the exercises of
religion here, and to take the oath of allegiance to her Majesty, their
Sovereign and ours under God, etc.

Now Sir, I take it, that these are three sorts of Catholics. Nevertheless
make them for your pleasure but two sorts in other order thus. One sort of
false Catholics, as in deed ye all and every mothers child of you Rome
birds be none other. Let the second sort be true Catholics: but not in your
sense, that is hot papists. Then again, of your false Catholics make two
sorts: one no Christians, and therefore much less Catholics, as you speak,
though you say they be Catholics in another place. The other sort of false
Catholics that remain, for whom you pretend that your treatise was made: ye
call them elsewhere cold Catholics, Schismatike Catholics, heathen men,
Publicanes, etc. and such as ye abhor for Fol. 28. and 61.
their only going to the Protestants Churches. For your selves yt are hot
Catholics take your place among the false Catholics where you like best; a
place among true Catholics can you neither find your selves nor (...) afoord
you, except ye alter your profession. Here is much ado about Catholics, and
a great stir, some true, some false, some hot, some cold, some schismatique,
some Heathen, and Publicanes, some embraced, some abhord. etc. and yet all
Catholics: We poor Protestants may be glad we are out of your hands, when
you play such Pageants among your own me^, taking a general view of your
Catholics here amongst us in England, and dividing and seuering the same
with your Catholic and divine judgment, at first chop ye send the most of them
quick to Hell without all hope of recovery. At next hacke ye cut of a many
branches, if not the very stock and body, and leave but a branche, and that a
weak branche of that tree in this soil, God be praised therefore. Only they
true Catholics; yt do not nor will not come to church here amongst us, nor
acknowledge the Queens Supremacy etc. Are all other catholics here led with
fancy; Are they schismatikes, or damned in hell; Speak out alowde and be
plain. So ye say, and I am in some respect, glad ye so say of your catholics
here amongst us, not yt I wish the^ da^natio^, which ye threat, or yet their
hurt any way: but ye I hope well it will make some of them better advised. Do
one sort of your catholics here sin against the holy Ghost? Are they to be
accounted damned in this life; no Christians; etc. A hard judgment against
those of your own religion, a pitiful case sure: but not with you, who judge
them to blaspheme against ye holy Ghost yt willingly break your holy Canons,
presume to speak against the^, or willingly agree to them that so will do.
And in deed to say the truth of 25. q. I. Vialatores.
them, if there be any such as you here describe, they are very naughty men in
deeply dissembling with God, their sovereign, and the Church, but yet not so
bad, as ye make the^, no damned persons, without all hope of recovery whiles
they live, not sinners against the holy ghost, for all this, if thinking on
their miserable case they will unfeignedly return not to you and your religion
which leave them no hope, but to God by hearty repentance, for deeply
dissembling with him and the world. You reject them quite, and acknowledge
them to be no true catholics; but schismatikes excommunicate persons, etc.
This have they gotten, by liking and professing all this while your Popish
religion: when you once show your selves to fall out with them, a poor
recompense at your hands: You have amongst you the keys of heaven, hell, and
Purgatory, ye can when ye list, send all men whether you list quick and
dead: but ye send men too fast to hell, to be charitable, especially those of
your own sect and profession: Nevertheless, if God have given them ears to
hear, we say first to you, for some excuse or defense of such, as being
aforetime of your sect and religion: howeuer you knew them in those days, yet
we take them to be changed men now, to have learned forth another and better
lesson in Christ's school; and as charity would we judge the best of them,
and generally to speak, we think they allow of Christ's religion here
professed. In sum that their saying, professing, and doing agree, till they
manifestly show the contrary. You sir, that can see far in a millstone, are
privy to men's consciences, it is ye seat where Antichriste challenges to
sit. You tell us here what men judge in their consciences, we cannot go so
far, we leave that to God, and themselves. You yt know well by experience
belike your catholic religion, to be full of hypocrisy and dissimulation, and
to yield Hypocrites, judge according to your spirit, and the fruits of your
religion: but we tell you, we judge them to (...) been in a new and better
schole, else we wish them at least to betake themselves to better masters
then to such, as judging so hardely, deal thus cruelly with them: If they have
by confession told you their conscience in ear shrift, yet are you (...) to
utter the same. Next, if that will not serve; for that you presume to know
those of your side, better then we do: we bid them, remaining in opinion,
such as you tell us, look for that in deed in the end, unless they repent
and that heartily, which you here threaten them, even hell fire with
hypocrites. A just recompense for such religion and doing: but not in respect
that they haunt our Church assemblies though, but for not rightly (...) the same
to Gods glory, their own comfort and edifiyng, and the benefit of other, for
not changing their fancy, and foolish opinion, which you call Catholic
religion and conscience, for continuing in this clear light of the Gospel,
obstinate in their ignorance and superstitions, for their wilful refusing of
Gods merciful calling, etc. which calling of God, if upon this advise they
yield unto accordingly, we assure them (by the warrant of Gods word) of Gods
mercy and favor in Christ. In the mean while, we observe here that amongst
you that will needs be called Catholics, there be by your own confession,
diverse Sects, that ye need not so hotly condemn us your adversaries and our
Religion, because there be Sects among us, and diverse opinions, whereof your
selves and your Religion is no cleerer, nay, it is not hard to find more
diversity of opinions among you by your own confessions, then among those
that profess the Gospel, even here. M. Howlet, writing in his Epistle to her
Majesty, of the diverse known religions in England at this day, reduces them
to four heads with their professors, to wit; Catholics, Protestants,
Puritans, Houshoulders of Love, etc. By Catholics, he means such as are of
your side. Householders of Love, are well known, neither to belong to the
profession of our Religon, and to better agree with Papists and Popery, then
with the Gospel of Christ. Puritans (as it pleases you Papists to call some
here) are by you expounded in this Treatise: Fol. 39. (...). 2.
to be the hotter sort of Protestants. So that here be but two sorts of
Protestants, and this is the difference ye make: Of Protestants, some here are
hotter, and some are colder, and yet neither sin against the holy Ghost. Are
these diverse in Religion; Then I pray you make the like of you Catholics, as
you will be called, for some of you are hot, some are cold, some Puritan
Catholics of yt hotter and better sort as ye say. Some other more conformable
men, as you here speak. And so of cold Catholics, Fol. 21.
ye tell us in another place of your book: Add the contrary difference, and
ye shall find a sort of hot Catholics too: Or else if you will, make three
sorts of Catholics here in England, as you now express us, and so one sort
more, then you make of Protestants. When you have reconciled your selves in
opinions: Then will it be time enough, for you to talk of great division
among us here in Religion, for some difference in opinion that is found among
us, which you count an insolluble argument of your side against us, and yet may
easily you see, be turned on your own heads.

Your three sorts of Catholics, that I say you here express, thus do I set
down, taking the same from your own words. The Catholics that are in this
writing justified only, are such as judge all other Religions false
erroneous, and damnable besides their own, which they call the Catholic
Roman religion. This is one point and common to al Catholics, true, false, one
and other. With all these, judge all perticipation with the religion here
professed in deed, word, or show, by oath, by sacraments, etc. naught,
forbidden, and unlawful: Another, or the second point not so common to all:
and herevppon by no means will they admit or consent to communicate with the
same; This is the third and last point, proper to true Catholics, as you call
them, M. Howlet, the author of this Treatise, and such like be of this first
sort of Catholics. There are made another sort of Catholics that are said to
agree with these in the two first points, disagreeing from them, in the third
only: And yet these that agree so well with them in opinion, and dissent from
them in doing only, and that as they speak, for fear, or some worldely
respect: the former Catholics so abhor and detest, that they pronounce these
yet alive in God his providence, dead and damned in hell. They are privy to
their consciences, they know who shall go thither: nay, they send at pleasure
whom they list: they leave these men without comfort or hope of pardon, and
esteem them no Christians, much less Catholics, so he here pronounces of
them. Of the third sort, I speak after in his place; that agree with the
first only in one, and the first of the three points disagreeing in the other
two points. These second Catholics in the mean while advise I thus: Take
heed to your selves, all yt at this day live in England and be in heart of the
Romish religion, or have to these your ghostly fathers by shrifte, or other
wise showed your selves to be such: finding your selves in this second rank
of Catholics, provide for your selves I counsel you, it stands you in hand
once: for you are shut out of doors for ever from the communion of the
Church of Rome in this life, and are firebrandes appointed by Gods providence
to hell in the world to come by definitive sentence; while ye yet live here,
your Master of whom you have learned your religion, and who best knows (as
seems) your hearts and consciences, and the number of you, speaks thus,
telling us; there be very many such in England, though we hardly believe him,
you must suppose while you hold you to that Religion, that this is the
Sentence of the Pope of Rome, and so of the Catholic Church and of GOD him
self in heaven, immutable and vnreuocable, never to be forgiven neither in
this world, nor in the world to come. Fol. 5. page 1.
This is true, if God be not untrue, says this Catholic M. Alas poor men and
women: Consider in time, into what extremity and misery ye are thrust by
those, whom ye hold of, and whom ye have taken all this while to be your
good friends. I pity your hard case, I assure you: It greeueth me to hear
tell of your eternal damnation in hell fire. They talk of the case of
perplexity, wherein men are sometime wrapped: But here men are tumbled and
wrapped in a harder case by this religion, if harder may be; for dispensation
with them might serve where men be forced, or by necessity driven, to choose
and do evil (as they can speak): here is no hope of any, they are already
paste all recovery in their determination? GOD give poor souls grace, to
consider this gear at the heart: Leaving the maze of Popery: I will now
endeavor to speak out of Gods book some what better to your comfort (good
hearts) that ye may see the difference between the Gospel and Popery, our
Religion and that, be it never so unholy, will needs be called Catholic.
They ungodly and uncharitably (...) you, and drive you with maine force into
despair for ever. Salve it up as they can: we call you, we comfort you, we
stretch out our arms to embrace you, God rather sending us to preach the
Gospel, and to call sinners to repentance; by us as his instruments does this
for you, but mark well how; to repentance (I say) and in yt Christ Jesus does
god and we call you. Be not deceived, in assuring you (in Gods name) as we are
bound, of pardon for all the sins that ye have ever heretofore committed
from the beginning. We bring you no pardon from Rome, nor from the Pope, of
which you see your selves to be out of al hope, by those your Ghostly fathers
judgment, that were sent and came hither to reconcile true catholics as they
speak, to the Pope; you are none of them; they tell you now the resolute
truth with the^, and their conscience: If they speak otherwise hereafter,
never believe them that pretending conscience, speak this without all
conscience: But we tell you out of Gods word, there is yet some hope and
comfort for you, so you will leave that Popish religion, and betake your selves
to the profession of the Gospel of Christ, turning from your sins and
transgressions into the way of righteousness. Hearken, hear, and believe us,
we will not speak unto you our own imaginations and fancies, and call them our
conscience and truth: But we bring you the word of the eternal God, and his
Read Ezekiel. 33. 11. and 18. 23. to the 32.
revealed will and truth, which is this, that as he lives, he desires not the
death of the wicked: but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn
you, turn you from your evil ways (Oh mark this word well). For why will you
die, O ye house of Israel. Though your sins Esaias. 1. 18.
wereas crimsin, they shall be made white as snow: though they were red like
scarlet, they shall be as wool. This is a true saying, and by all means worthy
to be received, 1. Tim. 1. 15.
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. So God loved the world
that he has given his only begotten Ioh. 3. 16. 17. 18. etc.
son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting
life: For God sent not his son into the world, that he should condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved. He that believes in
him, etc. read forward to the 22. verse. These and such like be the very
first words that are spoken, and they shall daily hear to their comfort that
resort to our Churches: But still mark the condition, of leaving our own
defections from God, of repentance, and turning from our own wicked ways,
etc. Turn therefore Look to this purpose, Daniels confession.
from Popery, and hearken to this doctrine, and tell us truly and in deed
whether religion is more true and more Daniel. 9.
comfortable unto you. This which is Christ's, and therefore ours, we wish and
will no other: Or the Popes delivered in this treatise, that condemns you, as
you hear. And yet, if all be well marked, for all this comfortable doctrine
of ye gospel, that is, of God his mercy and grace unto sinners; that by the way
I may answer yt Popish cavil: Preach we not carnal liberty, we set not
open any window to sin, we make not men slothful and negligent in godly
life and good works, etc. as the Papists sclaunder this doctrine. In opening
this plentiful fountain of God his grace to troubled and weak consciences,
we stop not up nor let not the brooks and rivers course that issue thence, of
godliness and good life; nay we further and advance the same greatly: I
would the Papists and Popery did the like; but that will they never do, we
are feign to be occupied in scowring and clensing, where they have troubled
with their filthy mudde; that our doctrine and religion may herein the better
be known: This foundation do we lay thereof; This order with the holy Apostle,
in sum, do we keep: The grace of God that brings salvation unto Tit. 2.
11. (...). 13. 14.
all men has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in
this present world, looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of the glory
of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar
people unto himself, zealous of good works. So then the clear manifestation
of God his healthful grace, or the preaching of the Gospel of the grace of
God, which is the word of life: is so far of from overthrowing godly life
and good works; that it is the fountain thereof, it establysheth and setleth
the same, and like a good School master, is occupied in faithfully teaching
all (...) toward God and man. God make us good and meet scholars. This we
believe, and this we profess: this we daily profess, this we daily propounde
and teach: in receiving and following this course, we are not deceived, we
err not; nay we are sure we go the right way, we please God, and subscribe to
the docrine of the holy Ghost: rail the adversary as much as he list,
against our doctrine and profession.

But I cannot let this Censurer pass thus, that not only cruelly handeleth
his companions: but her Majesty, the State, the Laws, and Magistrates here:
If this (says he) be true, as it is, if God be not untrue (where warranted,
tell us; bare affirmation suffiseth not) then in what a miserable case stands
many a man in England at this day which take oaths, receive Sacraments, go to
Church, and commit many a like act, directly against their own consciences,
and against their own knowledge, you should say against fantastical opinion
etc. Nay, what a case do they stand in which know such things to (...)
directly against othe^r men's consciences; and yet do co^pel them to do it: As
to receive against their will, to swear against their will, and the like, etc.
First, we tell you Sir, for the Scriptures ye cited before, for this purpose,
that ye corrupt the same: and that which ye say is false and ill applied.
Next, we say in just defense of her Majesty our dread Sovereign and the
State, that ye (...) them: for there is no such enforcement, by your own
confession, but that it might be borne, and the going to church, is simply a
willing and free actio^ in those of your religion yt do it, here you say they
receive against their will, swear against their will and ye like Fol. 21. You say
contrary yt it is not against their will but a willing and fre actio^,
absolutely and simply: speak thus still: and ye answer for her majesty and the
state, and condemn that you here say, so you conclude of it: Where things done
by outward violence and compulsion are simply inuoluntary actions. And yet if
it were otherwise, her majesty, and the state (...) cause all the pack of of
you false Catholics: as much as in them lies, to (...) by the doctrine of the
Gospel instructed: and to be privately also conferred withal, for the
remoouing of you, from your foolish, that I say not; deuilish opinions. They
know, what ever you brag of conscience, that if you will not hearken and give
over to the Gospel and word of God, it is but wilful obstinacy and peevish
standing in your conceived opinions. It is senselesnes, and not conscience.
They know and see that your proceedinges and busy stirs needs some sharper
severity than hither unto; seeing you have so greatly abused her majesty's
former lenity and clemency. According to duty therefore to God, in their
calling, do they proceed. Lastly, they, have for their warrant the example of
godly Emperors, Kings, and States both before Christ, and since, set down in
histories and their laws. This am I forced often to tell you and your fellows
that so much and often maliciously repeat this intolerable and wicked (...).
For the other point of your allegation of Scriptures, find us the words in
the fourteenth chapter to the Romans, you set us down, which ye shall never
be able to do look even upon your own translation: Or else confess when you
are taken with the manner, that you are a corrupter of the Scripture. Is a man's
corrupt or erroneous conscience or knowledge and faith all one think you; such
knowledge, if ye so will call it, is one thing c: onscience is another, and
faith differing from both, a third thing. Error and falshod in knowledge
bastard and corrupt the same, be enemies to faith, and no friends to conscience
Humble, iumble, such is your religious handling of the scriptures. I pray you
howeuer you talk of ye sense and meaning; shuffle us not out the holy Ghostes
words and phrase. A man, when the Apostle speaks only of the faithful, is
too general. Decerne or judge it to be unlawful, is put into the text by your
self, as is, not according to his conscience or knowledge. The next words
adjoining, are also a text of your own coining. In ye last of the three
sentences here cited, out of the fourteenth to the Romans, where find you in
doing contrary to that he best allows; And all these corruptions be in that
one place that you would cite out of S. Paul to the Romans. It is the first
text ye allege, ye give us but a taste therein, of the forgerie we have to
look for at your hands, if we have not good regard to you and your doings, It
is not for us now adays to receive things from you, namely the scriptures at
your hands upon your bare credit and report. S. James his place also somewhat
halteth by your citation: but let this pass. M. Howlet and you iumping so
close together in corrupting this text of S. Paul I need add no more then
that I have already said thereof: but refer the reader to my answer made to
him in his place: whereof, if you and he have any, shape me a good defense,
you will leese nothing for quoting thrice for failing the fourteenth to the
Romans in your margin Matthewe, Mark and Luke, for one sentence of the
Gospel. John the 15. proves not that you cite it for. Gregory out of whom
you took it cites it fitlier a great deal. Acts. 9. occupies also a room,
and touches not this sin against the holy Ghost, unless the whole had been
better understood, and applied, howeuer you would needs set us down those
holy writers to fill up your margin, yet might you have spared well enough your
doctors: your D. Thomas is twice here called forth, Gregory the Pope, is
adjoined to him, the place alleged out of Augustine is sufficiently answered
by the Godly and learned brother D. Fulke. It is very unfitly applied to the
multitude and common sort, and such as do things for fear, etc. That
Augustine shows, is properly to be applied to captains and ringleaders; but
without all proof, more unfitly yet to such as join with truth and godliness
though erring in conscience, is that applied which pertains to the leaders
into error, schism, and (...), but the supposition must help although it be
no reason. S. Paul's doctrine speaking of meats, or things in themselves
indifferent and lawful: and your doctrine talking of communicating with the
churches wherein the Gospel of Christ is preached, or abstaining from the same,
which is simply good or evil, agree as well as light and darkness, truth and
falsehood. Ye say truly that S. Paul lays no less punishment upon the sin
against a man's own conscience, than judgment and damnation, no more does he
upon any sin: Be it done according to the doers conscience, as you single
things, or against it: for that doctrine is general, The wages of sin Romans
6. 23.
is death: By one offense giltines upon all to condemnation. Romans 5. 18 and 16.
And again, judgment of one offense, unto condemnation. etc. But he deals
more favorably with the parties and their persons than you do; who leave them
without all hope of pardon in this world, or in the world to come, charging
them to have sinned against the holy Ghost. etc. S. Paul in the 14. to the
Romans, charge not those so far, unless he be racked: but that by
repentance they may be renewed again. The matter ye talk of is but an act
committed against a foolish co^ceite, or devilish opinion: which hardly can be
called conscience, unless ye prove it better than hitherto. God open their
eyes, and give them, that be entangled therein grace to leave it. I answer
you, I defend not their sin and wickedness, what ever it be: neither must ye
think we equal al sins or make no degrees therein, we acknowledge some be
greater, worse, and more heinous sins then other, but this is not
unpardonable nor sin against the holy Ghost, that we say.

For your description of sin against the holy Ghost out of D. Thomas to be
against an appropriate good thing, as your schools like to speak. As we are
not bound to believe them nor you in your subtilties: So in the application ye
make there of upon your own Catholics and to sin committed against
conscience, hardly agree you with D. Thomas, who makes that sin to be
committed of certain malice only. Again I marvel how you, that are so
addict to old doctors, could (to follow this opinion of others) leave the
exposition of the ancient doctors herein. Athanasius, Hilarie, Ambrose,
Hierom, Chrysostom, and Augustine, whose sentences of the sin against the
holy Ghost. D. Thomas reckons up in his sum. And if this (...), yt ye
follow be admitted, and the six kinds of sin against the holy Ghost, that D.
Thomas after the M. sets down, you had need to look well to your self,
that you be not 2. 2 q 14.
(...) charged therewith, rather then set so fiercely upon other. Inuidentia
(...).
Besides this, where your D. Thomas in his golden chain upon the words of
Christ, expressly treats of the (...) grace in ones brother.
sin against the holy Ghost; And after his manner reckons up the approved
doctors opinions he mentions not that exposition D. Thom. in aurea cathena.
in 12. Matthew.
that you here set us down: And seems directly to charge you in this your
application thereof, to be a Nouatian heretic; who said that the faithful
after their fall can not rise by repentance, nor attain to the forgiveness of
their sins, principally they which being in persecution (mark this) did
deny the truth, And this is the woorst that I am sure, even you can, will, or
do charge your own Catholics with now: who you say are to be accounted (ac
cording to S. Paul, that is untrue) damned men in this life: Or that they
sin against the holy Ghost, which to say is to play the Nouatian heretic.
Moreover, D. Thomas thus reports there, not from himself alone; I cannot see
how even the departing from christianity or the catholic church is sin
against the holy Ghost, and reason thereof is there rendered. Again, it cannot
be judged of in this life: for we must despair of none as long as the patience
of God brings to repentance: for what if those whom vou note in any kind of
error, and condemn them as most desperate men before they end this life,
repent and find true life in the world to come, with many other things
which out of Augustine he there recites, whom, he also most commonly,
follows. These things be contrary to your singular opinion against your
false Catholics. And yet I suppose you will admit this: if not for their sake,
out of whom it is alleged, yet for that ye take that which D. Thomas wrote as a
heavenly Oracle, according to Christ's Been (...) i de one Thoma. dixit (...)
Christi.
answer, so you beeleeue, given Friar Thomas by the mouth of the Image of the
crucifixe: Thou have written well of me Thomas. Furdermore, if one would enter
into more particular examination of that you say, it were not hard to improoue
this your subtle exposition: and by as good ground to ascribe to the father
authority, to the son nativity, or with the scripture power and grace, which
you appropriate to the father and the holy Ghost. And to the Aug de Ver. do
mini sermon. 11.
holy Ghost community of the father and the son, unity, society, Vide D.
Thom in 12. Mattb.
charity, or else power which you ascribe here to the father, as it may be to
both the father and the holy Ghost etc. This were not hard for him to do, yt
were disposed to dally John. 1. 17.
with the Scriptures and truth of God, as you do, drawing yt 1. Cor. 1. 24.
same into diverse and uncertain expositio^s too irreligeously. Gregory has not
one word of sin against the holy Ghost in place ye quote: I grant you, he
speaks of insirmitie, ignorance, Mag. Senten. lib. 2. (...). 43. D. and
(...). lib. 1.
and purpose, but every sin done advisedly or of purpose is not sin against
the holy Ghost. I pray you, sir, if these your catholics did commit a sin,
and that a grievous sin in haunting Protestants churches (which I trust they
do with better and more religious minds than you judge, or hereafter at least
will, Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come. etc. and so sin
not 1. Cor. 4. 5.
at all, But serve God faithfully) But I say put the case, there be some such
naughty men (then God amend them) But why I pray you may they not be judged
to do yt they do, of humane frailty, as did Peter, seeing you say they do it
for fear, favor, or some worldly cause. This is but hard freedom, hard
election, and hardly to be called mere will and malice, if al these terms be
admitted to define sin against the holy Ghost. Augustines modesty, noted by
Thomas, would have beseemed you: This is a deep question, let the Aug. de
verb. domini (...). 10
light of exposition thereof be sought for of the Lord. I tell you beloved,
there is not possible a greater nor a harder question in all the holy
Scriptures: Thus far Augustine, Whose description both Petrus Lombardus, and
Thomas auowe and like, better then I do youres. There seem ywis more things
required in the description of it, than you here express. In your heat you
shake up these your catholics: God make them wise, and you shall gain little
either by them or by that kind of handling. It is better going to the Popes
hell, or by his pretended sending thither than by his, that is able to destroy
both body and soul in Matthew. 10. 28
hell fire. Wherefore let us fear him that is the eternal God, which alone
has power to save and to destroy. I James. 4. 12.
speak not all this while to defend any man in doing against conscience any
thing, or if these men have so shaken off al reniorce of conscience, that they
are lulled a sleep in security; I with them to awake to learn a better
religion which is joined with conscience. I answer the adversaries unjust
charge and threat, and hope the best of such as communicate with Christ's
church and religion, here professed, or show them whereto they have at least
to trust. I would have none flatter themselves in evil, which these men
cariyng such a conscience, as he here speaks of, or such a mind, and not
altering the same, do, and are in a dangerous case for nourishing such a
serpent in their bosom, as is popery; and yet dissemble with all the world,
in pretending to be of another religion. The man's talk here (having been
possible abroad a shriuing of many, or taken it from them that have so done,
and so knowing their consciences better then we, that live among them, and are
daily conversant with them: for that we sift not their consciences) may make
one doubt there be many hollow hearted Catholics among us, or worldlinges
rather and Atheistes: for in deed such are utterly without God and have no
conscience at al. I wish them therefore to look about the^, men may be damned
and many a one is damned for other sins, the^ the sin against the holy Ghost,
how ever they sin, and that grievously: I dare not say they sin against the
holy Ghost for all this, or may not' be good me^ in time to come. Thus make I
mine argument against ye adversary: Nothing supposed to be done of fear,
favor or other passion, can be justly called sin against the holy Ghost: The
Catholics communicating with our churches is a thing supposed to be done, of
fear, favor, or other passion, even by this man and other of that side:
Therefore the Catholics communicating with our Churches, can not be justly
called sin against the holy Ghost. Thus far of those, that you account the
worst, and to to badde Catholics, I pray God we may find them good Christians:
And yet, if they have learned any evil, they have learned it of your religion
and in your school. I have been herein the longer because the whole book
seems to be written against this kind of men. God open their eyes they may
see, know, and discern their friends from their foes, be careful, and
watchful, amending at least in time to come, that which is amiss.

The third sort of catholics, or the second as you term them (quite leaving
out such as your self are) agree but in one of the three points I spoke of
before, and dissent in two: they judge all religions beside their own, say
you, false, erroneous and damnable, this have they common with other Roman
catholics: but they think it lawful for some worldly respect, as for saving
their offices, dignities, liberties, credits, or the like, to show themselves
conformable men, in going to church, and other church proceedinges here. etc.
thinking also other too scrupulous that stand in refusal of ye same. This make
you ye proper difference of these from other catholics. Now as they agree
with the rest in the first point: so in going to church, taking oath,
communicating. etc. they disagree from hot Catholics, and agree therein with
those I have at large discoursed of even nowte. The more I perceive they
acquaint them selves with the Gospel of Christ here professed and received:
the more dutiful they show them selves to her Matestie, the worse be they
liked of you: but the matter is not great. Albeit these agree no better with
you hot Catholics, but dissent in mo points then the other that went before,
yet ye thought it policy belike, having so scourged and taken up those,
somewhat here to spare these men, least you should do your religion too much
hurt, if you should fall too far out with all besides your selves. In places
elsewhere, you take them up very sharply though: but here thinking good to forbe
are, least you should want another main branche of your tree, ye have thought
good to make this Treatile for them, and take pains to set down Reasons, for
the due reforming of them, being in better hope then of the former: but if all
things be well considered, there will be found falsehood in fellowship, and
very hollow dealing. You cut them off from you, and yet you would feign hold
them in still, what opinion you hot Catholics have of all besides your selves,
even such of your own side, whom ye speak farest unto, let me be bold
shortly to give here a taste. Generally you count no better of all them that
go to Church here, for what respect soever, other then such as the Pope will
allow; (whereof you speak, and we shall see more in your qualifications
afterward) then of Apostataes, renouncers of the Catholic religion,
perfidious, betrayers of Gods Catholic cause, traitors to God, no Christians,
Heathen men, and Publicanes. etc.

And yet good sir, all these, as badde as they be, are birds of one feather,
and one neste, Scholars of your own teaching, and none of our religion, yea,
they defy it as you suppose hollow gear still, and nothing but hollow
Catholics. All the Catholics in England that go to Church, directly deny
their religion: yea, the yielding therein is a flat and evident denying of
God and of his faith: And yet they remain and be accounted Catholics still,
what a religion call you that: wherein men may deny not only their religion:
but God and his faith too, and yet be of the religion still: Your Catholics you
speak of be such, yet be they in your heap still: that is, Catholics, and
of the Catholic Religion. They be out of the Church, and so without hope of
Salvation, Scismatikes, excommunicate persons, and yet Catholics still, and of
no other religion: A good religion sure, and a commendable is that they hold:
who be Atheists and godless men in your opinion if they be not; which
directly and slatly renounce God and his faith, and yet judge all other
religions false and erroneous besides their own opinion, and will
nevertheless communicate with the same for some worldly respect, and condenme
other that will not do as they do: Now if Athiests, etc. be Catholics, I
can not tell what to make of you Catholics, you be neither fish, nor flesh,
nor yet I ween good read hering, as they say, the wrong and perilous
perswau^on that these men are said here to be in; builded only on their own
fantasy, may beseem a fantastical religion, not grounded on Gods word: but
on vnwrttten verities, traditions, doctrines of men, custom, multitude, etc. as
popery is. Little reformation, as hithetto may serve such a deformed religion:
for these two sorts of Catholics, as you call them, we think ye do in the
one, as in the other, that is, but imagine, and go all by supposition: it is
your Clearklie dealing, whereof you hear what I say: The advice that I can
give them is, that they leave not only that perilous persuasion of
communicating with contrary Religions, but also, and principally their Popery,
and the opinion they have of that religion: which as the rest, is builded only
on fantasy.

Now have we viewed your Catholics that you have set us here down, agreeing
all in Popery, though but ill fauouredly, and among them selves also hardely,
if your reasons following, proceed from such a Catholic mind, as you have
described us in these men, surely they are hollow, and can carry no great
weight with them, with such as live here in her majesty's dominions, I verily
think they can little or nothing at all prevail, if they have especially any
wisdom or fear of God before their eyes: for them yt being in heart, of your
religion, and do clean contrary thereunto, I wot not how easily they will be
led by you: but surely if they will depend upon God and his word, they
need neither fear your threats, nor regard your Reasons, for any value or
weight that is in the same.

But before I enter into the particular examination of your nine Reasons,
having respect to the rude and simple sort, I will make bold to set down a
reason contrary unto yours: whereby I mean to show, that all men here living
if they be not too far gone, are bound to haunt Church assemblies, and the
exercises of Religion used among us. And yet before I set down my reason, both
for the just defense and clearing of her Majesty and the State, here against
such quarelpikers, as you be: And also for yt better satisfiyng of all her
Majesty's duetifull subjects and people, I say, to gods glory, yt her
majesty, and yt state have not pretended to renounce Popery, a hollow and
rotten religion, grounded upon whatsoever not upon Gods holy word, surely
contained in the Canonical Scriptures, (as at this day is clear to all that
have eyes to see) to establishe another Religion, though not so badde as
Popery, yet not auowable, devised either by her self, or by any other men:
but professes to set up the only true religion of Jesus Christ, taken out of
the Scriptures. Her Majesty and the State have, and do declare to the world
daily, that in steed of men's inventions and glorious shows or voluntary
Religion, and will woorship, as the Apostle notes, Superstition. She and they
esteem the word of God alone, Col. 2. 23.
to be the foundation of true religion. The Apology of this Church of
England: The Articles of religion, set forth by public authority: and such
other writings do sufficiently prove this godly purpose and meaning, and even
of late in the proclamation for the recalling home of her Majesty's subjects
from beyond the seas, etc. is the same by express words mentioned. None
(though the Papists and enemies would make the world believe so) are here
called to the King and Queens religion, but with her Majesty, all degrees and
persons are called to Gods and Christ's true religion only, which she with
her people professes. Acts of Parliament, and Statutes, are not set into
Churches, in stead of Mass books, Grayles, Legends, Portuises, Images, etc.
But the Sacred Bible, the book of the High and Immortal God of Heaven,
faithfully translated into the mother tongue, to be read, expounded, heard, and
understood of all, to the unspeakable comfort, her Majesty's Civil Ministers;
As counselors, Judges, Justices, and so forth, are not the Church Ministers:
but spiritual Pastors and Teachers, which are and by faithful preaching ought
to show themselves to be the faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus, the Prince
of Pastors, or Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls. Her Majesty has not
taken away the Popes Antichristian office, and usurped title here, to set her
self in his place, nor to take on the other side Christ's office in hand, or
to infeoffe her self of his titles: who leaves even to Christ's Ministers,
their proper functions and charges whole, of preaching the word, administering
the Sacraments, public, prayer, and Church discipline: how ever this wrangler
and his fellows would bear the world in hand, all Church Ministry, and
functions are here exercised by mere lay men: and yet in the mean while, her
Majesty accounts justly it to be her office and duty, and to appertain to
a kingly authority (according to the high dignity of her royal throne, and
princely estate, and calling) to moderate, and by all means to assist,
according to Gods holy word, and to see the same faithfully executed, by every
particular in their degree: which, who so (...) or deny her Majesty, provoke
Gods heavy wrath, and displeasure, and she we them selves unworthy to live,
much less to enjoy so great blessings under so gracious a Sovereign: She
takes only, yt which is by Gods word due to Princes and Civil Magistrates,
she will suffer no one, besides her self, to be the chief Governor in her
dominions, under God, Christ, and the word, call ye him, Prince, or Prelate,
she requires her subjects first and principally to be Gods faithful
servants in duly and reverently keeping the exercises of true Christian
religion every one in their calling, expressed in the two Cables of Gods holy
commandments; which by her authority given of God she mainteyueth, and
like a godly Prince purposes still so to do. Next, unfeignedly to acknowledge
the Sovereignty given to her Majesty from God, for all outward and Civil
policy in her dominions. This, justly may she challenge, and more she
requires not, and who is there that justly can refuse or deny her Majesty
this: Out of Gods book rere religion, confirm faith, edify conscience, grow
and profit daily in godly knowledge and practice thereof. In sum, walk in
single uprightness of heart with God and man, and where this is the more
seen, there are the parties the better liked and commended by her Majesty and
the State, yt both God may be the truelyer served, her Majesty obeyed, and
others by good example in life and conversation edified. This is that I say
briefly, that the profession of religion here at this day in her Matestie, the
State, and her people, is no new profession, nor any other: but such as is
common with the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and all Gods faithful people
that have lived in any age, and is warranted by Gods holy word written. Now,
if in bending, and contendyng hereto, her Majesty, the State, and people,
every one in their place, have not thoroughly and fully attained to their purpose
in reformation and practice hitherto: yet is not the profession and purpose to
be blamed, yea, their will and affection is much to be commended, and they to
be encouraged and stirred up, to grow daily from good to better, in these cold
and naughty days, while other, seeing in so weighty and necessary a matter,
many and great abuses, sit still, and either maintain, or wink thereat.
Prayer, in this great work, is of all, and above all to be adjoined, and such
help of Godly knowledge, wisdom, counsel, and other gifts as God bestows
on any, would be brought forth to the advancement of this heavenly work:
every one keeping his bounds and calling. The foul and filthy dung hill of
Popery, and superstition, is not so soon voy ded, our sins are the only,
or the greatest impediment, and let of the full finishing of this work: if
there be any thing wanting, it is our hearty repentance, and unfeigned turning
to GOD, with thankful hearts expressed in words and deeds, for the graces
(...) upon us. In the mean while, where the profession I have spoken of, is,
and the work taken in hand, and entered as we see here among us, I say there
are none but very obstinate and wilful men that will refuse to come to the
public Church assemblies, to hear the word of God preached, the Sacraments
of Christ, and public prayers, etc. comfortablie administered, which that I
may in other words somewhat formally for our adversaries pleasure express,
thus now I frame my reason: None supposed to have Gods fear before their eyes,
to have care of their own salvation, to have respect to her Majesty, and
their duty toward so virtuous and gracious a Sovereign, and her godly and
wholesome laws. Again, to have due and charitable consideration of the Church
of God and their Christian brethren, and common honesty among men. No such, I
say, can or ought to refuse to come to church exercises used here among us at
this day: But all persons of what state or condition soever they be living in
England, are supposed to be such, that is: to have Gods fear before their
eyes, to have care of their own salvation, to have respect to her Majesty,
and their duty toward so virtuous and gracious a Sovereign, and her godly
and wholesome laws: Again, to have due and charitable consideration of the
church of God and their christian brethren, and common honesty among men:
Wherefore no persons of what state and condition soever they ve living in
England, can, or ought to refuse to come to Church exercises used here
amongst us at this day. The conclusion or the sequel of this argument and
reason being so well grounded, the adversaries cannot, nor will not I think
deny me, if they will, let them turn me to the proof of the goodness
thereof, or of the form of any argument I have made them: The ground of the
first part of mine argument, and the reason is because amongst other godly
things: as public prayers, provision for the poor, etc. Here is professed
and set forth principally in Church assemblies: the Ministry or Preaching of
Gods holy word and Gospel; and professed the obedient hearing and receiving
thereof, with the administration of Christ's Sacraments, according to the rule
of Gods book, which be notes and exercises of Gods true and faithful
congregation, whereunto every true christian ought to associate and join
himself. The second or middle part of my reason, there is none I take it
would be thought so wicked as to make question or doubt of.

Though the (...) and flender dealing of our adversary in particularly seeking
to find out faults in our church exercise in his seventh reason, be a
sufficient clearing thereof to him and his word, with those yt list advisedly
and with indifferency to weigh ye same, when they see he (...) charge it, and
(...) it untouched for ought he (...); where (...) we shall see God willing
when (...) come thither: yet because I have not to regard the adversary only,
but some other also, and among the rest, such especially as are sunple, rude,
and somewhat ignorant. Therefore will I be bold a little to wade here in the
proof of the particular parts of that piece of mine argument, wherein may
seem any (...), or to show the head of the fountain and spring whence the
whole is derived. Mark well the argument, and namely the first part of it: for
some further and better proof whereof, I note this that follows: None that
are supposed to have Gods fear before their eyes will refuse to come to
Church here. Why so; For because God is the author of such assemblies,
requires this duty, is present there, and blesses the same: This, if
comparison be made, is proved not only by the practice and example of Gods
people in all ages under the Law and the Prophets before Christ's coming in
the flesh, in going then to the Tabernacle, the temple, etc. and of the
Disciples and faithful, after Christ's Ascension, as the story of the Acts of
the Apostles does witness, according to whose direction and steps, so near
as we may herein, we profess and endeavor our selves to walk: But by the
express doctrine Mat. 18 19. 20
of our Savior Christ himself also, Verily I say unto you, that if two of
you shall agree in earth upon any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be
given them of my father which is in heaven, for where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, etc. Now that
we are bound to honor, love, obey, and worship God according as he appoints
us, and deserve very evil in doing the contrary, none I trust doubt, then
surely can none justly doubt of this point, of coming together to hear our
duty told us out of Gods book by preaching, to make publik confession of our
sins, of ye christian faith, to make prayers to God for our necessities, and
others, and namely those of his church, to give him thanks, and praise his name
in Psalms, to celebrate the Sacraments of Baptisine, and the Lords Supper,
etc. which be the substance and principal ends of our Church meetings. The
next point is of the care of our salvation, which none also I trust among us be
void of. Then cannot they doubt likewise whether they ought to practice and
use such outward means as God has appointed to bring men to salvation by.
Public church assemblies were first instituted and appointed of God for our
use, and for our good, and the principal things there to be used, are the
preaching of ye Gospel and the ministering of the Sacraments, to wit:
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, according to Christ's holy institution for the
(...) and increase of our faith, whereof they are seals as the commission
given to the Apostles, their (...) practice, and the use of the Primitive
Church sufficiently declare. And in this respect is the Gospel called, not
only the word of God: but the word of (...) also, of grace, of faith, of
salvation, etc As that which is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes, etc. If then we will receive the end of our faith, which is the
salvation of our souls, we must walk the way that leads thither, and use
while we may, those means that God has appointed to bring us thereto; by
contemning whereof we shall show our selves to have no care of our salvation.
For the benefit that redoundeth to men by this exercise, remember what the
Apostle writes: When the whole Church is come together in one, etc. If all
Prophecy, and there come in one that 1. Cor. 14 23. 34. 25. 26.
believes not or one unlearned, he is rebuked of al men and is judged of all.
And so are the secrets of his heart and. Cor. 6. (...). etc
made manifest, and so he will fall down on his face and worship God, and say
plainly that God is in you indeed. And a little after: Let all things be done
unto edifiyng. We as workers together beseech you (with the holy Ghost) that
ye receive not the grace of God in vain: and behold, now is the accepted
time: Behold now is the day of salvation, etc. The dutiful respect we ought
to have to our Sovereign, and the present State, our common mother, and her
Majesty's godly laws is next to be considered: which they that duly shall do,
besides other matter and occasion of thanksgiving to God offered to every one
in private, cannot besides refuse to haunt public church assemblies. That it
pleases her Majesty to have care of our souls healths that are her Subjects,
and to take pain to make laws and set orders for the advancement thereof is
the part of a good and blessed nurse in Gods church, and a singular benefit to
vs-warde. It is nothing to cause Preachers and preaching of Christ's Gospel to
be sent abroad in all quarters of her Dominions, etc, all must needs be in
(...) on our behalfes and so turn to our greater and more just condemnation:
if we thankefully accept not, and carefully use to Gods glory, and our own
profit this so great a grace of God offered, and take the opportunity. Again,
as duty greatly binds us to our princes and sovereigns to obey their
authority, and to honor them, especially being godly: so among other things;
have we to pray for them, not in private only; but in public also with
other, and thereby receive we also great benefit many ways. Notable is that
heavenly sentence of the blessed Apostle I exh ort therefore that first of all
supplicatio^s, (...). Tim. 2,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, for kings
and for all that are in authority, that we may live a godly, a quiet and
apeaceable life in all godliness and honesty: for this is good and acceptable in
the sight of God our Savior: who will that all men shall be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the truth, etc. This one sentence alone, well weighed if there
were no more might suffice for the matter we speak of. They can surely be no
friends to the Queens Majesty and the State, and so consequently not to
themselves, yt refuse in public with other continually to pray for the
prosperity and good of her Highness, and the State, etc. The last point is
the Church of God and our christian brethren, Countriemen and others amongst
who^ we live: Unto whom I think there is no man doubts, but we ought to have
a charitable regard and like respect to our living honestly among the^. Now
what charitable regard is that, to refuse in so holy, as Church actions be, to
join with the Church where we live, to (...) from giving public testimony
of our faith and religion, showing our selves to the world in so doing, to be
of no religion: And so by example to offend many ways and many men, the
strong, the weak, the faithful, the unbelievers, etc. When of duty we
should not only avoid that: but every way (...) all, namely one another in
all godliness and honesty, upon pain of Gods displeasure; keep, entertain,
and testify by all means the unity we have with Christ's Church, which
things are singularly performed by us in haunting Church Hebr. 10. 23, 24.
25.
assemblies, Let us keep the profession of our hope, says the Apostle,
without wavering: for he is faithful that promised: and let us consider one
another to provoke unto love and to good works, not forsaking the fellowship
that we have among our selves: as the manner of some is etc. Though this be an
ample matter and might very easily be waded in at large, yet I content me with
this su^mall and short declaration thereof. When marriages are to be made and
celebrated, children to be baptized, etc, where and how shall this and the like
be honestly and orderly performed and done, if we refuse church assemblies
here: It were not hard to run over all this authors nine reasons, and to
turn the^ all on the adversaries own head: As to give example, for infection
and the danger thereof, which they cannot be free from that abstain from
coming to Church here, lying open to the enemy of our salvation, and so not
in danger to be infected only: but by the Devils infection and poison, utterly
consumed and destroyed also: for explanation and trial whe^reof, mark the
nature, power, and property of the Devil: with whom we poor wretches have
to deal. Mark on the other side the nature of preaching the Gospel, namely
mark that our Savior Christ speaking to Jerusalem expresses it to be. How
often would I have gathered thy children together, Mat. 23. 37.
as the hen does her chicken under her wings and ye would not: and
consider what danger of the Puttock and Kyte the little chickin be in, not
being under the Hens wings upon this clucking and calling. Again mark what
danger the sheep be in of the thief and of the woolfe if either they run
astray out of the fold or be not daily fed and looked unto by the vigilaunt
Pastor and Minister of Gods holy word, etc. And it will not be hard to find
out how necessary it is for us daily and often to come to the Church to hear
the preaching of the gospel, to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper etc.
And how hurtful the abstaining therefrom, is unto us. Ywts if Popery and
Popith religion; if ignorant sir John's had but half as much to allege out of
Gods book the holy scriptures, yea but a cloak and coulor for their mumpsimus,
(...) service and abominable mass, and for their blasphemous sacrificing
priesthood, as we have for our holy assemblies, and the preaching ministry of
the Gospel by faithful Pastors in the Church, at this day, they would brag
mightily, and triumph: But thanks be unto God, they have not so much as one
clear syllable ne yet hardly any pretense. We Luke 11. 28.
bear what our Savior Christ says, blessed are they that hear the word of
god and keep it, etc, Tell us you if you can, what he says; for hearing mass
and Popish service: The other Reasons of offense, of note to distinguish and
know our religion by, of schism; participation, etc: might be dealt in, and
the like said thereof as in the first of peril of infectio^: But here I leave
yt to the Christian Readers consideration, especially seeing this argument is
at large entreated of by diverse godly learned in their writings. I pray God
all we his people, her Majesty's subjects, referring things to the right end,
may better then hitherto use to our salvation, these comfortable means of
Church assemblies, that we may reap plentiful profit by hearing the word
preached, etc. and not stick in outward ceremonies or doing of things for a
fashion, which is but too common in the world, and the redress hardly
compassed; howbeit let us not flatter our selves: God has dealt mercifully
with us, and her majesty has not only cleared her self herein toward us,
but greatly deserved at our hands also; so as all the fault is and rests in
our selves alone, and the matter will be but badly answered before God another
day; if we look not to it in time. I am not ignorant that the enemy will cauil
hereupon, but merely cavil indeed, as is easy to be seen in the rest,
without all good ground: So as he can hardely deceive any, but such as offer
themselves willingly to be deceived. But I respect, as I said, others besides
the enemy. If there be any found in this Church and reformation, some defect,
As what church is pure from all spots, living in this world upon the earth:
yet the preaching of the Gospel, and the administration of Christ's Sacraments,
concerning the substance being kept hole, and the desire and meaning, not being
to nourishe and maintain any ungodliness, abuse, etc, contrary to the
Scriptures, but according to thmeasure of faith and knowledge given of God; as
opportunity may serve to reform and redress the same: There is no cause or
reason why we should leave the communion with the church, or leese the
benefits offered unto us, in the same by the preaching of the Gospel and the
administration of the Sacraments, without nevertheless allowing in this our
joining with the Church, any abuses or devises of men, or their additions,
which through ignorance and imperfection, that yet remain even in Gods church
too easily crepe in. One of these extremities will the devil our common enemy
assay to bring us unto if he can. And we have great cause and need to look
about us, and to take heed of his slightes on both sides. And herein not to
dissentble or to flatter with those of authority and public charge as is her
majesty, and those of the state here. But to begin with them with all reverence
and dutiful consideration, and their good accepcation, I doubt not, I am bold
under correction, to say, that for the training up of us their people in Gods
true religion, it is their parts, in matters of Gods Kingdom and Christian
Religion, to look narrowly, and well to their proceeding, and doing, to try
and examine the same by the touch of Gods holy word, as well on the part of
the church Ministers, and ministry, as the rest of Church government, that
all to Gods glory may answer the pattern set down in his written word, They
pray I any sure as well as we daily at our heavenly masters commandments,
Hallowed beethy name, Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, They have not therefore to content themselves if the matter be well
marked, with a beginning or half a reformation of that is amiss, such as may
please man: but godly, wisely, and zealously to advance by the word of God,
and continually to set forward the work begun, and not to leave, be weery
give over or rest, in yt they have once advised or thought of, till the whole,
by their Godly care and travail, be so purged and fined, with the fire of
Gods word, as is unto his heavenly will correspondent and most agreeable. At
least, if they cannot or do not yt same at the first and at once, they have
more and more daily to contend to bring their work to that pass, which
thing is with great affection and hope longed and looked for at their hands,
and not only wished and desired: but earnestly and heartily prayed for also, by all the godly. Rome, they are wont to say was not built in a day; but how much
more justly may yt be verified in yt spiritual building up of G O D his house,
city, and kingdom among men: But this (when it shall please God) will be, as
unto us al most comfortable, so unto our superiors very glorious and
honorable to the procurement and continuance of Gods favor and liberal
blessings long among us. I enter not into particulars because I am not to
prescribe nor yet to distrust the Godliness, wisdom, and care of so religious
a Prince and state as God has given us. For the rest therefore as in this
imperfection and weakness of mankind and the hardness of the work; these
cogitations, these meditations, these endeavors, are in this case worthy, and
very necessary and meet for Christian Princes states, and public persons in
Church and commonwealth; often and much to be occupied in; every one according
to their place and calling; so providing that they and their people Gods
Church be not abused, with men's inventions and dreams in steed of Gods pure
and holy word: So again subjects and private persons (where this matter is
attempted and taken in hand with vantage, and (to Gods glory) with pain and
care labored in daily) have not only with all thankefulnes and reverent
dutifulnes, to acknowledge and accept this great blessing and goodness of God,
in, and by our Prince and state, with help of hartye prayer for success, to
the delight and encouragement of Christian Magistrates and Superiors: But
further also; if in thus proceeding, all things every way answer not the godly
minds and expectation of the faithful, to the full: We have first to lay the
fault and hinderance where it is: charging generally our selves and our own
(...) therewith, as the proper cause of all; and farther every one of us
particularly examining our selves, have to join our sever all sins with the
sins of our peo ple; and heartily as in public, so a part to lament and be
wail the matter in humble and plain confession to God: and in testifiyng to
men, as occasion is offered, or dislike with that is amiss, earnestly
purposing and endeavoring to redress that is amiss in our selves, and to help
the same in other as we may; keeping in all things the bounds and compass of
our calling. Next being thus in all godliness and modesty affected, have
we to consider there whilst, according to our bounden duty, wherein and how
far we may, and ought to join our selves in communion and fellowshippe
with the Christian and holy Church or Congregation wherein we live in all
Christian humility, patience, meekness, bearing, and forbearing without
breaking the unity thereof; so far as is possible; Christian and holy I call
this Look Esaias 54. 13. 55. 10. (...). etc.
Church, in respect of that honor that God has called it unto: and the good
benefit of his holy word, Sacraments, etc. Wherewith he has vouchsafed to
bless the same, not doubting in the mean while of good success, increase,
and daily edification from God by these means, so far as he sees expedient,
according to his promise; though in the mean while there may be found among
us but too many defects, not in life and conversation only; but in church
policy, and orders likewise: which defectes like spots, blemishes, and staynes
of the face, we may behold, not now adays first, but in these and some
greater matters also; even in the Apostles times, and afterward in the old
and former Churches by themselves planted (though in this behalf they be to be
accounted sick and imperfect) which retain yet still in Scripture the title
and honor of Churches, and of the church of God: As for example; The churches
of the country of Asia in the Revelation of Reave. 1. 11. and 2. and 3.
Saint John: the churches of the Country of Galatia: and of the City of
Corinth and such like. I speak not as Gala. 1 2.
though Churches should or might please themselves in 1. Cor. 1. 2.
their follies, or to flatter any, I have said my mind thereof; 2. Cor. 1. l.
etc
I tell here only what Christians particular duty is, for bearing in this
behalf, where things be not too too intolerable: especially, this have we
well to consider of, when we be not required by the Church and authority to
approve or embrace in God his matters and religion any thing but that which is
warranted by God his holy word, and we commended thereby in framing our
consciences and lives according to that rule, in all dutifulness toward God,
our Prince, and other our neighbors: And the Church, and they of authority
likewise be content to hear, and to be admonished of such defects and faults;
wherein they may be thought, not to have rightly applied, nor justly followed
the rule of all reformation; the word of God (so the same be Christianly done
and modestly, as I have said) and we still live in good hope of redress of that
is a miss, as the same may once be found out, perceived, and known, by those
to whom public reformation thereof does orderly appertain: which be the very
same whom God has placed in public authority and calling.

Hereby is it not hard to be seen, that I shut out of this account, that
Apostaticall and unholy Synagogue of Rome, by the titles before mentioned: as
wherewith we cannot join our selves without renounsing the unity we have
with Christ and his holy universal church. And again we must think that
they that excommunicate, shut out, and cut of, from all Spiritual communion,
and society with them; outward and inward, leaving them without all hope of
reconciliation, either in this world, or in the world to come, such I say,
as are of one religion, of one and the same profession with them: that as they
have done and do; so will no easiliar handle us hence forth, seek we peace,
as much as we will; and in us lies. The sum therefore of that we have to
rest upon, is; that walking in God his fear, in obedience, and charity
toward all men, which is the effect of a Christian life; we so edify our
selves, and other with whom we live in all godliness and honesty, that in
Godly zeal, (...) with wisdom and humbleness of mind, we take heed there
whilst, least declining, or turning to much on one hand without need, we
separate our selves from the society of them, that approve and show them
selves to be God his people, upon a dislike of some things amiss, that lie
not in our power or hands to redress; that be private men; if the same be
not intolerable to be borne with: As they be when they pluck up the very
foundations of doctrine, and the roots of Christian Religion: which doing may
be imputed to too much curiosity, self love, and wilfulness, etc. We have
to take heed on the other hand for all this, least by joining our selves unto
the^, we receive, approve, or (...) things confusedly; eue^ abuses yt do or may
creep in, hand over head, as they say; without any distinction or difference: with
may argue want of knowledge, zeal, and true godliness. When I would express
full my meaning herein, I can utter it in no better Ephe. 4. 1. 2. 3. etc.
or fitter words, then the holy Ghost his, set us down by that chosen
vessel, the blessed Apostle, who prays Christians to walk worthy their
calling whereunto they are called, with all humblenes of mind, meeknes, with
long suffering, supporting one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit, in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one spirit, etc.
look the place. To discern and distinguishe therefore things aright, here
needs the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom Esai. 11. 2.
understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord; that may make us prudent in the fear
of the Lord, etc. whereof the Prophet says: It should rest upon Christ; who
received the fame for the behoof of his Church, and us to 1. Cor. 2. 12.
be guided by. We have received (says Saint Paul) not the spirit of the
world: but the spirit which is of God, that we may know the things which are
given us of God. And the Anointing which ye received of him, dwells 1. John
2. 27.
in you (says Saint John) and: Ye need not that any man teach you, but as
the same anointing teaches you of all things, and it is true, and is not
lying, and as it taught you, ye shall abide in him. Again, our Savior
Christ: John 6. 45.
It is written in the Prophets: And they shall be all taught John 16. 13. and
14. 26. and 17. 17.
of God. A good and sure Schoolemaister is this Spirit of truth, to lead us
into all truth, to bring into our remembrance whatsoever Christ has told us,
and to redress and direct our ways according to God his holy word, which is
the truth. God only vouchsafe to (...) our ears and to touch our hearts
continually to hear, believe, and obey this truth. Thus much in respect of
some certain for their better satisfiyng (if it may be.) This matter, beside
the scriptures; which may and ought to suffice; has (...) and is diducted at
large by some writers both old and new Contra Epistola^ Parmeniani. lib. 2.
and 3. etc.
as they are called, where the same for them that list, may be seen, namely
Augustine (in his writings aforetime against the Donatists and such like)
wadeth herein very godly and wisely in my opinion; and such godly men in our
time also; as write against Anabaptists and ye like, that are infected herein:
that I need not to add there unto: And besides I do but here touch the same
by the way, as a caveat to prevent or cut of cavil and quarrelling, if it may
be, having rather to occupy meselfe in answering the (...) sarie at this time;
as one, that what reason or answer soever other may be thought to have, and to
make; he surely and his fellow Romanists, have very little or none: as who may
be thought to have been, in the orders of this Church, sufficiently; if not
too much respected and borne with, now above these twenty years: which may
serve with all the world to our (...) and the States (...) here toward these
men: And that a through and full reformation of the Church, need not be
forborne in respect of them: I would this great and necessary matter might as
easily be obtained (which our sins only let) as it is not hard to answer,
what ever those fellows can now allege for them selves: Unto the
examination therefore of this man's particular Reasons for refusal of coming
to Church, I now turn my self.

THE first Reason, why I being a Catholic in mind may not go to the
Churches, or service of the contrary Religion, is: because I persuading my
self, their doctrine to be false doctrine, and consequently, venomous unto the
hearer: I may not venture my soul to be infected with the same.

So that the first proposition or ground of this first reason, to make it in
form of argument: is this. No man that persuades himself, the doctrine now
professed and taught in the Church of England, is false and venomous to the
hearer, may venture his soul to be infected therewith: But every Roman
Catholic is a man that persuades him self, the doctrine now professed and
taught in the Church of England is false doctrine, and venomous to the hearer.
Therefore no Roman Catholic may venture his soul to be infected therewith.
First, Sir, such Catholics as are of contrary opinion unto you herein (for
whose sake you wrote this discourse) must you suppose, will deny one of your
two propositions, and find shifts to avoid all your proofs, which will not
be hard to be done for those of your religion: But let them shift with you
as they and you can agree. I am no patron of theirs: I will speak and answer
to the matter. Therefore, to this first Argument or Reason, I answer, that it
is vain and naught, because it is grounded upon opinion, fancy, and ones
persuading of him self, and doing after his persuasion: and not upon the
matter and truth. Now these two matters be diverse, and do differ much: I
persuade my self, that such a thing is thus or so: And such a thing in deed is
thus or so. The reason why, because one may be and to often is deceived in
persuading himself of things otherwise then they be: But the truth is always
one, and (...) not according to our persuasion, neither (...) thereon. What if
one persuade himself yt he is a Prince, or have a bag of money, is he so, or
has he it ever the more, or ever the sooner for that: never a whit sure. Or if
one persuade himself there is a snake in his bed, shall he not sleep near it,
or if your fellow persuade himself you go about to deceive him, shall he not
trust you: Surely our doing or not doing of things, even appertayning to this
life; to have the same well done; must not depend upon our own persuasion,
which is very changeable and uncertain: but our persuasion to do any thing,
must depend rather upon the truth and goodness of the matter, that we mind
to do. Otherwise, one persuading him self that every man he shall meet,
will kill him, may not venture to go abroad about his (...), nor come in the
company of any man: persuading himself, that what ever he eat or drink
poysoneth him: he may not venture to eat nor drink, for being (...): And so
within a while, die like a fool, and be guilty of his own death, because he
will not lay away his own (...) persuasion: In religion and matters of (...),
is this argument much more (...) and vain, as yt which has (...), and does
from Gods truth and is the mother and nurse of all superstition and (...). So
as, if this disputer or reasoner, will needs ground this argument or reason
upon his persuasion: yet must he give seaue to (...) the ground of his
persuasion, whether Fol. 57. in the 9. and last reason.
it be good or bad, true or false: And not say as he does elsewhere that he
will not dispute thereof, but how ever that be, the persuasion may not be
done against, be it true, be it false. First rather let him prove the goodness
and truth thereof: else must he hear from us that which the Galatians, (...)
themselves amiss, sometimes (...) from S. Paul: This persuasion is not of him
that calls you. etc. Galat. 5. 8.
Or to show the vanity of the reason in an example of his own, alleged
here. Let us propounde that: If dame Eve (says he) had not presumed to hear
the serpent talk, she had not been beguiled. But if she; say I, (delighting
in the tree forbidden, to satisfy her eye and desire) Genesis 3. 4. 5. 6. 13. 17.
had not persuaded her self that the Serpents talk had been the truth, and
so (persuading her husband also to leave the truth of Gods word, to believe
fancy and (...) lie) brought him to obey her voice, as she did the Serpents:
they had not eaten of the fruit for bidden, and so had not wrapped themselves
and us in misery. Then the nearer cause and Reason whereby both Adam and Eve
were beguiled, and the more proper that we need not run far off, was the
false persuasion they had, and admitted upon the Serpents talk, against Gods
expressed word and commandment, which, to make like your reason, thus I
(...): Dame Eve persuading her self the tree was good for meat, and to be
desired to get knowledge, and her husband by her means, the like: might not
venture to lack and lease so great a good and benefit; or might not venture
(...) do the contrary, which she, and he persuaded themselves was evil to
them. Add you the rest if ye like to make this a good Reason: for I answer you
that it is very like to yours, and all one in effect; which is grounded
likewise upon (...), and that a false, vain, and dangerous (...) contrary to
the truth: the scriptures phrase (...) this case is good: I am persuaded
through the Lord, etc. Romans 14. 14. 2. These. 3. 4. etc.
In religion, let us learn to speak religiously with this religious Apostle,
etc. Remember I pray you that I am the answerer: and if (...), ye can prove no
better then thus, I suppose ye know the order of the Schools, you Age Domi,
ne alia ratione, Aut (...) disputationi.
may be (...) answered, for all the great bragges be made of your dexterity
and skill, in brief scholasticall arguments. Because you are such a Reasoner,
to convince: and so great bragges is made of this Treatise, besides you say,
your. (...) desire (...), is only to give some (...) to them in England,
especially to her Majesty, and the right honorable her counsel, the learned
and wise in England, etc. I ask of you, over and above that I have said (to
M. Howlet your fellow) when you will make this a good syllogism or Reason (you
know what I mean) to convince or to satisfy any yt is of a contrary judgment
unto you. I say not her highness, and her grave and honorable wise cou^sellers,
which are not so easily led, as you in your muses and studdes imagine: but any
mean learned man of a contrary religion, unless one will suppose and imagine
your propositions to be principles as your (...) does, and so doubt of nothing
ye say, or let your proof be an asking of the principle, which is Sophistry,
and no good Logique. Let (...).
your compagnions and fellows tell you what they will, or let this argument
and reason serve, those that are already persuaded in your false religion, and
so need no Reasons to convince them. Sum; brag or crow like a Cock upon
your own dunghill, as much as ye will, I that (...) but a simple rude man, not
many a day of any University; and so not comparable with the learned and
fresh University disputers, will yet boldly here make you this offer, that
keeping your propositions, if you make not an Elench or fallacion of this (I
may say the like in the rest) Ex (...) particularibus (...) termini, etc.
that is a stark naughty Reason, or a badde Syllogisiue, consisting only of
particulars, or of four terms (as they speak) etc. Briefly, if you make in
good mode and figure to prove and convince by, not faulty in matter, or
form, (...) sieve Medius terminus.
or in both: let me be the answerer, and I will yield you the whole cause. You
hear a plain man's offer: Buckle your self to it, take the vantage: but it
will make you sweat ere you come to the end, or can perform it, you must seek
a new middle term as they speak in Schools, and new propositions to
confirm and prove your (...), or else (...) with your own fellows only, and
stay (...) supposition: but how ever they easily yield to false propositions
and (...), we can not suppose falshod to be Truth, and (...) falshod: And
sure, then can not (...) proceed in reasoning against us: to conclude, that
you would have false propositions, we can not, nor will not admit. True will
not serve your turn, you know the Logique Ex veris potest nil nisi verum
sequi.
rule: Truth can not prove falshod, we can defend easily enough against all
Sophistry in the world, that the Crow is black and not white: And (thanks
be unto God for his unspeakable gift) as it is hard for you to prove Popery
to be the truth, and Popish religion to be the true Catholic religion: So
is it on the other side easy for us to maintain and clear the truth, and the
profession of the Gospel against all your cauilling Reasons. So as one might
(...) at your impudency, and with what faces you dare presume, to make your
great bragges and chalenges in these learned days. But you are known well
enough, you dare do what you (...) to do, and pretend one thing and mean
another. I am the bolder at the entrance here to mention this, that the reader
may know what he shall (...), if he list to enter into examination of your
(...) and (...): we see the foundation of your first Reason, how darkely it is
laid upon a false persuasion: whereof, if the reader list to hear farther what
I say, he must have (...) to that I have written there of against M. Howlet
before, and you all, touching erroneous conscience and the bond thereof.
Though the foundation of this Reason thus (...), it may be seen, that it can
not (...), yet let (...) hear what this Reasoner says thereof further. Having
(...) himself, our doctrine to be false, and consequently venomous to the
hearer, and so may not venture his soul to be infected: He renders a reason
to convince and prove I trow: For (says he) as it is damnable for a man to
kill himself, and consequently deadly (...), without just cause to put his body
in (...) danger of death: so is it much more offensive to God to put my soul,
ten thousand times of more value then my body, in danger to the deadly stroke
of false (...) and (...), etc. Note this (...), (...). He does well to set his
marginal note to express his meaning; we might else by his much more have
judged it to have been a comparison, and so taken from another place in
Logique, whereby things greater, less, or equal, be compared together. But
let that go for the form and kind of reasoning in proouing matters, we had
rather hear of good, strong, and sound proofs by Syllogismes than by weak
(...), but let that also pass. Let us take such (...) all arguments, as are
offered us. Prove your similitude what it will, and as well as it can, it
proves not that you bring it in for, Note your similitude your self, and
make the conclusion, and you shall fee, you prove not that you propounded, but
reason from one thing to another, or Non ad idem as they say.
propound one thing and conclude another. It is an unlikely likelihood for the
matter it is to be applied unto: if you would have made it like to that it
should prove, or which you bring it for: Thus seems me should you have
made it: As a man persuading himself, bodily food to be infectious to his
body or dangerous, may not use the same: So in doctrine persuading himself
that it is heresy or false, he may not hear and receive the same, or some
such way. And then have I showed the weakness and folly of the argument before,
and given example thereof, that I need not repeat the (...): I say good meat
shall be wholesome: for the body, and necessary too; persuade men themselves
therein, as they will: And the sound doctrine of the Gospel here professed
and preached shall be much more wholesome and necessary for the soul, to keep
to your kind of comparing, persuade you your selves therein as you list. The
testimonies of scripture, etc. that ye allege, make nothing to the contrary
hereof, (...) fully against you, and the venime and danger of Popery and
Popish doctrine and heresy. The very (...) of the text, with a religious
mind, will (...) a (...) testimony of your abusing the same, and your (...),
and your followers herein. I marvel not a little (...) you grounding this
your first reason upon (...), (...) in the same again overthrow persuasion.
For after you have cited in one text, by and by as it were, by way of obiecting
and answering without farther proceeding, ye reason against persuasion: If your
men at least per swade themselves in that they think: you will obtrude to your
fellow and to us too, your persuasion under the title of conscience, not to be
done against, though it be erroneous: ye will not let other, no not your
fellow rest in his persuasion. Bide the law you make to other. This is a very
good touch to try persuasion and men's doings, by the scriptures. I would you
would ever keep that ground and trial in all yt matters in controversy
between you and us: That that which is done without warrant of scripture, or
is against scripture, should be condemned and rejected. With this overthrow we
your persuasion here pretended: with this overthrow we al your Reasons and your
whole religion, and kingdom of popery mightily. Popery yt is not grounded on
holy scriptures nor follows gods book fills men's minds full of vain
persuasions and their heads full of idle fancies, which they that stay them
selves upon Gods holy word are free from, and their consciences clered. As for
example papists promise them selves many good things whereof they are in the
end disapointed, and so confounded, for that they have no warrant from God nor
assurance of his word. Other limiting their hope, and keeping the same within
the compass of Gods word and promise are not confounded, but enjoy the same,
and are blessed: Blessed are they that put their trust in him. Hope makes not
ashamed because it has Gods promise going before. Again, papists and the
ungod ly are afraid where no fear is, have a faintnes and cowardlines in their
hearts, the sound of a leaf shaken, chaseth Look Prou. 3 from the 21. ver. to
the 27. Psalm. 81. etc.
them, in (...); they entangle and snare their constiences, without need,
whereas they that observe (...) and counsel, that is: hear Gods word, stay
upon it, and follow the (...) as a light to guide them by, etc. are (...) from
such fear and live in great and godly security: Popery it is alone and not
Gods word that tells them there is danger of infection in haunting our Church
assemblies. For your allegations and proofs out of the books that are
Apocrypha, which with you are as good and substantial as Canonical
scriptures; No distinction is to be kept. All is one with you, I will not now
charge you, because the doctrine is true and agreeing to the Canonical
Scriptures and to be applied of our men. to you and your religion, as the rest
ye heap together. And yet ye must remember, what Hierome in his prologues
set before your own translation of the Bible, says of that book of Jesus the
son Hieronimus, in prefat. in libros Solomonis. and Prologus Galeatus. in
libros Regum etc.
of Syrach, and the like. It were no hard matter to take the staff here out of
your hands, and to beat your self withal As the diligent reader even in this
first reason may easilye perceive. So fitly do these testimonies here
alleged serve us against you, and can by no means be forced against (...)
profession, you may carry a persuasion, to ground your reason upon; we shall
have ye truth and ye matter to ground ours upon. Let me in passing take an
example from you, in answer for our dread Sovereign and the States dealing
here with you. You tell us of seucre laws in the primitive Church, made for
prohibiting of corrupt and naughty service, sermons, and reading of like
books: ye refer us for proof to the Emperors Martian and Justinian, and
to the noble and zealous first Christian Emperor Constantine. What does her
Majesty, other then follow those and like examples, in forbidding your popish
mass. Your seditious books full of poison. etc. You say Constantine made it
death, for any man to read Arrius books, and reason, say you. Are you angered
that her majesty deals not so with you and your books, which are like: If
that be the fault, it may be mended soon enough to your cost, your Pope and
Popish heresy, is no less dandgerous and hurtful at this day then Arrius
was then. If you put her Majesty in mind and call upon such laws to be made
here now, (...) like cause you may quickly make a rod for your selves,
the matter will hardely possible afterward be (...) with words, or taken up
at your pleasures again. If you can do no more; I counsel you yet to hold your
peaces, sit still and be quiet. For the rest, where ye thunder out against (...)
Luther and iumble up together the Professors of the Gospel in odious terms
with other heretics and sectaries of your brood (as which your M. Howlet in
the beginning of his Epistle Dedicatory to her Majesty, has before confessed,
that ye need not father the same here on Lut her) you do but utter your
stomach against Gods servant in whom there were rare and excellent gifts of
God: and with whom, and by whom, his spirit mightily wrought for the
advancement of the Gospel in these later days, shaking the very foundations of
your Antichristian kingdom. It were not hard to show here, your error many
ways. Examine the doctrine of those ye name, and ye shall find it was in the
world before Luther was borne. Then may you not say they al sprung of that
first sect of Lutherans and they of Luther, So as if Luther had not been heard
there had not been now in the world any of them, etc. Consult but with N.
Sanders, and tell us from him whether Adamians Sanders visible Monarchy.
and Adamites, Trinitaries, etc. were not, and their doctrine professed in the
world before Luther was borne; how then sprung they all thence, how know you
their would not be at this day one in the world of them if Luther had not been
heard: M. Howlet says Wickliffe was one of the progenetours of some of these
ye here (...), (...) he was many and many days before Luther was borne.
How then is that true you here affirm; Here is a large field to walk in,
but let us pass over it. If in England at this day her Majesty, and the (...)
higher for their profession and religion then Luther. I (...) you will shut all
them out of this heap of (...); and not charge them to have had the beginning
of Luther, and sprung thence, otherwise you do them wrong. But (...) do so,
that is, (...) higher: leave therefore charging with these names, (...) devised
and called (...) by you. You play (...), (...) heed of (...) spirit that
said he would be a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophets. 1. King. 22, 22
Ye take upon you to tell, not only what had been in the world now, if
Luther had not been heard a great while since: But (as though you were yet
nearer and more (...) of Gods council, ye wrap men in eternal damnation yet
alive, and presume to tell what sentence shall be given upon these and these
men at the day of judgment. Great and rash is your audacitie in this behalf.
It is happy Sir, you have not everlasting fire at commandment to flashe and
fling amongst us at your pleasure, nor a throne, yet set you, to give sentence
like a judge in this case. You will needs be a Prophet, and you tell us what
you have persuaded your self: but we tell you again, many a man persuades
himself in his dream of many things, (...) when he awaketh he finds to be
false and vain, we yt stand by seeing you in a dream iog you as hard as we
can, we put you in remembrance what he says: Awake thou that Ephesians. 5. 14.
sleep, and stand up (...) the dead, and Christ shall give thee (...). If
that will not serve to do you good, then for the (...) of others we say: The
Prophet that has (...) dream, let him tell a dream: and he that has my word
let him speak my word faithfully: what is the chafe to (...). 23.
the wheat, says the Lord: But Sir, if the talk of our side be so greatly
to be avoided, and it be so dangerous for you, your fellows, and such (...),
to give our side the hearing, whence comes it ye so earnestly now seem to
sue to her Majesty, that you may hear us talk, and reason the matter with
us; for otherwise we cannot Preach, answer, or use (...) a certain space
continual speech, whereunto M. Howlet in all your names provoke. To conclude
this part, we may justly say to you herein, if none had given ear to the
Serpents talk in your Antichristian (...), if the Church (...) a virgin, had
not been presented to an other to be corrupted, but kept pure to her one and
own husband Christ (as the holy Ghost by the Apostle witnesses) she
should be, as for whom alone she is prepared and (...), if an other then
Christ's Gospel had not been preached and received: Popery had not now been
in the world, nor yet should the same be troubled with papists as it now is,
etc. Let the Reader consider that which the Apostle writes to the
Corinthians, And let them that have 2. Cor. 11. 2. 3. 4.
any zeal to Christ's Church here, show and use the same in clearing it from
Popish corruptions, and restoring it to the simplicity that is in Christ.

In the next and second Reason, you are much in Scandale, I well wot not why
ye so purposedly leave here that english word of offense, but let that go.
Here you exaggerate, here you amplify, here you set out the sin of scandale
like an Orator. In a thing not doubtful, you spend unnecessary florishes of
proofs, you paint and set out your judgment to the ix. degree. And all of
your scandale and scandalizing, using the same, in some textes where you find
it not, such love are ye in with this new English word scandale. And thus you
reason: All scandale is (...), etc, A (...) going to our (...) is scandale,
(...) to be (...), etc. As in the former reason, so here is it not hard to
turn this in truth upon you and your religion, go you upon persuasion and
supposition as much and as long as you will. The thing is (...) and well done
by the sacred scriptures of those of our (...) to (...) it unlawful to go to
your abominable Mass, and Idolatrous, and superstitious Latin Service. I
have here to answer your argument; in explanation and proof of your first
proposition, you are busily occupied, and divide scandale into three parts,
The first is, by (...) any to (...) scandale in general: Let us examine your
Hypothesis, or second or next proposition, and the application of the whole
particularly, wherein I tell you, you fault and fail. And I say, your second
and middle proposition: ACatholikes going to our church, is scandale, is false,
and you shall never be able to prove it: For this Reason there fore, bend your
self to do that, or else you do nothing. That you now say, does it not. We
grant that for the first point, to give offense by evil doing or speaking, in
life, or doctrine, etc, is a heinous sin, ye might have spared your travel in
that point: we admit your examples one and other here, because they beset us in
the Canonical Scriptures, and agreeable to that heavenly doctrine. Your
application is naught, It will be very right well, when, you By (...) the (...)
signified says (...). 2. 9. 7. nos.
apply all to your side and corrupt religion. You are like (...) Priests in
the old law, like the Moabites; you are Prophets like Balaam, and very like to
Jeroboam. that ye cite out of the Scriptures in inducing to sin, to Idolatry
and superstition, which is easily followed: and craftily under covert of words
by you broched and colored. The example ye bring out of (...) no less
pertains to you. Cyprians very words well considered will prove it: who in
Christendom, bring up their youth in ignorance more then you; Who persuade
there the tender young children to be come Nouices in Monkeries, Nunneries etc;
Before they know what the matter means, to vow obedience, single life,
wilful poverty, etc. to the unspeakable danger of their souls, as they
find in process of time when more years grow. Do you not know Sir, that in
our religion there is catechizing, and instruction in the principal points of
christian religion, both in Churches and houses for the avoiding of this danger
of ignorance and superstition; will the Pope of Rome, or your Popish religion
take up that exercise of catechizing and instructing publicly and privately
now upon your admonition think you; I hardly believe it. There is much a do
here to persuade any of your side, that it is necessary for their children,
servants, and so forth, and if they cannot themselves do it, to send them to
the Pastors of the church to have the same there, for all her Majesty's, and
the States godly care and provision in that behalf, and the continual
inquiry and calling upon by those, to whom that charge is committed. Can you
for your heart, deny her Majesty, her due commendation for this her godly
care over her people; etc. You content not your self with this first kind of
scandale because this hardly serves you, and yet herein is contained, you
confess, the proper signification of scandale. Ye come Romans 14. 15.
to the second point of scandale in a thing of it self lawful. I. Cor 8. 10.
Look how much the scriptures which ye cite, teaches us, so much we receive;
your addition and application we receive not: you give us an example of a
Priests haunting dishonest and suspected houses, meaning honestly. This is
your addition, though you give much to your Priests, and more liberty then to
lay people in these cases, yet I tell you, I think it an unlawful thing for a
Priest, to use and haunt dishonest houses, and not so lawful as you, under
honest meaning, do here cloak it to be: you give your Priests too large a
scope to walk in, or else ye think too well of them, that they can hardely
take hurt of any thing. The scriptures you cite in the first Reason, with many
other make against this doing of priests in respect of God, the matter, and
themselves; and not of Scandale to other only, as you here pretend, having the
licentious liberty you give them; they might easily wash away this blot of
Scandale, (...) 32. q. (...). and 4.
if there were no more, yea they may lawfully, by your doctrine do more than
this upon their Ecclesiastical Immunitie. T. dixit Sara. Intetio bona (...)
factum excu. sat.
In the said second part of your golden Decree: Is it not noted and set out
further in ye margin that a clarke, embracing or taking a woman in his arms, is
presumed Honest meaning with you (...).
to do well? and that men should not be offended thereat, but judge the best;
Is it not said in your (...) there, Cause. 11. q. 3. absit in margin in Glossa
(...).
If a clarke embrace or cull a woman it shall be interpreted, that he does
this to bless her withal; Is it not in an other place said by one of your
men; Although groping (...) Distinct. 34.
and kissing be occasions of naughty behavior in lay men, yet in Clerks it
is otherwise: for a Clarke is presumed (...). glos. in margin. did. 82. (...)
in gloss.
to do these things of charity and good zeal, etc. Here is expressed your
honest meaning sir, and showed that many (...) are lawful for your priests,
which caused that case to be noted us in your gloss, and set out in the margin
of your decrees in an other place also: Wantonness sumetime has more right then
chastity: and again yet further, they say now that no priest is to be deposed
for fornication, except he continue in it, and that because our bodies are now
frailer then they were in times past. These and such be now the Immunities of
your Clergy men. Of your third point of Scandale in respect of the enemy: I
say you take so much as you think will serve your turn, But you leave out
that, which if it had been added would have answered the whole in this case:
for there is a Scandale in deed taken and not given, whereby too many are
offended at Jesus Christ, his servants, their doctrine and well doing: And so
be there; that be offended at godly sermons, and at the going thereto now a
days. etc. But we may not for the avoiding of this Scandale, leave so
necessary a point of our salvation, as is the one and other. Now as I have
elsewhere noted, our Savior Christ, we see regarded Matthew. (...).
not the offense of the Pharisees in a matter, as (...), of less importance,
and we (...) not have A better example to follow than his. So he that (...) by
example, exhortation, etc. wife, children, friends, seruan s, and other to
haunt Church exercises here used, is so far of from (...) his soul or
theirs, as by abstaining or not doing hereof, he incurreth that danger, and by
doing the same, does a service agreeable to God, and but his duty: and so
answer I you for ye third also which falls in (...) ye first point. Taking
away your respect of worldly policy, for which if any man haunt our church
assemblies, and not for religion and conscience sake, he greatly offends God
and his prince our Sovereign under God, abuses himself, and the Laws, and
is disliked of all the godly, And herein you and we agree I trow, for the
general end of coming to church assemblies. For the second point of Scandale
(...) you (...) coming to our Service, or Prayers, to be: first we gather and
must suppose, that if your Catholic offend that way, by your own doctrine,
his coming to our service, is a thing of it self lawful, and of the own
nature not unclean before God, but in respect of the lookers on. Otherwise
hardly will your comparison and application proceed out of the 14. to the
Romans, and the 8. Chapter of the 1. to the Corinthians: and how agrees this
with your whole discourse. Again, where you say: They that know him in wardly
to be a Catholic, will think him to sin against his own conscience, etc.
We ask, how any should know a man inwardely, or his heart and conscience,
which is proper to God to know; What man knows the things of a man, but the
spirit of man that is in 1. Cor. 2. 11.
him. If you reply and say, you know him by his own words, I answer, that
where his deeds be contrary, that is no knowledge to judge his religion by: In
hypocritical Catholic religion: An hypocrite, and double man, doing acts of
contrary religion, may be, and (...) a Catholic in religion, by his fair
speech and words, contrary to that he does, and his example do much with them
that take him to be of their religion still for his words sake, yea and know
him inwardly to be a Catholic (as you speak) which is more: In Christian and
true religion contrary deeds way down words, for all the fair show, with
true Christians: So as, but that you speak of your, Catholics and Catholic
religion, that is: of hypocrisy and hypocrites, whom that religion makes
such, ye might have spared to talk of this kind of men here. They that know
him not (you say) as in deed no man does further then he utters, and shows
him self, must needs presume him to go of conscience, and as a favorer of
that Religion and so be brought to like the better of that religion, and the
worse of the Catholic by his example: You say true: This is (and if not,
needs must be) all christian and honest men's opinion of him, yea ours unless
he must be taken to be the devils child, and of his religion. And then know
you him inwardely to be a Catholic: a true Christian, or of Christ's religion,
and that we follow; we deny him to be, rid him from us, and take him to your
heap for his religion, if he be suchy a one. You say Anibrose did accuse
Valentinian the Emperor, for giving a public Scandale to the world, because
he did but permit certain altars to the Gentiles, saying: that men would
think that he privily favored them. Ye give a good lesson to warn Princes,
that be professors of the Gospel, to take heed they permit Papists to have
no altars to sacrifice upon in their dominions, for giving the like offense.
And for you Roman Catholics, that sue for tolleration, for the free exercise
of your Roman religion, may her Majesty answer you, by your own rule and
Reason. We thank you, sir, for giving us still so good weapons to beat your
selves withal. This is your very case: Now, let the Reader apply and make
his profit of the rest.

The third reason is this, When and where, going and not going to Church, is
made a sign (...) betwixt a Catholic and a (...), then and there is it not
lawefull for a Catholic to go to the Protestants Churches: But so is it here
now, wherefore it is not lawefull, etc.

The first part of this reason he explaneth by division of the ways, whereby
the professor of any religion may be (...), which he makes there: by words,
works, and sign, he sets out the whole, by example of the Jew in Italy,
familiarly known by our English Romanistes, among whom the Jew lives in free
profession of his religion, and therefore had need to be distinguished from
christians, by some marks: But among us here in England where there is no
such faction and diversity of religion by order of law under our gracious
Sovereign Queen Elizabeth tolerated, but all bound to profess the true
christian religion to Gods glory, and her Majesty's singular commendation:
neither is there, neither needs there in this policy, any such distinction
devised by me^, to sever between religion and religion, that is: between truth
and falsehood, Protestants and Papists, we content our selves with the notes
and marks to know the professors of christian religion in England, which
are set us down in the holy word of God, which also depend not on men's
cpinions, nor are at their pleasure variable: but are stayed upon a (...) and
better ground. And therefore we return thcse voluntary marks and signs to
note religion, and the professors thereof by, to you, to Rome, and to Italy,
where volu^tary religion, or superstition reign, and gain is thought to be
godliness. We thank God, and her Majesty, for our freedom from the same, and
that we may live at home in England in good conscience, and sincere profession
of Christ's religion, without needing to run into Italy, where there is such
danger to deny the christian faith, as ye tell us of. Look, you English
Italianates, to that, and other the like dangers that ye have willingly cast
your selves headlong into. And thus much concerning your first devise in this
reason, (...) that where telling us of a Jew, ye affirm that to keep the
Saturday holy day, is a work proper to Iudaisme: And again, that (...) a
christian yield therein, to use the same, he sins grievously, and in effect
denies his faith: Due might demand whether you English Romanistes, and such
other Catholics in Italy do (...) bear to keep holy even any of your late
Pope canonized Saints days falling on the Saturday, for fear of conformity
with the Jews in that behalf: I ween not, The^ in an external sign, as a
yeallow cap wearing on the head, which is a matter of less importance: be not
too hard: wherein, though I think not the whole weight of our religion to
consist, yet speak I not on the other side, as though I liked conformity of
the professors of Christ's religion, to antichriste and his ministers, in any
tokens and marks of their religion whatsoever: I speak here nothing of your
gross profane example of a Tauern bush, in liken ng the same to holy signs
of religion, which too profanely, in my judgment, ye bid the Reader mark,
he may also mark, that as ye make going to Church to sever us from you, and
to distinguish our religion from yours, which is known by not going to
Church, or by abstaining from Church: so the haunting of Church assemblies,
argues some religion to be in our men, and that they carry religious minds,
and abstaining from Church assemblies; which ye make a proper and peculiar
sign of a true catholic, argues as much religion as is in a Horse. For the
proof of the second part of your reason, that the going to Church, in
England is an apparent sign of a schismatike, and the not going of a
catholic: It is manifestly to be proved, ye say: but it is not so easily
done, as said, for unless we will presume going to the Protestants churches
to be heretical, as you do; and say a Catholic must so do, which is stark
false: your proof will not go forward. All is still grounded on your false
supposition, and on the double and doubtful taking of the terms of catholic
and schismatike: Al is but hollow and double dealing; and belongs for those
words to the fallation of equivocation, that ye may find more slights then
one in your reasoning. Must the Protestant be a schismatik and a Papist a
catholic, because you presume and think so: presume and think otherwise, and
as the truth is, or at least, notwithstanding your presumption, give us leave
to think and say the contrary as the truth enforces us. But let us see, how
by presumption, you prove going to Church, to be a peculiar sign;
distinctiue, betwixt religion and religion. First ye prove it by the
commanndement and exaction thereof. You take upon you to make a Co^mentarie to
expound the proceedings here. You make your self privy of her Majesty's
meaning and the Sates: you (...) imagine no other end that men are commanded
to come to church but to show themselves conformable to the religion here
professed. You might know (Sir) there be and may be, diverse ends of one
thing. Considering that God has instituted church assemblies to the good and
benefit of his people, if (to the end his Majesty may be obeyed accordingly,
and such commodity reaped as is there to be had) it be answered among the
rest; be the end of the commandment, of the exaction, and of the going to
church, what have you to say there against? If the Commisioners deal not
only equally, but very mildely, and courteously, without too far racking
men's consciences, and hoping that in exercises of religion, and matters
apperteining to God, men will not play the hypocrites: but have farther respect
then to make it an eye service: outwardly to satisfy and please the world,
and knowing that coming to church, they shall hear and find better matter of
instruction, and so learn their duty toward G O D and their Prince, they
move such as by you are perverted, to come to church; what cause have you or
they, to make such Tragical ado upon this upright and favorable proceeding?
To plain of the severity, and such cruel extremity of this State, as never
was heard of in England before? etc. This confession of your own mouth,
greatly condemns you. As you find your own religion to be but hypocrisy,
so imagine you of the religion here professed, but amiss: For her Majesty,
and the laws seek not to make men hypocrites, they delight in no such: their
meaning is, to have men religious to God ward, and thereto tend their
commandments in this behalf, etc. If you make, going to church here to be
a renouncing of Popery, and of your pretended catholic religion, as you say it
is, we grant, and we wish as many as go to church to leave halting on both
sides or dissembling; to cast away that corrupt religion, and all superstition
out of their hearts, to take a new and better course, and to testify by that
means, and all other as they may, their religious and honest minds to
Godwarde, and the world, which is so far of, that we think too be
hurtful unto them, as we judge it a singular benefits, if they can consider
thereof accordingly. Where, on the contrary part, we judge their not going to
church, or their going with another mind then we have expressed, not only to
be to themselves dangerously hurtful, and to others: but impious also and
wicked before God. The other and second proof, ye take from those of your
own side that are here indurance: which being many in number and of long time
suffering imprisonment, for this only thing, as ye say, do make abstaining
from church to be a proper and peculiar sign of a true Catholic: For what
does make a thing to be a proper and peculiar sign, but the judgment and
opinion of men? Heereto you adioyne your example, of the Tavern bushe to be
the sign of wine: we answer the similitude is unapt and unlikely, that is
taken from signs and tokens of civil things appertaining to the use of this
life, which are in men's power and will to dispose and order at their pleasure:
where it is otherwise, in cases of Gods true religion: for therein men have not
that liberty, but must take the holy signs thereof from the holy God: But you
add also your former example, brought with you out of Italy, of a Jews
yellowe Bonnet, and ye fetch us a third, out of Turkey, for to know a Turk
and his profession, by his yellowe Torbant: which, and all the like, are
unseemly, and unfit to match in this case with the true religion of Jesus
Christ. Let then the world, or men in civil and outward matters of this
life, make their representations and signs as they will, let the like serve if
ye will, among the Jews, the Turks, In fidels, Papists, etc; Whose religion
is pleasurable, a will worship, and consisting, for the most part, in
ceremonies and devises invented by men: Let them devise and have their proper
and peculiar signs, marks, cognisances, and badges to be known by, let us
abstain from the same: Let us content our selves with those that we have
received from the Author of our Religion: Let us religiously frequent and use
the same. When our Savior Christ asks: whence the Baptism of John Mat. 21.
25.
was, whether from heaven or from men? He notes fitly the diverse fountains,
and beginning of signs in religion. The example, of wearing a garlande in the
Primitive Church, wherewith out of Tertulian, ye amplify the matter,
perteyneth as little to the purpose as the rest. For it was heathenishly and
wickedly made by the heathen, a sign to distinguish them by, and to represent,
their heathenish religion, to the damage of Christians, and true Christian
religion: mark that we speak still of public religious signs, not of
other: in outward civil things, and for men's particular uses, wherein men
have more liberty, then in Gods religion and service: profane or civil
matters we here deal not with. That such things have been and are from time
to time, done by the devil and wicked men, in wicked religion, is not hard to
be found, and that true Christians have to abstain from such marks and
proper signs of superstitious and naughty religion: as for example, from your
Popish ceremonies at this day may well and fitly be proved hereby, and farther
can ye not stretche it, unless ye could prove the haunting of holy Church
assemblies here, first and principally to proceed from men, or from the
devil, etc; Which you shall never be able to do. God himself being the
Author, and the same being sufficiently, grounded, in his holy word. Make
you, and your compagnions, of going to Church here, what you will, and of
abstayning there from: We make thereof, as God and his word do, and no more.
If for your contempt of God, her Majesty, and her wholesome laws made for the
abolishing of superstition and idolatry, ye suffer any thing: Thank your
selves that so oppose your selves: Blame (...) God, her Majesty, nor the State
here, therefore: If for this only thing your men suffer: that they go not to
Church; then suffer they not belike for defense of the Popes supremacy, nor
other points of Popery: if they do, then is it not for abstayning from
Church only: which in deed is but a late taken up scrupulositie among the
most of you: yet let all mark and observe that ye here affirm and give us,
that the only thing Papists suffer for here in England, is for not going to
Church, or abstaining therefrom. A worthy cause to stand with the Prince and
State in, if all be well weighed.

The vanity of the three next Reasons of Schism, participation, and
dissimulation, do I nothing doubt, but that every Christian can easily epsy
and answer the same: That therefore which has been said before, being well
weighed, I shall need the less to tarry thereupon. If this discourser could
as easily prove it to be Schism, to haunt our Churches, us to be Heretics,
and those hollow hearted, that having before time in the days of ignorance,
been of their Popish religion, now haunt our Churches, which we yet hope well
they do of synceritie of heart: If I say he could as easily prove this, as
he only affirms the same, and occupies himself in proving that requires
no proof with us, we should have more a do with him. He is occupied in
showing at large how bad Schism and Schismatiks, heresy and heretics be,
how to be detested and their company shunned, what punishment they deserve and
have to look for. etc. But that our religion, and we are such, and in this
case: there is he for proof, in effect muet: And yet except that be proved,
not supposed only, the rest serves to little purpose. For the unity of
Christ's Church we have diligently to observe, that as it is, and ought to be
with every of us precious, so to consider again that the same is grounded in
the unity that we have with our Savior Christ, and the father, without whom
there is no sound unity: Further, we have to note that it is called the unity
of the spirit, for that it is begun, continued, and kept by the spi: rit of
God in spiritual and heavenly matters. And these two points be expressed in
the very textes here cited by this Reasoner out of the Gospel and S. Paul for
one (...) John. 17. 21.
form of belief, one form of Service, one form of Sacraments, Ephesians. 4. 3.
and the like that this man says, should be in Christ's Church, as it is
very obscurely and shortly spoken, so I see no such (...) thereof: So we may
have the substance and matter, for forms we will not greatly strive. If there
be any matter of importance, we like well the synceritie of Christian religion,
and Apostolic simplicity be Ephe. 2. 4.
always kept. The wayght and force of Christian unity, lies in deed in
greater points than in outward forms, whereof 1. Cor. 10.
ye make mention out of S Paul, and may see more in the 1. Timoth. 2.
Acts of the Apostles, etc. Concerning the testimonies of the Act. 2. from the.
40. verse. to the end of the chapter.
Fathers, we grant with Irenaee: that heretics that bring strange fire to the
Lords Altar, that is, (as he expounds) strange doctrines, shall be burned,
as Nadab and Abiu. They that rise up against the truth, and exhort other And
again, Act. 4. 32. etc.
against the Church of God, remain in hell swallowed up with yt opening of the
earth, as they about Chore, Dathan, and Abirom. They that cut and sever the
unity of the Church have the same punishment of God that Jeroboam had. What is
this against us? why may not the same be applied unto you, and your doctrines
and dealinges with this Church: Let the Gospel and Spirit of life be the Pillar
and strength of the Church. Let it be the foundation and Pillar of our Faith,
as the same Irenaee speaks. Lib. 3. cap. 11. and cap. 1.
Do not (as Irenaee says heretics do and we find you to do) who, when
they are reproved by yt scriptures are turned into the accusation of the
scriptures themselves; as though (...). lib. cap. 2.
they were not right, nor were of authority, both because they are diversely
uttered, and also because the Truth cannot be found out by them, of such as
know not Tradition, etc, and you will have little vantage. Augustine also in
his book or Epistle of the unity of the Church, against Petilians Epistle,
Cap. 2. and. 3. etc.
helps you and your case very little: For the question was then, where the
Church was; whether every where or bound to a certain place, person, and
sect, or no; As for example Aphrica, Donatus and Donatistes, then Rome, Pope
and Papists now. Augustine there tyeth the Church to no Sea, makes Christ
alone the head thereof, and the Church Christ's body dispersed over the face
of the whole earth. Again Augustine alleges and proves also out of the
holy Scriptures, as none can deny the same but he that professes himself to
be an enemy to the same Scriptures: Let us not hear, says he, I say Cap. 1
thus, thou say thus: but let us hear: Thus says the Lord. There be verily
the books of the Lord, to the authority whereof we both agree, we both give
credit, we both serve. There let us seek the Church, there let us discuss
Cap. 3.
our cause. I will not have the holy Church showed by the doctrines of men, but
by heavenly Oracles on infallible truth of God. Now add your words that you
here allege out of Augustine, yet, so if it please you, as ye take the
beginning of the chapter before you, and so come orderly to your words here
cited, which are after the beginning of the chapter: whole Christ, says he,
is the head and Cap. 4.
the body. The head is the only begotten son of God, and the body his
Church, the Bridegroom and the Bride. Two in one flesh. Whosoever dissent
from the scriptures concerning the head himself (thus do you, in making us
two spiritual heads of the Church; Christ and the Pope) though they be found
in all places, wherein there is a church to be pointed, they are not in the
Church. And again, whoeuer agree to the holy scriptures concerning the head
himself and communicate not with the unity of the Church, are not in the
Church, because they dissent from Christ's own testimony of Christ's body
which is the Church. etc. These be Austens words agreeing with that is before:
that we learn to discern and know the true Church of Christ aright by the
scriptures and not otherwise: And that we learn to begin with Christ the
head, and so come down to the Church his body, and keep no preposte rous
order. Now let the reader hardly read and examine your words, and judge of
the whole, In ye eleventh chapter of the same book; of the unity of the
Church does Austen notably write hereof. Touching Cyprian, Chrysostom, and
the rest for the unity of the Church, we willingly admit that they say, so
as with Cyprian ye will say, concerning false peace and agreement. That is no
peace, but war, neither is he joined to the Church that is separated from the
Gospel, And with Chrysostom, or who ever it were joined with Sermon. 5 de lapsis.
Chrisostomes works, for them that will know which is the true Church of
Christ; There is now no way to know ye same but only by the scriptures. etc.
The ignorance whereof brought forth heresy, corrupt life, and mingled and
turned all vpside down. as Chrysostom says elsewhere. As In. 24. Matthew. Hom.
49.
for us; we ioyn with those that are built upon the foundation Conc. 3. de (...)
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ him self being the head corner
stone. etc. We broch no new doctrine, no new religion, we make no separation,
But as we believe, that there is a Holy catholic church and a communion of
Saints; so, as members and parts we join our selves to the same, dispersed
over the whole world, in unity of Christ's true doctrine, and in love and
peace, with all reverence. The Antichristian Sinagogue of Rome, as it rejects
us with Christ and his doctrine, so again do we detest and go out from it,
as from that Babylon, whereof mention is so often and much made in the
scriptures. In sum, whether we be heritikes or you, Let Christ, let the word
judge, and as many as thereafter and according thereunto list to judge; and as
much say I, of Schismatikes (in Augustines words thus, if you will) whether we
be Schismatiks August contra. liter. (...).
or you, neither I, nor thou, but let Christ be asked, that he Lib. 2. cap. 85.
may judge or show his Church. In the application of this to us, and our
assemblies, and to your men that haunt the same, ye say The communion of the
Church confisteth in three things: that all christians have one sacrifice, one
and the self same service of God. There be greater in ward spiritual
things, wherein the unity of the Church does (...) consist: In the unity of
the spirit, one heart, one mind, love, peace, consent in one Christian
doctrine, faith, etc. But let us see these that ye thought, made for your
purpose. What is the sacrifice ye mean; If it be that which Christ offered
upon the Cross to his Father for the redemption of the world, we say it is
common to all Christians, all are partakers of it, and we are directed
thereunto contially, both by doctrine, and also by the use of the Supper among
us. If you mean the Sacrifice of your blasphemous mass, the^ thank we God yt
we are free from it as from a most abominable blasphemy. The giving up of our
bodies, Romans 12.
A living Sacrifice, holy acceptable unto God. etc. Heb. 13. 16. 15.
The sacrifice of distributing and doing good, the sacrifice of Praise and
thanksgiving etc. These grounded on Gods word, and in use among us: are belike
no sacrifices, we have no sacrifice at al, say you; none with you but your
massing sacrifice as seems; we are al made priests though, to offer up these
Apoca. 1. 6.
spiritual sacrifices wherewith God is pleased. You have of your selves,
without all warrant of Gods word erected a massing priesthood. Keep it, we bid
you to your selves. Of Sacraments we have in deed but two: Baptism and the
Lords Supper. As those which Christ instituted and left in his Church; we
acknowledge not your number of seven sacraments, for that the word warranteth
them not. Those that Christ has left, the less they have of your
superstitions and ceremonies: the more nearly they be administered, according
to Christ's Institution, the better is God pleased therewith, the better are
we contented also. Thus speaks the holy Ghost of the benefit, and of the
unity represented, 1. Cor. 12. 13 and 10. 17.
and bestowed on the Church in our sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
Supper. In one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, and have been all
made to drink into one spirit. And again, we that are many, are one bread
and one body, because we all are partakers of one bread therhood. etc. Let
the reader compare your translation with Fraternitas universe. Hard. (...). art.
4. (...). 5.
Cyprians or M. Hardings translation if ye will, to see your slight: then
considering all circumstances; Let him judge whether Cyprians time bear any
such orders and degrees In sentent. Episcop Council.
as ye imagine; to be above a Bishop in those times. Thus Carthagine. ad (...).
and alibi. Tom. 1. council. in. council. Cartha. Aug. de baptsm. contra Donatist.
(...). 2. cap. 1.
writes and speaks Cyprian in the assembly of many bishops in those days,
at Carthage in counsel; which is also repeated by Augustine. None of us
appoints him self to be a bishop of bishops, or drives his fellows with
tyrannous fear to necessity of obedience; seeing every Bishop according to
his free liberty and power, is at his own choice, as one that can not be
judged of another, as he him self also can not judge another. But let us all
look for the judgment of Vnus, and Solus.
our Lord Jesus Christ, who one and alone, has power both to place us in the
government of his Church, and to judge also of our doing. Here is more plain
words for the equality of Bishops in those days, and against that one
Bishop should be judge over all other Bishops, then can be picked out of the
other place for an universal or general Pastor over all, or thorough the
world: yea, here is plainly showed, there was no one Bishop of Bishops, or
judge over his fellow Bishops in those days. And that the Bishop of Rome, was
fellow Bishop and Brother with therest, and so reputed and called. And let
none cavil on that yt this Epistle was written to the Bishop of Rome, and
therefore these words by a prerogative, are to be understood Lib. 4. ep. 9. ad
Florent.
of him: when as Cyprian uses the same testimonies, to show the dignity and
authority of a Bishop in his own respect, and speaking of himself: and
says, whence sprang and spring Schisms and (...), but hence whilst the
Bishop that is one, and governs the church is contemned, by the proud
presumption of certain men, and a man vouchsafed with honor of God, is judged
of unworthy men. This Cyprian, of himfelfe being Bishop of Carthage, whom
though Christians seemed then to name In vita Cypr.
their Pope, as is reported, yet I think these men do not nor will not
account him general Pastor of all the world, nor to have such preeminence and
prerogative as they challenge to the Pope at this day head of the Church, etc.
For all this: Rome must needs have that alone, he nor none else shall have it.
It is not the word of one Bishop, wherewith Cyprian here calls himself, much
less of one Priest, as this Reasoners place reports, that will enforce, that
he would gather; or such jurisdiction and authority as he imagines: where
finds he one general Pastor over all the world? not here sure. Is not your
general Pastors soueraintie, yt you dream of, grounded on Peter's supremacy,
whereof there is not one word in all the scriptures: and does not this noble
Martyr, Saint Cyprian above thirteen De (...). Prelat.
hundred years ago, say thus of the Apostles: The rest were that, that Peter
was, endewed with all honor and power: and after him another Father, speaking
of the Bishops, says: where ever they be, they are of one and Hieronim. ad
euagrium.
the same merit or estimation, and of the same Priesthod and Ministry. The
whole brotherhood, was that particular congregation, where he was Bishop, of
whom he treats, were it the Bishop of Rome, or any other Bishop. For there
is one Bishopric, a part whreof is thoroughly holden of every one in
particular says Cyprian: but let De simpli. Prelat.
Cyprian and his place go, which is at large answered by other, for them that
list to see more: Let this man if he will gain his cause against us, reason
soundely out of the scripturs and book of God, which he can not do, and that
makes him to seek these outleapes: But when all is said, the best and surest
hold for this general Bishop over all, is that wicked Emperor Phocas and his
authority, and gift to Boniface a pope of Rome, many C. years after Cyprians
time. Considering the course that this Reasoner holds: how easy it is to
answer all that he brings forth; and that the same is already answered
elsewhere, by diverse in their books, and lately, by a godly and learned
brother, for troubling the reader over long, and not to repeat one and the same
things often: I will leave these three reasons, of Schism, Participation with
heresy, and (...), after I have noted a word or two there of more, till these
men can allege some sound proof that we are, that which they be: that is
Schismatikes, and Heretics: For Dissimulation, as we love plain dealing, and
Christ's Religion, and the truth is joined with a godly simplicity, so hope we
well that thase that come to Church aslemblies here, do the same with a single
and upright heart, we sit not in their hearts and consciences, we know not
what is in them. Which thing if they do not, they have learned their
dissimulation in Popery, and not in Christ's school, nor of ye profession of
his Gospel. Though I send not them quick to hell with this discourser, as I
have said, yet surely are they to be reputed very bad folk, so as hardly can
there be worse commonly among men, especially in cases of religion: let them
examine themselves by the holy scriptures, learn their duty thence, and
repent in time, else will they be found neither true servants of God, nor
duetifull subjects to her Majesty in the end, nor yet good common wealth
men. God give grace to consider hereof, and to shame the devil: we either
judge them not, or judge the best, and charitably of them. I marvel not a
little at these words of yours in the latter end of your Reason of
Dissimulation, many a thousand now in England, being as thoroughly persuaded in
heart of the truth of the Catholic religion, as the Apostles and other
Christians, at that time (that is in the time of the Apostles) were of theirs,
are content not withstanding to hear, digest, admit, and execute all or most
part of these things: recited contrary to the said religion. Here ye liken
together the Apostles and old Christians, and many of your Catholics now in
England: the Apostles and Christians religion then, and your catholic
religion now, and you show these men's usage to be unlikely and diverse, in
sticking to these two religions. By the way here I note, that your Catholic
religion, and the Apostles and christians then, be two religions, and diverse,
else ye speak very Comparatio (...) interdiuersa, and simile non est idem.
(...). But let that go, how can you, or any in england, be as thoroughly
persuaded in heart of your Catholic religion now, which is false, and not
only net grounded on Gods word: but contrary thereunto, as the Apostles and
Christians in the primitive Church were of theirs, which had God and the
Scriptures for their ground and warraunt. Though a house builded on the sand,
may have a fair show: yet in strength, for want of a good foundation, it can
never be so strong as that which is buylt on a Rock: He that hears Christ's
words and does the Mat. 7.
same, is like a wise builder on a Rock. I wis, he that hears your Mass,
Mattens, etc. is far off from that. (...) in blindness may be easily
gathered thereby, and a senselessenes, whereof comes no good, but much hurt:
As the contrary comes by hearing Sermons, and preaching of the Gospel.
Constancy and a good conscience, is rather lost then retained, much less
gained or increased by your blind and superstitious religion. You run to your
old starting hole of persuading your selves, be it right, be it wrong. But
to have a true, a sound, and a good settled persuasion for religion and matters
of conscience, it must be stayed in heaven, it must be warranted by Gods holy
word and Scriptures (which you, for your religion, are distitute of) else can
it not be. I will (...) say so thorough as the Apostles, etc. But in truth not
good, nor to be trusted unto.

Your seventh reason, is, that our Gods service is naught, and dishonorable to
God, and therefore must be abstained from.

Surely you say somewhat now, if you could prove that ye say, this is the
first, the last, and all the reasons that are worth the examining, the
foundation and ground of all the rest. Let us see therefore how you go about
to prove this point, forsooth at the first entry, ye leave of your proof and
fall a confuting of our reason before you prove the matter: One may perceive
it is easier with you in words to find fault, then in deed to mende it, or
justly to show where and wherein the fault lies, that other might mende the
same. The Scriptures lie in your way like a shrewd block, ye think good
therefore first, to assay to remove that, and then to proceed in your purpose
after. Handeled Dratour like, with your figure accordingly, but flourished
Occupatio.
at, in deed, rather then any thing else done. That we have the Bible and the
Scriptures so familiar, and so strong on our side, that offends you, that
angreth you, that hinders your purpose greatly: But we thank God therefore
highly. Burn the Bibles, and burn them again; fume, and fret, rage, and do
what you can: yet bidding battle to God, he will be found stronger then you,
and ye shall not pruaile. Alas poor scripture, is that it so offends you;
it is the swoorde of the spirit. It brings us Ephesians. 6. 17.
many, yea infinite other necessary and unspeakable commodities, we cannot
forgo it sir, we are utterly undone, if it be taken away from us. I pray you
give us leave to have it, and to use it. Can you not prove our church
assemblies naught, but you must impugn and disgrace the scriptures; Must you
needs beginn, and make entrance there; Happy for us, unhappy for you. A
happy turn for us; that we and our cause; nor our God his service, cannot be
foiled, but with the scriptures: an unhappy match for you, but even to
mislike with Gods book! What would you have us, to commend our God his
service with better then the Scriptures; We that are Christians, like that
better then traditions, and inventions of men, which you here talk of very
Look for this purpose the place I tited before in the fourth reason of schism
out of Irenaus lib. 3. cap. 2.
cunningly quoting us Augustine in the Margin, as though he in those places
condemned Scriptures, to contmende traditions, which is neither so nor so, as
we shall see after by examination thereof. Take you therefore these traditions
and leave us the scriptures, so we may feed (...) pure fine wheat, eat your
Cods, husks, chafe, and what you will: Ye are now in the matter in
controversy between us, we confess. It has been the question between Papists
and Protestants, that is, between you and us, full these threescore years now
together: who shall be yt judge to decide ye matters in controversy between us,
we say the holy Scriptures, and word of God, we appeal to that: you say no,
not the Scriptures, by any means. It is the Heretics book, let the writings
on both parts be perused for proof and try all hereof: but let us go
forward with this reasoner. If our service being full of scripture, (as ye
say;) it be no good argument that the same is therefore infallible good; I
pray you let us know the good argument ye will prove your popish Latin service
infallible good: It is contrary to ours, and ours to yt; an argument taken of
the contrary, will serve (it seems) your turn, that is: your service is
therefore infallible good, because it has no Scriptures, or is contrary to the
scriptures, as it is in deed showed plainly and plainly, if not to you, yet to
all those that have any eyes to see, ears to hear, or hearts to consider 2.
Tim. 3. (...). 19.
thereof. The whole Scripture, sir, is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness that the man of God may be absolute, and made perfect to all
good works. Good is the Scripture, nothing but good, every way and most
perfectly good. As bad as your service is, yet for shame, could your men not
call it God his, or divine service, without taking some patches of the
Scriptures, to commend the same withal. If ours have more scripture and in
better order, as in deed not dalying therewith: at least let it not be blamed
therefore, find some other fault in it. Let not the Scripture make our
service like to wicked service for that respect, and us in it to be like Jews,
Heretics, and the Devil, and his talk with Christ (so ye speak) unless ye
can make it for some like respect, and in such sense, as Christ's coming to
judgment, is to a thieves soden coming, and at unawares. And then shall it
not be prejudicial to us, nor to our god his service, nor avail or help your
cause. But I am not careful to expound August. Tom. 6. Contra Maxim. lib. 1.
Initio, and versus (...).
your meaning, that mean as seems, very unhappily, I pray you set us not to
make Apologies or praises of the Scriptures now. You cite Augustine, that it
was always the fashion of heretics to have scripture in their mouth, and to
cleave only to scriptures, and to refuse traditions as inventions of men;
though we be not bound to Augustine: yet we ask you where Augustine has
it; Ye say against Maximinus, we tell you as we are enforced still to do,
that you say untruly. Augustine finds no fault with ye Arrian Heretic there,
for citing or using ye testimonies of the scriptures, but for abusing the same.
For he himself enters that combat with the Arrian Bishop, and by scriptures
confuteth Arrianisme: Augustine grants that the Arrian Bishop uses the true
testimonies of God his Scripture, which is more then we can grant you Papists
now adays: which for your sluttish handeling and false allegation of
Scriptures, show your selves worse then ye old Heretic, who corrupted not nor
perverted the holy Scriptures: but the fault that Augustine charge him with,
is that he would prove thereby, says he, their Ratione 1.
false doctrine of Arrius, concerning Christ his divinity: Ex falsis falsum,
(...) sequitur.
which is not possible to do. God his true scriptures can not prove any false
doctrine: The Art of Logic would Ex veris (...) sequi
teach you so much, as I told you before. This is the abuse then that
Augustine reprooueth, and we with him, yea with God, Christ, and all the
Godly: that where Arrius doctrine was directly contrary to the scripture, with
sophistry, glosing, and other shifts; he would go about to maintain the
same, and hale in the scriptures by the hair, as they say, to seem to prove
that which they condemn, whom; and his wrangling, Augustine by scripture, and
by no other means confuteth. We are no Arrians, we are not, nor will not be
Heretics, show that we do abuse the scriptures, as to overthrow Christ's
divinity thereby, or to establishe devilish doctrines, devised by our selves,
or taken from other men as you do, or else forbear to liken us, and our God
his service, to wicked Jews, heretics, and Devils; What you are, and your
behavior, let your doings tell: whereof (as occasion serves) ever and (...)
I give the Reader a taste: here in this reason is (among the rest) some sparks
of your modesty, commended by your fellow M. Howlet to the s kie, in his
Preface to her majesty to discern a Sectarie by his spirit and proceeding.
Because you cite Augustine here against Maximinus an arrian Bishop and
heretic, and the first book: I wish ye learned Reader to look on ye place to
see your cunning, or slight rather; Augustine pressing the heretic to declare
his faith of the father, the son, and the holy ghost, the Heretic ran, as
to a starting hole, to a council of many Bishops, saying: he believed as they
believed, this is your manner aright, you know your divinity tale I am sure of
the Collier and the great Clarke his scholar, commended and set us down by
your side, as some heavenly Oracle. How beleeuest thou; Answer, as the Church
believes: and how believes the Church; answer, as I Hosius.
believe, further would he not go, but still repeat that, Aug. contra
Maxim. lib. l. initio.
and this was no table for that great doctor and Clarke to mark, and carry
away for his use, and to teach other. But Austen here checketh the heretic
for that answer, and The righteous shall live by his own faith Habacuk. 2. 4.
bids him express his own faith. How he believes, and not run to the
council of Ariminum and name that. The words are these, Augustine says to the
heretic: Where is (...) Implicita (...) then.
Tell me thy faith of the father, and the son, and the holy Ghost, Maximin.
the heretic answers: If you ask my faith, I hold that faith which at
Arminium, was not only expounded, but also by subscriptio^ confirmed of three
hundred and thirty Bishops. Here was a counsel of a great many more bishops
then were at your Trent meeting) Augustine says, I said even now, and I
repeat the same because thou would not answer me, Tell me thy faith, of
the father and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. etc. And by and by after
therefore I said thou would not answer because whilst I required that thou
should tell me thy faith of the father and the son and the holy Ghost.
which I yet now ask, thou have not told me thy faith, but have named the
Council of Ariminum, I would know thy faith, what thou beleeuest, what thou
think of the father the son and the holy Ghost. If thou will vouchsafe, I
believed therefore have I spoken.
let me hear it of thine own mouth; Send me not to those writings which
either are not now here present, and ready, or I am not bound to their
authority, etc. (...). Cor. 4. 18.
No Augustine; what; not to a Council and that of so many Bishops; No in deed
neither to Council nor multitude, but to the scriptures only. And therefore
against the same Maximin: he says afterward: neither ought I preiudicially
Aug. contra Maximini.
to bring forth now the Council of Nice (which made for Augustine and was the
first most famous general (...). 3. cap. 14.
Council after the Apostles time) Neither ought thou to bring forth the
Council of Ariminum (which we heard even now the heretic alleged for
him) I am (...) bound to this councels authority (says Austen) nor thou to
the authority of that Nicene Council, No Augustine; Again I say not bound to
the Nicene Council, No verily: Let matter with matter (says he) cause with
cause, Reason with reason plead by the authorities of the scriptures, not
proper witnesses of every body, but common to both. etc. This am I the bolder
with the Reader, to set down, that we may see your skill and trust in citing
the fathers, If one should follow all, he should make great volumes, which I
doubt whether for your pleasures, it be necessary For the devils talk with
Christ, how I pray you did our (...) confute him; was it not by the (...) before
I said Augustine did the heretic; Yes, yes, still: and all by the scriptures,
so necessary and profitable (...) are they, say or think you what you will.
Though we find not for that which follows the words in Hierome, where ye
send us to seek them, yet because Hierom in cap. 4. and 8. Hose.
it may be the fault of the Printer, I press it not, you should have proved
and showed us to be heretics, before ye should have applied that to our
service: supposition is a bare proof and serves not: The strange howling, as
of wolves and bellowing noise of mad Bullockes that in your Synagogues you
make, by your piping and singing in a strange tongue, in that you call your
divine service, seems to be lively expressed Hier. in. cap. 7. Hose.
by Hierome both in this sentence, and elsewhere also when upon these words
of the Prophet Amos: Take Hieron in cap 5. Amos.
from me the confused noise of thy Hymns, I will not hear the music of thy
Organes (that word does Hierome set down, according to the Septuagints
translation) The Prayer says he, of the Jews and the Psalms which they sing
in their Synagogues, and the heretics curious Composit (...).
and set hymn or prayer (as one would say artificially done Laudatio.
with descant and quauering) is a trouble unto the Lord, and In tragidor (...)
modum Theatrales modu li.
that I may so speak; it is the grunting of a hog, and the braying of Asses,
etc, And in the new Testament, upon these words of the Apostle: Singing and
making melody unto the Lord: Let them hear (says Hierome) whose office it
Hieronim. lib. 3. in epist. ad Ephe. cap. 5.
is to sing in the Church; that God is to be sung to, not with voice, but with
heart: and that their throat and jaws are not to be anointed and cleared
with oyntme^ts like players, that (measure and stagelike noise and songues
(...) You know the meeter.
may by heard in the Church: but in fear, in deed, in knowledge of the
scriptures although there be some man Non vox, sed votu^, no^ chor dula musica,
sed cor non cantans, sed amans cantat in aure Dei.
as they are wont to speak of an evil breast or voice. If he have good
works he is a sweet singer with God, Let the servant of Christ so sing,
that not the voice of the singer, but the words that are read, may delight and
please, etc. Thus much out of Hierome whom ye cite upon occasion of wolves
howling and the bellowing noise of mad bullockes, that the reader, may see
whether the same and the like agree better, with your curious pricksong and
descant in your latin service, or with our moderate and plain singing of David
his Psalines in the mother tongue. He (...). Agrippa De incertitudine
screntiaram. Cap. 17. sub finem. Annotation. (...). in. 1. Cor. 14. Polidore.
Virgil. de Inuentorib. (...).
that is desirous to see more, how fitly your wanton and fleshly melody, or
roaring rather in your Popish Churches is represented by Hierom. Let him look
upon Cornelius Agrippa, Erasmus, Polidore Virgil, and such like: who even in
our time so great plained of yt unreasonable and brutishe disorder in your
popish Churches, and namely here in England, for that is by express words
noted of Erasmus. Ye lib. 6. Cap. 2. etc.
cite Augustine here twice together, and still of the Donatist Heretics, it was
the first place ye cited in the entrance of your discourse, how little to
purpose we there examined: we tell you again and again we are neither
donatists nor other heretics, that should you have bent your self first to
have proved, that these testimonies might have seemed to have been (...)
applied, as that unproven (and so is like to remain) they justly may now
be applied to you. Between your two places here alleged out of Augustine.
the same Augustine upon the words of David: I cried unto Augustine in Psalm. 54.
the Lord, says well (and that to the Donatiste): Cry you to the Lord, not
to Donatus: So say we to you popish Heretics: Cry to the Lord, not to this
Patron, and that, which you have made to your selves, not to this canonized
Saint of your Popes, nor to that (whereof some, like enough, are far from
heaven, and so from helping of you) Take the lusty prelate of England, Your
S. Thomas Becket for example, if ye will, or some such like Saint of your
making: we say as Augustine said in his days, according to the perpetual
doctrine of the sacred scriptures: Cry unto the Lord, not to any creature:
we add further with him even in this place: Let no man be thy Lord, for the
Lord; (he means in stead of the true Lord of heaven) which under the
Lord would not be thy fellow servant, etc; Whether it be in heaven; Let
God in prayer be (...), per se, A, as they say: Or upon earth, to shut out
your Lord god the Pope, and to bring him to be but a fellow servant, with
other. Let that God of heaven keep his prerogative, or else be you (in
exalting and setting up that man of sin) Heretics with the Donatistes.
Briefly, to shut up this place, find no fault with our service, for that it
has the scriptures, and put a difference between the Jews, Heretics, and the
diuelishe perverting and abusing the same, and the right use thereof, with
reverence to our instruction and learning, that through patience and comfort
Romans 15.
we may have hope, which is an end the Apostles sets us down, the same to
be written for: Let it in all things be A lantern to our feet, and a light to
our path, as holy Psam. 119.
David speaks: For which causes also, the same is now 105. Nun.
published and made common unto us, by her Majesty, and the State, Mark the
great benefit the Church of God here has reaped thereby, and still does: and
ye shall show your self, besides your impiety to Gods word, very
uncharitable and envious, to grudge us the Scriptures, or to reproach the same
unto us. Now, whether we be Heretics, that stick to the scriptures, and to
the sincere, plain, and sure interpretation thereof by themselves, that one
place may sufficiently expound another, that we need not run to men, to have
the true sense, but to let the holy (...) ever expound himself: Or you that
cannot, nor will not be content with this, but call for this doctors
exposition: that doctors sense, and so forth rouing and running at randon, if
the world may not be judge, yet I pray you let your own Cannon Law be judge
between us: We must take the sense and meaning of the Truth, out of the
scriptures Distin. 37. Relatum.
themselves, says Gratian, out of Pope Clement. And yet further out of Hierome:
Whosoever otherwise understands the scripture, then the sense and meaning
Hieronym in 5. Cap. Gala.
of the holy Ghost, by whom it was written, requires: Although he be not
departed and gone out of the Lib. 3. q 3.
Church, yet may he be called an Heretic: and it is Haeresis.
among the works of the flesh, chosen those things that are the worse, etc.
We know the Queens coin by the stamp, by the Image, by the inscription, if
it carry not that mark we may lawfully refuse it: even so in the matters and
truth of God, etc. But it is time to proceed with you.

After you have thus declamed against the Scriptures in our service, you go
about to reckon up all the faults ye can imagine to be therein, which in a
bedroll ye reckon us up to be in all, about six: whereof you make two heads,
one the things that be in it, the other the things it wants. It is happy
ye can spy no more faults in particular but six: Surely, your Latin
service, were less dangerous and hurtful, if a man could in the whole,
find but half so many good things, amongst an infinite number of faults,
nay the whole must needs be, not in part altered but quite undone, rejected,
and new begun again, or else will there be no Gods his service among you at
all. For our service, it may have some faults, we deny not: As it comes to
pass in things that go through men's hands: we account not our books of
service a Bible, we make it not equal with G O D his Book. But this we
hold; what imperfections so ever there may be therein: yet all laid together
will be no sufficient Reason for you, or any man else: to abstain from Church
assemblies here, which is the end of this your Reason, and that it drives
unto. You say our service is so naught, as it may not be haunted, we deny it:
Let us see how you prove it: first in particular, you say it is devised by our
selves: different from your Romish Catholic service through Christendom: so I
take your words and meaning. As this is no warrant for the goodness of our
service: so is it not hereby proved to be naught, so that ye understand the
same to be so devised by us, as it have a farther, warrant then man's head and
fancy, as being grounded and directed by Gods holy word: The sum; the
ground, the substance Gods, the (...) form and manner, or order done by godly
men. There is in deed, no Lyturgie, or outward form of (...) Prayer for
every congregation etc; set down, and particularly described in God his word,
it had been a matter endelesse and needelesse, to have prescribed every
particular thing, beongling to seruerall Church assemblies. The substance and
general direction is to be had in the word of God, and thence to be taken,
and thereby in every particular circumstance to be ordered, for diverse and
several congregations dispersed in many Countries. The rest is; the
Application is to be performed by the Churches for their necessity and use
accordingly, and so may be lawful for (...) Church to do the like, without
your check and controlement. Ye heard before of the diverse and sundry
orders and manners of Masses, in your Roman Church, as ye call it, in
Italy, France, England, and so forth. And your S. Beda Ecole. hist. li. 1.
cap. 27.
Gregory (as is recorded by Bid) willed Augustine the Monk, to take that
from other Churches here and there, for this English Churchs service, that
should be most conuentent: Is it not known to all the world, that your
Mattens, Euensong, Complyn, Dirige, Mass, and so forth, was of diverse Bishops
of Romes patching. etc. And a long time a doing before it was in that order you
now use it. Did not your Trent meeting of late, agree and appoint Pius. 5.
your Church service should be reformed; did not your Anno. 1566.
Pope according to that decree, even of late years reform your breuiary, and
Missall, ywis sir, we give no such scope of reformation in our Gospelling
Churches, but teach and hold, that all should be done by, and according to
the rule of God his book, and holy Scriptures, as in matters appertayning to
his Majesty, with all godly reverence, and humbleness of mind. You say it is
altogether different from your service, so would we have it to be: for that
Popery is too bad a pattern, to reform Christ's Church by. It is even as
unfit to be an example for a reformed Church to follow, as a fylthy hogstie
is to frame and build a Princes Palace by and more unfit too. The freer our
Churches and assemblies be from Popish corruptions, the more happy be they a
great deal. You know in that old and unhappy controversy about keeping of
Easter in the (...) Church: home the fathers (...) it unmeet to follow the
wicked Jews, who had crucifted Christ, in observing their Easter, on the
foureteenth day of the first month, Eusebius de vita constan. lib. 3. cap. 17.
as Constantine then emperor writes. And ye gospel I am sure no better, but a
great deal worse, agrees with popery, and our christian religion with your
romish service: and (...) we easily admit that it is false, that our service
differs in nothing from yours, but that it is now in English, which was then
in latin, so were our English service too too bad: We would have you and all
the world think otherwise of the matter, and we wish you take no occasion
thereat to think so, we are content to ease you of the pain to compare or
prove that point. You say, the hotter sort of protestants called Puritanes,
condemn the service of the protestants here, and refrain from it as much as
Catholics do. Though there be that wish a more full reformation of the whole
Church and religion, yet know I none of the godly learned, that say with you,
it is unlawful to come at Church assemblish here, nor themselves refrain
from them: There may be some few simple unlearned folk, that of hatred to
your superstitious, and intolerable bloody dealings before time, wherewith by
their wills they would have no communion or fellowship, that may make some
scruple therein, for that they of zeal defy ye remnants, steps, traces,
ceremonies, and all affinity and likelihood with Popery: but how agree they
with you, and you with them; even as as dog and cat, as they say, so little
vauntage have you by them. Your minds and purposes being so contrary the one
to the other, I mind not to be a Patron of every bodies cause, ye have
heard what I said before of that matter, whither, I here refer you till I
hear your answer. Such godly moderation would I have kept in this matter, as
I trust can and will offend none that are godly. Wisdom may not quench
zeal, zeal may not destroy wisdom, godly zeal, and godly wisdom may
stand together, and go together: and so must do, and in Gods matters, the
word of God must direct and order both. Let me I pray you ask of you,
whether they of your side that wished, and sought for reformation of your
Popish service at Trent meeting, condemned the same, and refrained from
resorting to your Popish Church and service as much as Protestants or no; I
ween you will answer me, no. Then let that serve to answer you in this point
here. You say the Scriptures are read among us in false and shameless
translations. etc. This is the next particular fault you find: And this were to
be hearkened unto, if it were^ true, as it is most impudent and false; still
you go about to bereave us of the Scriptures: which I would have the Reader
mark; it is your old practice: Ye say this has been showed in particular by
many learned men, ye say so only, and there you leave them, and that they have
said: And until you particular out of your learned men, we can say nothing:
but that they have carried shame for their malicious lying and slaundering. Ye
threaten we shall be iolily quayled in this matter shortly, and by whom I prap
you; Forsooth one of your coat tells us, by Gregory Martin. Alas poor man,
he is but one, and far inferior, and too weak to deal with those and so
many grave, learned, and godly fathers; that have to God his glory, the
Churches inestimable benefit, and their own singular commendation traveled
in translating the English Bible: But let him go, and your brag and threate,
till we see more and hear further from him. It may be we shall receive some
profit and Ye wot what (...) means: Bonus quando quedormitat bomerus and
opere in longo, etc.
benefit by him, to amend some little faults that may have escaped men
aforetime. You know how hard a thing it is to do such a work so absolutely,
as nothing may be missing or wanting therein. Though he be an enemy, yet we
will not refuse to be admonished by him: we will maintain no fault as you
do, we will stand in no error. Let it be showed and proved a fault, and
it will be mended with all thankfulness to the admonisher: But I am afraid
all will be but poor spite, and this makes me the rather to think so,
because your faults here set down are no better: you are pickling and
carping at our English translation of the Bible: You cannot tarry till your
friends book come forth. I remember what was said in Queen Mary's days,
when ye burned the English Bibles, to excuse so horrible a fact withal: ye
said the Bible was naughtily translated, and being demanded a better by the
people that were loath to forgo that till they had a better, ye promised they
should have it better translated: that promise since that time you have
forgotten, at least you have not until this day performed the same; possible
you will better think thereof now, and yet I hardly believe that. But let us
hear how clarkely and woorthily you handle your self, to show manifest and
wilful corruptions in our translations to draw the Scripture to our own
purposes: Throughout the scripture where Idols are forbidden, they translate it
Images, say you. How can this be better checked, and proved a plain lie, and
a slander; then in looking upon our Bibles, which in the old Testament and the
new also use the word of Idols and Idolatry. We neither refuse, in time and
place as occasion serves, to set down yt name of Idols, nor yet are we in
fond love with the name of Images. Let the Christian Reader try herein this
discoursers trusty truth, by looking into the English Bible, here authorized
and used in Church assemblies under her Majesty. Ye say: throughout the
scripture where Idols are forbidden, we translate it Images. If this be an
impudent untruth and no better, but a lewd railing against our godly
translations of the Bible: then who may trust you in other matters; How shall
we think ye deal honestly and plainly in this cause; And that it is no
better: will I undertake briefly to show (to give the Reader herein also a
taste of your hollow double dealing) though I be (...) in following you, it
comes so often: First in our Scripture service; then in some Chapters of the
Bible in the old and new Testament, besides; let the Reader look in the 115.
Psalm, the 4. verse: there shall he find that thus it is Monthly read in
our Churches, on the three and twentieth day of the month, at Evening prayer:
Their Idols are silver and gold: even the work of men's hands, etc. Is not
here the word Idols, and Images; In the Epistle read on Easter day, taken out
of the 3. Chapter to the Collossians: Covetousness which is worshipping of
Idols. Here is again read Idols, not Images, in our translation. Then are
your words of us untrue, and a slander of our English translation of the
Bible. Above these 40. years has it been thus translated in our English
Bibles. Lying, it seems cost you no money: But how is it in your Simulacra.
Romish translation; in both places Images; the^ condemn you that: and yet me
do not so for that, nor in that respect, we say all comes to one in both
places, how say you; But let us leave your translation, and answer for our
own. You say: throughout the scripture where Idols are forbidden, we
translate it Images. This is your example to show our translations in English
to be naught: let me reprove this your saying by contrary examples taken out
of our English tra^slations, and yet will I allege no other translation
herein then yt which is above forty years old. The other ye have less to
complain of, that have been since translated: And yet I diminish nothing of
the fidelity and (...) of that translation in King Henry the eight his days,
which it well deserves among al ye godly. If any be well translated in
English; Allow English Church that, Bibles some be faultlesse, even in
these places for that you carpe other for; at least before you burned all, you
should have given us a better of your own translating, which you will never
do, unless you would be accounted enemies rather to the Bible and matter it
self, then to the translation: But I will proceed with the word and name of
Idols, which ye say we: throughout the scriptures translate Images, and take
upon you to show why we do so, full Clarkelye. Besides that, I have alredie
said, and that the diligent reader may observe and gather of himself: let,
among other, these places be read in the Bybles translated in our noble King
Henry his days, her majesty's worthy Father, to show the (...) cauilling and
lying vanity, first in the Law, and the Prophets; that is the old Testament,
then in the new, Genes. 31. 35. Thus reads the English Bible: So searched
he, but found not those Idols. Leuit, 19. 4. Ye shall not turn unto Idols. 4.
Kings. 17. 12. They served most vile Idols. For the Prophets look, Esaias. 42.
17. and, 44. thrice; verse, (...). 17. 19. A God and an Idol: an abominable
Idol, etc, and, 45. 20. Have they any understanding that set up the stocks of
their Idols, and pray unto a God that cannot help them, etc. Ezekiel, 8. (...).
and the 6. four times, verse. 4. 9. 13. twice. etc. For Idols and Idolaters
you have this word in ye very last book and last chapter of the new Testament.
ver. 15. and Revelation. 2. Idols twice. verse, 14. 20. Let this serve to note
your untrue slander. To woorship or religiously serve besides God, we make the
same an Idol. The outward representation also thereof, or Image, is in
scriptures called an Idol: He names an express place here: where we shall
find Images for Idols, in the very last words of the fifth chapter of Saint
John his first Epistle. First, that is but one place and one example, which is
a very bad proof to show that we translate Images for Idols throughout the
scripture: next thus it is read in our Church assemblies at this present, what
ever this lying quareller dream: even in the Bible translated under her
majesty's government and printed with privilege, by her highness Printer
Richard Judge. 1568. and. 1572. and set into Churches and there daily read and
expounded Babes keep your selves from Idols. Then are you not (...) only, but
a shameless liar and a slanderer and abuser of the people. So is it likewise
translated in the english Bible printed at Geneua. 1560. in the beginning of
her majesty's happy reign and dedicated unto her highness: So is it translated
in that worthy Theodore Beza his new Testament dedicated also to our
Sovereign etc. But how is it translated in your authentical translation I
pray you: that must alone be approved and received without check, and all
other in comparison thereof rejected: There is that fault ye charge us with, if
that be a fault; as in (...) I judge it to be none, or not so great; Idol
being the Greek, and Image the Latin and English word: Then if any English
Bybles have left the word Idols and used the word Images in this place of S.
John yet is no more done, the^ you permit your selves: and therefore ye need
not call it manifest and wilful corruption, etc. Except it be to discredit
that, you account your own translation: If that be your grief to see or
hear the word Images in I. John the. 5. 21. forbidden: though it be not
greatly material, the circumstance considered, yet to satisfy and please you
(if that will serve) that word Image is removed, and the Greek word Idol
kept in diverse of our english translations, why mend you not your own common
latin translation, not here only; wherewith we charge you not; but in infinite
other places, wherein the same is very corrupt. Where you would clear your
church of Idols and Idolatry, by his childish distinction between Idols and
Images: It is so well answered as I need add nothing to that the Godly learned
have here of said. Ye know it is Hierome his manner on the Prophets to apply
to the times and persons under Christ, that which is spoken of Idols and
Idolatry, under the Prophets, to show their are among Christians Idols and
Idolatours; that we need not cast the same from us to the Heathen; as though
Christendom were free from Idols and Idolatours. Which I would it were (if it
pleased God) but will never be, so long as you maintain Images in churches, and
the worship thereof: which is clear and plain Idolatry: In yours and all other
religions, man's vain fancy, brain, and idle head, is the source, fountain,
and first-shop, to conceive and (...) Idols and Idolatry in, afterward the hand
is made an instrument to fashion and frame an outward form or picture of that
Lie, which is there first conceived. etc. Call the same a God, an Idol, an
Image, a Picture; or what you will: In grossenes, and in cunning there may be
some diversity; in effect al is flat Idolatry, whatsoever we choose. Let al yt
world judge who be shamlesse corruptors and wylfull to draw, yea to pervert
the scripture to their own purpose in this point that I talk of, to go (...)
further now: They that here translate Images; as your vulgar translation
(...); and some other do; But not (as I have showed) the english Bible,
printed in her majesty's reign, and read at this day in our Churches, as ye
unjustly slander: Or you Papists, that for the retaining and maintaining of
your Idolatry The papists in reckoning up the ten comman dements leave quite
out the second commanment.
or Images and Image worship among the people; have quite rased out the second
commandment of the ten, against Images and Idolatry, or if you will have it
gentlier spoken, have left it out of those latin and english primers and books
wherein the ten commandementes were expressed to be learned of the common
people here in times past: I Ierem. 10 14. 15 Abacuck. 2. 18. Lactant. lib. 2.
ca. 19.
know your shift for such forgerie: but (...) me thinks, have let the words
stand, and follow in order as God pronounced and propounded the same to his
people in the scriptures, Origin. contra. cel sum.
ten words are not many, you might have kept your shift for a better purpose;
if it so had pleased you: For the (...) Gent lib. 6.
matter, as the scripture tells us, that such stuff teaches lies, and is
contrary to the doctrine of the same scripture: So Lactantius says;
undoubtedly there is no religion where an Image is, Images are void of
religion, etc. And the Heathen and heretic charged the Christians in the
primitive Church with this, that they had no Images; as though Christians had
been too blame, for being without Images, who if they had had Images, could
not have been so charged, or might have answered at the least, otherwise than
they do. And as one of your own men writes out of Hierom; almost all the
ancient fathers condemned the woorshipping of Images for fear of Idolatry,
than the which, no wickedness can be greater. etc. Famous is the story of
Epiphanius translated into Latin by Hierom; who cut Polydorus Virgilius, de
Invent. lib. 6. cap. 13.
in pieces the painted veil wherein the image of Christ, or some saint was
hanging at the door of the Temple: for that it was against the authority of
the scriptures; that a man's image should hang in the Church, and against our
religion, Epiphan. Iohanni. Episco po. Hierosolym.
says he: And more famous yet, is the public edict of sundry the old
christian Emperors, in forbidding Images, and the worship thereof; not
thinking it to pertain to religion, that the Image of any should be
worshipped, no not of Hieronym.
Christ; whose Image, by name they forbad: as in their decree Tom. 2 inter
Epist. Hieronim.
is to be seen. etc. You see the hanging of Christ's Image in the Church, or
any Saints: the worshipping also of such Images is condemned and forbidden:
Now would Vide. Pet. Crinit. de honest. discipline. lib. 9. cap. 9.
I know of you in what commandment, the same is forbidden, unless it be in
that which forbids Idolatry and Idols? Plead against those of your side,
against these ancient fathers ye emperors. etc. If ye needs will? Say what ye
will, ye shall never be able to clear your Images set up in Temples, from being
Idols, nor your woorshipping thereof, from idolatry: which you must do better
than hitherto, before you can make us believe the contrary, or otherwise of
them then the scriptures and antiquity teach and report of Images; Blame them
not and say; they should have said: of Idols. What though the Image of God
according whereunto man was made, be not, nor be translated by us, nor called
an Idol; As we use the word at this day? What though (to go further) her
majesty's image in her coin or otherwise be free from that gross term? etc.
what makes all this, for excusing and clearing your religious Images (that I
may so speak) or those that are made for religion, from being Idols; which are
painted, carved, graven, set up in churches, decked senced, clothed, crouched
unto, kissed, offered unto, prayers made before them, and lights set up, with
such other superstitions? Is the one case and the other like? Do you find
your Bybles faulty in this point? Or can you reprove our speech and talk?
You roue at your own pleasure and at randon, to maintain your fools babble:
how will you maintain your Paraphrasis, or far fetched Periphrasis and Look
Ephe. 5. 5.
Circumlocution upon the fifth to the Ephesians, to be a better and more
faithful translation than our english Bybles set us down; you shall never
find, I trow, the words ye here set us down, in the fyfth to the
Ephesians, in any Bible, Latin, or English, Greek, or other. You are the
first peruerter and falsifier of the Greek, Latin, and English (...).
translation, in that place, that I know: Thus say you, S. Paul satth; that a
covetous man makes his money his Idol, Thus say some of our English
translations, A covetous Vulgat. Aua rus, quod est Idolorum.
person, which is an Idolator Thus other (which in sense is all one) A covetous
person, which is a worshipper of Images. The former translation of the two,
keeps the Seruitus.
Greek word used now in english, the other renders the same in mere english
terms and both well. You neither keep the Greek nor render us the same in
english faithfully; but tell us your own meaning: For the matter you utter
your own great folly in so foolishly dallying with the scriptures. If your
common translation may render us these words Idolatry and Idolatours
sometime; service of Idols as here, sometime service of Images, as Coloss. 3.
5. etc, Why may not our english translation likewise render the same, sometime
Idolatry and Idolators, sometime woorshipping of Idols, as Coloss. 3. 5. and
worshippers of Images, as here. etc. Checking our translation, you check by
more right your own: But I marvel how you that look so narrowly into our
translations, pass so great fault here in your common translation, as you
construe the matter: To excuse your Idolatry withal, you make a curious
distinction between (...), and (...); that is, worship Latrie and Dulia.
and service, And here your own translation renders (...); service, so
confounding both words: how agrees this with your subtle distinction; Let
the reader now hardlye, judge of the whole between us, and in conscience tell;
who (...) more sincerity and more fidelity in translating and handling the
scriptures: you; or we; Thus much concerning the first fault you unjustly
find with our english translation of the Bible; taken out of 1. John. 5. 21.
and of Images Idols and Idolatry; and your subtle distinctions between images
and idols, Latria and Dulia; and your vame excuse of your Popish idolatry, etc.

Ye cannot stand, ye say, to rehearse our like absurd translations in
infinite other things. No marvel, if ye bring the like to this out of Saint
John, that is: false slanders, though ye cannot stand to rehearse the same:
For it is no honesty, neither needs it; and you may be ashamed thereof, if
ye can blushe: we can make you no answer to that which you note not, nor set
us down: But this I say, he that should enter your common translation the
Bible in Latin, so advanced and approved of your side, yt none may compare with
it: but it must stand alone without check and controulement, etc. As your
Pope, with his Popish Trent Council has resolved; should easilier find a way
in, then well get out again, so corrupt, and wilfully, and shamelesly
corrupted is it. In the place of 1. John 5. 21. and diverse other like, will you
(for all the fault you find) correct your own vulgar translation, or abide
by it to the popes face, that it is not scripture, except it be thus: from
Idols, but manifest and wilful corruption; I ween Ab Idolis.
ye will not, you know the peril of it too well: But let us leave yt. Bide any
thing in your selves, bide nothing in us: This is your equal rule, I pray you
Sir, what made you; Genesis 3. 15.
even in the beginning of Genesis, in that notable and comfortable promise of
man's restoring after his fall by the seed of the woman Jesus Christ, to turn
that was spoken (...) Ipse (...) Ipsum.
of Christ, over to the Virgin Marie, to change the ge^der, and in steed of
He, or It, that is: Christ, or the seed; to say in your vulgar or common
translation: she, that is the Virgin Marie; and so to pervert, not only the
words but the meaning of the holy Ghost. Let Lyra, and other Commentaries
thereupon be seen. Surely I think the Devil himself was the Author and
father thereof; as he was of the Ladies Psalter, and such other impieties: Let
your Hyperdulia help this treachery, you were best devise defused terms, to
help defused and naughty matters: If Christ be our Lord, you will needs have
the Virgin Mary; our Lady. I fhee be king of heaven, She must be Queen. If
he be ascended, we must think She was assumpted, etc. I will not here
follow your abominable superstitions and Idolatries. What moved you in the
Luke. 15. 8.
new Testament, in steed of sweeping the house, to translate (...), verrit
Vulg.
vertit (...) euertit.

it in your vulgar translation: overthrowing the house; Insomuch as your
Expositours, making Comment thereof, show how the woman ouerthrewe the house,
some taking it, spoken by a figure, some simply, in deed, and plainly, as the
words lie. If it were a fault in the Printer, why caused it you not to be
amended, when ye were admonished, and found it out; especially, seeing it
deceived your learned writers; to make us false Commentaries thereon. Why
retain you that corruption still in the Text in both places, and set down the
true reading aloof in the margin, in sundry Bibles of diverse Printes; Why in
that notable opposition between grace and works; have you left out in the
Romans 11.6. these words in your translation? But if it be of works, it is no
more grace, or else were work no more work: The reason may easily be spyed;
because you will be thought to be great friends to works, ye are content to
become enemies to grace. Why are not these faults with other, being so
notorious, so often told, and cried out against, amended in your corrupt
translation; I think the religion you bear to your Pope, and to the
translation by him authorized, stays you; else for shame you would have
mended so gross corruptions, and have floung them out of the Text of
Scriptures, and restored the truth, and the Text: But your religion toward the
Pope and Popery has taken away all religion toward God and his word; As
may be seen in infinite places of the Bible, observed by the godly and
learned aforetime, and now a days, and by diverse of your own side; and
notably in the New Testament by Faber, Valla, Erasmus, etc. and by those that
have examined and answered your Trent Counsel; as Calvin, Kemnitius, and
other: To whose writings I refer the Christian Reader herein; to turn all that
here is said against us and our translation, upon the Papists, and their
corrupt translation of the holy scriptures: which I would have forborne to have
entered into, except necessity, and this discoursers importunity had pulde me
into this odious matter; to show the Papists partial and hollow dealing
herein.

Now because this common Latin translation of the Bible has gone and still
does with many, under the name of Hierome his translation, and has gotten
thereby credit, for the man his great learning; our adversaries also (as
seems) would feign have it reputed for Hierom his: Therefore shall it not be
amiss (out of many places) to bring one, out of Hierome in his Commentaries
upon the Scriptures, which plainly condemns, and reprooueth these Gentlemen's
corrupt translation, as not good; and so none of Hieromehis. A little leaven
corrupts the whole Galatians. 5. 9.
lump: Thus the old translation, as they call it. Hierome Modicum fermentum
totam (...) corrumpit.
thus: a little leaue^ leaueneth or sowreth the whole lump, and immediately
after in his Co^mentarie on those words It is ill; in our Latin books, says
he: a little leaven corrupts the whole lump; and the interpreter translated
Hieron. Lib. 3. in 5. ad Galatas.
rather his own meaning than the Apostle his words, etc. A shrewde check of
your translation, by Hierome. Why will ye not mende it; If you say it be
Hieromes, Why will ye not let him mende it; But let us proceed for ye place
of the second book of the Machabees (which is the second fault you find in
our tra^slatio^ of ye Bible) considering 2 (...). 12.
yt it is never read in our public church meetings: you might have spared yt
from being a fault in our service: saving yt where you find none, ye think good
to devise and imagine faults, and to put the same upon us, will we, nill we.
If ye had had any store, ye might and would, no doubt, have made better and
fitter choice to have found fault with the English translation read in our
assemblies: either your skill is not great, or your store poor and slender, or
lastly our English Bibles, too well translated; to be justly controuled by
you. Your conclusion grounded upon so weak and slender premises or proofs
thereof, must needs but ill fauouredly follow: This I say (and when I have
said, yet report me too any learned indifferente Reader, upon conference
with the Greek, to Judge) that in these books of the Maccabees (which are
among the Apocrypha, as they are called, that is privately and secretly read
rather, the^ openly approved and received to be canonical scriptures, as Hierom
says.) Our english bibles keep Ecclesiainter Canonicas scripturas no^
recipit, says Hiero^, Prefat. in libros Solomonis. etc.
more (...), and come nearer to the Greek text than your vulgar translation,
and more help (upon conference) shall the English Reader have, to understand
the sense of the Author, than at the other: Although in deed the Greek it
self, even here, be somewhat diffused and dark: And therefore no marvel
(the original or fountain being troubled) if translations be not the
playnest. Josephus, a Jew, has in Hebrew written five books of the Iewishe
Hystories, from their captivity in Babylon, until Pilate their President: In
which books (among other things) are written the worthy Acts of the
Maccabees: And entreating this very place in that book, he makes no mention
Joseph, Ben Gorion, hist. Iudaic. lib. 3. Cap. 19.
of this prayer for the dead. And this Joseph, Ben Gorion, is thought to be
that Jason of Cyrenae, out of whom this book of the Maccabees, was taken as
an Abrigeme^t: So as I marvel how that should orderly come into the
Abrigement, which is not found in the body of the story look 2. Macab. 2.
From the 23. verse, to the end of the Chapter. 2. Maccab. (...), 28.
written at large: And yet the Abridger does but tell his opinion of Judas, and
his fact: wherein if he have not said and done as he should, let him (as he
requesteth in the end) be pardoned; especially, seeing he leueth the truth of
things in particular, to the Author: Besides this, it is noted to be noted to
be contrary to the custom of the Jews, even to this day: to sacrifice, or
pray for the dead. And what commandment 2. Macc. 14 41 42, etc.
or warrant is there in God his Lame for the same; Lastly, to leave other
things, the example of Razis, in killing himself (an ancient and famous man
among the Jews) seems likewise to be commended in this story, by this
abridger; which is not justifiable by the scriptures though. Ye need not
therefore make so great a do, (...) the one particular example of Judas, thus
commended here, to ground a doctrine thereon for oblations and prayers for the
dead: nor check our English translation in the 12. Chapter of the 2. book of
the Maccabees, if you consider the matter well, saving that where you have
little or no proof (as the Canonical Scriptures prove not that article)
there you had need make much of a little, or but of the show of a thing
only. Your devised Purgatory, and Diriges, and Masses, etc; have made this
doctrine of prayer for the dead, so gainefull unto you, as you are now loathe
to let it go. The godly learned and my good brother, D. Fulke, a paineful and
profitable minister in Christ's church, eases me here by his travail: As he
does in many other places; that I may now the more haste to an end; that the
Reader finds not in one to his contentment, that possible may he find in the
other. I refer therefore to him, in that may be here missing: and walk
somewhat the more confidently and at large after him and his answer hereto,
which is gone before, because he is well known (God have the glory) to be so
sufficient as he is. Thus much concerning the Scripture, read in our
Assemblies, etc. So ye speak too lauishly and lewdly. Let the reader by this,
judge in the rest; of your upright, honest, and plain dealing: which if you
write again, I wish you to be better advised in: if you have respect to your
honesty and good name.

You say, and belie us, that throughout the Scripture where idols are
forbidden, we translate it images: And here in your margin, yesay: See the
English Bible Dedicated to King Henry. It is worth the noting; that where this
gentleman finds such fault with the Bible Dedicated, as he says, To King
Henry ye 8. and charge us, or side, and men, with that translation: those of
his own side then approved the same, and some of the greatest Clergy men,
were then (...) and dealers therein: He shall never be able to deny, but that
Cutbert Tonstall, a pillar of the popish Church here, Bishop then of Durresme,
and in Queen Mary's time also; was a principal man in perusing that
translation, at the king his commandment. If your self had looked but on the
very first chapter, of the first book of the Maccabees in the English Bible,
and the latter end of the Chapter; besides that you might have seen, whose
successors the Pope and you Papists be; in renting, cutting, burning, and
destroying Bybles: 1. Maccabees 1. 59. 60. Ye might have found the word
idol and idols; four times used, there in the English Bible, translated in
that our renoumed Prince his days king Henry the 8; once more in deed than in
your common translation, that ye make so much of. Let the reader look the
Chapter and 1. Macca. 5. 54. 57.
judge: So far are we off from that you vainly surmise, and put upon us:
measuring us by your own foot. The second fault you find, is for that our
God his service and sacraments, is not said and ministered by Priests, but by
mere lay men (so ye speak) though we have, but too many of your Popish
Priests among us; But (Sir) for this ground of your Reason; Is the service or
sacraments therefore to be accounted naught, because the party that
ministers the same, is not a convenient minister: Ye do not make, I take it,
the sacrament to depend on the worthiness of the Minister. As for saying
Church service, that God his Ministers are bound unto: it is the preaching of
God his word and gospel, the administering of Christ his Sacrament; Baptism,
and the Lord his Supper, and withal to make public Prayers, with the
Assembly; As in deed these things can not be performed without public
Prayer, etc. Other service, as your Popish Mattens, Mass, Euensong, Compline,
(...), etc. We leave willingly to your popish Priests, of whom and their
office in Christ his Church (no more then of this kind of your service) we
have no mention nor warrant in all the New Testament: But for sacraments, do
you not hold, I pray you, and teach with your Canon law taken out of De
co^secrat. distinct. 4. ca. Sanctum ex August. ad Fortunat.
Austin; that Baptism is holy of it self; which is given in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: so that there is also in the
same sacrament, the authority of tradition by our Lord to the Apostles, and by
them to the Bishops, other Priests, and lay persons also that are Christians,
coming from the same beginning and stock, etc. And in the gloss there: the
Lord delivered the form of Baptising to the Apostles, and by them to others,
even lay persons. And in another place, pope John says: to do this work of
baptising, if it be need 30. q. 1 ad limina.
full, is freely granted to faithful lay me^, according to cano nical
authority. First therefore I say, for this place, yt your Priests be intruders
into Church offices without lawful calling from God: Next, if lay men have any
thing to do in this business of Church ministry, I say they take the
authority from your popish religion, not from Christ, nor the Christian
religion that we profess. Thirdly, I say that this is no sufficient reason to
stay from our Church assemblies, whereto you drive; neither is one bound
always to enquire of the person, or certainly to understand, whether he be a
Priest, or no, before they come to the Church, or receive: but to respect the
matter, which is God his, the edifiyng of our own consciences thereby, etc.
and for the rest to suppose, the man that executes that charge is a public
church minister lawfully called, or stands and is reputed for such a one, at
least; while the Church and state disaloweth him not. I speak not in defense
of any that without lawefull calling, meddle in Church functions, nor that they
of authority, may suffer and bear with such, or let them alone: I speak only
for the satisfying of private men's consciences in this case. Lastly, I say, if
that be your let of coming to Church, it may be soon eased: For there be
diverse, and to many as I said, here in the Ministry that have bin before time
priests: Choose your place, your person, and come to Church; but you mean it
not, I ween, it is but a shift and a cloak, to cover more mischief under: For
the name of priests, because it is somewhat doubtfully taken, and we love to
speak plainly: Therefore we call such, Christ his (...)
Ministers, Pastors, Bishops, or Overseers; and such other Sacerdotes. etc.
names as we find in the Apostles wrytings; do we give our church ministers,
agreeable to their holy functio^s. We leave the name of Priests, and their
sacrifieing office, as unwonted and unused by the holy Ghost in the new
Testament, in Church functions, in the time of the Gospel: who^, and whose
phrase of speaking, in his matters especially, we like well to follow so much
as we may; though we love not, in the mean while, to strive about names,
where the matter is plain. You quot your margin, but you set us down the words
of no express testimony, neither in deed is it material to stand upon
words, or to color things by doubtfulnesse of speech, when the matter is
evident: And therefore leaving your priests and priesthood without all
foundation and stay of God his book, ye turn to the Apostle in the Epistle
to the Hebrews: which after your Heb. 5. 4.
manner ye cite falsely against us, and run at large: that no man may take
unto him this honor, but he that is called (of GOD, should ye have say de)
as Aaron was. Ye say true: For in deed; no man is meet to be our high
Priest, but Jesus Christ, who was appointed and called thereto of God, and of
whom, and his preisthood; Aaron was a figure. The more wrong a great deal does
your pope to Christ, and to his church also; to take upon him ye title and
office of high Priest in Christ his Church, without warrant from God: seeing it
was allotted by a singular prerogative to our Savior Christ alone of his
Father; As the Apostle (...) by in the next verse declares: Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. And again yet straight way: Heb. 5. 4. 1.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. The greater and
more is your fault still, that will needs succeed him in the office of
Priesthood whether he will or no: When he neither needs, nor shall have any
successor: As who lives a Priest for ever. And calling all Christians 1. Pet.
2. 9.
into the fellowship of his Priesthood, has made us a Reave. 1. 6. (...)
Royal priesthood, and Kings and Priests to God, even his Father, without
appointing any to serve the office of a sacrificing priest in Church
Ministry. Show as good a warrant of God his calling you, to the office of
Priesthood, to sacrifice the Son of God daily for the quick and the dead,
etc. and we will yield, but ye can not: Nay ye cite the scripture against
your self: ye tell us much of men, of fathers, counselles, fained Canons of
the Apostles, and the authority of the Catholic Church.

You say, because Ministers be not ordained by such a Bishop and Priest, as the
Catholic Church has put in that authority, therefore they have no authority
in Church matters. I find two faults here with you: one for clipping the king
of heaven his lawful coin, or leaving out a word of importance in this text,
of the 5. to the Hebrews: For ye should say: that is called of God: But it is
your mauer, ye can do it well enough: we have now taken trial thereof but
too much: and ye think ye may do herein what ye list without coutrolement.
The other fault is, that when you have put God his name out of the text, in
whom the Apostle says, the authority is to call, and appoint, etc. If ye
did cite that text, to prove that all Church Ministeries, and ministers must
have God for their foundation and Author, and must be called of him; we
would find no fault: But you place in God his stead, your Catholic Church,
of Rome you mean I trow. This dealing we cannot away with: where God is shut
out, what have we to do with men, or the Churches authority, etc. The
sentence of S. Paul to Timothy, speaks nothing of the dignitte 1. Tim. 5. 2
2
of the high Priest. Ye need not have put in therefore, this dignity, there:
neither speaks (...) one word of your Popish 1. Tim 5. 17. 19.
priesthood and Priests; but of those he called before Ancients, or Elders; in
that Chapter where ye find, laying on of hands; ye dream of making Priests,
and giving orders by and by: But that ye like any pharse better than the
Scriptures, ye might have also called Timothy, with S. Paul, an Evangelist,
etc. as well as by a name which ye scripture 2. Tim. 4. 5.
gives him not: (...) is not now ye first time you call him Vide supra. Fol.
7.
thus: The name I deny not is honest, lawful, and used in the scriptures: But
because it is diversely taken sometime generally, sometime particularly, and in
use of speech with us, sometime for such a one as is a Popish or false Bishop,
sometime for a true (...) of Christ; there needs distinction (...) plain
exposition, for fear of mistaking the word in a wrong sense. And nothing is
better in such abuse of the office and name, and variety and doubtfulnesse of
speech (in my 1. Pastores.
opinion) then to follow the simplicity of the Scriptures, 2. Doctores.
and to keep the phrase and manner of speech, used of the 3. Presbyteri.
holy (...), in all sincerity; especially, seeing properly to 4. Diaconi.
speak, the office of an Evangelist and of a Bishop, Be distinct and two
several offices: but let that go. The holy Church functions instituted by
our Savior Christ, and in the Scriptures recommended unto us for to continue
ordinary Ministeries among us: as Preaching Pastors; which are sometime
called Bishops or Overseers, sometime otherwise, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, do
we receive (...) uerence; (as becomes) Your under orders with your sacrificing
Priesthood, as devised by men, do I not see how our Church is tied unto, nor
why it should be. Our Ministers that preach the Gospel here, besides the
inward assurance of God his sending after they be called, have their admission
with imposition of hands, and prayer; and that publicly in the face of the
Church, with the approbation (...), being first examined, (...) their gifts
serve the^ for that office, and testimony being given for their honest life
and behavior. This is more religiously done, and is more agreeable to the
Apostles doctrine to Timothy, and admonition by you here alleged, then your
Ceremonious doing is, as their office is better grounded on God his book then
yours: Court the^ you lay men, or call them so, as much and as long as ye
list. The sum is, you do but go about with slander to deceive the simple.

The third particular fault of our God his service is alleged to be this:
that we have diverse fall and blasphemous things therein, says this Papists
blasphemous mouth, so placed, as they may seem to be very scripture: he
gives example: in the end of a certain Geneua Psalm; as lyingly he
speaks like himself. You papists have a poor spite at that (...) City
Geneua, to call that a Geneua Psalm, which I think was never said, song,
nor heard in Geneua: And I am sure the Psalms being printed in English meeter
at Geneua, and there songue when there was an English congregation assembled
there, in time of our persecution; this Canticle was not in the book, nor
known of, nor any but David his Psalms. Besides, this is not, neither ever
was, any part of the service here used: But being since made by a godly man,
and after the Psalms by the Printer set in ye end of the book with the Author
his name, according to his discretion; wherein I wish, for mine own part,
Printers took not themselves so much liberty; especially in these matters;
and if that may appease or content and win you to the profession of Christ
his Gospel, to tell you mine opinion, I would not care, if both that and all
other songues besides David his Psalms and Scriptures, Were laid aside and
(...) out of our congregations: We have not to answer for every particular
man his fact: Howebeit the thing is (...) so much disliked of by you; for that
it is not Scripture: for then would you dislike your own service a great deal
more; but because your corrupt religion is therein touched; and namely your God
the Pope, this is (...) grief, but not just Sir. Ye cannot like that we have
the scriptures in our Church assemblies; ye cannot like that is not
scriptures, though it be godly, and not against the Scriptures in any part.
Sumine; liking or disliking, all must be as likes you. We pray (ye say) to
God to keep us from Pope, Turk, and Papistrie. And why not; Can we lightly
pray to be kept from worser things, than from these mischievous breakenecks of
men's souls; Of Papistrie I have said enough through this whole book, what in
deed it is; and what me^ shall find it to be, if (...) call it to good and just
trial: And ye (...) at this day sees, thanks be to God, well enough thereinto;
saving a certain that are and needs will be wilfully obstinate and blind.
Concerning that your Pope is joined with the Turk, the match we say, is (...)
fit, they may well draw both in one yoke: saving that if there be any
difference or odds; the Pope is ye worse; because he does not only persecute
and slay, with the sword, as the Turk: but slaieth more, and more cunningly by
persuasion of word: not God his word and Scripture (...) grant: but his own
dreams glosed, and under pretense, as appears in you that are his Imps, and
come from him for that purpose. You are very ready to lay blasphemy to the
charge of others, we have expertence, even toward those of your own religion;
and to spare your selves, by cloking your manifold and great blasphemies
thrice together here; blasphemous, upon courage and choler rather then upon
any just occasion. Blasphemy was laid to our Savior Christ his charge, when
he was here upon earth, by no small babes, but besides the common Jews, even
by the Scribes and Pharisees that sat in Moses chair, and challenged the
highest rooms in Church assemblies, and to (...). 10. 33.
be called Rabbi, Rabbi, etc. even by him that had that title Mat. 9. 3. and
23. (...). 6. 7. and 26. 65
and room of high Priest: which (putting it in the first place) you here make
so much of, in your pope. When among the Jews, God his Church then, he yet
had the same by better warrant, then your Pope that you brag of, can claim
it by now. And yet all that could not make (...) an honest man; much less
will it help your Pope now: But as that high priest then did blaspheme, and
they (...). 5. 11.
were blasphemers that charged Christ; so look you to your selves and your
high priest; and you will not be found in much unlike case. Blasphemy, was
objected to S. Steeuen (...). 13. 4.
the first Martyr after Christ his Ascension: unto Saint Paul also
afterward, etc. No marvel therefore, though in zeal of your high priest, and
for maintenance of your Idol the Pope, ye tread in like steps, and charge us
with blasphemy; the best is: we are never the worse, nor you ever ye better
menfor all this charge. Your (...) tytles wherewith ye go about to deck and
set your Pope, are already so well examined as I need not stand there upon,
nor list not to trouble the Reader with too often repetition.

All antiquity in Christ's church (say you) spoke very reverently of your
pope. No antiquity (say we) knew such a monster as you make your Pope to be,
or at (...) allowed not the same in the Church, much less spoke so reverently
of him. The first old Fathers, might in some respect, give much to the good
and Godly Bishops of that place, which many of them a great while together
suffered martyrdom for the profession of Christ's Gospel, though they gave
not so much as you now pretend, and challenge: But what (...) it was, what is
that to your proud Antichrist the pope now; Times, Persons, manners, are too
far and greatly changed, distinguishe times, etc. and things then will
disagree from persons now; they are not always holy, that occupy the places
and rooms of Saints and holy men, or succeed them. Blasphemy is a great
matter: So will you say, is the Pope great, surely yea, by your computation,
exceeding great; I wot not how many degrees you hoise him above the Emperor:
as for kings as his (...), they are (...) meet to hold his stirrup, or wait
on his bridle, when he rides in his pontificalibus. These tytles here set down,
though (...) be too excessive and not well warra^ted by Antiquity, yet are they
nothing to set out your Pope with in his coulors. Let us hear therefore in
some part, to know Dominus (...) noster Papa.
him by; not what Antiquity, that was not acquainted with your Pope, gave to
godly Bishops: But what we are Deus: Non purus Homo. etc.
bound by the Popes canon Law, himself, and his own (...). John, 22. cum.
(...). 1.
doctors to give: and what he challenges here; let us see what he is, and how
he is called; he is called (as ye have heard) Our Gloss.
Lord god the Pope: god: neither god nor man, No pure Did. 96 C. Satis.
man, A Pope, that is, wonderful, and the woonderment of Extrau De verb.
(...). Tit. 14. in margin. Papa stupor (...). in Proem.
yt world, he is inferior to none, neither can he be judged by any; The
Prelate or pope of Rome is free from al Law. Who may doubt hun to be holy, whom
so high dignity exalts; Clementin in (...), and margin. Presvl. Romanus
(...) omni lege solutus.
In whom if there want good things gotten by merit, those suffice which are
bequeathed of the predecessor of that Sea: For either he lifts up to that
high room, those that are famous, or he does beautify and set out them that
are exalted Extrau. Job de (...). (...). Cap. 1. in gloss.
to that place, as the Popes themselves tell us of themselves. And the gloss
there tells us ye meaning to be, that if passible Did. 40. C. non. nos: and
si Papa etc. Gloss. ibidem Diftinct. 19 C sic omnes. etc.
ye Popes sometime be not good; yet are they presumed or presupposed always to
be good. And in the marrowe or margin we find, that the Pope cannot be accused
of murder or whoredom: for why it is no better tha^ sacrelege to Papa
sanctitatem recipit a Cathedra. Extrau.
dispute of his doing: Or else (says the gloss) Say the popes doings are
excused as the murders of Sampson, and the Joan. 22. Tit. 4 de conces. (...)
cap. in Gloss and margin. Sext decretal lib. 1.
theftes of the Hebrews, and the whordome of Jacob. Let no man be so bold
(says the gloss in another place) to say to the Pope, sir, why do ye so; He
has fulness of power I tell you: Now how can we irreverently think or speak De
election. and elect. Potestate. Tit. 6. Cap. 17. (...). etc.
of such a one without blasphemy? though he carrye by heaps innumerable
souls to the Devil of hell. No mortal man presumes to reprove his faults
there. etc,

This and the like is the gentle doctrine of the Pope and his stately state,
not taken from antiquity or the first fathers; but of late years in
comparison, devised and broched us by that Antichrist, and stoutly mayntained
by his proctors. Though the Pope be never so bad, though Rome be a sincke of
sin, yet if either we shall call a spade a (...), that is, repute him and it to
be such as they be, or pray and desire to be kept from that and the like
infection, we blaspheme straight way: No marvel, this sore of many years might
not be touched, we may not say any thing, which is against Rome or the Pope
of Rome, yet thus reports your own gloss. Io. Mo. said; that Rome founded of
robbers and thieves keeps still her beginnings: Rome is called as it were
gnawing the hands, Gloss. (...).
There is set us down in his meeter thus much in English Roma quasi (...)
manus.
Rome gnaweth the hands, whom she cannot gnaw she hates. etc. As you be very
bold and forward in defining Roma. (...) quos (...) non (...), odit.
sin, and making it blasphemy to contrary or speak against Rome, your Pope
there, and his canons and laws, and all in blind zeal for their defense: so
must we tell you again: Ye take too much upon you, Gods church fears not nor
needs fear your (...) resolutions and threats. Besides you injury God
himself greatly: I hear and remember how you determine, and what ye say of
blasphemy and blaspheming the holy Ghost in your canon Law: They that
willingly do any thing or presume to speak; or easily agree to them that will
do or speak against the holy Canons seems not vnfytly to hlaspheme the holy
Ghost: 25. q. I. C. (...) and. Generali, ibidem.
for such presumption is manifestly one kind of the blasphemies against the
holy Ghost, etc. Thus far your Gratian, out of Pope Damasus. We go about to
abuse none, nor to equal any other men's writings with the scriptures: But if
that be blasphemous, as ye here constantly avowe, Did. 19. C. In Canonicis.
Tit in ter Canonicas scripturas Decretales epist. connumerantur.
then is your canon or the Popes Law blasphemous for your M. in another place
goes about to reckon your Popes decretall epistles in the number of Canonical
scriptures, and to rack in Augustines authority to prove that matter, I
think this gear and the like may better and more justly be accounted of us
blasphemy against god the^ our prayers to be kept from the Pope and his
infection of papistry. But to conclude this point, there is you say, falshoode
and blasphemy in our service, and we sing and cause to be sung as though it
were scripture and one of David's Psalms, a prayer made by man: wherein we
have seen how you fail and fault greatly, and yet can find no
ungodliness, much less blasphemy in that prayer: But were it sung as ye
say, what I pray you, that are so precise and hard with us, were there therein
done more than in your Popish mattens? How is your Te Deum made by man and no
scripture, distinguished from Benedictus, that is the holy Ghostes hymn and
scripture? You had need then mend your own service, before you find such
fault with other: Again, whither will you lead and bring us from this
service, that you seem to find fault with? You had not need bring us to your
Popish blasphemous service: For then have we made but an evil change. You had
need to bring us to a service void of all note of falshoode and blasphemy,
that charge ours so there with: and are so squaymish and precise that you
cannot abide our service. It were too long upon this occasion thoroughly to
examine your Popish service, yet let us take a view in this matter, that is in
prayer and singing of Psalines, and give you for one example two. Thomas Becket
a naughty proud Prelate. etc; is made a Saint and a Martyr by you, and has
his holy day, and service; Is not this among the rest a blasphemous prayer with
you? By the (...) per Thomae (...) quem per te (...), (...) no (Christ) (...)
quo Thomas ascendit.
blood of Thomas, which for thee he did spend, make us (Christ) to climb
whither Thomas did ascend. If this gear be not blasphemous, I know not what
is. For to leave the making of a proud traiterous Prelate to his king a Saint;
to ordain service etc to Creatures in steed of the Creator; To talk also of
Thomas ascending to heaven, what is it to desire Christ to bring us to heaven
by the blood of Thomas; but by Idolatry and blasphemy to Ex Psa. 131. 15.
stain Gods glory and to injury Christ's merits: and withal to delude and
abuse Gods people? Is not moreover this Viduam a widdowe, for victum vitailes.
verse sung by you in your Temples continually; as it were out of one of David's
Psalms? Viduam eius benedicens benedicam. etc? I set down the Latin because
you sing it in Latin, craving herein pardon of the Reader, and yet take it as I
find it corruptly, and yet worse translated in your English Primer, printed
here in former Popish days, that ye had been as good have left the ignorant
people the Latin Primer alone and Beads still, as to have abused them with so
corrupt an English translation. Thus has it; the popish english Primer that I
saw at the writing hereof, distinguishing full ylfauouredlye the verses, and
disioyning the words that are to be joined together: For the more plainenes I
will set down two verses. This is my resting place for evermore. Here shall I
dwell: for I have chosen it with blessing. The widow of it I shall blyke, the
poor people of it, I shall fullfyll with bread. False translation, false
printing, false singing, false saying: All false, and nothing but false agree
well enough together, and with a false religion? The best in the world, and
therefore belike being admonished, and called upon for amendment, you let it
stand still, such is your reforming and amending of things, deforming and
making them ever worse and worse.

The next fault you charge our service with, is the lack of necessary things,
which it should have in it. Ye take example of a man's reciting of the Creed
or Articles of the Belief: If you leave out one article, as in effect the
Protestants (say you) do: the Article of descention into Hell; all the whole
Creed were naught thereby. I ask you first what if I add an Article more, as
you Papists do, when you ask men how they believe in the Sacrament of the
Alter. etc. Is not that as great a fault; Next for answer, I report me to all
the world whether we in effect, or otherwise, leave out that Article: Descended
into hell, in the Creed or teaching the people to recite it: We bid or wish
them to leave yt article out. The creed or articles of ye belief are daily
twice a day publicly recited, in the Congregation by the Minister and the
people in the mother tongue: At morning and evening prayer. Is not this article
of descending into hell: at both times expressed? Look upon the book, come to
Church and hear. Wherefore you are a very slanderer here in as you are ever;
But sir, is all the Creed naught, if that article be left out or any other:
How say you then to the creed of that famous general council of Nice, which
leaves out the Article of descending into hell, that I say nothing of other
parts of the Creed; How say you to the like Creed in the first Council at
Constantinople: How to Athanasius (...). lib. (...). cap. 6. (...). lib. 1.
Creed; that leaves out these words, Crucified, Dead; Buried; etc, I trow
you will not condemn these forms cap. 5. (...). lib. 1. (...). 13. etc.
of the Creed or Belief to prove your saying true; It were better you and
your saying too, should be found false and faulty, as you be herein, the^
accuse so godly and ancient forms of Belief: but to come nearer to you: What
say you to your own service, and the chiefest part thereof in your estimation.
If this be a fault and prove ye whole naught; The^ is your mass naught and
your mass creed, eue^ for this respect, for you cannot find Descended into
hell in your Mass Creed, nor died neither, nor yet the communion of Saints,
And yet for all this, is it among the rest of the best that is in your Mass.

It would be too long particularly to examine your propiciatorie sacrifice of
the Mass, which is a new crucifiyng of Christ again, as much as in you
lies, of which argument I speak a little after, where you repeat and mention
your Mass sacrifice again, and extol it to the sky, it is your precious
Jewel, your popish priesthood and priests finagogues or temples, aultars,
priests apparel, vestments, Sen sors Franckinsens. etc. which you here reckon
up, and we, you say lack; in deed we do so, And we thank God therefore,
saving that we have those which you call temples wherein we (...) for the
exercises of our religion; which are therefore called Churches, with us, because
Gods church and peo ple meet there, the rest you bring no scriptures for,
which in steed of all that ye allege, is the foundation of our christian
religion, so called of Christ. Priests ye say and all were (...) for that
cause, that is for your abominable mass (...): take it your popish priests
and all, and away with the same out of Christ's church, to the Devil if ye
will, (...) it first came among us. Your doctors, etc. have (...) and are so
answered, as I need not stand therein upon this occasion. If ye take that or
any other matter in hand, ye cannot go unanswered, God be thanked for his
gifts. I list not now to repeat that is and has been so often well and
truly told you herein. The like to this I tell you of your popish and apish
ceremonies. We live not in a ceremonial time, nor in a ceremonial Church,
to heap up the number of them now. We are content you be the fathers and
fosterers of your superstitious and unnecessary ceremonies, of your seven
sacraments, yea seven hundred if you will, for your priest in his pontificalibus
and massing apparel is compounded I trow of nothing, if we will believe you,
but of mysteries, and so of sacraments, all your religion is ceremonial and
mystical, but all of your own devising.

We (as those that are called to worship God in spirit and truth, that is,
after a more spiritual and heavenly manner inwardly in a service more agreeable
to Gods nature, then that which is shadowed by Ceremonies) content our selves
herein with Gods wisdom; desire to keep sobriety, and following the rule
of the Scriptures, refer all heerin to order, comeliness and edification
especially: But not such as is fleshly, and agreeable to fleshly men and minds,
Aug. ad (...)
but such as is correspondent and agreeable with the crucifides kingdom, and
the preaching of the Cross. Our sacraments we confess, and are not ashamed in
this time of yt Gospel under Christ to confess the^; being in number most
few, in observation most easy, and yet in signification most heavenly. When
you can prove that ye here only say, that we either have not most few, that
is: two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, according to our Savior
Christ's holy institution, or are bound to have more, you shall hear what we
have further to answer and say unto you, If yt, which have been already
said content you not, as it may do any reasonable men, that wilfully (...)
not themselves. Our Communion can be no Sacrament you say, yet you cannot be
ignorant that the word and matter are taken out of the Scripture: much less
then can your private Sacrifice and Action, that is secret coniuring, sole
receiving, etc. be a Sacrament. Houseling, and being houseled once a year,
which is a half receiving of I wot not what (not of a Sacrament sure, where
you have left no Element) is such a profanation, and contempt of Christ's
Sacrament as hardly can there be a greater. Let not us then, among (...) the
Communion of the body and blood of Christ is celebrated monthly or quarterly
at least, of every one be called contemners of Christ's Sacraments, and
charged with Sacrilege: and you Papists be let go scotfree: who in steed
of often receiving, content your selves with gasing, crouching, kneeling, etc.
The like I tell you of prayer for the dead, of our prayers, etc. in the mother
tongue: You are always so like your self, as ye can hardely deceive any that
once know you, or will know you.

THE eight Reason is grounded upon the loss of the benefit of the Romish
Catholic religion: If they go to Church here, which is made a great matter,
and a weighty: Before we enter into that is particularly said hereof: let
us examine this general ground. Here is no more alleged for the Papists
refraining from our assemblies, then may be alleged by the Jew, the Turk,
or any Heathen: by the Arrian, Anabaptist, or any Heretic: who in
communicating with an other religion leeseth the benefit of his own: And
therefore as we may answer the one, so may we do the other, that is: that it
is no loss at al, to forgo that which is not beneficial to any, but hurtful
to all, yea as some loss is a gain: so is it a great gain, not only to
forgo so Diuelishe and poysonfull a religion, but with all to gain the truth
by the profession of the Gospel. How beneficial soever a man have esteemed
and found a (...) and lying aforetime to be, yet has he lost nothing
thereby, that leaves that custom, and uses himself to the telling of the
truth, yea he has gained greatly by that change. To have men's eyes opened, by
the ministry and preaching of the Gospel, that they may turn from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified
by faith in Christ, etc, is no loss but an incomparable gain. And this is
Acts. 26. 18.
your very case, to the world ward more gain and benefit many ways by your
voluntary religion: then by the sincere profession of the holy Gospel of
Christ Jesus; I grant to the soul and Godwarde no profit but unspeakable
hurt gotten by the profession of Popery. Where upon, I counsel all to leave
those filthy puddles of Popery, and to drink of this pure fountain of the
water of life, that is: to leave that god the Pope, his law and traditions,
his idolatrous Religion, and superstitions, and to betake them selves to the
true God of heaven, to Jesus Christ, his holy Scriptures and word to be guided
by, contained in the Bible and book of God: That which this discourser calls
a loss, that let them count an inestimable benefit. And what ever these men
slander us withal, yet we protest it before the eternal God, that our
meaning is not to draw any from Popery to any Religion devised by men, how
wise or mighty soever they be: but to the true Religion of Jesus Christ set
us down in Gods book: Let them betake themselves to that, let them profess
the gospel of christ Jesus, they shall go long enough vnblamed for their
profession by us: let them answer their profession and live according
thereunto as is set down, in the same book of GOD, they shall please us
marueilously well, it is all we require at their hands, we will wish peace
unto them and to the Israel of God: Though then we wish men to depart from
that whoorishe Babylon of Rome, though we (...) them save them selves from
this froward generation, etc. Yet wish we them well to mark, whether we call
them, we leave them not at randon, we call them not to follow our Religion
framed at our pleasure, much less call we them to Atheism: but we call them
from that usurper and woolfe, to Christ Jesus the Prince of Pastors, our only
high Priest, and the Bishop of our souls. Read the 1. Peter. 2. if but only
the last verse of the Chapter, and see whither, and to whom S. Peter himself
called men, even the Church: Let his successor, as he falsely pretends, do
the like, at least if he call us to himself or any for him, let us learn to
know him and them: Let us mark our loss and take heed of the change, though
they that hear this Counsel shall be accounted of the Papists, (...),
Schismatikes, and I wot not what, for leaving the Idol of Rome, it makes no
matter, the gain and vantage is so passing great, as it will easily satisfy
and recompense all. A great loss, think and say you to part from the Church
of Rome: an inestimable gain say and think we, more (...) to win Jesus
Christ, which will not be in stifely cleaving to the other. Christ and
Antichist, light and darkness, the temple of God, and Idols have no
agreement. The things 2. Cor. 6. 16.
that were vantage unto Saint Paul, the same counted he loss, for Christ's
sake. Philip. 3. 7.


But let us see what the losses be, that by parting from Popery men have:
They are says this reasoner, six in number: whereof, let us see
particularly: the first loss is, men leese the benefit of the sacrifice of
the Mass, a great matter! and often repeated by you without sound of the
goodness thereof: but with us a happy loss sure, being of all blasphemies
and idolatries the most abominable: But says this discourser here: our
Savior Christ appointed his body to be offered up daily in the oblation of
the Mass: for the commodity of the whole world, quick and dead, etc. I
hear you say so sir: but I ask you where; Mat. 26. 26.
what our savior Christ appointed, is faithfully recorded Mar. 14. 22.
unto us by the four Evangelists, the faithful witnesses of Luke 22. 19.
all that Christ (...) did and taught, never a word of your John. 13.
Massing sacrifice there. No; yes I pray you: Do this in Do: Facite Uirgil cum
faciam vitulos pro frugibus ipse (...) to, 1 cum Sacrificanero.
remembrance of me. Do this, that is, sacrifice this: for do, is to sacrifice,
so does the Heathen (...) Uirgile use the word, and so may we by the Poet
expound Christ's meaning to be gentle stuff and a Clarkelye proof to
corrupt the sacred scriptures, with profane gloses. If you have any better
proof for your massing sacrifice out of the Evangelists, which tell us
faithfully what was appointed by our Savior Christ, let us hear of it. Else
hearken to S. Paul, who received of the Lord, that which he also delivered
unto the Church: and is a faithful and trusty expounder of the three
Evangelists. Now he in his exposition of these 1. Cor. (...). 25 verse. 26. etc.
words not only overthrows your counterfaite sacrifice but your new
devised transubstantiation also: who repeating: this do in remembrance of me,
expounds the same of eating and drinking, not of Sacrificing, and says: for
as often as ye shall (...) this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come, etc. Mark these words well. So that where ye say
this was appointed by our Savior to offer up his body daily, etc. We say, you
say untruly and are found a false witness bearer, (...). in (...) cap. (...).
but ye run to the fathers, finding nothing in the Evangelists Nec (...)
maiorum error (...) quendus est, sed (...) scripturarum and dei (...).
or Scriptures to make for you: but, as in time and place we reverence the
fathers: so again tell we you; that we are not bound to follow the errors
of the fathers: but what if the fathers call the Supper of the Lord, sometime
a Sacrifice, (...) as they say, or by a figure; what if they say it is a
Sacrifice, because there is offered to God thanks giving, of which it takes
also the Eucharistia.
name, and because the remembrance of that one Sacrifice of Christ once
offered, is therein celebrated by the Church according to S. Paul's exposition:
as often as ye shall eat this (...), and drink this cup, ye show the Lords
death till he come, etc. What makes this for your Massing propiciatorie
sacrifice, or the offering of Christ's body for obtaining of grace, and
avoiding of all evils for the remission of sins, both of quick and dead, or
daily in the oblation of the Mass for the commodity of ye whole world quick
and dead, as you speak, which comes all to one. Why may not we reconcile
the fathers with the scriptures. Give us leave I pray you herein, y wis your
own Master says: that which is offered and consecrated of the Priest is
called (...) and oblation: because it is a remembrance and representation of
the true sacrifice and holy oblation made on the (...) of the Cross. And
again, because in the Sacrament Magister sen tentiarum li. 4. distinct. 12
there is a remembrance of that which was once done, etc. In this sense deny
we not the Supper of the Lord, to be called a sacrifice, because praise and
thanksgiving are there offered unto the Lord, and we are not without this
kind of sacrifice in the celebration of the Lords Supper (as I said before)
And if by haunting our Church assemblies you had been as well acquainted with
our book of common Prayer, as now blinded with malice, ye are ready to
cavil and slander, ye might have found we reject not the word of
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving in the action of the Lord his Supper: Nay
that we offer not only that but our selves also, etc. to be a reasonable,
holy, and lively sacrifice unto the Lord, according to the doctrine of the
Apostle, beside the sacrifice of alms, etc. That ye need neither Romans 12. 1.
say we have no sacrifice, because we have not your Heb. 13. 16.
abominable Idol of the Mass, nor that they deprive them selves of
participation of the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood that haunt our
Church assemblies. Every one of us by the working of God his spirit in us,
and by faith applies to (...) Christ and his sacrifice, with the fruit of his
death and passion, more effectually and more faithfully, tha^ any mortal man
besides can apply ye same unto us. We advance and (...) our faith therein,
with the participation, that is: by the often use and (...) of this holy
Sacrament with the word preached withal: We trust not your Popish
application in his Mass, who, commonly sacrifices for money, as indeed all
your religion is for gain, No penny, no pater noster, they say with you. If
the Church of God should receive no commodity of Christ's sacrifice or of
his death and passion till your priest applied the same, it would never be.
Keep this your application therefore, with the commodity thereof to your
selves: we will hearke^ to ye holy ghost, a better scholemaister then you, who,
by the Apostle thus speaks amongst other 1. Cor. 10. 16 Heb. 10. 14. 19. etc.
things: The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the
body of Christ? Seeing therefore, brethren, that by the blood of Jesus we
be bold to enter into the holy place by the new and living way which he
has prepared for us through the veil, which is his flesh and seeing we
have an High priest which is over the house of God. Let us draw near with a
true heart, in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil
conscience. For with one offering has he made perfect for ever them (...) are
sanctified, etc.

To Chrysostom, and his hyperbolicall speeches you have your answer
elsewhere, and to Pope Gregory's testimony: seeing Masses be thought to be
so cheap with you, as the hearing of one is so well worth an hundred marks,
etc. where you have a good pennieworth, blame not her Majesty and the State,
it were pity you should have your masses too good cheap, that make such
price thereof; I perceive if they were dog cheap, they were (...) worth;
how say you to two hundred marks and a years imprisonment for hearing of a
Mass; It is too good cheap, it is well worth more ye think. You are in your
hundreds and thousand lives, you amplyfie in words iolily, would you needs
have it death, which in words and terms ye so talk of here at pleasure;
Take heed, make not to great account neither of saying nor hearing Mass, for
raising the price: Of naughty behavior I tell you grow good laws. Cast your
number together by Arithmetike and tell us plainly how many lives the hearing
of one Mass is well worth, and how many you can be content to affoorde in
that case. But be wiser and better advised, that is it I wish. You abuse to
grossly and childishly the holy scriptures.

For your Popish Bishops confirmation, and your extreme unction, or aneling
which is the second loss ye think ye have, and therefore ye put grace in
every place here. These myraculous gifts in the Primitive Church, serve your
Popish Church never a whit, to take away all your Popish graces even in the
whole seven sacraments. Why add you not to your gresie oil, your spittle,
etc, and your Ephata, after Christ's example, to make deaf infants to hear,
and by touching their tongue to make them speak. If it were as easy a matter
to bestow the heavenly and extraordinary gifts, or as you here speak the
grace, as it is easy to counterfaite the outward Ceremony, you would be
meruellous men: But Apishe imitation is without good grace, he is very simple
that in looking on the places ye allege only, cannot make you answer. When
we see the visible graces and gifts of the holy Ghost come upon them that
your Bishops confirm: as speaking tongues, etc. which are said to have been
given those, the Apostles laid their hands on, we will make (...) in your
comparison: You tell us of the grace of Priesthood: But Saint Paul neither to
Timothy, who was an Evangelist and Preacher of the Gospel, neither any where
else speaks of your Popish Priesthood, as I told you before. Priests (you
say) were ordained for your Mass sacrifice, and they cannot other wise be
called Priesces but in respect of yt sacrisice. Now the Popish Mass bears
too late a date, besides the naughtines of it, to have been in the Apostles
time, and ye prove nothing. An (...) and double taking of the word Mass,
helps but little; no not taken out of men's (...), nor of sacrifice neither.

The Apostle thus reasons, that; If Christ should have offered himself often
then must he have often suffered since the foundation of the world, etc. If
the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood to God his father be linked so
narrowly with his suffering, that is: with his death and passion, as it cannot
be without the same: Then must you leave your daily Sacrificing of him in the
Mass which you (...) commend so highly, or else be found among them to
crucify again to themselves the son of God, and make a mock of him, etc,
If Christ be daily offered, Christ is Look Hebr. 9. 25. 26. and 6. 6.
put daily to suffer: But Christ is daily offered by Popish Priests in the
Mass, say you, ergo: Christ is put daily to suffer by you. Otherwise thus: If
Christ be daily or often offered, then must he daily or often suffer: But he
can not nor needs not, daily or often suffer Ergo: he cannot nor needs not
daily or often to be offered. Answer hereto directly, shift not things off,
cavil not with your fond distinction of bloody and unbloody: you profess
your Mass sacrifice to be propitiatory, and all one with that Christ offered
on the cross: now, that I tell you was not unbloody, nor without shedding of
blood. This is the cause, that seeing the doctrine of the holy Ghost on the one
side, and your bad shifts on the other side, makes us to abhor your
blasphemous Mass, and to cry out against it, that I touch not other many and
many gross abuses therein, Thus much against your abominable popish mass
which you so much commend, though you bring nothing for proof thereof but
bare words.

I see you would make us believe that all your sacraments give grace,
therefore ye say the grace of priesthood also: how hap there be so many
ungracious priests, and so many graceles priests then; if the order of
priesthood give grace, or be a conduite of grace as you speak; Belike they
that take the order of priesthood leese grace, that they that take not that
order may find and have the same. Again, how make you this argument common
for all those that come to, our Churches, shall they leese the grace of
priesthood? why, many of them will tell you they never mind to be priests, and
so shall leese nothing by that, but that which a great many papists among you
shall leese as well as they, which haunt your Churches and abstain from ours:
which are called Laymen. Again sir, how is priesthood a sacrament, by it self?
I have heard of your popish sacrament of orders: of priesthood never. The grace
of Matrimony, all your wiuelesse priests, Nuns, etc. shall leese: they are
very unholy belike: that so holy an order of God: as Marriage, can not beseem
them, will they reject the grace of God, ye call it the grace of Matrimony,
Marriage, etc. are conduites of grace ye say, here ye belie saint Paul sir, and
corrupt the text: when you make Marriage a sacrament, your common translation is
no good president to make us sacraments: Else must you make us yet again more
then seven by him, as the learned know, and I think you be not ignorant.
Again, the Apostle says expressly there. I speak concerning Look Ephe. 1. 9.
and. 4. 3. 9 etc.
Christ, and concerning his Church: that is the mystery he speaks of there.
I leave to speak of the beastlines of Pope Siricius, who wickedly applies to
honorable marriage, that sentence of the Apostle: They that are in the flesh can
not please God: to show how contraryly you judge and speak of Marriage: You
tell us of seven sacraments, sieve more then (...) Christ instituted: but is
that all? I wene if ye describe a sacrament, to (...) it to the number of
seven, ye shall find many more: ye will follow the common opinion of the
Romish Church I trow: And (...) not your gloss tell us even in marriage, that
there are two sacraments, so shall we find eight by your doctrine: And one
look well; it will not be hard to find nine, and more too: so shall we have
no end, nor keep any measure if we follow you herein: Your seven
sacraments, as you reckon them here, are these: Baptism, Confirmation, 27. q.
2. ex di (...) digest.
Priesthood, Matrimony, Extreme unction, Penance, the sacrament of the Altar.
The grace of Baptism you leave untouched, not deniyng but we enjoy it: more
of your (...), for sacraments of Christ's Church (properly to speak) do not
we acknowledge: But in steed of your counterfaite sacrament and Idol of the
Altar, we have restored unto us the sacrament of the Lords Supper, or of the
Heb. 13. 4.
body and blood of Christ, instituted by this our good master him self: As for
marriage, we esteem it honorable among all, and a bed undefiled, as the
Apostle speaks and say with him on the other side, that: whore mongers and
adulterers God will judge. So then we repute it as the institution of the holy
God, and his order to live in, according to his word in his fear: A sacrament
(as holy Baptism, and the Supper are) do we not repute it to be, none
Priesthood, have we among us such Church (...) as Christ also has left us by
his institution and word, as namely, Pastors, or Ministers of the word and
Gospel. In stead of your dumb ceremonies and Popish confirmation, have we a
continual Catechizing of the youth

As every one here can tell you, we have visitation of the sick, counsel,
and prayers with him and for him, to his comfort, as the rule of Charity
prescribes. Repentance is continually taught here, and persuaded: public
confession of sins is made in our assemblies unto God daily. The power and
authority of binding and loosmg, or the keys, as you speak of the church
(are here by the ministry of the word and preaching, as occasion serves
more faithfully and uprightly used then with you. In stead of your
Ashewednesday ashes, and displing on men's bare heads, and women's bare hands,
etc. we have some form of public discipline and correction (though not such
and so perfect) as were to be wished. Now, let the Godly judge of the gain
that you brag is to be had by the profession of your popish religion, and
haunting your Antichristian Synagogue, and the loss that you imagine is to be
had in the profession of the Gospel, and our religion, to in haunting our
Church assemblyes: you that are blinded, partial, and take no trial of our
Church meetinges, no marvel though ye corruptly judge of the whole, For the
authority of the true Church of Christ, there is no great strife between us:
there is more for your Pope, and Popish prelates, and Clergy, for their
appropriating and abusing of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, for taking
away the key of knowledge, neither entering themselves, and forbidding them that
came in. Saving that even in the Churches authority, we deny that our (...)
Christ did at his departure (as you speak here) leave all his authority with
his Church, which he had received of his father: he has not resigned his
authority to any: he lives, reigns, and continually guides and governs
his Church himself, providing for the same as our only king, high priest,
lawegiuer, prince of pastors, and so forth, after a far better manner than
any mortal man can or will perform that office, and yetin the mean while,
he has appointed under him, offices and officers, such as he thought
requisite, keeping the Sovereignty in the Church still to himself, Luke (...)
1. 52.
of which offices and officers ye may see to the Romans, Romans 1 2. 6. 7. 8.
Corinthians, Ephesians, etc. Whose offices are limited and bounded, so as
they may not go without their compass. (...). Cor. 12. 28 Ephe. 4. 11.
That which you confess Christ to have given to his Church, let no man take
from the Church. Let no creature usurp over the same; keep well to the Church,
that ye here speak of the Churches authority.

Concerning Confession, in that place which ye (...) De poenite^t.
out of the Acts, or out of your Gratian rather as appears, Did. 1. c.
volui. sent. 6. ex his.
you put in of your self, that they came to the Apostles, it is not in the
text, though your Gratian have it; there was none of the Apostles there but
Paul, that we read of, to Act. 19. 18. 19.
whomsoever the confession was made, it was public, as of the fruits, it is
reported, that immediately many which (...) poenite^t.
used curious arts, brought their books and burned them Did. 1 Agite. De
(...) morum.
before all men. You cite us a long place out of a bastardely book, cast for
credit upon Augustines back (for the former place makes nothing for
auricular confession.) And yet would I the learned reader would confer
Gratian and you together, from whom you took this: but you thought good more
strongly to confirm it with Hob, Nobs Erasmus.
authority: of whom for answer, I say as that learned man in his Censor
before the same book says: A Praters talk neither learned, wise, nor
eloque^t: what faces or minds had they yt put upon us such writings in
Augustines name; For the matter of your forged Auricular confession to a
Ghostly De poenite^t. did. 1.
Father, that is a popish Priest and so forth, you might have found that your
own doctors agree not, some thinking confession with the mouth to man not
necessary for forgiveness of sins, some thinking otherwise, and good
authorities are by your M. Gratian that moves the question, alleged against
yt kind of confession, how ever you doctorlike decide the matter to the
contrary, as though all the world must go with you one way, that is a Popish
way. Does not your he own gloss upon Gratian, where he brings in men's
authorities to prove confession (as he does also against it) say: alleges
(meaning Gratian) for the other part: to wit, that sin is not forgiven one
of years of discretion without confession of the mouth, which yet says the
Gloss is false. De poenite^t. did. 1. c. omnis qui. 6. (...) contrario.


For our Churches doctrine in the matter of confession of sins, though we
condemn your (...) order, and the butcherly straitnes of reckoning up all our
sins particularly in the priests ear. etc. Yet with the scriptures we
teach and exhort men to acknowledge their faults one to another. And where
either the church publicly, or any man privately is offended, there for
reconcilement, we teach that it is necessary not only that ones fault be
acknowledged, but farther testimony also given of repentance and sorrow, to
the churches satisfaction or the parties, according to the degree of the fault
be it public, be it private. Moreover where one feels his conscience
burdened or entangled with sin and the remorce thereof, and is not able to
help or rid himself out of the snares of the Devil, there do we advise
him, to choose for his comfort and help, some godly learned and discreet man,
minister, or other, to break his mind to, to ask council, and to learn that
may be for the benefit of his soul and conscience. Thus whilst confession
proceeds from a religious and willing mind prepared by doctrine and
exhortation in steed of your devised downfall and break neck to men's
souls, is it made by us a sovereign medicine, and plaster to cure wounds
withal and sick souls.

For the often receiving of the holy communinion, this is no loss in our
Churches, whereunto menare daily exhorted to come often, and may receive it in
most places monthly, or as often as the parish will, and that in both kinds
according to Christ's institution comfortably: where in the popish Churches to
be houzeld once a year, and then to receive but a dry host without the
consecrated cup, as they call it too diuelishly, was enough: words are but
wind, and you give us nothing but words either for your self or against us:
and yet am I driven to answer even bare words. How much a do we have to bring
our country people to an often receiving of this most comfortable sacrament vy
reason of your popish custom of rare and seldom receiving that they have
been so long acquainted withal, and thereby infected: And what people they
here be that most refrain (...) the communion, not of superstition, but of an
opinion, (...) the seldom receiving, as they were wont before time in popery,
may suffice: none that knows but meanly the state of this Church can; be
ignorant.

In your talk of good works: leave out merit and meritorious that ye babble of
without all ground after a popish manner, and let Gods order be kept, and good
works ranged within the compass of Gods law and commandments and esteemed by
his judgment, and not by our fancy. Let will worship and superstitiously
devised good works go, and that being marked, which I have before written,
there will be no difficulty.

The Communion of Saints, as I showed before, your mass service Creed,
leaves out, how ever you urge it here: and yet would I not have objected this
as any fault, but that you begin, deal so hardly with us about the article
of Descending into hell, without cause; and will needs make so heinous a
matter of this doing. Still I did you apply this to your selves and your
religion, (...) keep your own law: But sir this communion of Saints is not
to be had in your Church where the Pope is head, from who^ all the members of
that body must take influence, as you call it. The true communion of Saints is
among the members of Christ's mystical body, whereof he alone is the head,
from whom all must take spiritual (...), being by God his spirit engrafted
into him, and coupled unto him by faith, or which is all one, having him, by
the same spirit dwell in our hearts by faith: On this, and in this is the true
Communion of Saints grounded, whereof for answer to you there is enough said
before. The sum is: the communion with the Pope cutteth of the communion with
Christ, and so joining us to Antichrist as head, destroys also the Communion
of Saints.

WE are come to the nienth and last Reason, which is taken from the example
of Infidels and heretics, meet mates for you, and a fit pattern in religion
for those of your side to follow, a good and sure foundation for your erroneous
consciences: meet as a poor help, to be kept for the last place: but if
your cause were good, you would make better choice. The Devil is the father of
such and their religion, naughty consciences and doings: wherein the more
(...) they be, the worse they be, for want of a good foundation and a good
guide: Obstinacy and peeuishnes in steed of Godliness may be learned at these
schoolemaisters and their doings, falsehood, error, and lies, may be (...)
from them: truth and goodness not at all, or very ylfauouredly: but where there
is any spark left in them, it may be better fetched from a clearer fountain.
So we may be free then from learning a rule of conscience from such (...): Let
them serve you and your erroneous consciences, if you will learn no better.
Suppositions, (...) and railing at the profession of Christ's religion here,
and nothing but such stuff, amplified by comparison, similitude and example,
not worth the answering: I have so much answered of an (...), as I need not
stand therein now. It (...) to be your best Anchre and last refuge, when your
matters cannot be maintained with a good conscience; and therefore both M.
Howlet, and you plead it so hard in the beginning, in the midst, and here in
the end for a conclusion of the whole treatise. Good intents in popery, or
your well meaning minds as you can call them when ye list to speak thereof,
have a great force: The matter though it be had, though it be hurtful to
other; is mended; nay is made good, by that intent, or well meaning mind of
yours. Thus may heresy be good, Idolatry good, theft good, whordome good,
treason good, rebellion good, and what not good and godly, at least by his
Dispensation all may be made good, that has so infinite power and (...), as
your GOD the Pope has, Ca me, Ca thee: say they. Excuse you the Popes
whoredoms, as (...) whoredom etc. As the (...) be fore wills, and ye shall
not leese all by his blessing, absolution or dispensation, etc. Ye shall gain
somewhat: he is no Churl, he will play the good fellow where he takes. His
doctrine and canon law gives great scope, he can enlarge the same for his
Darlinges: But it cannot be so taken of her Majesty our dread (...) here: it
will not serve to excuse that is amiss: for that which is supposed and vaunted
by you to be so forcible and strong as to persuade any, to draw all; is found
(what should I say) by her Majesty's, and the States great wisdom? Nay, by
any that list with indifferency to examine it to be as weak as water:
Wherefore be advised, Leave this hollow hollownes of popery, Embrace Christ's
true religion prescribed and described in Gods book, cast away vice, embrace
virtue: Be faithful and true hearted to our dread Sovereign and the state,
(...) your selves and other Paply, and profit in all godliness, living together
with us in godly peace and vuitie to your own joy and ours: Let God in all be
praised, and ye are welcome home: otherwise, as we had as leeue have your
room as your company: so for a watch word and fare well, take heed to your
selves, and provide for an evil day I counsel you: And yet I mean not so
much in this world, as in that to come: God give us all his grace.

Amen.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson, for
Toby Smyth dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crane 1581.

An appendix, or addition for aunsweare to the Authors recapitulation in the
end of his Treatise.
BEfore you conclude up this first part of your discourse, you gather for
(...) sake to the unlearned, four conclusions, taken out of yt you have to
fore said: which being falsely supposed, rather then duly proved, might easily
have been here omitted. But it is to the unlearned. You may not be gain
standed: You will have no nay: You will not now dispute of the matter you say,
all must be supposed: indeed the unlearned and unstable are easeliest seduced
and brought to wrest even the Scriptures to their own destruction, as blessed
Peter reports. The godlier learned, and wise, will call (you know) 2. Pet. 3.
16.
for sound proof of the matter; you think to carry all before you, upon your
own credit: it is no reason; it may not be.

Going to Heretical assemblies, we grant you is prohibited Christians by the
law of nature, of God, and of his true Church, and not to be dispensed with by
any mortal man: but where, when, and how, prove you that our Church asse^blies
be heretical; this would have been proved, which you put off, before you had
been so rash to have without warrant or ground pronounced it unlawful to
haunt our Church assemblies. What it aduauntageth your side to suppose that
which you cannot prove; and lies in controversy between us, I wot not, but
easily may one perceive that it sauoureth neither of truth, nor of learning,
which you so confidently affirm. Till you can convince us therefore of heresy
and our assemblies to be heretical, (which while we may be heard to make
answer will never be) give us leave to turn on your own heads, that which
you charge us with. And forasmuch as our men have proved Papists Heretics,
and their Idolatrous assemblies heretical; give the Pastors, and other godly
Learned, leave to admonish all the faithful to abstain therefrom, as from
prohibited and unlawful things, where you especially have nothing to do, or
not to command at least.

And seeing the case thus stands now between these two religious that of
the Protestants and Papists: In the mean while till you can more sufficiently
then hitherto, reprove our Church assemblies, let us crave at your hands to
show, that the whole act of going to Church, is (as it is of you Papists
said to be) prohibited also Iure diuino and naturali: that is by the Law of
GOD and nature. For we hold the contrary; not by Supposition as you do, but
by good warrant of God his word, reason, and experience: to wit, that to
haunt Church assemblies, is a thing (...) on GOD his Law: Whether we respect
the old Testament or the new, and also on the Law of nature; as not
experience only taken from the Heathen, and the example of them that have
amongst them any exercise of Religion: but reason also sufficiently teach:
and not to haunt Church meetinges on the other side, or vttetly to abstain
therefrom is a contempt and utter denying of all Religion. If therefore you will
needs busy your self, where you have no cause, and little thank of
autoritye for your labor: show either your self more religious and
favorable, in speaking for Church meetinges, or prove more substantially
then hitherto, the faults wherewith you charge the same here among us,
especially seeing all the world may know, and judge, that our meetinges in
the exercise of Religion daily, are not only void of Idolatrye, wherewith
your meetinges are (...): but tend also to the (...) and comfort of our
consciences, unto the good example of other, in making public confession of
our sins, and the Christian faith, in hearing GOD his holy word, making
public prayers, participating of the holy Sacraments, etc. which we take to
be the principal ends, and chiefest uses of Christian assemblies, in steed
of gasing, crooching, crossing, pyping, singing, and other ceremonial fashions
in use among you.

For the rest whether it be impossible to be so, that your Pope should offer
too her Majesty to confirm the English service upon condition to recover
his Supremacy here in England, which he is far from, and GOD so keep
him still: and whether his authority be above the Scriptures, so as he may
dispense with things against GOD his Law or no, I leave to the Authoures,
that first invented such brabbles to occupy men's heads with all. Only this
in perusing of late, I remember N. Saunders an Archepapiste among you English
Romanists, handeling this latter question of the Popes authority in dispensing
against the word of God, disputes whether the Pope may not dispense against
the Apostle, thus mynceth he things, and for his advantage propounds this
question, and he affirms as one put to his shifts therein, that the Pope
may do, or suffer to be done, sometime otherwise then the Apostle
commands and orders. As for example, where the 1. Cor. 7. 12.
Apostle commands, if any brother have a wife, that believes not, If she be
content to dwell with him, let him not forsake her. The Pope may for some
respect dispe^ce and give the man leave to put a way such a wife content and
desirous to dwell with her husband: and further he may give him leave to marry
an other, contrary to the Apostles, doctrine and commandment. With which, he
has authority to dispense, Saund. de (...). monarch. Eccle.
though the former wife have committed no fault against her lib. 8. cap. 22.
husband after their marriage. And why not, I pray you: when he has done,
still does, and can do greater things then this, whereof I enter not now to
entr eat upon this occasion particularly, nor to examine Saunders, cauilles
and mere shifts indeed, and no better. The Learned know this man of sin
well enough, and the excessive authority he usurps and chalengeth. The
unlearned I think are sufficiently warned before. Let all that are Godly take
heed of dealing with Pope or Papists in marriage, or otherwise.

In the second conclusion, you bring no new matter, but turn us over to the
old, and therefore I also send the Reader to that I have before particularly
answered.

In the third conclusion, it greeueth you her Majesty's Subjects be and
should be so obedient to her godly commandments, and therefore where
obedience for going to Church is alleged, you call it a A vain pretense. As
the holy Scriptures, for the ground of our G O D his service, were a great
block lying in your way, wherewith you were troubled before, and therevppon
traveled to inuay against the sacred Scriptures: So now here, her Majesty's
authority grounded on the Scriptures, and joining therein with the Mynisters
doctrine and exhortation, to call her Subjects to holy assemblies, lies in
your way again, and combreth you greatly. It will make you sweat, and your
shoulders ache too, before you will be able to remove these two blocks. If you
possible stumble at them, and break your shinnes; thank your self of your
hurt, who are more busy with them then you need be.

Obedience, yea and protestation of obedience to her Majesty and her wholesome
laws in this behalf aggrawateth the sin, rather then diminishes it, you
say: although I think there be none that has so little regard to his Souls
health, as to go to Church ouelie for obedience sake, and not of a religious
mind also. He that thinks it is naught to speak against the Pope at Paul's
Cross (which is your example, though you call it railing) thinks therein
amiss, and therefore being commanded, if occasion serve thereto, shall do well
to obey and do it, redressing his former foolish thinking, which too absurdly
still you make conscience, when it is indeed but a fancy and a dream: tell us
it is Pilats case, as much and as long as you will, we will (...) bid you prove
it. Your pope is not Christ (fir) nor the clearing or condemning of him the
like doing to Pilats with Christ, there is great odds in the case.

Of pretended conscience etc. I think I have said enough, and of the foolish
and wicked band of a naughty and erroneous conscience, whereof you talk.
Prove still I bid you, or hold your peace, that haunting our churches is
naught, though you suppose it, that is, imagine and dream so. We that by
experience find and know the contrary, can not grant it you. Obedience to
her majesty and protestation thereof in haunting holy church assemblies here
authorized by law, makes the sin greater. Disobedience to her majesty and
her godly laws herein, disloyalty, rebellion, treason, etc. not only diminish
the subjects fault toward their prince, but is a virtue with you, it is a
confession of your popish catholic faith. Obedience to your pope and to a
prelate in a naughty thing, and to your church eue^ against conscience
excuses. I have given examples and a taste before: this is your religion and
conscience. After this (fighting as you do still with your own shadow) you make an
objection of your own, and answer it at pleasure. And because you like not to
single the matter (it is your own word) you huddle, you shuffle, and double;
iu^bling up things full evil fauouredly together. For reckoning how many
things are contained in going to Church, you bring us forth some that we
acknowledge; but diverse and very many of your own devising which we justly
reject and (...) as our answer before does sufficiently declare. Single things
therefore I pray you, and sever and distinguish between good and bad, one and
the other, better then you here do, or else keep your annexes as you call
them to sport your self withal: defend your obstinacy by word, by
writings, by imprisonment, or as you will make all the world know your sturres,
and gaze upon you to please your selves therein as much as lyketh you: yet
shall it be obstinacy still, say and do what you can, the more the matter
comes into trial, the less credit, and vauntage has it of your side.

The conscience of the Catholic that thinks he does naught, in haunting our
Church assemblies, is devilish and dangerous, as we have seen the explanation
of the church as you call it, that is of the popish route and antichristian
stuagogue, is like to yt imagined conscience: you labor hard to bring the
church assemblies here into discredit: You tell us of the holding up of a finger
only: How unlawful it were in this case, you add (such is your modesty) a
similitude of lifting up but of a straw to the devil in token of obedience:
which you say is as much, as if one did word by word deny his creed: But I
ween not, there is a difference in the greatness between sin and sin, all
sins are not equal.

Afterward of courtesy and grace, you make us four qualificatio^s as you term
the^, which may make going to church lawful by the judgment of your divines,
mere, particular, known, temporal business; How gingerly and nicely you walk
in the matter. These conditions added to going to church, make it al one (you
say) as not to go to church at al. You so profane it as it is no better in
your opinion, then (...) of the market, or some like worldly business: which
exercise is good enough for those of your religion, if you leave but such a
going to church, as is al one with not going at al: then may I shortly answer
you, as good never a whit as never the better. In that which follows in this
third conclusion of Naaman the Sirian: you so handle the matter, as I know not,
whether you make his fact sin or no, if he (...): what needed he to seek
pardon at God his hand, purchasing the same from the prophet to be obtained by
his prayer; If he sinned: what tolleration could the prophet give him therein;
For our case there is no difficulty, and therefore I omit it without further
discussion your exposition of ye whole.

In the fourth and last conclusion, that you gather supposing lalfhood still,
you show your self very precise against our God his service: for you say a man
may not yield in any one little point therein, which you would further ground
upon an other conclusion also. If all be not lawful then no part of it is
lawful, which ground of yours, how you can prove better then yt rest if you be
put thereto I wot not, but I think hardly enough. Nevertheless I now put you
not unto that labor; you have enough to do already, and more then will ever
be well done or cleared: we must admit supposition, for any thing you have yet
said, I see not why our exercises in (...) may not be thought lawful,
co^me^dable, and godly also.

For the general doctrine you here deliver us, that God accepts no particion,
no mayme in our service, but either al or none must be his, that we must walk
with an upright heart before him, in roundnes of conscience without limitation,
dissimulatio^, or haulting, sticking precisely (...) his holy law and
commandments, it is most true, and as a heavenly truth, so we receive it:
But the whole is very badlye applied to your popish devils service. The textes
of scripture that you cite, talk of the sincerity of God his service, of his
law and of his commandments, etc. Hold you there, keep to his holy word and
we shall agree, but you do not, you will not, you may not, you can not, your
false Proverb. 16.
suppositio^ deceives you, there is a way says the wife man, that seems
right to a man, but the yssues thereof are the ways of death. O yt the word of
yt Lord in religion, in life, in gods matters and in ours, every where and
every way might be a la^tern to our feet, to be continually carried before us:
and a light to our steps to direct us in all our ways. O that we could, and
would wholly give over our selves to god to be (...) thereby, we should never
delight more in popery: nor yet in our own fa^cies. Christ, you say, says; that
he will not have one jot of his law to be passed over unkept, and whosoever shall
break one of the least of his commandementes, shall have least pare in the
kingdom of heaven. The which words of Christ, Saint James explicating, says:
he that keeps all the whole law and does offend but in one thing only,
yet is he guilty in all the rest. And again, to be imperfect is contrary to
the will of Christ which would have us perfect. For Christ's words you quote
Matthewe. 5. for the other, James. 2. Now let me be bold to stay here a little
and common and talk with you. Is it not God his Law I pray you? Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in
heaven above. etc. Who break the same and teach men so to do? Who strike it
out of the number of the ten commandments and keep it from the knowledge of
the lay people? Who but you papists? Is it not Christ his commandment, in the
Supper of the Lord? Drink you al of this. Who break and corrupt the same with
false gloses? But you Papists.

Even in this place of the. 5. of Mat. the. 6. and. 7. also. Who but papists?
make of Christ his precise commandementes counsels ouely, so loosing or
breaking rather the knot whereby God has tied men in duty toward him: and
all this to bring in works of supererrogation, merits, the popish perfection
of Friars, and other their religious men. etc. things of their own devise. Who
at this day but Papists denies concupiscence or lust to be sin, which is
forbidden in the tenth and last of God his commandments, to the extolling
Look. Romans 7 from the. 7. verse.
of man's nature, and derogating of Gods grace? who to the like effect, set our
justification by works but they? who is it I pray you tell me if you can, that
comes to that perfection in life by works that Christ here requires? who
can say that he offends not in one thing, which if he do, he is thereby (as
you here tell us out of S. James) guilty in all the rest. There is no such man
I trow. That made the holy prophet Psalm. 143. 2. and 130. 3.
say, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none
that lives be justified. And again: If thou O Lord, mark iniquities, O Lord
who shall stand? But there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared etc.
Thus think we, and thus had we rather speak then be deceived with the
papists, and use their phrases.

Now then, out of these places. Thus do I reason against men's being justified
by works: none that is guilty in all Gods commandementes, can allege his
works for his justice, or can be justified by works, but who ever offends
but in one thing only, as I think you will grant every man does, is guilty
in all the rest as you allege us here, out of S. James. Wherefore none that
offends but in one thing only, or which is all one, no mortal man, can
allege his works, for his justice, or can be justified by works. To be
justified by works and through works to offend GOD and be thereby guilty
and that in all his commandments, be two contrary things, and will euelly
stand together: which makes us I tell you to seek out of our selves, and to
find our righteousness in Christ, and to lay hold on him and it by faith,
where alone it is truly and indeed to be had. And for our selves and our
works, though received now to grace and justified in Christ by faith, We be
continually and diligently occupied in godly and good works commanded of God in
his law, acknowledging it to be our duty so to do, as wherein true
christianity is lively expressed and showed forth: and do likewise teach
other the same, and set them in that course: Yet come we short ever of that
Gods Law iustly'requireth therein at our hands, and we our selves would be glad
to perform. And therefore in the matter of our (...), we renounce our own
righteousness: and cleave only to yt righteousness of God, which is by faith of
Jesus Christ our Lord: and when we have done all those things that are
commanded Luke. 17. 10.
us, yet say we (as Christ our good master teaches us.) We are unprofitable
servants we have done that which was our duty to do. etc.

Albeit then, we distinguish and join nevertheless together iustifycation and
sanctifycation, faith and good works, as light and heat, in, and with the
fire continuasly: yet set we not up works of supererrogation to merit (...)
for our (...) and other, or vainly vaunt of our meritorious deeds, things
devised commonly by men and papists rather then proceeding from the spirit of
God. In sum, papists extol man and his nature, diminishing thereby Gods
glory and the riches of his grace, we humble man and his nature, we beat down
his pride, that looking on his foul feet, he may have no cause to brag of
his peacockes tail, that is by any means glory in him self; on the other
side, we magnify the great name of the eternal God, and praise his glorious
grace toward us in Jesus Christ: that as it is written. He that glories let
him glory in the Lord. To who^ as the same 3. Cor. 1. 31.
is due) be all honor, glory, power, dominion, etc. for ever. Now let ye godly
reader hardly judge, whether doctrine, and profession, the papists or ours,
serve more to the setting forth of God his honor and glory, be more godly and
sound, grou^ ded on the sacred scriptures, and sticking precisely to Gods law
without breaking any (...) thereof, be more necessary also and profitable for
us in the course of this transitory life, amids our many and manifold gross
corruptions and imperfections, which we humbly acknowledge to be in our (...)
and in other, yea even in the best; and yet neither flatter our selves therein,
nor teach other so: where the papists set up merits, works of supererrogatio^
etc. As to give yet further example, even in this place of this papists
corrupting of the holy scriptures to man's praise and gods and Christ's
dishonor. Let us consider one only place by him self here alleged. He
pretends it to be in the first chapter of S. Paul's epistle to the
Collossians, but as he began with forgerie, corrupting the words and sense of
the holy ghost in the first text of scripture, that he alleged out of S. Paul
in the. 14. to the Romans, as we have seen in ye beginning of this his
treatise: So in this place, now which is his last text, concludes he and
binds up the whole with corruption and forgery: still he has wanted none in
the body and mids of his discourse, he is like him self ever. That which S.
Paul, and we with S. Paul ascribe unto god and Christ that they may have the
glory in all, that does this forgerer ascribe unto man and us; corrupting both
S. Paul's (yea the holy ghosts) words and the sense of the sacred scriptures
also: for where S. Paul lively describing the office of the true Christ
shows what benefit the church Gods people receive from god by him, thereby
discerning and seuering him from all false Christ's: there this fellow as
though there wanted other false Christ's, sets man or our selves in place to
take gods, and Christ's office, and room upon us. Thus S. Paul: And you which
were in timee past strangers and enemies: your minds being set in evil works
has he reconciled in the body of his flesh, through death, to present you
holy and unblameable and without fault in his sight. Thus this gentle companion
tells us, S. Paul says: yt Christ died for us, to the end We should exhibit
our selves holy, and unspotted, and irreprehensible in his sight. And yet he
further corrupts the text with his Commentary: Let the Reader compare,
examine, and judge indifferently of the whole.

For the rest either it needs no answer, or is already answered before.
Wherefore I will here end: wishing us only, that at this day profess the
Gospel, and Christ's true religion, to apply to the confirming of us in the
truth, those testimonies and places: which this man (abusing the (...))
applies to Popery and falsehood. Let his and his fellows blind zeal, and
feruentnesse in lies awake us that sleep in security. Let it serve to
condemn our kay coldness in ye matters of God, and our salvation, which is I
ween if not all: yet as the common, so the greatest fault of us (...)
professors of the Gospel at this day.

We hear what he says, and says truly: If error find such zeal, what
zeal ought truth to have; If they be stout in fancies, and stick so hard to
their pretended consciences, how should we stick and stand to conscience
(...) on Gods holy word without (...) between two opinions; 1. Kin. 16. (...)
If the Lord be God, follow him: if Baal be (...), then go after him. Let us
hear for shame, and apply to our selves (at least, at this man's admonition and
calling) the (...) of the Ephesians, taken out of the beginning of the second
Chapter of S. JOhn his revelation: let us not be between (...). 3. 14. (...).
16 etc.
both, luke warm, neither cold nor hot, as the same S. John tells us the
Laodicians were. Look the place to the end of the Chapter. Let us be zealous
therefore, and amend etc. For God is a ielous God. Separate your selves (...)
2. Cor. (...) the 14 verse to the end of the Chapter.
layth the Lord, and touch no unclean thing. etc.

Lastly, with our knowledge, joining zeal, let us remember and apply to our
selves in the truth of God his holy religion, that, which he even here in the
end of his work truly tells us: that God accepts no partition, no
limitatio^, no mayme in our service: But either al or none must be his.

Let us follow herein the example of S. Basile, Gods resolute (...), that this
man recites us out of Theodoret, and retain and bear in mind the most
worthy and excellent (...). lib. 4. cap. 17.
saying also, as he calls it of Christ's holy Martyr S. Cyprian: rather (that
in steed of his Father, wherewith he In Epist. 1. Cler. Roman: apud (...).
(...). 31.
concludes his book: I may conclude with holy Scriptures) let us (high and
(...), one and other) well mark, bear in (...) and execute, (and God give
grace we may so do) as Gods cause and glory shall require, amongst other that
most worthy and excellent speech and counsel (may I be bold to say) of the
holy Ghost, uttered by Iosue in the last (...). 24.
Chapter of that book: read and peruse it, I heartily pray thee Gentle
Reader, for thine own profit, at the least, from the xiiii. verse of that
Chapter onwarde to the end, make thy profit of all: and so farewell heartily
in Christ.

I beseech thee in thy prayers, remember to pray among yt rest) for the
aduanceme^t, and co^tmuance of Gods holy Gospel in sincerity (...) us: free
from all dregs of Popery. also for the prosperity of the Queens most
excellent Majesty, our dread (...) in all things: and for the preservation
and blessing every way of this whole Church, and Land, our dear Country, and
that thou in heart prayest, procure indeed, that is, by all means endeavor in
thy (...) effectually to (...), and to put the same in practice.

(...) glory and his Churches benefit.

Amen.
P. W.


