The true copye of a Prolog written about two C. years paste by John Wycklife
(as may justly be gatherid by that, that John Bale has written of him in his
book entitlid the Summarie of famous writers of the Isle of great Brita^) the
Original whereof is found written in an old English Bible bitwixt the old
Testament and the New. Which Bible remaynith now in ye King his majesty's
Chamber.

Imprinted at London by Robert Crowley dwelling in Elie rents in Dolburn. Anno
Do. MDL.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The figure of John Wycklife.


King Edward the. iii. did Wicklife defend
Wherbi he did flourish in Oxford long while
But Richard y^. ii. King did something bend
To papistis by whom Wicklife was in exile
Yet did this good man never alter his style
But wrote mani volumis whils he was alive
To extinguish error, and truth to revive
At the last he returnid to his contrei again
And lyuid at Lutter worth, where his charglay
And after his death he did there remain
Forty winter and one, till come was the day
When Satan was suffrid to ^en without stay
But the^ did our clergy set open his grave
And bre^t al his bonis, such chariti they have
To the Reader
AFter I had perused this prolog (gentle reader) and was fully determined to
set it in print to the edifiynge of all such as be desyrouse to read and
understand the holy Bible. I thought it mete to give such a name to it, as
might declare the fruit that springs thereof, that the^ by the gredy
stude^tis of gods book might be stirred (even when they do but hear it ^amed)
with the desire to read it, keep it in memory, and apply it to the use it
seruith fore. A more mete name therefore could I not i^uente, the^ ye Pathwaye
to perfect knowledge, which this little book ledith unto. For what shorter way
might a man take to y^ perfection of godly knowledge, then to have in memory
first what Books of the Bible the christen feythe is bylded upon, to what use
the rest do serve, what is said in euery^ of them, and by what means al dark
sentences therein may be understand?

All this thou have (gentle reada^) in this book, so briefly, so plainly, and
so effectuously: that noman can justly reprehend any thing therein. It was
first written by one that hongred after thine health (as it may be justly
gatherid by the great travail he took in it) and y^ in a time right
da^ngerouse. It has been preserved wonderfully, even in all the stormis of
persecution and fyry shuers of false religion. Many men bistowed much to have
it copied out to the intent they might enjoy y^ ^tutes of it, in the time of
errowre and ignorance: but thou have it now offered unto the for little cost,
in a time when true religion biginnith to floryshe. It was at y^ first made
common to few men y^ would and were able to obtain it. But now it is made
commen to all men, that be desyrouse of it. Forget not therefore, to take it
thanckfully, to use it Christenly, and to esteem it of no less value than a
most preciouse Jewel, first framed by the divine wisdom of gods spirit
poured upon the first Autoure, preserved by goddis merciful providence, and
now offered unto the by God himself, that thou hongring the perfect
knowledge of goddis word should not be destitutid of so necessary a mean
to attain to the same.

The spirit of God work in thine heart that thou may s^e frutfully read the
lively word of God to his glory in y^ emendment of thy life. Fare well.

Londini. Anno salutis nostre. 1550. Maij. 28. Robertus Croleus

The path way to perfect knowledge.
Five and twenty bokis of the old testamet ben bokis of feith, and fulli bokis
of holy wryt. The first is Genesis. the. ii. Exodi. the. iii. Lenitici, the.
iiii. Numeri, y^. v. Deutronomi. And these five ben ye bokis of Moses: the
which ben cleped proprely, the law. The vi. Iosue, the vii. book is Iudicum:
that encloseth the stort of Ruth. The viii. book, ix. x. xi* xii. and xiii: ben
the. iiii. books of kings, and the tweie books of Paralipomeno^ The xiiii. book
is Esore, that co^prehendeth Neemy. And all is do book Anentis. is With.
anentis Hebreus, as Ierom seith. But anentis Grekis and Latins: these ben
tweie bokis. The xv. is Hester, the xvi. is Job, the xvii. is ye Psalter The
xviii. book. xix, and xx: ben the three books of Solomon. The first is
Proverbs, either Parables, the. ii. Ecclesiastes, and the iii. is songis of
so^gs The xxi. book xxii, xxiii. and xxiiii. be^ y^. iiii. great prophets.
Esaiis first Jeremy is the. ii. Ezechiel is the. iii. and Daniel is y^ iiii.
The xxv, book is a book of xii. small Prophetis. Osee, Joel, Amos, Abdie,
Jonas, Michee, Nau^, Abacuke Sophonie Aggei, Zachari and Malachie: and al these
xii. small Prophets be^ oo book and in this order. And what ever book is in ye
old testament wythont these xxv. forseyde: shall be set among Apocripha, that
is withoute^ authority of bileue. Therefore the book of Wisdom Ecclesiastici
Judith and Tobie, ben not of bileue. The first book of Machabeis was fou^de^
writtun in Hebru. And y^. ii. book of Machabeis: was written first in Greek.
Jerome seyth all this sentence in the prolog on the first book of Kings. Also,
y^ book of Baruk, and y^ Epistil of Ieremi: be^ not of the authority of y^
bible anemis Hebrus ne y^ praiere of Manasses, as Ierom witnesses. And how
mich of yt book of He ster and Daniel is of autoriti anentis Hebreis, and in
hebru lettre: it is told in ye same books by Ierom himsilfe Netheles, Ierom in
suing Hebrus, co^prehendeth al these books in. xxii. for Hebrus, make^ oo book
of ye first and y^. ii. book of Kyngis, and clepen it Samuel. And their make^
oo book of the thride. and iiii. book of kings: and clepe^it Malachim. And they
co^prehenden in oo book, y^. ii. books of Paralipomenon. But certis lytil charg
is of this rekning, whether ye bokis of Kyngis ben nn^ bred four, as latinis
don: either. ii. as Hebrus done. Also littil charge is, whether Paralipomeno^
be departed in two bokis, as latinis vsen: or be oo book alone, as Hebrus vsen.
And so of ye first book of Esdras and Neeinie, litil charge is, whether they
ben tweyne as latynis and grekis vse^: either one al one, as Hebreus vsen.
Netheles, it seems y^ latinis and Greekis han more reesone in this rekenyng
than Hebreus han. But how ever these books be^ nou^bred: al these be^ of
autoriti of bileue either of christian feith. Tha^, if ye first book of Esdras
and the book of Neemi ben nou^bred for. ii. as Grekis and latynis vs^n: and if
men taken Judith for a book of holy scripture, as the general co^gregacio^ of
clergy did at the seine of Nicene Seine, is a council
as Jerome witnesses in y^ prolog on Judith: the^ in the old testament ben
xxvii. bokis of bileue. Also Ecclesiastici was written in Hebrew and the book
of wisdom is not anentis Hebreus: but sowneth Greek Eloquence. And su^me old
writeris affirme^: that the Jew Ph^o made it. Therefore, as holy chirch redith
Judith and Tobie and the books of Machabeis, but receives not tho among holy
scripturis: so y^ church readithe these. ii. books Ecclesiastic^ and Sapience
to edifiyng of the puple, not to confirm the authority of techyng of holy
chirch. Jerome seith this pleinli in y^ prolog on proverbs Also Ierom
translated the first book of Esoree and Neemie, and bids that no man delight
in the dreemis of the. iii. and. iiii. book of Esore, y^ ben Apocripha. That
is, not of Authority of bileue. For ane^tis Hebrus, the words of Esdree and
Neemy, ben driven into oo book. And the books of the old testament that been not
ane^tis Hebrus, and ben not of the nou^bre of holy writ: owen to be cast far
away, Ierom seyth in the prolog of Esdree. And therefore I translatede not the.
iii. ne. iiii. book of Esdree that been Apocripha: but only the first and
Neemi, that been riken^id for two books ane^tis Greeks and Latinis, and ben of
authority of believe Netheles, Apocrypha ben seide in two manners: as Catholico^
seython this word Apocripha. A book is seyde Apocriphu^, either for y^ autour
is un known and the truth thereof is open, and holy chirch receives such a
book, not to preuing of feith, but to lernyng of virtues, and such be^ the
books of Judith and other which. s. Iero^e nu^breth in the prolog on Regu^:
either a book is seid apocriphu^, for me doutith of the truth thereof, and holy
chirch receives not such books. And such ben the book of the young
chyldehoode of the Savior, and the book of the ta king up of the body of
seint Mari to heuene. Catholicon seyth this on that word Apocripha. But
sothely all the books of the new testament that is four Gospellers, Matthew
Mark, Luke, and John, xii. epistles of Poule, seven small epistlis, the deeds
of Apostles, and the Apocalips ben fulli of authority of believe.

Therefore christian men and women, old and young, shoulden study fast in y^ new
testament, for it is of full authority, and open to understanding of simple men,
as to the points that most ben nedfull to salvation. And the same sentence is
in ye derkest places of holy writ, both open and derke, which sentence is in
the open places. And each place of holy writ both open and derke: teaches
meknes and charity. And therefore he that keeps meknes and charity: has the
true vndersto^ding and perfection of all holy write, as Austine preueth in his
sermon of ye preising of charity. Therefore, no simple man of wit be aferde
immeasurably to study in the tex^ of holy wryt. For why, tho ben words of
everlasting life, as Peter seyth to Christ in the. vi. chapter of John. And
the holy ghost stirrid holy men to speak and to write the words of holy write
for the confort and salvation of meke christen me^, as Peter in the second
Epistle in the end, and Poul in the xv. chapter. to the Romans witnesse^. And
no clerk be proud of the ve^i vndersto^ding of holy write: For why, verey
understanding of holy wryt, wythouten charity that kepith Gods heestis:
makes a man deper damnid, as James and Jesus Christ wytnessen. And pride and
couetise of Clerks is cause of here blyndnes and heresy: and priueth he^ fro
verrei understanding of holy wryt, and maken hem to go quik into hell, as
Austin seith on the Psalter on that word, Descendant in I^fernum viuentes.

The second Chapter
THE old testamente is departed into three parts, into moral co^ma^dementes,
Judicials and Ceremomals. Moral co^mau^deme^ts techen to h^lde and preise and
cheryshe vertuis: and to fle and repreue vices.

And these commandments binden ever and han strength, for tho ben grownded
in charity and in reason: and in law of kind. Judicials techin domis and
peinis for orrible sins. And the Iudiciales of Moses law werene full just
and profitable for men, for tho weren ordained of god, that may not err in
his domis and laws and werks Netheles, since Christ was made man and ordained
Law of mercy and charity, and wole not the death of a sinful man but
repentau^nce and salvation: christen men ben not bounden to keep y^ Judicials
of Moises law that weren ended in y^ time of Christ's passion. But yet christen
lords that han the sword and ben goddis vikers in the. xiii. chapter to the
Romans: moune punish me^ that trespassen openly, in cattele and bodili
prisone, and sumtyme by bodily death: when the syn may not else be distried,
nether that the cominalte may else be stablished in peace, as the four doctors
and other lattere preuen openly by holy writ and reeson. But look that this
be don for charytye and co^mou^ profyt: with mercy and co^passyon of brythren,
not for couetyse neither pride, neither for vengeance of a ^anis own wrong.
C^ymonials techen fyguris and sacraments of the old law, that fyguryde^
Christ and his death and the mysteries of holy church in the law of grace And
the^e Cerimonials ceassiden utterly, as to obligacioun, in the time of Christ's
death, and ben noyeful and damnable to me^ that kepen tho, and for that the
gospel is preached and known generalli. For if tho ceremonies ben kept now:
the keperis of tho knowlechen y^ Christ is not yet common, neither suffered
death for mankind. And this knowlechynge is open heresy. For why, the truth
and fredome of y^ Gospel sufficith to salvation without keeping of Ceremonies
made of god in the old law, and much more wtoute ceremonies of sinful men
and vnkunning, that been made in the time of Antichriste, and of vnbyndynge of
Sathanas in the. xx. chapyter of Apocalypse. Therefore, as it is open Heresye to
seye that the gospel with his truth and fredom suffysith not to christen men's
salvation wythouten keeping of ceremonies of godis law yeouu^ to Moises: so it
seems open heresy to sey that the gospel with his fredo^ and treuth suffisith
not to salvation of christen men without keeping of ceremonies and statutis of
sinful men and vnkunnynge, that benne made in the time of Sathanas and of
Antichriste.

The thryd chapter.
SImple men of wit moune be edified to heavenly lyueing, by reading and knowing
of the old testament. For in the beginyng of Genesis they moun know how God
made heaven and earth and all the creaturs of naught, and made man to his own
Image and liknes and to have bliss in body and soul, wythouten any end.
Also men may know how sore God punished Ada^ and Gue for breakyng his
commandment, And how Abel pleased God by feyth, meknes and charity: and how
Cayn displesed him by sins, and specially by envy, hatred, and manquellinge.
Also how Noe was loved of God, and all the world (outake^. viii. persons) was
distroyed for sin. And how for pride and other sins, God departed many
langagis: that noman understood other in y^ tour of Babel And how feythfull
and obedyente to God Abraham was that he yede out of his land into a straung
country and was ready to slay his own son I saac, at the will of God, and gat
therefore myche reward of God. And how God distried Sodom and Gomorre and
other iii. Cities, for lechery and other sins, that tho were sunk down,
and the dead sea is now where tho great Cites weren.

Also how true and obedient to God weren Isaac, Jacob and Joseph: and how God
kept hem in all periles. All this process of Genesis should styr christen men,
to be feithfull, and forto dread and love God: and in all things dohys will.

Also in Exodi me^ may know how God kept his simple Puple in Egypt, and
increased hem greatly in that land, under the persequucion and tyrantry of
king Pharao, and delivered hem by mani miracles, and punished Pharao and his
puple with ten strong vengeaunces, and fed hem meruilousli in desert. xl.
yers, where no dwelling of men was before, and made he^ to overcome the strong
puple of Amalech. After this God taught he^ wise gouernaile, and bitoke to hem
the ten commandments and other iudiciallis to punyshe greatly open great
sins. And they weren full bisi to make a costlue tabernacle to the honor of
God by his bydding and teching: y^ figured holy chirch and vertuis in men's
soulis. At the last God took great ve^geau^ce on hem for Idolatry: wha^ they
forsoke^ the feyth and worshipyng of God, and honoreden yeotun caluys by
styring of the devil. And then Moses was a true mediator bytwyx God and the
sinful puple: and seyde thus to God, for great tryst of his mercy and for
ryghtfulnes and great charity to y^ puple. Either forgive thou this trespass
to hem: either do me out of y^ book in which thou have wri te^ me. And for this
devout preier and great charity of Moses: God sparid the sinful puple, and
distried not sode^li all the puple, but took he^ to mercy and grace. And this
process of Exodie should make me^ cristi in gods help and to be true in his
love, and Eschew his offense with al here mightes

The third book clepid leuitici: teaches men sacrifices due to God, and for
sins of the puple in the time of the old testament, and that no man unworthy
should nyghe to the seruise and sacrifice of God. These sacrifices own not to
be kept now: for tho figuriden the passion and the death of Christ, and
remission of sins by the bl^e and merit of Christ in the law of grace. Also
this book te: cheth men to abstain fro wedlock of nyghe kynne and affinity
within the. ii. degree, and ordeyneth peine of death for Idolatrye, and wedynge
within the. ii. degree of co^sanguinity and affinytye. At the last, this book
teaches me^ to keep Gods hestes and forto love here neighbors and to do
equity to hem, and werkis of mercy to nedy men, and commands just
weightes and measures and domis and for byddeth strongly Idolatry and
wytchcrafte and false coniutinges and tells prosperiti that shall come to hem
that kepen Gods hestes, and vengeance and peine to hem that breaken Gods
hestes. And this process of Leuitici, should make christian men aferd to break
Gods hests and joyful to keep tho to life and death for reward of God in
everlasting bliss.

The fourth book clepid Numeri, tellethe the noumbre of puple led out of
Egypt, both of lewd men and and of priests and of dea^enis: and how God
kept hem lo^gein y^ hor^yble desert, and punyshed hem all by death, outake
Caleph and Iosue for grutchyng and mistrust to gods word, and punished Marie
Moses suster with lepree: for back bytynge of Moses the mild servant of God.
Also, wha^ God would have distried the puple for grutchyng ayens him Moses
preyed with all his heart for the puple that would stone him to death. Also
God teaches there, that he that does any sin by pride: shall be dead. And that
he that brake the sabat, yea by gaderyng of stiks, should be stoned of all the
puple.

Also God punished sore Core, Dathan and Abiron, that weren rebel ayens Moses
and Aaron, and maden discencion in the puple: so that the earth opneide and
devoured hem with here tabernacles and al here cattle, and they yeden down
quick into hell. Yet when the puple grutched ayens Moses and Aaron, and would
slay them unjustly, and God kyll^d many thousands (...) Puple heerefore:
Mo^es bade Aaron prey and offer en^ens for the puple, and so he ceased the
ve^geau^ce. Also God techeth there that priests shule^ have y^ first fruits and
first borne things and part of sacri^ices, au^wes and offeryngs, and dekins
shoulen have tythis of y^ puple, and give her tythis, that is y^ tenth part of
tithis (which they toke^ of the puple) to ye highhest priest, and priests and
dekins shulen hold hem apayde with here spiritual part of tythys and
offringes, and take no possession in ye land of here brithren. For God him
silfe shall be the part and heritag of priests: in ye middis of the sons of
Israel. Also for Moses and Aaron beleuide^ not fully to Gods word, but
doureden of his byhestes at the water of a^enseinge: God sufferede not hem to
enter into the land of byheste, but, both were^ dead in desert. Also in this
book ben told the dwelings of the children of Israel in desert and the
batteils that the^ hadden aye^s heathen men, and of b^laa^ how he was hired to
curse Gods puple: and how God compelled him to bless his puple, and to seye
prophe^i of Christ. And for the puple of Israel did fornication and (...): God
bade Moses hang all the princes ayens the sune, that the strong vengeance of
God were tur^id away fro the pup^e of Israel. And for as miche as Phinees the
pr^ste killed a Duke of Israel yt did fornication with an heathen wom^, and
did th^s for fervent love to Godhe gate of Godeuerlastynge pri^hode for him and
his scede, and turnid awe^ gods wrath fro ye children of Israel. Also there is
taught, who (...) be heir of a man* and of holy days and ^crifices and
offerings made in tho, (...) which a^ows shule^ be holde^, W^ not, of b^tels
and how y^ preis shule^ ^e parted among the puple, and what should fall to the
priest, and how the land of bihest should be departed to xii. lynages, and
dekenis shoulen have cities to enhabite in tho, and the subarbis to here sheep
and beasts, and cities of refuite shoulde^ be ordained for hem that shedden
blood vnwylfully, not of purpose, neither hatred before going. And he that is
gyltie of maus death: shall be slain wythouten any redemption.

This process of Numeri, should stir christian me^, forto love here enemies and
do good to hem, as Moses and Aaron diden, and to keep Goddis hesles, and shede
not man's blood vniustli

The. v. book clepyd deutronomie: Deuteronomi.
is a rehersynge and co^firmyng of all the law before going, and styreth me^
greatly to keep and teach gods hests, and adnothing to tho, neither draw away
any thing fro tho. And first it teaches, that wise men and mighty shoulden be
made judges, and deem right the pore and the rich. Afterward, how the Jews
ouercame^ Deon the King of Esebo^, and token his land and all the goods
therein, into here own possession, and dyden in like manner to Og ye king of
Basa^, and to his land and goods, Forthermore God commands men to keep his
heestes: and add nothing thereto, neither draw nothing therfro, and y^ they
dread and love God of all here heart and of all here soul, and al here
strength, and eschew Idolatry, and serve and worshipe him alone, and that
theye teach goddis heestes, to here sons and thyncke on tho hests in howese
and wey, sleping and wakinge. Also God commands his puple to eschew
weddingis of heathen men and women to here childer lest they be drawn to
Idolatri, and bihetith mani blessings to hem and myehe encreasyng of goods,
if they kepe^ truli his co^mau^deme^ts* And y^ strong ve^geau^ce and dist^ng
shall come on y^ Iues, if they don idolatri, and be^ vnobedient to God. Also God
byddeth hem have mind that they weldide^ the land of biheest, not for here
own rightfulnes and strength: but for the sins of me^ that dwelliden therein,
and for the ooth of God which he made to Abrahame and to other holy men. Th^n
God remembers to him many great sins: to make hem ware y^ they trespass no
more, but that they dread God and love him in all here heart and soul, keep
his commandments, and s^ere by his name, and love pilgrimis either
comelingis. Efre, God bydith hem have his words in here hertes and wyts and
have tho for a sign in y^ h^ndes and bitwixt her iyen, and yt they teach here
sons to bythinke on the words of god ever and yt they write ye wordis of god
on y^ posts and yates of her house and tells and yeueth his blessyng to hem*
if the^ kepen his heestis, and yeueth his curse to hem if they brea ke^ his
hestes, and worshipen alien Goddis. Also they shoulen distroye the places
wherein heathen men dydden Idolatry, and distrie here auters, Images, wodes and
Idolis. And they shulen make here sacrifices and offer here tythys and the
first fruits and yeftes, and auowes: in the place which the lord has chosen
to his name, and this was the temple of Jerusalem. Also a prophet either a
feyner of dreams that stirs men to do Idolatri: shall be slain, and so shall
a friend, either city, that does Idolatry* either styrreth other men thereto.
Also thou shall pay tythis of all fruits that grown in the earth, of wheete,
of wine, of oil: and the first borne things of neete and sheep And in the
third year, y^ shall depart another tith of al things yt grown to thee, and
keep it within thy yates, to sustain the dekin, pilgrim either comlyng,
fatherless child either motherlesse: and wide we that been within thy yeates.
Also in the. vii, year shall be remission of debt to citisens and kynsmen,
netheles, not to a pilgrim and comelynge, for he may be compelled to pay.
Utterly a nedye man and begar shall not be among Gods puple: but pore men
shoulen not fail in the land. Therefore, rychemen shoulen help hem with
love: and help hem wylfully in here need. Than God teaches of three great
solemnities, Of paske, of the feast of wokes either Pe^tecoste: of the feast
of Tabernacles, and that masters and judges sholen be ordained in all yates
either cities by each lineage, to deem y^ puple by just do^^ and take not
yeftis neither persons. Ferther more God teaches, y^ who ever is convict
bitweine either three witnesses, that he has do Idolatri: he shall be stoned,
first by y^ witnesses and than by all the puple. He that is proud and wol not
obey to the commandment of the high priest and to the do^e of the iudgis
in that they teache^ gods law shall be dead.

Then God teaches what manner king the puple shall make: and what shall be his
office. Afterward God teaches that priestis and dekynys, and all that been of
the same lineage: shoulen not have part and heritage with the residue puple of
Israel. For they shoulen eat the sacrifices of the lord, and the offerings of
him and they shole^ take none other thing of the possession of here britherne.
For why, God him self is her heritage. Ferthermore God for bideth Idolatry,
and to inquire co^iureris: and to keep dreamis and chiteryng of byrddis, and
commands that no ^ytch neither enchau^ter be, and that me^ take not counsel
at hem ye han spirits in cloos: neither at ^alse diuiners, nether axe of dead
me^ ye truth. Also god sh^l reise a prophet of her brethren, ye is Christ y^
savior: and he y^ hears not his words, shall be pu nished. A prophet that
will speak by pride, in ye name of god yt thing that god bade not him, either by
ye name of other gods: shall be slain. Also. v^ cities of refuite either of
fraunchise, shullen be: that he that sleeth a man not by hatred but ayens his
will: be saved. And he that sleeth a man by hatered and before castinge: shall
be slain without mercy either rau^som. He that is co^uicte to have seide
false wytnes ayens his brother: shall have the same pain to which his brother
should be put, if he had be gil tie. Also priests shoule^ comfort he^ that gone
to just batteil, to have trust in god and dread not here enemies. And ye
^erdful me^, and they that han newil bil ded an house, either newly plante^ a
vine, or new^ wedid a wife, and not used her go not to batteil. And first
warriers shule^ profer peace to a city And if ye city yield it self: me^
therein shule^ live under tribute, else al men therein shoulen be slain. And
this is vndersto^de^ of tho cities yt be^ not yeuun into possession to ye puple
of Israel And there is told the departing of preyes and what trees shoule^ be
kit down in the bysegyng. Also God teaches what shall be done: when a man is
founden slain, and the slear is unknown. A child rebel to the father and
mother, and that yeueth himself to glotonye lecheti^ and dru^kenesse* shall be
stoned of all the city. A man shall keep the ox and sheep of his brother that
is straied awei: and bring it a^en to his brother, and so of other beasts and
of each thing. And if thou know not whose tho ben: y^ shall keep tho still:
til thy brother seek and receive tho. Who ever does auoutrie: shall be dead.
And if a man defoul a virgin: he shall wedde her, and give fifti sicles of
silver to her father Thou shall not take a servant to his lord: which
servant fled to thee, but he shall dwell with the in a place that pleases
him. None whore shall be of the daughters of Israel: neither a lechour of y^
sons of Israel Thou shall not lene to thy brother for usury. If a man hate
his wife: he shall write and give to her a libell of forsakyng. But this is
forbedun of Christ in the gospel of Matthew, in the. v. and xix chapter. When a
man has take late a wife: he shall not go to bateil, neither any commune office
shall be put on him, but ^o year he shall be glad with his wife, and take heed to
his house. He that proloineth his brother, which is a frema^, and seleth hyin:
he shall be slain.

Thou shall yield at night to a poor man his wedde: and in the same dai thou
shall pay to a ^edy traueilour his hyre. Fathers shoulen not be slain for the
sons, neither sons for the fathers. When thou reapest corn iu y^ feeld,
and foryetist an ha^dful thou shall not turn ayene to take it: but thou shall
suffer that a comling, fatherles child, and wydowe take it away. And so of
gatheryng of olyues, and of gatheryng of grapes. When tweyemen ben at debating,
and the wife of one wole deliver her housband fro y^ hond of the stronger and
take him by the pryuimembres: she shalleese her hond withouten any mercy. And
there God for bydith false weightes and measurs, a more and a less. Also
dekinnis sholen prouou^ce and seye with high voice to all the men of Israel.
He is curssed that does Idolatrye, or breaks any commandment of God, or
does ayens any part of the law of God: and all the puple shall sei^ A men. Also
God bi^teth great prosperity to his puple if they keep his he itis, and they
shule^ be blessed in citi and blessed in field and ye fruit of here womb, and
the fruit of, here lono shall be blessed, and al things that pertein to hem
shule^ ve blessed 'and they shule^ have victory of here enemies, and mani
prosperities of soul and body, shule^ bifale to hem. And if they kepe^ not
goddis hestis: they shulen be eurssed in city and field. The fruit of here
womb, and al things that perteyne to hem, shulen be curssed. God shall se^de
him hunger thryst, pestilence, fever, and cold and brenning, and he ate and
corupte air, till they perishen. Enemies shulen have victory, and conquer
hem, and take of hem prisoners. And yet God shall punish hem with huge
vengeance that all that heare^ be astonished. Nethelesse, if wha^ al these
vengeau^ces ben fallen on hem, they repe^ten, ve ryli in y^ here and ^utnen
aythe to God and obeien to his hestis in all he^e herie and al here soul: y^
lord shall have mercy on hem, and bring hem ayene to here lord fro al folks
among which they were^ scatered. And god shall bles he^ and make ^em to be of
m^re nu^bre, tha^ hete fathers were^: and shall turn al y^ ^uisses on here
enemies. And God shall give to he^ abu^da^ce in all were kis of here hands and in all thi^ os that per teyne to hem. Moses spoke all these words to all the puple
of Israel and bade hem dread not here enemies for God shall go before his puple,
and ever come here enemies. And Moses ordained ^osue to be leader of the puple
before all the multitude of the sons of Israel. Moses wrote this law and af^it
to priests y^ ^ons of Leui, and to the elderme^ of Israel and badehe^ read y^
words of this law before al Israel in y^ heating of al men and women little
children and comlings either co^uersis to the feith of Jews: that they hear and
learn and dread our lord God, and keep and fyl all the words of this law.
Moses by goddis commandment wrote a great song and taught it the children
of Israel, that it should be into wytnessynge ayens hem.

And Moses clepyd togithere all the elder me^ and teacheris: and clepid heaven
and earth into witnessyng ayens hem. And when Moses had filled all the words of
this great ^oung: he styed in to an hyl, and was dead there, and God buried
him, and manne knew not his sepulcher till into this day. Chryste^ men sholde^
much read and hear and ^un this book of Deutronomi, that comprehends all the
law of Moses: and disposes men for to believe in Christ and hear and keep his
words.

The. iiii. chapter
THe. vi. book which is clepid Iosue: telith in general yt Iosue brought the
puple into yt lo^d of behest, and depar ted it by lot to hem. And first how
God bihight to Iosue y^ none should mou^ a^ensto^d him and his puple in all y^
days of his life. And God bihight y^ Iosue should depart by lot to his puple
y^ land of bihest. And God comanded him to keep al ye law and how not fro it:
but think therein by days and nyghtes, that he keep and do tho things that been
written therein. After this, Iosue sent aspies: to behold the land and the City
of Ierico, and they entriden in the house of a common woman Raab: and weren
sauyd there, by counsel and help of the woman. Tha^ Iosue bade the priests
take the Arc of the bond of peace of the lord and go before the puple, and
they diden so. And when the priestis camen and broughten the arc to the
brink of Jordan: y^ great water of Iorda^ went aweie to the dead sea, and the
higher waters stoden still as a wall, so that the puple passed by the dry
bottom, and the priestis stoden on the dry earth in the myds of Iorda^. Also
Iosue bade. xii. men of the. xii. linages of Israel, take. xii. great stones
fro the bottom of Jordan: and set tho in Galgalis, where the puple settid
te^tis in the next night after the passing of Jordan: and take. xii. stonis of
the land and put in the middis of Jordan, where the Arc had stond, and bade
that fathers shulden teach here children how they passeden by the dry bottom
of Jordan, for god dried the waters thereof, as he had do before in the red
sea. And the priestis and princes and all the puple obeiden to Iosue. Than Iosue
circumcidid the puple that was vncircumci did. xl. years in deserte: and the
Puple made pask in the. xiiii. day of the month at euentide. And Iosue sees
an Angel of the lord, which angel was prince of goddis oost. Also the strong
wallis of Jericho feldene down at goddis ordenaunce, whane priestis braiden
with seven trumpis, and all the puple cried anhigh in the. vii. dai of cumpasyng
of the city. And the puple of Israel dystroyed and brent the city and al
things therein: outaken Raab and tho that werene in her house, and outaken
gold and silver and vessel of brass and Irun: which they haloweden in to the
tresorye of the lord. Also, for Achior did ayens goddis bydding and took to
him silf a thing reserved to goddis use: he was stonid and brent and al his
goods weren brent with him. And all this punysheyng was done on hyme: for afor
this the puple of Israel might not stand but was ouercu^e of here enimyes.
After this punyshynge of Achior, Iosue took the city of Haie, and killed the
king and all the puple and distryed and brent the city, and honged the king
thereof in a iebat. Than Iosue bilded an auter to God in the hill of He ball:
and offered thereon brent sacrifices, and peacible sacrifices, and wrote the
Deutronomie of Moses law on stonis. And first he blessid the puple of Israel.
And after these things: he read the words of blissynge and curssing and all
things y^ weren written in the book of the law. He left nothing un touched
of these things which Moses had commanded: but he declarede all things before
all the multitude of Israel, to women and to little children and to com^ings
that dwelliden among hem. Also men of Eabaon feynid^n hem to be offer cuntre:
and by this fraud they gaten of Iosue peace and life, of Iosue and other prin
cis. And for this fraud: they and al here successors weren made bond to bring
wodde and water to the service of the auter and of all the multitud of Israel
for ever.

Also Iosue by gods help, ouercam v. great Kingis in oo day, and made his
Princis tread on the neckis of these Kingis. And tha^ he ho^gid these Kingis
on v. Iebatis. And he overcame al tho Kyngis and here puples* y^ dwellyde^ in
the land of bihest, that weren. xxxi. Kyngis, and departed the land of
biheste to xii. linagis of Israel by lot, and cities of refuite and cities to
Priests and dekenis to dwell in as God commanded.

This process of Iosue should styr christen men to have great triste in God:
and dread no man neither puple, as loung as they seruiden tre^ly almighty God.

The vii. book cleped Iudicum: tell lith that y^ puple of Israel was rulid with
Iudgis either domesemen aftir the death of Iosue, and sometime by a womanne
Delbora. When the puple fell to great sins, and specialli to Idolatry: God
sent adversaries on hem, that turme^tiden the Jews full sore, and kyllide^
mani thousandis of hem, and helden other under tribute and great thraldam. And
when the puple repentid verily and cried to God with all here heart: he sent
help to he^, and reisid a judge that overcame here enemies, and reulyd hem well
in peace and in goddis law.

This process of Iudicum should stryre christen men for to flee sin and
love God, that doethe so great mercy to hem that repenten verily. Ruth


This book co^prehendith y^ story of Ruthe, that was an heathen woman: and
left hirnacion and Idolatri, and beleuid in God and kept his law. Therefore
she was wedid to a noble man of the Jews, and is set in the Genalogie either
kynrid of our savior. This stori should styr al me^ to forsake here sin
and serve God truly in all here life, for reward of heuenlye bliss.

The first book of kings, tells ^. Reg.
how the priest Elie and his sons weren repreuyd and slain: for they
gouerniden euile, goddis puple. And for here sin and necligence, the puple
did myche sin: and was ouircomen of heathen men, and the Ark of God was
taken of heathen men, and they kylliden many thowsandes of y^ Jews. And how the
treue child Samuel was a feithful prophet of the lord: and gouernid well the
puple in goddis seruise and ryghtfulnes, and did none extorcio^, nether took
yeftes of any man: neither couetid any ma^s good, but did al things in his
office iustli before God and man. And when Samuel was elde he settid his sons
Iudgis on Israel. And for they bowden after avarice and token yeftes and
peruertede^ dome: the puple axeden And David reigned. vii. years in Ebron, and
gate. vi. sons. Also David made ^ych sorrow for the death of Abner: when Ioab
had killed him bitreason. Also David killid Banaa and Rechab, that kylliden by
treason Isboseth his enemy. Than al Israel came in to Ebrou, and anoyntyd
David into king on Israel. And David reigned on Judah in Ebron bii. yers and
an half. And he reigned in Jerusalem. xxxiii. year on al Israel and Judah, and
was xxx. year elde, when he biganne to reygne, and reined xl year. After this
the noble king David had tweye victoryes of philisteis. Than David took xxx
thousaunde me^ chosen of Israel: to bring to his place the ark of God. For
reverence and devotion: David made great minstrelsie, and mekid hymsilfe
before y^ Arc, and suffered rebuking of Michole y^ daughter of Saul therefore.
David thought to build a^ house to y^ ark of god. Tha^ God telde to David y^
his son should bild his house and the tro^e of David. shall be stable with oute^
end, and this is filed in Christ. Than David had victory of many lo^des and
made tho tributari to Israel And god kept David in all things to which he
yedeforth. And David did dome and rightfulnes to al his puple. And he did merci
and curteci to Miphi boseth son of Ionathas. After these things David dwelid at
home wha^ Ioab and the ost went to batteil, and did aduoutri with Bersabe ye wife
of Uri: and procured y^ death of Urie by treason. Tha^ God sent Natha^ the
Prophet to repreue David of his sin and he took mekeli his repreuing: and
knowlechid y^ he sined ayens God, and god foryafe y^ sin but sword and
persequutio^ went never a way fro his house. For God killed ye son of
Bersabe, and do son of David killed an other. And Absalo^ his son roos
ayens him and drove him out of Jerusalem, and sought with strong oost to s^ea
him. Than david yede out of Jerusalem on his feet: and stied with bare feet
into the hyghnes of y^ hyl of Dliuete and wept. And al his puple wept
bitterly: and david mekyd him to God and seide. If God seye to me, thou
please not me: I am ready, do he y^ is good before him silfe. Than Semei that
was of the kyn of Sa^: dispisid David, and clepid him a manquelar, and a man of
Belial, and a rauenoure of the rewme. And he cursside David, and castid stones
and earth ayens David and ayens al y^ seruau^ts of king David. And when Abissay
wuld slay this curssar: David bade him suffer Semei to curs him, and seyde. God
co^maundid him to curs David. The king said to Abissay and to al his
servants. Lo, misonne y^ yede out of my wom be, sechith my life: that is to
slay me: How much more now this son of Gemini? Suffer ye him to curse by
commandment of the lord: if in case the lord behold mitorme^t and yield good
to mefor this curssing to day. Afterward Absalo^ defoulid openli, his fathers
wyfes, before al Israel. Than Achitofell yafe a fell council to pursue David in
that night with. xii. thousa^ds of me^, and slay him before y^ he were ware.
But this counsel was distried by goddis will and by a wise counsel of Cusy, the
friend of David. Then Absalo^ gadride y^ power of Israel, to make open warayens
his father. Nethelese David for pity and charity co^mau^did three princis of
his ooste to keep Absalon alive: y^ he might repent and be sauid. And when
David knew that Absalon was slain: he made so great sorrow, that almost he
was dead. And all the puple was in point to forsake David. Tha^ for this peril
David left his mourning, and sat ope^lie in the yate to comfort al his oost.
Afterthis, the council of al Israel came to David: yt they shoulde^ bring him
into his rewme worshypfully. And David foryafe the open treason to hem, that
they hadden do before: and steride swetly me^ of Judah that weren specialli his
traitors, to come and bring hyme into his rewme, and foryafe here treason. And
he foryafe the souereyne treason to Amasa that was of his own kyn: and was
prince of the ooste of Absalon to slay David. And David swore to make this
Amasa prince next Ioab. And foryafe the sin and cursyng and treason to Semei
and swore that he should not dye. Yet before David came to Jerusalem: a new
debate roos bytwixe the me^ of Israel, and the men of Judah, for this bringing
again of ye king, was not telde first to men of Israel. And by stiring of Siba
a man of Belial yt was of ye kyn of Saul: all Israel was d^partid fro David and
suid this Siba. And in this time Ioab killed by treson y^ noble knight Amasa
Tha^ this Siba passed by all the Images of Israel til into Habela and Bethmaka
and al chose^ me^ were^ gatherid to him. And Ioab and his oost bise gide^ these
cities, and wolden distrie the great city Habela, and a wise woman of y^ cite
sauid it by her counsel, and made Siba to be slain and al yt puple to be
sauid on boeth sides Also. vii. men of the kyn of Saul, weren slain of
Gabonits, by sufferyng of David and by counsel of God. For Saul kyllid
wyckidly the me^ of Gabao^. And for this sin of Saul, hu^ ger was made three
year in the days of David. And after this ve^geaunce don on the house of Saul:
God did merci to the land. Tha^ is set a great ^onge of David which he spoke
to God: wha^ he had delivered him from y^ hond of al his enemies. Tha^ sueth
the nou^bre of strong men of David. At the last David for pride, and ayene the
law: nou^bred ye puple of Israel. Therefore. lxx. tho^sand of me^ weren dead by
pestylence. Than David repented him sore and meked him to God and seide thus. I
it am that fynned and did wickedli, that han these men do that been sheep? that
is simple and innocent, in comparison of me. I bisech the that thine hand be
turned ayens me, and ayens the house of my father. Than God sent ye prophet
Gad to him and bade him make an auter and offer brent sacrifices, and peaeible
sacrifices. And god did me^ cie to the land: and the ve^geau^ce ceassid of
Israel. Th^s process of this. ii. book: ought to ^yre kings and lords to
mercy and ryghtfulnes, and ever to be ware of idelnes that brought David to
auoutri and other mischeuis and ever to be meke to God and his prestis and sore
repent here misdeds and make amends to God and men and wilfulli foryeue
wro^ges don to hem, and ever be ware of pride and extorcions: lest God take
ve^geau^ce on all ye puple, as he did on David and his puple. And ever to be
patie^t and merciful as David was: to get remission of sin before don, to get
peace and prosperiti, and heuenli bliss wythouten end.

The. v. Chapter
THe. iii. book of kings tellith first how Adonias son of David would have
reignid and David in his life ordained Solomon to be king, and he reigned
before ye death of David. Than Adonias fled for dred to ye tabirnacle of god,
and held ye corner of ye auter till Solomon said y^ if he were a good man: he
should not die. Else, if iuil were fou^de^ in him: he should die. Tha^ David in
ye time of his dyinge charged Solomon to keep well Gods law: and to quite to
the sons of Bersellaye the truth and kyndnes of her father and to punish
Ioab for his treacherous manquellyng of Abner, and of Amasa in the time of
peace. And to punish wisely Semei, for his worst curssing which he did to
David, After these things Solomon made Adonias to be slain: for he purposed
gilefuly to be King. And Solomon casted: away Abiathar, that he was not the
priest of the Lord and exiled him also. For he assentid to Adonias and was
traitor to the King. And Solomon commanded Ioab to be flayne in the
tabernacle at the auter: for he had slain gylefully two princis in peace,
wythouten wittynge of David. And the King ordeinid Sadoch priest: for Abiathar.
Than the King commanded Semei that he should not go out of Jerusalem. And if
he passed the strond of Cedron: he should be dead. And Semei acceptid this.
And for he passid these bou^dis: the King commaundyd him to be slain. And so
he was slain by commandment of the King. After these thyngis: the reume was
confirmed in to the hondis of Solomon, and he weddyde the daughter of Pharao
King of Egypt. Tha^ God bad Solomon axe of him what him liked.

And he axid that God should give to him wise heart, yt he might deem his puple
and make discrecion either departing bytwix good and evil. And this axynge
pleased God full much Therefore God yafe to him a wise heart and understanding,
in so much that none before him was like him, neither shall rise after hyme.
Also God yafe to him richesse and Glory that none among kyngis was like him
in all days before. Than, for Solomon yafe a wise sentence of dome bitwix
tweie common women, y^ passide the wit of common men: theye dredden the King
and seiden, Gods wisda^ was in him to make dome. Than is told the worshipful
household and meinie of Solomon.

After these things Solomon byldyde a noble house to himsilfe: and a famous
temple to God in Jerusalem And after that the temple was fully made: all the
elder me^ and pryncis of linagis and Dukis, and of meinies of the children of
Israel, weren gatherid to King* Solomon in Jerusalem: to bring the ark of God fro Sio^ in to his own place in ye temple. Than the King axed of God many
prayeris, and profetis for he^ that preiden devoutly in the temple, and God
granted tho. After these thyngis, God hallowed the temple and certified to
Solomon: that if he kept all his commandments: he should set the trone of
Solomon's rewme on Israel wythouten end. And if the puple of Israel and here
children kept not Goddis heestes, but worshipen alien goddis: he shall do away
Israel fro the fat of y^ land which he yafe to hem, and God shall cast away
fro his sight ye temple which he hallowed to his name, and Israel shall be into a
proverb, either fable either tale to al puples, and this house shall be into
ensample. After this, the Queen of Saba came to Solomon: and had great array
of me^ and iewelse, and yafe many iewelse to Solomon, and he ayene to her. Also
Solomon taught her al things that she had in her heart, and she blessed God and
Solomon and his seruau^tis and yed in to her land. Than Solomon made many
sheldis and bucleris of gold, and made a great trone of Iueriand clothed it
with fine gold. Than king Solomon was mangnified over all kyngis of the
earth: in riches and wisdom. And al ye earth desired to see his face and to
hear his wisdom, which his God had yeuen in his heart. After al these things
Solomon when he was elde louid gretli mani hethe^ women and had a. M wives
principales and seco^daris. And tha^ his heart was be shrewed and peruertid by
tho women, y^ he suid alien Gods and worshipid he^. Therefore, God reised a^
aduersari to Solomon in his life, and departed his rewme in y^ time of Roboa^
his son, and yafe. x. linagis to Ieroboa^ his servant, and kept oo lineage to
his son for the merit of David his father. And this departing bifelmich for y^
Roboa^ forsook y^ counsel of old and wise me^, and surd the counsel of young
me^, and spoke hard worcester des to y^ puple. Tha^ Roboa^ gathered proudli al y^
house of Judah and the lineage of Benjamin, an hu^drid thousand and four score
thousand of chose^ men and warioures: that they shulden fight ayens the house
of Israel, and bring ayene the rewme to Roboa^, son of Solomon. But God for
bad this war to Roboam and al his puple for whey, this word of departing of y
rewme was don of God. Tha^ Jeroboam made two golden calves and bade Israel
worship tho, and stie no more to Jerusalem and seide. Israel, ^o these ben thy
Gods, yt ledden the out of Egipte, And he made vnworthi prestis of the last
(or visest) men of the puple, that were^ not of y^ sons of Leui. And he made
temples in high places. Also wha^ Ieroboa^ stood on y^ auter and casted ince^s
a man of God came from Judah by the word of God, and seide. A son (Josias by
name) shall be borne to y^ house of David, and he shall ^lea on this auter the
priestis of high places, that brenen now incens in this auter. And he shall
brene bonis of men on this auter. And ye prophet yafe this token. That the
auter should be clef^ and the ashis therein shall be shed out.

Than Jeroboam held forth his hond, and bade take that prophet: and his hond
was dry, and he might not draw it again. And by prayer of the prophet the
hand was healed: and the token befelle on the auter as the prophet seid. And
for yt the prophet eat bread in that place ayens godis bidding, yea by
dysceyte of a false prophet: y^ true prophet of God was flayne of a lion by the
weye homeward. After these wordis Ieroboa^ turned not ayene fro his worst wei:
but ayeneward, of the last (or vilest) puple he made priestis of high placis.
Who ever would fyl his hond, was made pryeste of high placis. And for this
cause ye house of Jeroboam sinned and was distried and done away ^ro the fare
of the earth. After this, the prophet Ahia that was bluide for elde: knew the
wife of Jeroboam, that feined her to be an other wo^man. And he before seide to
her y^ her sike son should die, in her entering into her house, and that ye
house of Ieroboa^ should be destried utterly, for his syns. And Israel shall be
dreue^ out of his land for the syns of Jeroboam, y^ sinned and made Israel to
do sin. Also the puple of Judah did Idolatri. Therefore the King of Egypt took
away ye treasurs of gods house and of the ^ingis house, and the golden shieldis
of Solomon, for which Roboa^ made sheldis of bras and battle was bytwyx Roboa^
and Jeroboam in all days. Than Abia reigned. iii. year in Judah, and yede in all
the sins of his father. After him roose King Asa in Judah, and he did
ryghtfulnes before God, and did aweye Idolatry, and Sodomitis fro the land.
And his heart was perfect with god in all dais. And shortli, among all the kings
of Israel, was none feythful to God. Some were^ good among the kings of Judah.
And this fygurith that a monge men of holy church ben some good: out among
heretikis, is none good utterly, as Iero^e seith. After many euel kingis of
Israel, rose Achab the worst of al before him. And he weddid Iesa bell an
heathen woman, the daughter of Mechaal, king of Sidonies, and Achab did
manifold Idolatri. Than rose Helye the prophet, and seyde to Achab, that in.
iii. year and an half: neither rain neither dew shall be. After this the
prophet Helie hyde hymsilfe, in the stronde of Carith ayens Jordan: and drank
water and was fed of ravens there, which broughten to him bread and flech,
in the eue^tyde and morowtide. And after that the stronde was dried up: God
bade Helie go in to Sarepta of Sidonies, and there he was fed of a wydew, and
ye pot of mele and ye pot of oil failed not to y^ wide we, til God yafe rain
on ye earth. Tha^ Heli reised to life the dead child of a wo^ma^: at who^e he
was myche sustained. And after many dais God bade Heli show him to Acab y^ God
should give rain on the land. And Helie did so, and great hunger was in
Samari. Than Helie appearid first to Abdie that dread God: and feed an hundred
Prophets of God, when Iesa bell kyllyd the Prophets of God. And Heli swore to
Abdie by the lord of oostes: that he would appear in yt day to Achab Than
Achab axid Heli. where thou art he that dyftur blist Israel? And Helie seide.
Not I disturble Israel: but thou and the house of thy father that han forsaken
goddis heestis, and han sued Baala^: han disturblede Israel. After this, the
prophet Helie conuictyd by an open miracle eight hundred and fyftie prophets of
Bal of open Idolatry: and killid hem al with help of the puple that bileuid
to God, for the great miracle. And after this God sent great taine, and Helie
ran before Achab to ye citti of Israel. After these things Helie fled for dread
of Iesabell: y^ manacide to ^lee him. And wha^ he had fled into de serte by y^
iurney of a day: he axed of God to die. And wha^ he slept: an An gel bade him
rise and eat bread, bake^ under ashis and drink water, and he yede in ye
strength of y^ meat. xl. days and. xl. nightis: tilto Oreb the hill of God.
And wha^ he was hid there in a de^, and seid yt he was left alone a prophet of
the lord, and they soughten to slay him: God bad him go to Damask and anoint
Asael king on Sirie, and anoint Hieu king on Israel, and anointe Elise prophet
for him. And these three shulde^ do ve^gea^ce on trespassours: and flee hem. And
god left to himsilfe. vii. M of men of Israel: whose knees were^ not bowed
bifor Baal. Tha^ it suith how Elise suid Heli. After these thin gis, king Achab
had. ii. great marvelous victoris aye^s Benadab king of Sirie: for he
blasphemed God of Israel. And for king Achab did false merci and kilid not this
blasphemer Be nadab who^e God bitoke into his ho^dis: god sent a prophet to
Achab and te^d thus. For you suffridst a man worthi ye death to go fro thine
hand: thy life shall be for his life, and thy puple shall be for his puple.
Aftirward Iesabel ye Queen made Naboth to be stonid to death by false witness and
asse^t of Achab: for he nolde chau^g neither sell his viner to y^ King. And wha^
Achab yede down to take possession of this viner, god bad Heli mete him, and
seie thus. Thou have slain and have ta ke^possessio^. The lord seith these
thingis. In this place wherein dogs likide^ y^ blud of Naboth: they shule^ ly^
also thy blud. And Achab seid to Helie. Where have y^ fou^de^ me thine enemy?
And Heli seid. I have found: for ^ art sold to do iuil in gods sight.
Therefore God shall distry and slay each man of ye house of Achab, and give his
house as the house of Iero boa^ and as y^ house of Basa. For Achab terred God
to wrath: and made Israel to do syn. Also doggis shule^ eat Iesabel in the
field of Israel. If Achab dye in the City: doggis shulen eat him. If he die
in the field byrdis of the air shule^ eat him. None other was such, as was
Achab y^ was seld to do evil before God. For whi, Iesabell his wife excitid him
and he did abomynable Idolatrye Than Achab did full great penance and was mekyd
before God. Therefore God brought not in this euyle in his days: but in the
days of his son. In the third year after these things: about iiii. C.
Prophets of Baal, cou^celeden Achab, to make war ayens the King of Sirie:
for a City clepyd Ramoth of Galaade and ^ihighten victory and prosperity to
Achab. But Michee oo prophet of God telde to Achabe in goddis name: that the
spirit of leasings disceyued him by his false prophets, and that Achab should be
slain in y^ batteile, and so it befeld in deed. But Miche was dispisid and
beaten of the false prophets, and was prisoned purposed to be slain of y^
King, when he came ayene in peace. And King Iosaphat a good man: was in this
battile with curssid Achab. But Achab was slain and doggis lycked his blude:
and Iosaphat was sauyd by goddis help. Than roos Ocosias King of Israel for
Achab his father: and Ocosias worshipid Baal, and terrid God to Ire by all
thyngis which his father had do. This process of y^. iii. bo^e of kingis, stulde
styr lords and kings to be mercyful and pytuouse on here sugets, that
trespassen a yens hem, and in all things eschew Idelnes, lecheri treason,
Idolatry, and falls councelouris and vnwyst, and ever dystrye sin, and take
counsel at holy scriptur and trwe prophetis, and trist not to false prophets,
be they never so many, and cry fast ayens one, either few true men,

The. vi. chapter
THe. iiii. book of kingis tellyth in general, how the rewme of Israel and
the rewm of Judah, were^ conquerid of hethen men: for mani sins whichthei didde^
a yens God and men, and were^ obstinat and didde^ not frutful penance in due
time. First it telith inspecial, how the wicked King Ocosias, sent to take
counsel at Beelzebub: where he might live and ^kyuer of his syknes. Therefore God
sent Helie the prophet to tell to him: that he should dye and not go down of
his bed. Tha^ this King se^te to Helie a prince on. l. men, and fifty* me^
with him: to clepe Heli to the King. And fiere came down fro heaven and
devoured this prince and fifti me^ that weren with him: for in scorn they
clepidden Helie the man of God. And in like manner fire devoured an other prince
and fifty men with him. The thyrdde prince and his fyftie y^ mekid hem to God
and to the prophet: weren sauyd on live. And God bade Heli go down with hem to
the King and repreue hyme of his sin: and tell to the king him sylfe, that he
shall die, and go not down of his bed. After this the prophet Helie should
be rauishid awey fro earth, and Elise knew this, and sued him in each place,
tilto the rauishing. And Helie smote with his ma^tell the waters of Jordan: and
tho were^ departed thereby: and Helie and Elise yeden ouir by y^ dry bottom
thereof. Than Helie was ravished in a chair of fiere fro Elise: and stied by a
whirlwynd into heaven. And ye double sprite of Helie rested on Elise. And with
the ^ntyl* of Helie he smot ^wise the waters of Jordan, and in the second time
tho were^ departed and Elise passed over: Afterward Elise dweled in Ierico:
and healed y^ waters from bitterness and bare^nes by putting of salt in ye
watir. Tha^ Elise stighid into Bethell and as he stighid by ye weie: little
children yede^ out of ye city, and seiden to him in scorn. Thou ballard stigh
up. And he curssed hem in ye name of God: and tweie beeres yede^ out of ye
foreste: and torenten of hem. xlii. children. After these thyngis, Ioram the
King of Israel, and Iosaphat the King of Judah, and also the thredde King
that was King of Edome: weren in deserte and hadden no water, and weren in
point of peryshinge. These three Kyngis camen to Elise for help: and by
spirit of prophecy he bade hem make dichis, and they sighen neither wind
neither rain, and the boune of dyches was filled of waters. And he before
seyde, that God should betake Moab into the hondis of these Kyngis: and they
shulden distrie cities and fyeldes and trees, and thus it was done in deed.
Also Elise multiplied a little oil: and made a pore wydowe to fyl many vessels
thereof, and bade her pay her dettes with some thereof, and yt she and her sonns
shulde^ live by ye residue thereof. After ward Elise beforseid to a good woman,
y^ her berwed him freely and largly: that she should conceive a son And when
Elise knew y^ this son was dead: he sent his servant Gihezi with his stafe
to reise him and neither voice nor sense was in the child. Than Elise entered
into a closet where the child lay dead: and preied to God and lay on the
child, and leyde his mouth to the mouth of the child and his hondis on the
chylds hondes. And the child yoxyd seven siethis, and opened his ien: and (...)
bit oak y^ child quick to his mothir. And Elise, wha^ hu^ge^ was in Galgal a:
healed the pot of noyful meat by sendinge in of mele, that no more byt ternes
was in the meat: Than Elise made a little bread to suffyce to an hundride
men: and theye leften reliefes ^han the King of Sirie sent let^ers to the
King of Israel that he should cure Naaman of his lepre, and the King of
Israel torent his clothes for sorrow: Elise bade yt Naaman should be waisshen.
vii. sithis in the water of Jordan, and so he should be cured. And thus it was
don in deed. Than Naaman knowlechyd, that none other God is in all earth: no
but only the God of Israel And Elise took no yeft, yea freli pro ferrid and
preased of Naama^. Tha^ Gihezie ran after Naaman, unwitting, either not
co^se^ting his master, and made a leesinge, that Elise sent ^o him: that he
should give a talent of silver, and double chau^gyng clothes to tweie young
men of the sons of prophetis. And Naaman co^straynid hyme to take the duble
that he axed and ordeinid twey children to bear it before him. But hereof
Elise said, that the Lepre of Naaman should cleue to Gihezi and to his sede
withouten end. And Gihezi yede out fro Elise: and was a mesel as snow. When
the sons of prophets yede^ to the wode to hew down wode to bylde places for
hem to dwell in: y^ Irun of an axe fell dou^e into ye watir And Elise castid
down ye tree, either helue: and the Iru^ houide, and was taken up therbi. When
the King of Sirie, set bushme* ^ts privily ayens the King of Israel: Elise
warned the King of Israel thereof. And wha^ it was certified to ye King of
Sirie, that Elise told his priuyties to the King of Israel: the King of Sirie
sent a great multitud of his ooste to take Elise. And when the oste compassid
ye City Doatim, wherein Elise was: God made this oost blind at the prayer of
Elise. And so he led hem into the myddys of Samarie. And when the King of
Israel would siea hem: Elise seide nay. But make ready a feast to hem, and
let hem go in peace to her Lord. And when full strong hunger was in Samarie,
yt women eaten her own children: oo woman axid dome of the king ayens an other
womman, that would not by covenant bring forth her child to be eaten, when
they hadden eaten the child of the first wo^man. Than the king that weride the
heir next his body: to rent his clothys for sorrow, and swore strongly,
that in that day he would gird of the head of Elise. E^ise before knew the
coming of this messenger todo this deed and bade men close y^ door, and suffer
not him to enter, for his lord co^eth ano^e after hyme, to revoke his oothe and
sentence. Than Elise seide in goddis name that tomorow in this time, a bushel
of wheat flower shall be for oo statere, that is a little quantetie of money, as
it were a penny: and two bushels of barlie for oo statere in the yate of
Samarie. And Elise seide to a great duike, that bileuid not this word: thou
shall se it with thine ien and shalt not eat thereof. And thus it was in deed.
For when the oost of Sirie fled by night for dread that God made among hem:
they leften al here goodis and fledden nakyd, and couetide^ only to save here
lives. And when a bushel of whete flour was sold on the morrow for oo
statere: the king made that noble Duike kepar at the yate, and the co^pani
trade him to death, as Elise before seide. Also Elise spoke to ye woman* whose
son he made to live: and bade her and her house go a pylgrimag either strange
land, where ever she found couenable. For God shall bring strong hunger on the
land seven year. And at the. vii. years end: the king restorid to her al her
things, and all the re^tes of her fields in the time of her abse^ce. Benadab
king of Sirie, sent Asael to Elise: to enquire where this king might recover
of his sycknes. And God showed to Elise: yt Benadab should die. And Elise wept
full sore wha^ he sigh Asael: for God showed to him that Asael should be king
of Sirie, and do mani euilles to the children of Israel. Br^n of her strong
cites: and slay by sword the young men of hem, and hurl the little children
on hem, and kerue women with child. Ioram y^ son of Iosaphat did euel in
goddis sight: as ye house of Achab did, for the daughter of Achab was his wife.
But God nolde distrie Judah for David his servant: as he bihyght to him, to give
a lantern to him and to his sons in all days. After these thingis Elise bad
one of y^ sons of prophets anoint Hieu into King of Israel: and seye to him.
Thou shall distrie the house of Achab, and God shall make it as the house of
Ieroboa^. And doggis shulen e^te Iesabell in the fyelde of Israel: and none
shall birye her. And Hieu killed Ioram King of Israel and Ocosias king of Judah,
and Iesabell the curssed quen. And dogs eaten the flesh of Iesabel: her flesh
was a tord on the face of the earth. Than Hieu made. lxx. sons of Achab to be
slain of her Kepers and noryshers: and he killed. xlii. men brithern of Ocosias
And after this doing Hieu feyned him to worship Baall, more then Achab did.
And by this feining he gadrid togider al prophetis and priestis and servants of
Baal, in y^ temple of Bal and killed he^ al: And casted out of ye temple of
Baal: his Image, and brent it and drofe yt into duste. And dystryed the house
of Baal: and made gongis for it. And so Hieu did aweye Baal fro Israel.
Nethelesse Hieu yede not a weye fro the synnys of Jeroboam: neither forsook
gold^n calves that were^ in Bethel and Da^* But for Hieu did this vengeance
ayens the house of Achab: God said, that his sons to the. iiii. generacyon
shulen sit on y^ tron of Israel. Than Athalia the mother of Ocosias: when her
son was dead, kylede all the blude of the king, and reigned. vi. year. But
Ioas the sun of Ocosias king was kept preuili. vi. year in y^ temple of god
and in y^ vii. year he was made king by help of Ioiada ye great priest, and
Athalia was slain. Therefore Ioiada made a bo^de of peace betwix God and the
king and the puple: that it should be the puple of God. And the puple distried
the auters of Baal, and altobrake his Imagis: and kylliden Mathan the priest
of Baall before the auter. This Ioas began to reygne when he was vii. year
old: and he reignyd. xl. year in Jerusalem, and did rightfulnes before God in all the days, in which Ioiada the priest taught him. And Ioas bade priestis
take all the money that was offered for price of soulis and by free will: to
make reparatio^ of the temple. And for priestis weren necligent in this
reparation: Ioas the King bade priestis yield this money to reparation, and
take it no more. And the chau^celler of the King and the Bishop Ioiada,
heeldide^ out of y^ arcke monei: and yaue^ it into ye ho^d of mastirs and
workme^ and they spe^dide^ it well in this office and necessari reparatio^: and
maden no reke^ing to souereins, but tretide^ this monei in feith either good
co^sci e^ce. For as myche as Asaell King of Sirie came with his ooste, to
war ayens Jerusalem: Ioas king of Judah took all thyngis which fathers hadde^
hale wed and which he had offered: and all the silver that might be founde^ in
the treasouris of the temple of God, and in the paleise of the King, and sent
al to Asael king of Sirie, and he yede a wei fro Jerusalem. The servants of
Ioas sworen togidir, and kylliden him: and Amasias his son reignid for him.
Ioachas the son of Hieu reignid on Israel: and did iuill, as Jeroboam did.
Therefore god bitoke Israel into the ho^dis of Asael king of Sirie, and of
Benadab his son al days, that there were not left to Ioachas of all the puple
of Israel, no but five hundrid horsemen, and te^ charis, and. x. M. of fotemen.
Than Ioachas bisought God: and he yafe a sanioure to Isra ell, and Israel was
deliuerid fro the hand of the king of Sirie. Tha^ Elise field into great
siknes: by which he was dead. And wha^ Ioas king of Israel came to him and
wept: Elise bade him bring a bow and arrowis, and bade him set his hond on
the bow. And Elise set his hondis on the kyngis ho^dis: and bade him shote
out at the east window openid. And Elise said. This is the arrow of Gods
help ayens Sirie in Apheth, til thou waste it. Efte Elise bade Ioas smite the
earth with a dart. And wha^ he had sinytte^ thries and styntid: Elise was wroth
ayens him, and said. If thou haddist smitten. v. sythis, or. vi. sythis or.
vii. sithis: you shuldist have smitte^ Siri tilto the ending. But no we thou
shall sinyte it thryes. Elise dyed and was biried. And when a dead body was
byryed in the sepulcher of Elise: the man lived again and stod on his fete.
Amasias king of Judah reignid. ix. year: and did ryghtfulnes in party, but not
as David. He killyd ten. M. men of Edom: and for pride thereof, he terrid the
king of Israel to war. And Amasias was ouercommen in this batteile, and the
king of Israel took him prisoner, and brake the wall of Jerusalem by. iiii. C.
cubitis. And the king of Israel took aweye all the gold and silver, and all the
vesseles that weren founden in gods house: and in the tresouris of the king,
and took pledgis and turnyd ayene into Samarie. At the last the men of Amasias
conspiriden ayens him: and he fled into Lachis, and they senten thydur and
kylliden him there, and biriden him in Jerusalem with his fathers. And Asarie
his son reignyd for him in Jerusalem. L. year. He did ryghtfulnes in party: as
Amasias his fathir did, and God smote him with lepre, till into the day of his
death. And Ioathas his son gouernid the paleis: and demid the Puple of the
Land. And ever the Kyngis of Israel dyden iuyll: and yeden in the synnis of
Jeroboam. And in the days of Manaheu king of Israel: Phull the King of
Assiriens, took great try bute of him, to make Manaheu strong in the rewm. And
in the days of Phace King of Israel, that did iuill in Gods sight: came
Teglathfalasar King of Assure, and took many placis in the land of Israel.
And he took Galaad, and Galile and all the land of Neptalim: and translatid hem
into Assiriens. Aftir that Achaz reignyd on Judah xvi. year, in Jerusalem, and
yede in the weyes of Kyngis of Israel: and did foul Idolatry. And after these
thyngis Osee the King of Israel reigned. ix. year and did iuill: but not as
the kingis of Israel that weren before him.

And this Osee was made tributarye to Salmanasar King of Assyryens. And when
this Osee would be Rebel and pay not tribute to Salmanasar: he bisegi^ Osee
and prisoned him, and bysegid Samarie three year and took it in the nynth year
of Osee, and translatyd Israel into Assiriens. Than the scripture rehersyth
many great synnis of the puple of Israel: for which they weren conquerid and
driven out of here land. Than the king of Assiriens brought puple fro
Babilo^, and fro many other heathen co^treis, and settid hem in the cities of
Samarie: for the children of Israel. And for this puple dred not God: he sent
into hem Lions that kylliden hem. Therefore the king of Assiriens sent thydir oo
priest of Israel: to teach hem the law of God of Israel: and so they
worshypyden Godde of Israel, and here heathen Gods (*togidyr*)

The. vii. chapter.
EZethie King of Judah reignid. xxix. year, and did good before God, by all
thyngis which his father David had do. He dystroyede high placis and alto
brake I magis, and hewed down wodis, and brake the serpent of bras. For the
children of Israel brenten incence to it. And he hopid in God. Therefore of
all the kyngis of Judah was none like him after him but neither among these
kingis that weren before him. And in the. xiiii. year of Ezechie: Senacherib
king of Assiriens, stied to al wallyd cities of Judah, and took tho. Tha^
Ezechie yaf to him all the silver that was fou^ den in goddis house and in the
treasouris of the king: for he should go awey, and distrinot Jerusalem, neither
Iudee. And for y^ Senacherib kept not covenant: Ezechie rebelled ayens him, in
trist of gods help. Tha^ Senacherib sent Rapsaces with strong often to
Jerusalem to blaspheme God, and make yt puple yield hem to him for dred. Tha^
Ezechie tore^t his tlothes for sorrow and was hilid with a sack and entrid into
gods house, and sent y^ high priest and other elde ine^ clothyd with sackes, to
ye prophet Esai yt he should prey to God ayens the blaspemie of Assirie^s, and
Esaie seid in Gods name yt they shulde^ not dred of these words of Assirie^s.
For God shall se^de a sprit to Senacherib and he shall hear a mesenger, and he
shall turn ayene into his land: and God shall cast him down by sword in his
land. And when Senacherib went home to defend his land ayens the king of
Ethiope: he sent blasphemous letters to Ezechie, and seide. That his God might
not deliver him fro his hond. Therefore God co^fortid Ezechie by y^ prophet
Esaie y^ he should not dread Senacherib. For Senacherib shall not enter into
Jerusalem, neither find arrowe into it, neither occupy it, neither bisege it.
But God shall deiende and save Jerusalem, for hyme self and for David his
servant. And in that night the angel of God killed in the tents of
Assirie^s: an hundred thousand, and. lxxxv. thousand, And in the morowtide
Senacherib yede into his land and his own sonnys kyllyden him in ye temple of
his God Nestarath, while he worshipyd his God Nestarath. After this when
Ezechie was sick to the death: Esai seide to him in Gods name, dispose thine
house, for thou shall dye and not live. And for Ezechie wept greatli: God curid
him and made him go into the temple on the yde day and encreasyd. xv. year to
his life. And in sign hereof: God made the sun go bakward vi. x. degrees.
After this doing, ye king of Babilo^ sent letters by messengeris and yeftes to
Ezechie And by pride he she wed al his treasours and Ieuels to the messengers.
Therefore God seid by Esaie to him That days shule^ come and al thingys in
thine house shulen be take away into Babylon. And Ezechie seid.

The word of God is good: only peace and truth be in my days. Aftir
Ezechie, Manasses his son reigned. lv. year in Ierusaie^, and did great evil
in goddis sight, and mich Idolatry. And the puple of Judah was disceiued in
Manasses, y^ they diden more evil then heathen men, which God destried fro the
face of sonis of Israel. And for Manasses did these worst abominacions over al
things which the men of Amorreys didden and he shed full miche innocent blud
till Jerusalem was fyllyd tylto the mouth: God seyde that he would bring in
euilys upon Jerusalem and Judah, that who ever hears, boeth his ears tingle.
And he shall do away Jerusalem: as tablys on board ben wont to be done away.
But God shall leave remnau^ts of his heritage and bitake hem in the hand of
here enemies. Manasses dyede and was biried in the orchard of his house, and
Amon his son reigned for him. ii. year, and did evil as his father did and
forsook God and served uncleanness and Idolis as his father did, and worshipid
tho. And his servants settiden treason to him: and killiden him in his house.
And the puple of y^ land kylliden al men yt hadden conspirede ayens the king
Amon: and for him they ordeynyden Iosie his son king to hem. Iosie bygan to
reign when he was. viii. year elde: and reignid. xxxi. year in Jerusalem. And
he did that, that was pleasant before God, and yede by all the weys of David his
fathir. In y^. xviii. year of Io sie, he had visines, that the temple of God
were repareilid. And when the book of the law was read before the king: he
torente his clothis, and sent solemn messangers to take council at God for
hymsilfe and his rewine. For he seide, that great vengeance of God is kinled
ayens us: for our fathers herde^ not the words of this book, to do all that is
written to us. And God seid by the prophetess Olda, ye wife of Selum. I shall
bring euiles on this place and on ye dwellers thereof al y^ wordis of the law
which Iosie readde: for theye forsoken me and maden sacrifice to alien gods.
And for thou Iosie heardist the words of the book, and thine heart was aferde,
and thou were mekid before me and torenteste thy clothes and weptest before me,
therefore thou shall dye in peace, that thine eyes se not all these euylys,
which I shall bring in on this place. Tha^ Iosi gadrid to him al ye old men
of Judah and Jerusalem, and ye King stied into y^ temple of God, and all men of
Judah, and al men that dwellide^ in Jerusalem prophets and prists and al ye
puple flied with him. And he red to al men herynge, all the wordis of the book
of couenau^te of the lord: yt was fou^dun in the house of the lord. And the
king stood on the grees and smote covenant before the lord, that they
shulden go after the lord and keep al his hestys and wytnessingis and
ceremonies in all the heart, and in all the soul: and the puple assentyd to the
covenant. And the King bad ye bishop and priests and porteris cast out of
Goddis temple: all vessellis that weren made to Baall and to other Idolis. And
he burnt tho out of Jerusalem in the valei of Cedro^: and bare the dust of
tho into Bethell. And he distried Idolatours and the houses of lechours that
weren in the house of God And he destryed auteris and high places of Idols and
Imagis: and took out bonis of sepulchris, and bre^t tho on the auter in
Bethell, that seruiden to Idolatry. Also Iosie did awey all temples of hie
placis that weren in the cite of Samarie, which ye kingis of Israel hadden made
to terrie the Lord to wrath: and he did ^o tho as he had do in Bethel. And he
killyd y^ priestis of high placis: which prests weren there over the auteris.
And he burnt men's bonis of tho on the auters. And Iosie made the puple to make
a solemn paske. And such paske was not made fro ye days of iudgys and al
kyngis of Israel and Judah: as was this pask made in the xviii. year of Iosie.
And he did away spirits spekinge in menis wombis: and false diuinou^is and
figuris of Idolis, and vncleanessis and abominaciouns that weren in the land,
of Judah and of Jerusalem. No King before him neither after him was like him:
that turned ayene to God in all his heart and in all his soul and in all his
virtue, by all the law of Moses. Nethelesse, for the orrible sinnis of Judah: God
turned not aweye fro his strong vengeance* but seide that he would take aweye
Judah fro his face, as he did aweye Israel, and that he would cast aweye ye
city of Jerusalem which he chees. Therefore Pharao Necao king of Egypt, kilid
Iosia in Magedo, and Ioathas his son was made King for his father and he
reigned three monthis in Jerusalem and did evil before God, by all thingis the
which his fathers hade^ do. And this Pharao prisonid him in Reblatha: and took
tribut of the land, an hundrede Talentys of silver, and oo talente of gold.
And this Pharao made king, Eliachym y^ son of Iosie, and turnede his name
Ioachim. And this Pharao led Ioachas into Egypt: And Ioachim did evil before
God, by all things which his fadirs hadden do. And this Ioachym was made
servant. iii. year to Nabugodouosor King of Babilo^. And eft he rebellid ayens*
Nabugodonosor. And God sent theuis of Call des, and theuis of Sirie, and theuis
of Moab, and theuis of ye sons of Amo^, into Judah: yt he shulo distrie it, as
he spoke by his Prophetis, and specially for y^ sinis of Manasses. This
Ioachim dyed and his son Ioakim reigned. iii. monthis in Jerusalem: and did
evil before God, as his fathers hadde^ do. In ye time, y^ serua^tis of
Nabugodonosor, stide^ to Jerusalem: and bisegide^ it and Ioachim and his
mother. Tha^ Nabugodonosor came to Jerusalem to ouircume it, and Ioachym and
his mother and his serua^tis and princis and chau^berlaines yede^ out to
Nabugodonosor* and he tra^slatid Ioachim and his oste ten* M. and many crafty
men into Babylon: and took all the treasuris of gods house and of the kingis
house, and beat to gydir all the golden vesels which King Solomon had made in
the temple. And king Nabugodonosor ordeynid Mathanie ye brother of Iosie to be
king: and clepid him Sedechie. And he reignid. xi. year in Jerusalem: and did
iuil before God by al thingis that Ioachym had do, for God was wroth ayens
Jerusalem and Iu da, till he casted he^ awei fro his face. And Sedechi yed awei
fro the king of Babilo^. And in the. ix. year of Sedechie: Nabugodonosor came
with al his oste, and bisegid Jerusalem, tillto the. xi. year of Sedechie: and
tha^ the city was broken, and Sedechie and his warriors fledde^ by night, and
the ost of Caldeis pursuid and token him, and brought him to Nabugodonosor in
Reblatha, and Nabugodonosor spoke dome with Sedechi and kilio his so^is before
him, and puttid out his iyen, and bound him with chaynis and brought him into
Babylon. Than Nabusardan (the prince of the oste) brent gods house and the
kingis house and y^ houses of Jerusalem, and distryed y^ wallis of Jerusalem in
co^pas. And he translatid into Babylon: the residue puple of Judah (outaken a
few pore men, vynetillars and earthtilars) and he brake all the brase^
vessellis and of metal in the temple, and bare the metal into Babylon. Than
Nabugodonosor made Godolie to be sovereign of the puple, left in the land of
Judah. And than all the Dukis of Knyghtis came^ to Godolie in Maspha: and he
made an oath to hem, that it should be well to hem, if they wolden serve the
King of Babylon. And Ismael, that was of the kings blood: kyllyd Godolie and
Iewis and Caldeis that weren with him, and all the puple of Judah and the
princis of Knightis: and flede^ into Egypt for dred of Caldeis. At y^ last,
Euilmeradach King of Babylon, reised Ioachim fro prison, and settid his trone
about the trone of other kings that were with him in Babylon. And Ioachim eat
ever bread in the Kyngis syghte of Babylon in all the days of his life.

This process of Godolie, and that suith: is told largelier in the ^nde of
Ieremi: tha^ here in ye end of kings. This process of the fourhe book of
kyngis: should stir al men, and namely kyngis and lordis, forto hate syn, as
Idolatry and couetise, and breakyng of goddis heestis: for which the puple of
Israel and the puple of Judah was thus punishid and co^querid of heathen men.
And forto love virtues and keeping of Gods heestis, and distriyng of open synis,
for which many good kyngis (as Ezechie, Iosie, and many other hadde^ great
thank and succor of God in many great perylis, and bliss of heaven wythout^
end. God for his merci grant this bliss to us Amen.

The. viii. chapter
THe bokis of Paralipe menon ben full necessary: to understood the storis of the
old Testament: in so myche as Jerome seith, yt if a man wtoute^ these bokis
would presume to have y^ kuning of holy scripturs: he scornith him silfe, that
is disceiuith and makith him silfe worthy to be scornid. For why, the storis
left out in ye bokis of Ryngis, ben touchid in these bokis: and vnnou^brable
questions of the gospel be^ declarid by these bokis. The. i. book of
Paralipomeno^, telith in the bigin yng, the generations from Ada^ tilto Jacob:
and so forth tilto David, and t^ chith shortly many storis of Saul and of David
and of Solomon, in the end thereof. And how David ordeynyd priestis and dekins
in her office: and how and by what service they shulen serve God. The biginyng
of the. ii. book of Paralipomeno^, tellith how Solomon axid of God wisdom to
deem his puple: and god yafe to him wisdo^e and ku^yng and riches and glory,
so yt no^e among kyngis either before either after him: was like to him. Tha^
is told how Solomon byldid the temple of Jerusalem: and an house to him silfe.
After this the queen of Saba came to Solomon, and brought mani preciouse ^e
welis to him: and preuid his ku^ing and wisdom in many thyngis. And all the
Kyngis of the earth desyriden to se the face of Solomon: forto hear ye wisdo^e
of god which he had yo^u^ in his heart. After that it suith how Roboa^
departid the ten linagis fro the house of David. And by his pride and hard
words, and by the ^uyng of the council of young men, and when the rewme of
Judah was co^firmid to him: he forsook the law of Godde, and all Israel did
the same wych him. Therefore God sent the king of Egypt with vnnou^brable puple on
he^, and took away ye treasours of goddis house and of the kyngis house. And
theye seruiden the king of Egypt, to know the diuersytie of goddis setuice, and
of the seruise of the rewme of londis And after him reigned Abia his son and he
treatyd wysly with y^ puple of Israel: that they shulden forsake here sin,
and war not ayens goddis puple and the rewme of Judah. And for they wolden
proudli war ayens the rewme of Judah and ayens this counsel of Abia* he killed
of hem by goddis help. v. hu^drid thousand of strong men. Afer this counsel
Abia died: and Asa his son reignyd for him. And in the days of As^, the lo^d
was in rest. x. year. And Asa did that that was good and plesaunte in the sight
of God. And he distried auters of Idolatri and high placys and he Brake Imagys
and hewed down wodis and co^maundyd the puple of Judah, to seek the lord God of
her fathers and do his law, and keep al his heestis. He reigned in peace and
bildid strong cities with walls and toures and yates and locks. And he had in
his ooste three hundred thousand of Judah, men bearing shee^dis and speeris. And
of Benjamin two hu^dryd thousand and lxx thousand of men of Arms and of
archars. And he overcame the King of Ethiope that came with. x. hundred
thousand me^ and. iii. hundred charis. And Asa had the victory, for in trist
of gods help he came ayens this great multitude. Than ye prophet of God seid to
Asa and al his puple. The lord is with you, for you weren with him. If ye
seken him, you shoule^ find him. And if you forsaken him: he shall forsake you.
Mani days shulen pass in Israel wythouten very God and without priest and
teacher and law: and Asa his father had take. And the Lord was with Iosaphat:
and he yede in y^ first weyes of David his father. And he hopyd not in Baalim,
but in God almighti: and yede in his commau^deme^tis, and not by the sins of
Israel. And God confirmide the rewme in the hond of Iosaphat: and he had full
mani richessis, and myche glory. And when his heart had take trif^e for y^ weis
of the lord: he did aweye also high placis and wodis fro Judah, where y^ puple
made offringe ayens the law. And Iosaphat in the third year of his rewme: sent
five of his princis, that they shulden teach in the cytes of Judah, And he
sent. ix. dekenis with hem, and. ii. prists with hem: and they hadde^ the book of
goddis law, and taughte^ the puple in Judah. And they co^passiden all the cities
of Judah: and taughte^ al ye puple. And therefore the dread of the lord was made
on all the rewmis of londis that weren by the compass of Judah, and dursten not
ware ayens Iosaphat. And he had redye at his hand. xi. C. thousand, and. ix.
thousand of knyghtis and men of Armis and archars outake other, which he leftin
walled cities, and in all Judah, And Philisteis and Arabies broughte^ to Iosaphat
yefts and tributis, and many thousau^ds of sheep and buckis of geet. And after
this doing Iosaphat was alyed to Achab and yede with him to bateyle into
Ramothe of Galaad, and. iiii. hundrid prophets that weren dysceyued by a
spyrite of leasing: excytyden Achab to this war and byhyghten, prosperyte
and victori to him. But Micheas, a true prophet of God: teld to Achab that he
should dye in this bateyll, and so it was in deed. And Iosaphat that was in
most perile of this bateyle: was sauyd by goddys help. After this bateil
Iosaphat turned ayene in peace to Jerusalem, and a prophet of God met wit
him, and seyde. Thou helpest the wicked man, and art joined in friendship with
hem yt haten God, and therefore thou deseruist the wrath of God. But good works
ben fou^dun in the: for thou dyddist aweye wodes fro the land of Judah, and
made redi thine heart to sech the lord God of thy fathers. Therefore Iosaphat
dwellid in Jerusalem. And efte he yede out to the puble, ^ro Bersebee, tylto
the hill of Effraim: and cleppid hem again to y^ lord God of her fathers. And he
ordained iudgys of y^ land in all strong cities of Judah by each place. And he
co^maundyd thus to ye Iudgis. Se ye what ye owen to do. For ye vsen the dome,
not of man but of y^ Lord. And what ever thing that ye shall deem: shall turn
into you. The dread of the lord be with you and do you al thyngis with
diligence. For why, neither wyckednes, neither taking of parsons neither
couetise of yiftis is anentis your Lord God. And in Jerusalem Iosaphat
ordeinid Dekenis and priestys, and pryncys of meinees of Israel: that they
shulden deem to ye dwellars thereof y^ doom and cause of God. And he co^mau^did
to hem and said. Thus ye shulen do in the dread of the Lord faithfully and in
a perfect heart. Each cause that comes to you of your brithern that dwellen in
here cities bitwix kinrede and kynrede, where ever is questian either doubt of
the law of commandment, of ceremonies, of iustifiyngs show ye to hem, yt
they do not sin ayens the lord, and wrath either ve^geaunce come not on you,
and on your brethern. Therefore do ye thus: and ye shulen not do sin. And
Amarie your pryeste either bishop: shall be sovereign in these thingis y^
perteyne to God. After these thingis y^ sonnis of Amo^ and the sonnis of Moab
with men of Idumee: weren gadryde together to war ayens Iosaphat. Than
Iosaphat yafe him all to beseech God: and preachyd faistnge to al Judah: and al
Judah was gatherid to bisech the Lord. And Iasaphat knoleched that he had not
power to ayenstonde so great a multitude of enemies. Than God co^fortid him
and his puple by a prophere: that theye shulen not dread this great multitude
of enemies. For God him self should fight and ouer^o^e her enimyes without
stroke of his puple, and so it was in deed. At the last Iosaphat made
frenshyppe with Ocosie King of Israel (whose werkis weren full evil) and they
weren felows to make shypps that shulde^ go into Tharsis. Therefore God by his
prophet seyde to Iosaphat. For thou haddist bond of peace with Ocosie God
has smitten thy werkis, and the ships been altobroke, and migten not go into
Tharsis. Tha^ died Iosaphat, and Ioram his son reignyd for him. This Ioram
weddyd the doughtyr of Achab, and killed his o^ ^retherne: and yede in the weis
of the (...) of Israel, as ye house of Achab had do. He did Idolatrye and made
the dwellaris of Jerusalem and also of Judah: to break goddys law. Therefore,
Edom and Lobna yeden a way fro his Lordship: for he had forsake the Lord God
of his fathers. And therefore god reised aye^s him philisties and Arabies, that
costen with Ethiopiens. And theidistri eden the land of Judah, and token away
the cattle that was foundune in the house of the King, and token away his
wife and sons: outake^ Ioachim the youngeste. And God smote Iora^ with
incurable sorrow of womb two year: so that he rottide on earth, and castyde out
his entrailles and died in worst sickness, and his son Ocosias ceygnyd for him
and did evil as the house of A^hab. For why his mother excitid him to do
wyckyd^ie. And they of the house of Achab, weren his cou^cellours into his
death: and he yede in the counsel of hem. And therefore Hieu, wha^ he distried
the house of Achab: killid Ocosie and the prince of Judah, and the sonnis of the
brithern of Ocosie. After these thingis Ioas was made King by y^ help of Ioiada
the priest: and the curssed woman Athalia was slain. The priestis and great
men of the puple broughten out of godis horse the son of the King: and
settiden a crown on his head, and yauen in his hand the law to be kept and
maden him king And Ioiada made covenant bitwix him and all the puple and the
King, that theye shullen be the puple of God, that is forsake Idolatri and
keep truly goddis law. Therefore all the puple yede into the house of Baal, and
distriede^ it: and braken the auteris and simulacris either Imagys of him. And
they kylliden before the auter: Mathan the priest of Baal. This Ioas did well in
the time of Ioiada, and reparelyd the temple of Jerusalem: that was dystryede
by Athalia the queen and her sonnys. But after the death of Ioiada, he was
flatteryde by the princis of Judah: and they felden to Idolatry, and forsoken
the temple of God. And y^ wrath of God was made ayens Judah and Jerusalem: for
his sin. And he sent prophetys to hem that they shulden turn ayene to God
and they nolden hear those prophetis. And Zachary the priest and son of
Ioiada: repriuid hem for this sin, and they stonyden hem to death in the
purseynte of goddys house: by commandment of the ^yng. And when the year was
endyd: the ^oste of Sirie stied ayens him, and came into Judah and Jerusalem,
and kylliden all the princis of the puple and senten all the preye into Damask
to the King. And certes when full little nu^bre of me^ of Sirie* was co^me^:
God bitoke in here ho^dis a multitud wythouten end. For they hadden forsake the
Lord God of her fathers. And they vsiden shamfull domys in Ioas: and yeden
forth and leften him in great sorows. And his seruau^ts risen ayens him for
vengeance of ye blude of ye son of Ioiada the prist and kylliden him in his
bed. And Ioas was dead, and Amasie his son reigned for him.

The. ix. chapter
AMasie did good in party: but not in a perfect heart. And he killid hem that
had den slain the king his father but he killid not there sons, as God bade
in the law. This Amasie found in all Judah and Benjamin fro. xx. year and above:
xxx. M. of young men that yeden out to batteyl, and helden spear and sheeld.
And he hi^ide of Israel an hundryd thousand of full strong men, for an
hundride talentis of silver: to fight ayens the sons of Edom. And a man of
God seyde to Amase. A thou King, the ooste of Israel go not out with the. For
the lord is not with Issraell: and with all the sons of Effraim. That if thou
gessest y^ bateylis stonden in the stre^gh of oost: the lord shall make the to
be ouercomen of thine enemies. For it is propre to God for to help, and for to
turn into ^ygh. Therefore Amasie departed away the ooste of Israel: and
trystyly led forth his puple to batteil, and he had the victory: and killed.
xl. thousand of his enemies in this bateyl. And after this victori Amasie
worshipid ye gods of Edo^: and brent inces to he^. Wherefore God was wroth ayens
Amasie: and sent to him a prophet that should seye to him. Why have thou
worshipid goddis y^ deliueride^ not here puple fro thine hond? Wha^ the prophet
spoke these thyngys to him: he answered to the prophet* Where you art a
cou^sellour of ye king? Cease thou: lest peradventure I slay the. Therefore ye
prophet yede away and seyde. I wot yt the lord thought to slay the, for thou
have do this evil: and ferthermore, thou assentist not to my council. And so
it byfelde in deed. For by pride he terrid the king of Israel to war: and
nolde cease for helthfull counsel of the King of Israel. Therefore the King of
Israel overcame the puple of Judah, and took Amasie and distryed the wall of
Jerusalem by. iiii. hundrid cubits, and took away all the treasoure and
vesselis which he found in goddis house and in the kyngis house. After this
doing Amasie fled out of Jerusalem into Lachis: for treason done to him of
his men. And they senten and kyllidde^ him in Lachis. And Olias his son
reygnid for him. lii. year in Jerusalem, and sought God in the days of
Zachary, understanding and seeing God. And when he sought God: he louide
hyme in all thyngis, and God helpyd him ayens philisteys and Arabeis, and ayens
Amonitis.

And Amonites paide^ yiftis to Osias: and his name was publyshede tylto the
enter of Egypt, for often victories. He byldyde many tourys in Jerusalem, and
also in wilderness, for he had mamy beasts and vines, and vynetiliers. For he
was a man yeuen to earthtilth. He had in his oost. ii. M. and. vi. C. princis
of strong men, and. iii. C thousand and. v. hundryd that weren able to batell,
and foughten for the King ayens aduersaris, and his name yede out fer: for God
helpid him and made him strong. But wha^ he was made strong: his heart was
reisid into his death. And he dyspysyd his Lord God. For he yede into the
temple of God: and would brene incens on the auter of ince^s ayeng the law. And
wha^ the Bishope and maninoble Priestis ayenstode^ him, and told^n the law yt
was ayens him: he was wrath, and held the censer and manacide hem. And anon
lepre rose in his forhead before the priestis in gods house. Than the priest
puttid him out. And he hastyd to go out for dread: and for he felid anon the
vengeance of God Therefore the King Josias was leprouse tylto the day of his
death, and dwellid in an house departid. And Ioathan his son gouernid the
kings house: and demid the puple of the land. And Ioathan reignid. xvi. year
in Jerusalem, and did rightfulnes before god: bial things which Osias his
father had do, outtaken this, that he entryde not into the temple of God: and
yet the puple trespassed. He bylded many thyngis and faught ayens ye King of
the sonnis of Amon* and ouircame him. And the sons of Amon yauen to hyme an
hundryd talentis of silver. and. x thousand chorus of barley, and as mani of
whete. And Corus conteynethe xxx. bushels. And Ioathan was made strong for he
had dressid his ways before his Lord God, and he was dead. And Achaz his
son reigned for him. xvi. year in Jerusalem. This Achaz did not ryghtfulnes
in goddis sight: but yed in the weies of the Kyngis of Israel, and made Imagis
to Baal, and did manyfolde Idolatry, and God bitoke him into the hond of ye
King of Sirie. which King smore Achaz, and took a great preye of his rewme
into Damask. And Achaz was bitake into ye ho^dis of the King of Israel, and
was smite^ with a great wound. And Phacee the son of Romelie kyllid of Judah
vi. score thousand in oo day, all the warriors: for they hadden forsake the
Lord God of her fathirs. And ye sons of Israel toke^ of her brithern of Judah.
ii. C. thousand of women and of children and of damsellis and preye wythouten
end: and baren it into Samari. And Obed the prophet of God, seide to the me^
of Israel, that they hadden do great cruelty, and synnyd ayens God* And bade
hem lead ayene the prisoneris of Judah. Forwhie, great vengeance of God
neighith to you. Therefore, the princis of Israel maden the warriors to
forsake the pray, and al thyngis which they hadde^ take. And ye princis
clothiden hem that weren naked and refreshiden hem with meat and drink and
annoyntynge with oil for traueil, and sente^ hem home benignely. Than King
Achaz sent to the King of Assirie^s: and axid help. And Idumeis came^ and
kylliden moni men of Judah: and token great pray. And Philisties token many
Cytyes of Judah: and dwelliden in tho. And God made low the puple of Judah: for
Achaz the King of Israel, for he had made him naked of help: and for he had
dyspy^id God. And God brought ayens him Teglathfalasar the King of Assiriens,
yt torme^tyd him and distried, for none ayenstod.

Therefore Achaz spoyllede goddis house, and the house of Kyngis and princis,
and yafe yeftis to the King of Assirie^s: and netheles it profityd nothing to
him. And Achaz in the time of his anguyshe, encreasyde despysynge ayens God,
and offryde sacrifyce to goddis of damask, and he said. The goddis of Sirie
helpe^ hem, which Goddis I shall please with sacrifices, and they shule^ help
me when ayenwarde they weren into falling to him and to all Israel Therefore
Achaz rauishid and brake all the vessellis of goddis house: and closed the
yatis of goddis temple, and made to him auteris in all the corneris of
Jerusalem, and in all the cities of Judah, to brenne incence: and terride God to
wrath. And he died. And Ezechie his son reigned for him. xxix. year in
Jerusalem. He did that, yt was pleasant in goddis sight: by al things which
David his father had do. And he openid the yates of goddis house in the first
year of his rewme, and made priestis and deakenis to cleanse and hale we the
temple, and the auter of God, with all the vesseles and purtenauncis of the
temple. And he gaderid togidyr al ye pryncys of the city, and styed into
goddis house. And they offriden. vii. bullis. vii. rames. vii. la^bren, and.
vii buckis of get: for sins for the rewme, for the sentuary, and for Judah.
And he said to the priests the sons of Aaron: that they shulde^ offer on the
auter of God, and theye didden so. And he ordeynyd dekinys in the house of God
with symbalis and psalteries, and harpis by the ordinance of David and of
Gadde ye prophet of the King, and of Natha^ the prophet. For it was ye
command me^t of god: by ye ho^d of his prophits And deke^s stode^ and helde^
the organis of David, and preistis helden trumpettis, and Ezechie co^mau^did,
that they sholden offer brent sacrificis on the auter. And when brent
sacrificis weren offirid: they. begunen to singe heriyngis to God, and to sown
with trumpetts and diverse orgains, which David the King of Israel had made
ready forto sown. And Ezechi and the princis co^maundiden to the dekeines:
that they shulde^ herie God with the wordis of David and of Asaph ye prophet.
And Ezechie sent to al Israel and Judah: and wroote epistlis to Effcaim and
Manasses: yt they shulde^ come to goddis house in Jerusalem, and make paske to
the Lord God of Israel. And it plesyd the ^ynge and all the multitude, And they
demide^ to send mesengers into all Israel, fro Bersa be tylto ^an: that they
shulde^ come and make pa^ke to the Lord God of Jerusalem And currours yede^ out
with Epi^s by the commandment of the king and of his princis into al Israel
and Judah, as the King had co^mau^dyd and preachid. Sons of Israel, turn
ayene to ye lord God of Abra ham, of Isaac, and of Israel: and he shall turn
ayene to the remnauntis that ascapiden the hondis of the King of Assirians.
Serve ye to ye Lord God of your fathers: and the wrath of his strong
vengeance shall be turnede ayene fro you. For if ye turne^ ayene to the lord:
your britherne and your sons shule^ have mercy before her lordis, that
lead he^ prisoneris. And they shulenturne ayene to this land. Therefore,
currouris yeden swyftly fro city to city, by the land of Effraim, and of
Manasses and of Zabulon: and they scordiden and bimowi den ye messengers.
Nethelesse, some of Aser and Manasses and of Zabulo^ assentiden to the council:
and camen into Jerusalem. Goddis hand was made in Judah: y^ he yafe to hem one
heart, and they dydden the word of God by commandment of ye king and of
pryncys. And many puple, weren gatherid in Jerusalem: to make sole^nite of
paske in ye second monthe. And they distrieden ye auters y^ were^ in Jerusalem.
And theye dystryeden al thingis in which incens, was offrid to Idolis, and
castiden forth into the stronde of Cedro^. When these thyngis weren halewyd
ryghtly, all Israel yede out y^ was founden in y^ cities of Judah. And they
braken semulacris either Imagis, and he wede^ down wodis, and destrieden high
places and auteres. And not only of Judah and Benjamin: but also of Effraim and
Manasses, til they destride^ tho utterly. And Ezechie ordained companies of
Priestis and of Dekenis by her departings each man in his own office as well of
prists as of deke^s, to bre^t sacrificis and to pesible sacrificis, that they
shulde^ mynister and knowledge and sing in ye yates of ye castelles either
oostes of y^ lord. And Ezechie commanded to ye puple to give to prestis and
dekenis here partis, yt is the first fruitis and tithis y^ they myghten give
tent to ye law of God. And there is told much of y^ payinge and dealing of
tythis and other holy thingis. Than it sueth, how Senacherib blasphemed god of
Israel, and how Ezechie comforted y^ puple ayens his blasphemy and pride.
Ezechie and Esaie the Prophet preiden ayens the blasphemy: and crieden til
into heaven. And God sent his Angel, and he kyllyd each strong man and
warryour and Prince of the ooste of the King of Assiriens. And he turnid ayene
with shenshyppe into his land: and his own Sonnys kyllyden him with swerd.
And God sauid Ezechie and the dwellars of Jerusalem, fro the hand of
Senacheryh King of Assitiens: and fro the hond of all men, and yafe to hem
rest by cumpas. After these thyngys, Ezechie was sick to the death: and he
prayed to God, and God heard him. And the heart of Ezechie was reisid to
pride: and Wrath was made ayens him and ayens Judah, and ayens Jerusalem. And
after he was mekyd (for his heart was reysede) both he and the dwellaris of
Jerusalem weren mekyd: and therefore the vengeance of God came not in the days
of Ezechie. And Ezechie was full rich and noble: and in all his werkis he did
welsumlie what ever thing he would. Nethelesse in the message of princis of
Babylon, that weren sent to him to axe of the great wondre yt byfell on
earth: God forsook hyme that he was tempyd, and althyngis weren known that
weren in his her^e. Than died Ezechie: and Manasses his son reigned in
Jerusalem. lv. year. And Manasses did evil before God: by abhominacio^ of
heathen men which Goddy* tried before the sonnis of Israel. And he byldyde high
placis and made auteris to Baalym and did manyfolde Idolatry, and served to
wythcraftis, and se^tyd Idols in the temple of God. And he disceiued the puple
of Judah and the dwellars of Jerusalem: that they didden evil more the^ heathen
me^, which the Lord had distried from ye face of the sonnis of Israel. And God
spoke to him and to his puple: and they nolden take heed. Therefore he brought
on he^ the prince of the oost of ye king of assiryens: and they token Manasses
and bounde^ him with chayns and gyues, and led him into Babylon And after that
he was anguishid: he preyede his Lord God, and he did penance greatly before
the God of his fatheys. And he preide hertely and besought God: and God herd
his preyer, and brought him ayene into Jerusalem into his rewme. And Manasses
knew that the Lord hymsilfe is God. And he did away Alien gods, and
simulacres either Idols fro goddis house, and destried auteris which he had
made in the hill of goddis in Jerusalem, and castid al out of the City. And he
restored the altar of god: and offered on it Sacrifycis and heriynge. And
co^maundid the puple of Judah, to fear the Lord God of Israel. And nethelesse
the puple offerid in high places to here lord God. Manasses died, and Amon his
son reigned for him. ii. year in Jerusalem. And he did euel in gods sight,
as Manasses his father had do, and offered and served to all Idolis which
Manasses had made And he reuere^ced not y^ face of God as Manasses reuere^ced,
and he did many greater trespasses. And wha^ his servants hadden conspirid
ayens him, they kylleden him. And y^ puple killed hem ye hadden slain Amon:
and maden Iosie his son king for him, and he reigned. xxxi. year in
Jerusalem. Iosie did that that was rightful in gods sight, and yede in the
weys of David his father, and bowed nether to y^ rightside, nether to ye
leftesyde. In the. viii. year of his rewme wha^ he was yet a child, he began
to seek ye god of David his father. And in ye. xii. year after y^ he began: he
cleansed Judah and Jerusalem fro hight places and Imagis and Idols. They
distriede^ before him the Aulteris of Baalim, and the simulac^is that were^ put
above, he kytted down and alto brake wodis and graue^ Images, and scaterid the
re^lifis on y^ biriellis of hem ye were^ wunt to offer. Further more, he br^nt
the bonis of priests, in the aulteris of Idolis And he cleansed Judah and
Jerusalem and distried all Idolis in the cities of Manasses and Effraim and of
Simeon tylto Neptalim. In the eightenth year of his rewme, when the Land and
the Temple of God was clensydde: he sent worthy men to repareyle Goddis
house, and so they didden in deed. And Elchie the great pryeste yafe to Sapha^
the scriueyne and solemn messager, the book of goddis law: and he bare it to
the King. And when the King had heard the wordis of the Law: he torent his
clothes. And he co^mau^did Elchie and other great men to go and pry the lord
for the king, and ^or y^ residews of Israel and Judah on all the words of the
book of gods law, for why, great vengeance of God has dr^ppid on us: ^or
our fathers kep^e^ not ye words of God, that they dydde^ al things that been
written in this book. Therefore Elchie and they that weren sent togider of the
King: ye^n to Olda, a Prophetess, the wife of Sellu^: and God said by her
that he shall bring in on this place and dwellers thereof euilles and all
curssi^ges that been written in this book of gods law. For they forsoke^
God, and sacrifyed^n to alien gods, to terre him to wrathfulnes in all the
works of her hondes. But for thou king of Judah ^eardiste the words of the
book, and were meked in gods sight, and weptiste and rentist thy clothis: I
have heard the, says God, and thou shall be borne into thy Sepulcher in piece
and thine e^ne shullen not se all the evil which I shall bring in on this
place, and on the dwellars thereof.

And when Iosie had heard these words: he clepide together all the elder men
of Judah, and Jerusalem. And he stied up into gods house: and all men of Judah,
and the dwellars of Jerusalem, stieden togider, Priestis and Dekenis and all
puple fro the least tilto the most. And in audience of hem, the king read
in gods house, all the wordis of the book. And he stod in his trone either
seat of dome, and sinote bond of peace before God, that he should go after
God, and keep his hestis and wytnessynges, and iustifyingis in all his heart,
and in all his soul, and do tho things that been written in this book, which
he had read. And he chargid greatly on this thing, al me^ that weren founden
in Jerusalem, and Beniamyn, and the dwellars of Jerusalem dyden by covenant of
her Lord God of here fathers. Therefore Iosie did avoid all abominations, fro
all the contreis of the sonnis* of Israel, and made al men that were^ residue
in Israel: to serve here lord God. In all ye days of his life they yeden not
awey fro the Lord God of her fathers. Afterward Iosie made paske in Jerusalem
and ordained priestis in her officis, and bade hem ministre in Goddis house.
And bade dekenies serve God and his puple Israel: and make hem ready by here
houses and kynreddis, in the depar. tinge of each as David king of Israel
commau^did, and bade he^ serve in the sentuari, by the meines, companies and
deakenis: and that they be ha^owide and offer paske, and make ready here
brethren thereto. And Iosie made such a paske: yt none was like in Israel,
fro the days of Samuel the prophet. Neither any of the kyngis of Israel: made
paske as Io sie did, to priests and dekenis, and to al Judah and Israel, and to
the dwellars of Jerusalem. For he yafe to all the puple that was fou^den in
Jerusalem in the solemnity of paske: xxx. thousand Lambrens and kyddis and
other sheep, and three thousand of oxe^. After that Iosie had repareilide the
temple: Necao King of Egypt, stied to fight in Cartamis, and Iosi yede forth
ayens him. And the King of Egypt seide to Iosie, I come not to day ayens the:
but I fight ayens an other house to which God bade, and made me go in haste.
Therefore cease thou King of Judah to day ayens God which is with me: lest he
s^ea the. Iosi nold turn again: but made him self redye to batteile ayens the
King of Egypt, and assentid not to the words of ye King of Egypt: spoken by
goddis mouth. Therefore, Io sie was slain of ye King of Egipte And the puple
of the land made Ioacas his son King in Jerusalem He reigned three months in
Jerusalem. And the King of Egypt puttid him down, and condemned the land of
Judah in an hundred talentis of silver and in oo talente of gold, and made
Eliachim his brother King for him on Judah and Jerusalem, and turnid his name
Ioachim. He reigned. xi. year in Jerusalem, and did evil before God. Therefore
Nabugodonosor took him and led him bounden with chains into Babilo^: and bare
thither the vessels of Goddis temple. And Ioachim his son reignyd for him
three monethis and. x. days in Jerusalem: and did evil in Goddis sight.

Than Nabugodonosor sent men that ledden him into Babylon, and bare out the
preciouseeste vessellis of goddis house. And Nabugodonoso^ made Sedechye King
on Judah and Jerusalem: he reignid. xi. year in Jerusalem, and did evil in
Goddis sight, neither was ashamid of the face of Jeremy the prophet that
spoke to him of goddis mouth. He brake the oothe made to Nabugodonosor. Therefore
Nabugodonosor came and took him: and led him and all the vessellis and the
treasuris of goddis house and of the King and princis into Babylon, and kyllyd
the puple, and destried and brent Jerusalem. And the puple yt was left alive
was led into Babylon and seruyde the King and his sons, till the King of
Persis reignid, and til. l. year were^ fyllyd, by goddis word, said by the
mouth of Jeremy. And Cirus King of Persis co^maundid to be preachyd (yea by
writing in all his rewme) ye Iewis shoulde^ turn ayene into Jude.

The. x. chapter.
This process of Paralipomenon, in the first and second book: should styr
Kyngis and christian lords: to distrie syn and love virtue and make goddislawe
to be known and kept of here puple. For here theye moune se how sore God
punnished evil Kyngis that liuiden evil and drouen the puple to I dolatrie
either other great sinnis and how greatly God preysed, rewardid, and
cherishid good kingis, that lyueden well, and gouerniden well the puple in
goddis law, and open reason and good conscience. And though kyngis and Lords
knewen never more of holy write, than. iii. stories of y^ second book of
Paralipomeno^ and of Regum, that is, the storye of King Iosaphat, the storye
of king Ezechie, and the storye of King Iosie: they myghten learn
sufficientlye to live well and govern well here pupl^ by goddis law, and
eschew al pride and Idolatri and couetise and other sins. But alas alas alas,
where King Iosaphat sent his Princes, and Dekenis, and Priestis to each Citi of
his rewme with the book of goddis law, to teach openly gods law to the
puple: some christen Lords senden general letters to al here mynisters and
lyge men either tenantis, that the pardons of y^ Byshopis of Rome, that been
open leasings (for they grau^te^ mani hu^drith years of pardons after
domisedaie) be preachyd generally in here rewmis and lordeshypis. And if any
wise man ayensaye the open errors of Antychrist: and teach men to do her
almese to poor nedie men to ascape the peinis of hell: and to win the bless
of heaven, he shall be prisoned as a man of vnchriste^ believe, and traitor of
god, and christen kingis and Lor des. And where king Ezechie made him full
bisie to cleanse Goddis house and do away all uncleanness fro the sentuarie,
and co^mau^dyd priestis to offer brent sacrifice on goddis auter and ordeynid
dekens in Goddis house to herie God, as David and othere prophetis ordeniden:
some christen lords inname (and hethe^ in co^dicions) defoulen the sentuarye of
God, and bringen in Simonielit clerkis, full of couetise, and herecie, and
Hipocricy and malice, to stop Goddis law that it be not known and kept and
freali preachid. And yet some christian lordis holden mani prelatis and curats
in her conrtis and in secular office ayens goddis law and man's openly: and
wythholden hem fro here gostly office, and helping of Christen souls.

And where King Iosie preachyde openly Goddis la we in the ^mpel to all the
puple, and casted away Idolis and brent the bonis of prestis that did Idolatri
some christian lords (in name and not in deed) preisen and magnyfyen fryeres
letters, full of dys^eyte and leasyngys, and maken here tenauntis, and meines,
to swear by heart, bonys, nails and sides, and other mem^ryes of christ, and
pursuen full cruelly, hem that wolden teach truly and frelye the law of
God, and preisen, meinteynen and cherishen hem that preachen fables, leesyngis
and sinful men's traditions either statutis, and letten great ly the gospel
to be preachyd, and ho ly write to be known and kept.

But wit these unwise Lordys, that Elie the Prophet (one alone) had the
truth of God. And King Achab with eight hundrid and. L. pryestys and Prophetys
of Baalle hadden the false part.

And efte Micheas, one alone Prophet of God, had the truethe ayens four
hu^dryde Prophetys of Baall that councellide^ Achab to war, to his own
shenshipe and death. So now a few pore men and Idiots in compariso^e of
clerkis of Schole: moune have the truth of holy scrip ture, ayens many
thousand prelatis and religiouse, yt ben yeue^ to worldli pride and couetise,
simoni, hypocrisy and other fleshly sins, most sithen these pore men
desire^ only the truth and fredome of the holy gospel and holy sc^ipture, and
accepte^ ma^s law and ordinau^cis, only in as much as they ben grou^did in holy
scripture, either good reasone and common profit of christen puple: and
worldly prelatis and feinid religiouse, grounden hem on sinful men's statutis,
that sowne^ pride and couetise and letten ye truth and fredome of goddis law
to be known and bringin christian puple in endless thraldom and great cost.

But it is to be dread full sore, lest kyngis and lordis been now in the
former sins of Manasses: god grant that they repent verily and make amends
to god and man, as he did in the end, for they setten Idols in goddis house,
and exciten men to Idolatri: and sheden innocent blood in many maneris as
Manasses did. First they setten in here heart (that should be the temple and
special chamber of god) the Idol of couetise, either of Glotonie, either of
Pride, either of other great sins. For saint Paul seyth that our bodies
ben the temple of the holy ghost. And efte he seyeth that glottons maken her
belies here God. And God seith by Job: that the devil is king over all the
children of pride. And Jesus Christ seith, that the deuel is Prince of this
world, that is (as Auste^ seith) of false men yt dwelle^ in this world. Then
they that setten pride, either couetise, either glotonie either raueine in here
heart: setten Idols of Baal, either of the deuell in the temple of God.
Specially lords sitten Idolis in Gods house when they maken unworthy
prelates either curates in the chirch. For why such unable prelatis, either
curatis, ben Idolis, as God seith in the. xi. Chapyter of Zachary, to an
unable prelate. Athou shepperd and Idol for saking the flock. Wherefore
Archedekene in his Rosarie, which is one of the famousest doctors of the
Popis law, wrytteth thus. An evil prelate is seyde a ^orynge Lion: and a wolf
raueshyng pray. And in the xxxiiii. Chapter of Ezechiell: he is seyde to feed
him self, and not the sheep. Also he is said to seek his owe^ profit
temporal. Therefore he is not of goddis children, as Austyne seith. viii.
question, and first Chapter. Sunt quidam. And for this thing power shall be
taken away fro him as God seyth in the xxxiiii. Chapter of Ezechiell. Also an
evil prelate is said a wolf, as the law witnesses in y^ lxxxiii.
distinction, Capite. Nihil Also for defaute of gouernall, he is seyde an
unchaste dog: as Austen witnesses in ye second cause ye seventh question.
Capiter. Que nec. Also he is seyde a Crow, either a Rauene for the blackenes
of sinnis: as ye law witnesses there in capite. Non omnis. Also he is seyde
founid salt, not profitable to any thing, as the law witnesses there in
Capite. Non omnis. Also he is seyde an Hog: as the law witnesses in the.
lxiii. distinction Chapter In mandatis. Also he is said a cherle of a
cherlesched of evil life: as the law witnesses in the. xivii. destinctio^ in
the beginning. Also he is said a Capo^: for he has ye manner of an Hen. For as
a Capo^ croweth not: so an euel prelate croweth not in preaching. Also an euel
prelat ge^dreth not by preching of gods word neither he fights for his
sogettes. Also as a Capon clepyth not he^nes: so an evil prelate clepith not
poor men, to meat. Also as a Capon makes fat him self: so an evil prelate
makes fat him self. Therefore sithe^ he sechyth plentuousenes of meats and
rechessis: he shall be put into fire of hell, as Jerome wytnessith on Michee in
y^. xxxv. Distinction, Capi. ^cclesie Principes. Atchdeken writith all this in
the. xliii. Distinction, in Cap. Sit Rector On this word ^uti. Also adombe
Prelate is an Idol: and not a very prelare. A dombe pre late is not a very
prelate, since he uses not the office of a prelate, but he has only the
lykenes of a prelate. As an Idol that uses not the office of a man: is only
like a man, but is no man. Therefore such dom be prelates moune rightfulli be
said simulacris either Idolis of which it is seyde in the. vi. Chap. of
Baruck^. The trees of hem ben made fair of a carpe^ter and the ben a raied with
gold and silver, and ^oun not speak. And they ye maken such prelatis: been
like hem, which makeris shule^ be damned with such prelatis, by that word of
David. They yt maken tho: been made like tho. But marcke well that heathen men
hadden simulacris of. vi. kyndis. That is, of cleye, of Tree, of Brass, of
Stone, of Silver, and of Gold. We moune find these. vi. kyndis in evil
prelatis (for why) simulacris of cley been fleshly prelates, of which God
seyth in the Psalter, I shall do hem away, as the cley of the stretis.
Simulacris of tree been unwise prelatis and boistuous and with out wit. Of
which it is said in holy scripture, a tree is wlappid in silver. And these
been seyde to be mad and naught: into prelatis. These ben beastis clepid
chymeris: that han aparte of each beast. And such been not, no but only in
opinionne either speech, and not in deed nether in kind. Simulacris of Brass
ben they that han only wordly eloquence. For why brass yeueth great sown. In
Epistle to Corthinthies. xiii. Chapt. If I speak in ye langagis of me^, and of
Aungellis, and I have not Charity: I am made as bras sowneing. Simulacris of
stone been they, y^ been broken fro rightfulnes and virtue for temporal
strength. These prelatis be not the stone which is set into the head of the
corner, but these ben the stone of hurtyng and of sclander. Simulacris of
Silver been they y^ been made by money, either riches which prelates seyne.
What wolen ye give to us? and we shulen bitraye Christ to you. Golden
simulacris been tho that been made only for worldly nobly. For why gold
signifies nobley. And therefore y^ head of the Image of Nabugodonosore was of
gold, in the. ii. Chapter of Daniell. Archedeken tells all this, in the.
xliii. destinction. Capiter. Si^ rector. On this word. ^utus. Though this
doctor of the Popis law, be pleyue and sharp: he seythe truth sesonable.
For the chirch now accordith with holy write and reason and common Doctors of
holy scripture. For in the. xi. Chapter of zachary, God clepith an evil
prelate an Idol.

And in Ezechfell and other Prophetis he lykeneth Tirantis, and raueinoures, to
Lions, woluis, bearis and other insatiable beastis to dispyse here sin. Here
Lordis and other prelatis moune se in party, how perilouse it is to ordeyne
evil prelatis either euratis in the church. For as Saint Gregorye seyth in
the first part of Pastorallis. ii. Chapter. No man harmeth more in the ^hirch
then he y^ does weywardly and holdith the name of order, either holiness. And
ye law seith De electionibus capite Ni^hil. That nothing harmith more in the
church of God: than that vnworthi men be taken to the gouernall of soulis. And
Grosted seyth, in his sermon Premonitus a venerabili pa^re That to make unable
prelates either curats in y^ chirch of God: is to have come to the hyghiste
degree of treaspasses. Also in his sermon, Dominus noster Jesus Christus: he
wrytith thus to the pope. He y^ bitakith y^ cure of soulis to a man vnmighty,
vnku^ing either not wylfull to help duly the soulys: is gyltye of all the
soulys, though any ascape either is sauid by Goddis grace. And he that bitakith
the cure of soulis to him that is openly unable thereto: techith to set more
^rice by unreasonable beastis, than by men, and forto love more earthly thyngis
y^ passen shortly: than everlasting thyngis, more than y^ death and blood of
goddis son. And he that yeuethe thus the cure of souls to unable men: is
worse than Herod that pursued Christ, and worse tha^ Iewis and heathen me^ that
crucifiden Christ. Gros^id seith this plainly, and preuithe it openly before
the pope and all his clergy. And the ye that procute^ beneficis either
rychessis ^o men: hate^ hem to whom the^ ^rocuren thus, as if they procuryde
hem to be set in the cop of the chirch in whirle winds and great te^pestis.
Grosted seyth this in his sermon* Scriptum est ^e Leuitis And he that is
negligent to draw soulis out of the ^yt of sin, as much as he may by the
order of law: and he that letti^h him of his work sleythe the souls. And he
settith more price by a flesh^ sheep than a gostly sheep, yt is man's soul. Yea
settith more price by a penny than by the life of Gods so^e: which is worth all
this world. A rechlesse curat that sleeth so get is by evil ensample and with
drawing of Goddis word: is worse than the unreasonable beastis, and he is
worse than the crucifiers of Christ: for he crucifieth him in his me^bres.
Good councelloures they been alone: that been wise men and dread God. For why,
al couetouse men been foolys and unwise men. And to belede by the counsel of
hem: is to dyspose of (...), by the council of foxys, and to dyspose of foldes
of Sheep, by the counsel of wolves. Gros^ede seyth this in a sermon.
Premonitus a venerabili patre. Se ye lords and prelatis that maken unable
curatis for fleshly affection and yeftys (and specially for pleiynge at the
beer, and other unlawful iapis) what treasone ye done to God and what harm to
Christis chirch and your auau^sees. Ye maken horrible abominacion of dis
comfort stond in the holy place: for ye maken Antichrist to stand at the high
auter in the stead of Christ: and treat the holy sacrament of Christ's
flesh and blude full unworthily. And as Parisyens seyth, when ye maken a
coueitous pryest to sto^d at the auter: ye make^ a Moldy warpe to stand there
in the stead of Christ. And when ye maken a fond Byshope that can not and
louyth not Goddis law stand mytryde at the auter: ye maken an hornyde ass
stand at the auter instead of Christ. And so of other unreasonable Beastys
as Lions. Woluys, Berys, Apis, Dragons, Hoggis, Doggis, and other visious
Priestys, Proud, Coueitouse, Raueinouris, wrathfulle Hypo^ritis, trecherouse,
Glotenouse, Lecherouse, Envious, and Back byteris. Ye trans fyguren Satanas
into an angelle of light when ye maken curatys either prelatys that been
contrary to Christ to occupy the office of a bishop, Abbot either pryeste,
Lords and prelatys that have set such Idolys in goddys house as Manasses
did. Sue ye Manasses in very repe^tau^ce and making of amendis to god and men.
Also lordis and prelatis exciten strongly men to do I dolatrye. For they swere^
custo^abli, nedles^i and often vnauisely and false, by the members of god, by
Christ and by seyntis, in so much that each lord and prelate, comynly makes
to him an Idol of some seint, who^ he worshipyth more then god, For comenly
they sweren by our lady of walsyngham, seynte John Baptyst, saint Edward, seint
Thomas of Canterbury, and such other seintis: and chargen more this ooth then
though they sweren by y^ holy Trinity. And in all this, they honoure^ more
these seintis, than they honoure^ the holy Trinity Though it were leful
toswere biseyntis. this is Idolatry to charge more an oath made by such
seyntis, than by God almighti either by the holy Trinity. Nethelesse
Chrisostom wytnessyth on the. v. chapter. of Matthew: that to swear by any
creature, is to do Idolatry. For as Jerome there (and decrees in the. xxii.
cause. i. question.

Siquis per capillum. and Capite. next before, and Decretalis De Iur^iurando,
Capite Etsi Christus) wyttnesseth plainly, that to Swear by a Creature: is
ayens goddis commandment. And therefore Christ in the. v chapter of Matthew
co^maundythe to not swear by heaven neither by earth and vnderstondyth by heaven
and earth: creaturys of heaven and creaturys of earth. And in all the old law
it is not foundun where Godde grauntythe to swear by any creature, but only by
his own name, or by him self. And therefore the wise man seyth in the xxiii.
chapter of Ecclesiasticus.

A man that swerythe myche, shall be fyllyd with wyckydnes: and vengeance
shall not go away fro his house. And efte he seythe. Thy mouth be not
customably to swexeynge: for whi much falling is in it. The ^empning of God be
not custo mable in thy mouth: that is to swear by his name in vain, either
false e^ there for an euylle end. And be thou not medlid with ye namis of
seynts: that is to swear by seyntis. For thou shalt not be gyltlesse of hem.

Here Lordys and Prelatys moune se, how theye done openne Idolatry: when they
gessen to honor Seyntis. And here open dedis of Idolatry, been open bokis of
Idolatrye and Blasphemye to here soget^s.

Therefore, as Gregory seyth in the second book of Pastorallis the fifte
chapter* Prelatis been worthy so many Deaths: how many ensamples of perdision
theye senden to sogettis. And in the five and twenty chapter of Numer^ God
bade Mo ses hong all the Pryncys in Iebats ayens the Sun: for the puple of
Iscaell did Lechery and Idolatrye by ensample and sufferau^ce of hem.

Now in England it is a common protection ayens Persecutyon of Prelatis and
some Lordys: if a man be customable to swear nedles false, and vnauysyde, by
the bones, naylys and sydys, and other membrys of Christ and to be proud, and
Lecherouse and speak not of Goddis law, and repreue not Sin about him. And
to a bstayn fro othis nedelesse and not leful and to eshewe Pride, and speak
Honor of God and his Law, and repreue Sin be way of Charity: is mattere
and cawse now, why Prelatis and some Lords, slander me^ and clepen hem low
lardis, Heritikis, reisars of debate and of treason ayens the King. Now
Manasses sertethe Idols openly in the temple of God, and styryth men greatly to
do Idolatry and cherishes hein that breake^ openly gods, hestis and puny
sheth hem sore as heathen men either heretykis, that bysien hem to learn,
keep, and teach goddis hests The. iii. time lordis and prelatis both: sheden
innocent blood, as Manasses did. For they waste^ folili here goods in w^yngis
and pleyingis binyghtis and in reresopers, and in other vanities, and taken
great and unmeasurable taxes of the comens. And less lords and prelatis done
great extortions to pore me^: and taken poreme^s goodis and pay little or
naught (and out of time) for tho. Therefore as Miche the prophet seyth in the.
iii. chapter, they hielden pore me^: and eaten here flesh. And Grostede
declares this well in his dict that begynyth thus. Siut lumbi vestri
preci^cti, and in the^ thryde Dicte. And God seyth in the Psalter of such
tyrants: they deuoren my people, as the meat of bred. How miche blood
Lordis sheden in warris for pride and couetyse, by coun^eil of false prelates
co^fessouris and preachars: it passes man's wit to te^ully in this life. But of
shedynge blood and sleyng of poor men, by ^drawyng of Almese, and in yeuyeng
it to dead stockis either stones, either to rich clerkis and feyned
relygiouse: were to speak now, if a man had the spirit of gostly strength.
Now men knelene and preyen and offren fast to dead Imagis that han neither
hunger nor cold, and dyspisen, beaten and sleen christen men, made to the
Image and lykenes of the holy Trinity, what honor of god is this? to knele
and offer to an Image made of sinful man's handis, and to despise and rob the
Image made of gods handis, that is a christen man either a christian woman.
When men yeue^ not Almese to pore nedie men but to dead Imagis either rich
clerkis: they robben pore men of here due portion and nedfull sustinaunce,
assignyd to hem of God him sylfe.

And when such offerars to dead Imagis robben pore men, they robbe^ Jesus
Christ: as he seyth in the xxv. chapter of Matthew. That, that ye dydden to
one of these leest of mine: ye dydden to me. And if they shulen be damnid that
yeuen not meat and drink and other necessaris to pore men as Christ seyth:
where shoulen they bicome, that robben pore men, and so Jesus Christ him silfe?

And if these tweyne, that yeuen not lyuelode and that robben pore men, shulen
be dampnyd sodeape in Hell: where shulen false teachars, styrars and
confessors bicome, that styren Lords and rych men to rob thus pore men, and
to do this under the color of excellent Almese and holiness?

But mourn we sore for this cursydnes, and prey we to God with al our heart,
that sythyn Lordis and prelatis suen Manasses in these open sinnis: God styr
he^ to sue Manasses in very penance, and make a mendis to God and men, lest
our rewm be conquiryd of aliens either of Heathen men, for these open synnis
and many mo.

The. xi. chapter.
The first book of Esdras tell tellyth, how Cirus King of Persys yafe license
to Iewis, to turn again to Jerusalem and Iudee and bylde the temple of God in
Jerusalem. And bade yt other me^e in his rewme: shulden help to this bildinge,
and he yafe the vessellis herto, that Nabugodonosore had taken away fro
Jerusalem. Than is telde the noumbre of hem that turniden again into Jude under
Iosue the priest, the son of Iosedeche, and under Zorobobell the Duike. And
how they bygunnen to bylde the auter and the Temple, and what lettynge they
hadden of enemies, and what conforte of God and of his Prophets.

Than it is telde what sorrow Esdras made, for the Princis and Pristes and
commons token Heathen women to wyfes ayens the Law. And how the Princes and
the Puple repentiden mekely and verily, and maden ame^des to Godde and men.

In the book of Neemie, which Neemie.
is clepyd the Second book of Esdras, is toolde how Neemie* gate grant of
the King to bylde the wallis of Jerusalem. And how he and other men boeth
Priestis and other princis and comins, byldeden the yatis and walls, and
lockis and touris above: for defense of enemies And how the enemies of Iewis
purposiden with strong hand to slay Iewis priueli, and distri here wercke. Tha^
half ye part of young me^, made the wercke, and half the part was re die to
bataile. With one hand they made^ the wercke, and with the other they helden the
sword and each of hem y^ bilded, was gyrde with his sword. Than it suith, how
Neemie Duke of the puple did freely his office: and took no coostis assignid to
the Duke And he did thus: for the poverty of the puple. After this doing,
Esdras read in the book of goddys law fro the morningtide tylto noone: before
the multitude of men and women, And dekenis maden scilence in the puple to
hear the law. And Esdras red in the book of gods law: fro the first day
tilto the last.

Than the children of Israel camen togidyr, in fasting and in sackis either
hairis, and earth was ^n hem And the seed of the sonnis of Israel, was departid
fro each Alyen son: and they stoden before the Lord, and knowlechyden here
sin, and the wyckydnes of here fadyrs.

And they rysiden to gidir to st^nd: and they readden in the book of the law
of here God. Four sythys in the day and four sithis in the night: they
knowlechyden and heriyde^ here Lord God. And Dekenis ^ryeden with great
Uoyce to here Lord God, and baden the Puple rise and bless God.

Than suyth the solemn confession of Esdras, how he knowlechyde first the
gloriouse works of God: and afterward the horrible synnis of all the puple,
and of here fadyrs.

And than all the puple made cou^nau^t and swore to keep gods law: and to bie
not in ye Sabot and holy day of hem that broughten vyteilis to sell.

And they byhyghten to pay the first frutis to priestis: and tithis to
Dekenys, and to bring all this to the temple of God. At the last Neemie
su^eryd neither Jews neither Strayngars: sell neither bye in the Sabottis. Not
only in Jerusalem: but neither in placis nigh the wal^s.

And he rebukyd and curssyd and beat men and made hem ballyd: that toke^
alien women to here wyfs. As of Osotus, of Amo^, and of Moab. And chargid hem
greatly in the Lord: that they shulen not give here daughters to the sonnys of
heathen me^, and take not of ye daughters of heathen men to here own sonis and
to hem s^lt. This process of Esdras and Neemi should stir us to be bysy to bylde
vertuis in our soul, after turnyng ayene fro catiftie o^ sin: and to fight
ayens temptations, and byld fast vertuis, as they foughte^ with the toon ho^de
ayens enemies, and bildide^ with the the other hand. And we shoulden be full bisy
to keep the gostly Sabot in good werks and heriyng of God: sithen they weren so
bisy to keep the fyguratyse Sabot.

Though the book of Tobie is not Job ^*
of bileue, it is full devout story and profitable to the simple Puple, to
make hem to keep patience, and goddis heestis, to do workis of mercy, and to
teach well here children and to take wyfes in the dread of God, for love of
children, and not all for foul lust of bodi, neither for couetise of the
goddis of the world. And also children mou^e learn here by young Tobie, to be
meke and obediente, and ready to serve fadir and modir in her need. Therefore
among all the bokis of the old Testament: simple men wit shoulen read and
hear often this book of Tobie, to be true to God in prosperity and
aduersytie, and eschew Idolatry, glotonnye and couetyse, and to be patient in
tribulation and go never a way fro the love and dread of God. Though the
Judith
Seen of Clarkis, either generalle gaderynge of clergy, has taken the book
of Judith, among the nombre of holy scriptures: netheles it is not of the
cannon, either feyth of the bible anentis Hebruis. For they recey uen not the
Autorytie of this book. Nethelesse it was written in Caldee langage: and it is
nounbryd among stories, as Ierom witnesses on the prologe. But nethelesse,
this book co^mendith Chastity, and Abstine^ce penance and wydewhod of Judith:
and her love which she hade to deliver Godds puple fro here enemies, and to
keep the faith and worshypynge of God among his puple. Also, this book
co^mendyth thefeyth and truth of Achior, that was conuertyd to Goddis law: by
miracle and sleayng of Holofernes, by ye ho^dys of the wyddow Iudyth. Than
Iudyth repreuide pryestys, for they temptide^ God and consentyde^ to de liver
the City to enymies: if Godde sent not help to hem within Five days. And
good Priestis token mekelie this repreuing of a woman, and she taught hem how
they shoulde^ do penance for this trespace: and comfortide the puple for to
trust in Godde, and abide his mercy and help at his own will. Us nedyth not
to excuse Iudyth for leasyngys and treason to Holofernes: but we moune
fauourablye excuse her fro deadly sin in this dornge, for the great love yt
she had to Gods puple, and to sl^ Holofernes a blasphemer of God and dystrier
of his law and puple. And iustlye Godde took this ve^geau^ce on Holofernes,
for his sin and harinis done to Gods puple, and which he purposid to doi^ he
might live long. Of this process, proud war riers shulde^ dread God: that made
proud Holofernes to be slain of a woman, and al his great oost scatteryd and
destryed. And christian me^ shulde^ be comfortyde greatly, for to have full
tryst to God and in his help: that so myghttylly delivered his puple fro so
great an enemy and strong oost, wythouten perishyng of his puple. And sythen
Iudyth had so great preysynge for her doing that was medlid with many synnis:
much more preysynge shule^ they have in heaven wtouten end, yt putten forth hem
silfe to be martirid for Gods cause, with true meanis of patience and of
chatitie.

The book of Hester tellith first, Hester.
how the Queen Uasti was forsaken for her pride: and was departid from the
marriage of King Assuerus. And how Hester for her meknes, beautye and Goddis
grace was made queen in the styd of vasti. Also ye true Mardochee, the father
in law of adoption of this woman Hester: taught her to love God and keep his
law. And she was full meke and obedyen^e to Mardochee: yea wha^ she was queen,
as to her father in law. Than Aman of the kynryde of Agag, co^spyred by
subtyle malice to dystrye all the puple of Iewis in the land of Assuerus: and
had grant of the King at his own will, and the day of dystriynge and of
sleaing of ye Iewis was publishid through all the rewme. Than Mardochee and the
Iewis dydden great Penance and n aden great Sorrow: and prayden Godde of
help in that great need. And Mardochee sent to Hester: that she should do the
same, and go to the King in peryle of her life, and to axe grace of him and
reuokynge of letteris and power grau^tid to Aman the enemy of Jews. And After
mich fasting, penance and pryer: Hester betoke her self to Goddis
dysposytyon, and to peril of here death, and entryd to the King, yea ayens
the law of the land, when she was not clepyd: to axe mercy and help of the
King for her self and all her puple. And Godde turned the fiersenes and the
cruelty of the King to mekenes, mercy, and benygnitie: ayens Hester and ye
puple of Jews. And than he reuokyd ye power grau^tyd to Aman: and let hang him
as he had purposyd to have hongeyd the true Mardochee, and yafe general power
to Ieues, to slay all her enemies in his Empire. After these thyngis, the King
enhaunsyd Mardochee, and made him greatest next the King: and yafe great
franches and honor to the Jews. This story of Hester should styre men to be
true to Godde and to his Law, and put away Pride and Envy, and ever tryste
in God in all perylis: and Tyrauntis shoulden be aferde to conspyre ayens Gods
seruauntis le^te God take vengeance on hem, as he did on this manne Aman
that had conspired the death and general dystriynge of Iewis

The book of Job, is full subtyle Job.
in understanding. For Job arguith ayens his enemies, yt wolden bring him out
of christen feyth: and co^clu dyth mani errouris that suen of here false believe
and opinion. And Job affirmyth not that allis south that he speakyth ayens his
adversaries: but concludyth hem in here false believe, that mani errors suen
thereof. And, for I have declaryde in party in the gloss how, hard sentencis
of Job shulde^ be vnderstande^: therefore I pass ouyr lyghtlye now. First
this book telllyth the kynne of Job and his rychesses, and holy life of him
and of his children. And afterward it tellyth: what trybulatyon befell to Job,
in his cattle, in his chil dren, and in his own body, and how patiently he
suff^yd this, and thanckyd Godde in all his dyseases. That his wife whom the
Dyuill reseruid as a special instrumente to him to diseyue Job by his wife, as
he disceyued Adame by Eve: counsellynge him to blaspheme God and thereby dye.
And Job reprehendid her folly and said. If we han receiuid goods of Goddis
hand: why suffer we not euillis? that is peynes.

And in all these thyngys: Job synnyd not in his lyppys.

Than suyth the dysputynge, bytwyxt Job and his frindys: almost tilto the end
of the book.

Job held strongely the truth of Christen feyth and specially of risyng ayene
of bodies at domies day And his fre^dis seyden many truthis and medlide^
falsnes, and ever purposyden an evil end and falsed.

For they helden that mede is yeuen only in this life for good werkys: and
that no man is punnyshed here, no but for synnys passed. And as a man is
punished more then an other in this life: so he has synnyd more than a another
man, less punished.

But all this is false, as Job priueth and Godde confyrmyth in the end. For
why, reward of Good dedis is much more in the life coming, tha^ in present
life. And a virtuous man is punnyshed here, for to have mede in heaven. And
co^monlye a just man has more trybulacion in this life: than a wicked man.
As it is open of Christ yt suffrid here much disease: and of tirau^tis, y^ han
mich prosperitte in this life, And therefore, Job telde his good deeds openly,
to comfort him self ayens dyspeyre: to which his fryndes wolden bring hyme.
But Job did this over myche and with some pride, and iustyfyede him self
ouermich: that his frindis co^ceiuide^ that he blasphe myde God, and preuyd God
vnrygffulle. And of these two poyntys, Job repentyde in the end. Than Godde
foryafe to him this little syne, and appreuyde his true sentence: and damnid
the error of his adversaries. Than Job preied and made sacrifice for his
adversaries: and God heard him and did mercy to hem. And Godde addyde all
thyngys duble that Job had. And he had. xiiii. thousand of sheep and. vi.
thousand of Camellis, and a thousa^de yokis of oxe^, and a thousand Femell
Asses, and seven sonis and. iii daughters. And Job lived. vii. score year after
his turmente and sygh his sonnis and the so^nis of his sonnis tilto the. iiii.
generation. This process of Job should styr men to be just of lyueyng, and to be
patient in Adversity, as Job was and to be stidfaste in christen feyth, and
answer wisely and mekely, to heretikis and adversaries of ou^ faith as Peter
and Poule techen: and ever be meke and full of charity, and prey for our
enemies, and look after mede in heaven and not in earth, for our good dedis.

The Psalter comprehendith all the ^salter.
old testament and new, and techith plainly the mysteries of the Trinity,
and of Christis Incarnation, Passion, and Riseyng again, Stiynge into Heaven,
and sendyng down of the Holygoste, and preaching of the Gospel, and the
coming of Antichrist, and the general dome of Christ and the glory of chosen
men to blis: and the peynis of hem that shulen be damnid in Hell.

And often rehersyth the stories of the old Testament: and bryngyth in the
kepeyng of Godis hestis, and love of Enemies. No book of the old Testament is
harder to understanding to us Latins: for our letter discordith much fro the
Hebrwe.

And many Doctouris taken little heed to the letter: but all to the gostly
understanding.

Well were him that could well understand the Psalter, and keep it in his
lyueyng: and seye it devoutly and conuicte Iewis thereby.

For many men that seyne it vndeuoutely, and lyuen out of charity: lyghen
foul on hemsylfe to God and blasphemen him, when they crien it full loud to
mennis Earys in the Church.

Therefore God give grace to us to live well in charity, and s^y it deuoutely,
and understand it truly: and to teach it openly to christian men and Iewis,
and bring hem thereby to our Christen Feyche and brenyng Charity.

The Prouerbis either Parablis Prouerbis.
of Solomon: teache^ men to live justly to God and man.

Ecclesiastes teachith men to forsake Ecclesiastes.
and set at naught all goodys in the world: and to dread God and keep his
hestis.

The songis of songis, teache^ me^ to Songis of songis.
set al here heart in the love of God and of here neighbors: and to do all
here business to bring men to charity and salvation, by good ensample and true
preaching and wylfull sufferyng of pain and death if need be.

Prouerbis speaken much of wisdom and keeping of Gods hests: in co^mondyng
true teaching, and in repreuyng false teaching. And prouerbis teachen much of
ryghtfulnes and just domis and governance: and of punishyng of Adultery and
other falsenessis, and co^menden much just Lords and sogets: and repriuen
strongly wronful Lords and rebel sogettis.

Also Prouerbis teachen derkly, the mysteries of Christ and of holy Chirch:
and teachen much wisdom and prudence for the soul and the body. Therefore
Lords and comeners also, and namely priestis, shulen study well this book: and
rule hemsilfe thereby to salvation of body and of soull.

Ecclesiastes is a full sotill book. Ecclesiastes.
For Solomon speakith in many persons: and concludith here intent and sentence.
Not in appreuing the sentence of fleshly men, that preisen more bodily goodis
and lustis of the body, than heavenly goodis and likyng of vertuis: and damnith
many errors of me^, and shewith that al is Uanitie, till me come to the dred
of God, and keeping of his hestis. Therefore, men moten be well war how they
vndersto^de^ Solo mo^ in this book: yt they appreue^ none error and damne^ no
truth, for misco^ceyuyng of Solomon's wordis, and the Holigostis wordis in this
book.

The songis of songis teche^ derklye, the state of ye Sinagoge, fro the going
out of Egypt, tylto Christis incarnation and passion. And than tho songis
teachen the state of Christis church and of the Synagoge in the end of the
world: and treaten hyghlye of love to God and neyghbouris also, And this book
is so sotle to understand: that Iewis ordeyniden that no man should study it,
no but he were of. xxx. year, and had able wit to understood the gostli
pryuities of this book. For some of the book semith to fleshly me^, to sow
unclean love of lechery: where it tellyth high gostly love, and great
priuities of Christ and of his church.

Therefore, men moten be full well ware: to conceive weil the wordis of the
Holygoste in this book, and know when Christ speakyth to the church either to
the Synagoge, and wha^ the Sinagog speakith to God and when the church
speaks to Christ. And when God speakyth to Angelis, Patriarkis, and prophets
and Apostles: and when these persons speaken to ye synagoge, either to the
church, either again ward.

The book of wisdom, though it be Wysdom
not a book of bileue: teachith miche rightfulnes and preysyth wisdom, and
repreuyth fleshlye men for here false believe and euyllyuyng, and co^mendyth
much just men, sad in believe and virtuous living. And it touches much of
Chrystys incarnacion, his manhede and godhede together: and damneth greatli
Idolatry and false worshypynge of Idolles and false goddis

Though Ecclesiasticus be no book of believe: it teaches mich wisdom Ecclest^.
and prudence for Soul and body, and has mich ye sentence of prouetbis And
co^mau^dyth men to think and speak of gods hestis: and for to dread God and
love him, and ever have mind of death and of the great dome, to keep men out
of sin, and in perfect love to God and man. Also it preisith much almese and
good preier, and repreuith greatly extortions and wrong, and false othis and
false measuris, and false weyghtis, and al fraud privy and aparte.

At the last it co^mendith good men, and heriyth God, that deliuerith fro all
perilis. If this book be well understood: it is profitable both to ghost ly
gouernouris, and bodily Lordis and Iusticis, and Comins also. The Prophetis han
a general Prolog for all. And for I declarid some dell the great Prophets and
in party the small Prophetis: and thyncke sone to make an end (with Gods
help) of the Gloss of the small Prophetis: I think now to pass ouir wythouten
any tariyng.

The first book of Machabeis, tellith Machab.
how great dystructyon and cruelty Antioke the noble, did again the Jews, and
how mani thousandis he kyllyd of hem, that wolde^ hold Goddys law. And brent
the books of Gods law: and defoulid the temple of Jerusalem, and compellyd men
for dread of death to do Idolatry, and forsake God and his Law. And he took
vesseles and tresourys in the temple: and bare into his lord. And he burnt
the City of Jerusalem: and dystried the housis thereof and the walls thereof in
compass. And he took the high toure of David and set men of armis therein, to
let men come to Jerusalem, and they dydden much harm to the puple of
Israel* And who ever held the book of Goddis testamente, and kept his Law:
was slain by commandment of Antioke the King.

And women that circu^^ididen here children: weren slain by commandment of
Antioke the King. And they hangiden children by the neckis, by all the houses
of men of Israel, and kyllyden hem that circu^cididen children. Than arose
Matathias y^ pryst and fled fro Jerusalem into Modin and byweilede greatly this
distryynge of the puple, of the temple and city, and of all the land. And he
ayene stood the King and his ministers: and kyllid the Kingis ministres that
co^pelliden men to do Idolatry. And he killid a man that did Idolatri on the
auter: and dystried the auter whereon Idolatry was done. Than Matathias and his
sonnys fledden into hyllis: and leften all thyngis which they hadden in the
City. And mani men that soughte^ dome and ryghtfulnes: and wolde^ keep Gods
Law: camen to hem into deserte. Heathen men made wars on hem in Sabates: and
many dieden in here simplenes, for they nolden make battle in Sabatis. Than
many Iewis weren gaderyd to him and maden a great Ooste, and weren redye to
fight in Sabattis and they kylliden synnars in great wrath.

And Matathias and his fryndes compassiden and dystrieden auters, and
circumcididen children, which they founden in all the coastis of Israel. And
they pursuiden the children of pride: and the work had prosperity in his
hondis.

And they gotten the law fro the honds of heathen men and of kings: and yeaue^
not strength to the sinful man.

And when Matathias was in point of Death: he comfortyd his sonnis to put here
lives for the law of God, by ensample of Abraham and other holy me^ before
going. And he ordeynid Judas Machabeus to be Duke of bateyl: and ordeynid
Simont his son to be Fadyr and priest to hem, for he was a man of counsel.
Than been told many batteylys of Judas Machabeus ayens heathen men: and of
great vyc torie by Goddis help. Than Judas Machabeus made frendshyp with
Romaynis for her prudence, ryghtfulnes and power. And when Judas was dead in
batteyle: the puple ordained Ionathas his brother their prince and Duke for to
hollde war ayens heathen men. Than ben telde many bateils of Ionathas and
vyctories: which he had ayens heathen men. Than Ionathas after many vyctories:
sent to renulle frenshy pe with Romans and Sparcyatys that weren of the Kynne
of Iewis. And Ionathas and his sonnis weren slain at the last by treasonne of
Trifon, that was an heathen manne and myghtie Duke. Than Simont was made Duke
of the Puple: and in the styd of Judas Machabeus and of Ionathas, and he did
many bat teylis and strong, and had great victories ayens heathen men. And
Iewis hadden much rest under him: and he made strong holdys and cy^yes in
Judah. And he renullyde friendship with Romaynis and Sparciatys, and hade much
glory of his folk and of heathen Kyngys. And at the last Symont and his
sonnis were^ slain by treasone: and John his son was Prince of priestys
after his fathe^ys days, and did many bateyls ayens heathen men.

The second Book of Machabeys: tellyth much the same sentence of the first
book, and has a few special points of Eliodorus and of Eliazarus, and of the
noble Wydo we and her seven sonnis. Eliodorus was sent of the King to take
away the treasuris of the Temple of Jerusalem, and bear tho to the King. And
though the treasourys weren kept for the lyfelode of Wyddowes and fatherless
children, and some weren another manys goodis. Eliodorus would algate bear al
to the King. But God made him and his felowis sore aferd, And Elidorus was
beaten almost to death, of a ferdful one sytynge on an horse, that hade two
young men about him. And Elio dorus was cast down to the ground and was
borne out on a bear and ley doumb^.

And when the hyghste Priest offrid sacrifice and preied for ye health of
Eliodorus: God grauntyd life to him. And he thankyde God and the hygheste
priste: and yede to the King and told him how it stood. And he wytnessid to
al men the great werkis of God: which he had seen with his iyen.

Than is told of the curssyd dedys of Jason the priest, that came in by
Simonie, and would bring the Iewis to Idolatry and Sodomitie, and to forsake
God and his Law.

Than is told of the great crueltye of Antiochus which he did ayens the
Jews and the holy place of Ie rusalem: and God suffrede this for the sins
of ye puple, for why God chees not folk for the place, but the place for the
folk. Than Eleazarus cheese to dye a sharp Death: rather that he would break
Goddys law in a little point to eatte porke, yea to feyne to eat porke.

After this it sueth how the blyssyd wide we and her. vii. sonnys weren
martyryd for they noldenne break Goddis law: and how gloriously the blessede
mother comforted hein, to take Death with joy for the law of God.

This story of Machabeys should styr Christen men to hold Goddys law to life
and to death. And if knights shule^ use ye swerd ayens any curssyd men they
shoulde^ use it ayens lords and pryestis principally, that wolde^ compel men
for dread of prisone and death to forsake the truth and fredome of Christis
gospel. But God for his great mercy, give very repe^tau^ce to hem that thus
pursue^ true men: and grant patience, mekenes and charity to hem that benne
thus pursuyd.

Amen.
The. xii Chapter.
But it is to wit, that holy scripture has. iiii. vndersto^dyngis. Literal,
Moral Aligorike, and Anagogike. The Literal understanding teachith the thing
done in deed. And litteral understanding is ground and fou^dement of. iii.
gostli vnderstondingis In so much as Auste^ in his Epistle to Uincent and other
doctors seyne. Only by the lytteral understanding a man may argu ayens an
aduersari.

Aligorike is a gostli vndirsto^ding that teachyth what thing men owe^ to
believe of Christ either of holy Church. Moral, is a gostly understanding
that teachyth men what virtues they owen to sue, and what vices they own to
flee. Anagogik, is a gostly understanding that teaches men what bliss they
shullenne have in heaven. And these. iiii. vnderstondingys moune be taken in
this word Jerusalem. For why, to y^ literal understanding it sygnifieth an
earthly city, as London or such an other. To Alygorye it syngnyfyeth holy
church in earth y^ fytyth ayens sennis and Fendis. To moral understanding, it
singnifyeth a Christian sowlle. To anagogike it sygnifyeth holy church reynyng
in bliss, either in heaven, and tho that benne therein.

And these three Gostlye vnderstondyngis ben not autentike, either of believe:
no but tho ben growndyd openly in the text of holy Scripture in oo place either
in other, either in open reason that may not be distryid*

Either when the Gospelars either other Apostles: take Allegory of the old
Testament and confirmen it. As Poul in ye Epistil to Galathies the. iiii.
chapter, preuyth, that Sarai the fre wife and principal of Abraham, with
Isaac her son: signifies by Alegorie, the new Testament, and the sonnis of
byhest. And Agar the handmayde with her son Ismael: signifies by Alegory the
old Testament, and fleshly men that shulen not be receyuyd into the heritage
of God, with the sonnis of byheste, that holden the truth and fredome of
Christis Gospeil with endelesse Charity.

Also holy Scripture has many figuratife speachis.

And as Austin seyeth in the thryd book of christen teaching: that Autours of
holy Scriture vsen more figuris, that is more figuratyfe speachis, than
gramariens moune guess that readen not tho figurys in holy Scripture.

It is to be ware in the begynyng: that we take not to the Letter a figuratyfe
speech.

For than (as Poule seythe) the Letter sleayth: but the Spirit, that is Gostly
understanding, quyckennythe.

For when a thing which is seyed figuratyfely, is taken so as if it be
seyed propirly: me vnderstondyth fleshly.

And none is clepyd more couenable the Death of Soull: than when understanding
that passith Beastis, is made sogette to the flesh in suyng the Letter.

Whateuer thing in Gods word may not be referrid propirli to honesty and
vertuis, neither to the truth of feyth: it is figuratife speech. Honesti of
vertuis perteinith to the love of God and our neighbors. Truth of feyth
perteynith to know God and thy neighbor. Holy scripture co^mau^dith nothing
but charity: it blamith nothing no but couetise. And in that manner it
enformith the good vertus either ye good conditions of men. Holy scripture
affirmith nothing: no but christian feith, by thyngis passid, present, and to
coming. All these thyngis perteinen to nourish charity and make it strong,
and to ouircome and quench couetise. Also it is figuratife speech: where the
wordis maken Allegory, either a dearke lykenes either a Parable. And it is
figuratife speech in ye first chapter of Jeremy. To day I have ordeinid the
on folckis and rewmis: that thou draw up by the rote and dystry and bylde and
plant. That is, that thou draw out old synnis, and dystry circomstau^cis
either causis of tho: and bylde vertuis and plant good werckis and customis.

Al thyngis in holy scripture that seme^ to unwise me^ to be full of wykidnes
ayens a man himsilfe either ayens his neighbor: ben figuratife spechis, and
the priuities either gostly vnderstondyngis shulden be sought out of us, to
the fedyng either keeping of Charity.

Such a rule shall he kept in figuratife spechis, that so loug it be turnid ^n
mind by diligent consyderation: till the expownyng either the understanding be
brought to the rewme of Charity.

And if any speech of scriptur sown propitly Charity: it o with not to be
gessid a figuratife spech. And if it for bid wickidnes either command profit
either good doing: it is no figuratife speech. If it seem to command cruelty
either wyckidnes, either to for bid profit either good doing: it is a
fyguratife spech. Christ seith If ye eatten not the flesh of manis son, and
drynken not his blood: you shoullen not have life in you. This speech semyth
to command wyckidnes either crueltye: therefore it is a fyguratyfe speech,
and co^maundith men to common with Christis passi on, and to keep in mind
swetly and profinablie, that Christis flech was woundid and crucifiede for us.
Also when holy scryptur seyth. If thine enemy hunger, feed thou him, if he
thryste: give thou drink to him: it co^maundyth benefyte either good doing.
When it seyth, thou shalt gather together coals on his head: it semith that
wickedness of evil will is co^maundyd. This is said by fyguratyfe speech: yt thou
vnderstoud that the coolis of fire, ben brenyng weilyngis either mourningis of
pe^naunce: by which the pride of him is made whole, which soroweith that he
was enemy of that man, that helpith and releuith his wrechednes

Also the same word, either the same thing in Scripture: is taken some time
in good and some time in Evil. As a Lion signifiyth some time Christ: and in
an other place it signifith ye devil. Also sour dough is set some time in evil:
where Christ seith, beware of the sour dough of the Phariseis, which is
Hypocrisy.

Sour dough is set also in good: when Christ seyth, the rewme of heavens is
like sour dough etc.

And when not oo thing alone but tweyne either more ben felyd either
vndersto^den by the same wordis of scripture, though it be hyd y^ he understood
that wrote: it is no peryle if it may be preuid by other placis of holy
scripture, that each of tho things accordith with truth, and in hap the autour
of scripture seith the ilke sentence in the same wordis, which we wolen
understand. And certis the Spirit of God that wrought these thyngis by the
Autour of scripture: before sees wythouten doubt that the ilke sentence should
come to the readar either to the hearar.

Yea the Holygoste purueied that that ilke sentence (for it is grou^did on
truth) should come to the redadar, either hearar. For what might be purueyed of
God largelyer and ple^tuouselyer in Gods spechis: tha^ that the same wordis be
vndersto^den in many manners: which manners other wordis of God that been not of
less authority, make to be preuid?

Austine in the. iii. book of christen teaching, seyth all this and myche more
in the bygynyng thereof.

Also he, whose heart is full of charity: comprehendith wythouten any error,
the manifold aboundau^ce, and largist teching of Gods scripture. For why, Paul
seith. The fulness of law is chariti. And in an other place The end of law
(that is perfection either, fyllynge of the law) is charity of clean heart
and of good conscience and of feyth not feynyde. And Jesus Christ seyth. Thou
shalt love thy lord God of al thine heart, and of al thy soul and of al thy
mind: and thy neighbor as thy self. For in these two co^mau^deme^tis, hangith
all the law and the prophetis. And as the rote of all euillis is couetyse: so
the rote of al goodness is charity.

Charity by which we louen God and the neghbour: holdyth sykerlye all the
greatness and largenes of Gods speachis. Therefore, if it is not leisure to seek
al holy scripturs, to expowne all the wlappings of words, to perse all the
priuities of scrypturis: hold thou charity where al thyngis hang, so thou
shalt hold that, that thou lernidest there. Also thou shall hold that, that
thou lernydiste not. For if thou know charity: thou knoweste somthynge whereon
also that hangyth, that in hap thou knowiste not.

And in that that thou vndersto^dist in scriptur: charity is open, and in that
that thou vnderstondysie not, charity is hyd. Therefore, he yt holdith charity
in vertuys either in good conditions: holdyth boeth that, that is open and
that, that is hid in Goddis wordis. Austyne seyth al this and mich more in a
sermon of the preising of charity. Also. vii. rue^is of Tyco, nie and of
Austine: declar^n many thyngis of holy scripturis.

The firstrule is of Jesus Christ and of his holy spirit. Do person of the
head and of the body, that is of Christ and of holy church: is shewid to us
in this rule. For it is not seid in vain to feythful men, ye been the seed of
Abraham: when there is ^o seed of Abraham, which seed is Christ. Dout we
not, when scriptur goth fro the head to ye bodi, either fro ye bodi to the head,
and netheles it goth not awey fro one and the same perso^e. For w^ye oo perso^e
spekith in Esai. He settid a mi^er to me as to a spouse: and he hono rid me as
a spouses, with an orname^t. And nethles it is to understood, what of these. ii.
accordith to the head, yt is Christ: and what accordith to the bodi, yt is holy
chirch. For wh^a myter accordith to Christ which is ye spouse: and an orname^t
acordith to holy chirch, which is the spouses of Christ.

The. ii, rule, as Ticonie seith, is of the bodi of Christ: which bodi is
departed into tweyne.

But certis th^s body of Christ ought not to be clepid so. For truly it is
not the bo^i of Christ: wh^che shall not be with him wtoute^ end. But it shall be
seid of the very body and of the medlid bodi of Christ, either of ye very bodi
and of the feinid bodi of Christ. For why, hypocritis shoullen be seid to be
not with Christ, not only withoute^ end: but also now, though they semen to
be in the Church of Christ. Wherefore, this rule might be clepyd thus: that
it were seyde of the medlid church that is that co^prehendyth chosen me^ to
bliss, and also Hipocritis that shoulen be damnid. And this rule axeth a
waking either dylygente reader. When it speakyth of other men, it semith to
speak now as to the same men which it speak before. Either it semyth to
speak of the same men: whane it speakyth of other men, as if oo body be of
euereither, for temporal medlynge, and communynge of Sacramentys.

To this rule it perteyneth that the chirch seyth in songis of Songys: I am
black and fair, as the tabernacles of Cedar, as the skynnys of Solomon. The
Church seyde that she is euereither for temporal unity within oo net of
good fyshys, and of evil fyshes. For why, the tabernacles of Cedar, perteine^
to Ismaell, that shall not be Heir with the son of the free wife, The third
rule is of byheestis and law.

This rule may be said also of the spirit and letter: and may be said also
of grace, and of commandment. And Ticonie errid in seying, that wercks ben
yeuen to us of God for merit of feyth: but feyth it self is so of us, that it
is not of God to us. The fourth ruele is of all and of party. When some of a
thing is set for all, either ayenwarde, all is set for a party. The. v. rule
is of times. And this is by a figure clepyd Sinodoches, when the part is set
for all, either al is set for a part. One Euangelyste seyth that it was done
after. viii. days: whannethe face of Christ shynyde as the sun. And an
other gospeller seith, that it was done aftir. vi. dais. Euerether might not be
forth y^ is seyde of ye number of dai^ (...) but n^ y^ seid aftir. viii. dais,
be (...) ^en to have set for the whole day, the last part of the day sith
Christ biforesei^ it to come, and to have set for ye whole day the first part
of the day, in ye which he shewith that the apearing of Christ's face was fully
done. And yt he that seyde, aftir vi. dais, reckenyd all the whole days and
the middle days and none other, By this kind of spech by which kind al is
singnified by a part: the ilk question of Christis rysynge ayene is assoyled.
The last part of the day with ye night passed before, and the first part of
the sundaye in whose morrow tide he rose ayene: is taken for all sundaye and the
night before going. And the Sabot with the whole night before going is al an
whole day and night. If these days and nyghtys were not taken thus: there
moute not be. iii. days and three nyghtis, in which he byforseyde that he
should be in the heart of the earth. Also this rule of times is taken for
lawful numbres as ben. vii. x. xii. and such mo.

For often such noumbris ben set for all time, as this that David seyth.
Seuensytis in the day, I said preisynge either he riyng to the, is none other
thing than thus His heriyng be ever in my mouth. Also by an. C. and. xliii. in
Apocal: is signified the university either all the multitud of seintis. The vi.
rule is of recapitulatio^, either rehersing a thing done before: not in order
as it is set, for whi some things be^ seid so, as if tho ^uen in the order of
time, either be^ teld by continuing things, that be^ ioynid next togidir, when
the teling is clepid privily to the former things that were^ left out. And if
men vnderstonden not such seiyng is by this rule: they erren. As in genesis, it
is seyde. God plantid paradise in Eden at the east, and settyd there the man
that he formyd. And Godde brought forth yet of the earth each fair tree etc.
This is said by recapitulation. In like manner, there the land was of oo lyppe,
that is speech: it is seid ^i recapitulacion

The vii, rule is of the deuyle and of his body. For he is head of al wickyde
men, that ^ene his boddye in a manner, and shulen go with him into torment and
everlasting fire: as Christ is the head of holy church which is his body,
and shall be with him in rewme and glory everlasting. Also they that han
liking to study in holy writ: shulen be chargyde that they kunne the
kyndys and manners of speakyngs in holy scripturis and that they perceyuen
dylygentlye and holdenne well in mind, how a thing is wont to be seid in holy
scrip ture. Also, that is sovereign help and most needful: preye theye that
God give to hem the very understanding of holy Scripture

For they readen in tho scripturis, about which they be^ studiouse: that God
yeuith wisdom and cunning and vndersto^ding of his face, that is yift and
grace. Also if here study be done with mekenes and love of christian lore, it is
of God.

Austine wrytith al this in. iii. book of christen teaching about the middle
and in the end.

I sidre in the first book of sovereign good: teach these rules shortlyer, but
I have him not now.

And Lire in the bygynynge of the Bible: touchyth more openly these rulis, but
I have him not now. And Armaca^ in the beginyng of his book Dequestionibus
Armenotu^. yeuith many good growndis to understood holy scripture to the letter
and gostly understanding also: but I have him not now. Also nothing maiseme to
be wyser, nothing of more Eloquence: tha^ is holy scripture, and the autors
thereof yt were^ enspirid of God. And they oughte^ not to speak in other manner
tha^ they dyde^. And y^ Pro phetis (and most Amos) were^ full eloque^t. And
Paul was full eloque^t in his Epistlis. Also the authors of holy Scripture
spaken full dearkly, that the preuities thereof ben hyd to vnfeythfull men, and
good men ben exercisid either occupied, and that in expownynge holy Scripture,
they have a nwe grace diverse fro the first autours, Austine in the beginning of
the. iiii. book of christen teaching. Also as the little richesse of Iewis
which they baren awey fro Egypt weren in comparion of richesse which they
hadden afterward in Jerusalem in ye time of Solomon, so great is the
profitable kunnynge of philosophers bokis, if it be comparisoned to the
kynnynge of holy scripturis. For why, what thing ever a man ^earneth
withouten holy wryt, if the thing be vein, it is damnyd in holy writ, if it be
profitavle, it is fou^ did there. And wha^ a man findith there al things which he
lernid profitably in or (...) place, he shall find mich more ple^t^ly tho
thingis in holy scripture, which he lernyd never in other place, but be learned
only in ye wonderful highness and in ye wonderful meknes of holy scriptur.
Austine seith this in ye end of ye. ii. book of christian teching. Also holy
scripture co^teinith al profy table truth and al other scie^cis preuily in ye
virtue of wyttis either vndursta^dingis, as wynes ben contained in grapis, as
ripe corn is contained in the seed, as bowis ben contained in the rotis, and
as trees been contained in ye kiruels. Grosted in a sermon. Premouitus a
venerabili patre. Also ho ly scriptur wlatith sophimis and seith.

He that speakyth sophistically either by Sophisinis: shall be hatfull, and he
shall be defraudid in each thing, as the wise man seyth in the. xxxvii. Chapter
of Ecclesiasticus.

If Philosophers, and most the distiples of Plato, seyde^ any truth is and
profitable to our feyth: not only tho truthis owen not to be dread: but also
tho shulen be calengyd into our use either profit fro hem, as fro unjust
possessouris.

And as Iewis token by authority of God, the gold and clothis of Egyptians: so
Christians owe^ to take the trwe seyingis of Hhilosophers, for to worship oo
God, and of techyng of vertuis. Which truth is the Philosophers founde^ not,
but dyggiden out of the metalis of Gods purueyaunce, which is shed every
where. So did Ciprian the swetest Doctoure and most blessed martyr. So did
Lacta^tius, Uictorinus, and, Illarie, and Grekis wythoute^ nou^ber. Austyne in
the. ii. book of christen teaching.

By these rulis of Anstine and by. iiii. under sto^dyng is of holy scripture,
and by wise knowing of figuratife speachis, with good living and mekenes and
studiyng of the Bible: simple men moune somedeal understood the text of holy
write, and edify myche hemsylfe and other men.

But for gods love ye simple men beth ware of pride, and vein jangling and
chydyng in wordis ayens proud clerkis of scholis and vein religiouse, and
answer ye mekely and prudently, to enemies of Gods law and prey ye hertli for
hem, that God for his great mercy give to hem very knowing of scripturis and
mekenes and charity. And ever be ye ready what man teachith any truth of God:
to take that mekely, and with great tha^kis to God. And if any man in earth
either angel of heaven techith you ye contrary of holy write, either a ny
thing ayens reason and charity, fle fro him in yt, as fro ye foul fe^d of hell
and hold ye steadfastly to life and death, ye truth and fredo^ of ye holy
gospel of Ie su Christ* and take ye mekely menis seyingis and lawis, only in as
miche as they accorden with holy write and good consciences, and no ferther, for
life neither for death.

The. xiii. Chap.
ALso holy Scripture is bet ter known by lyknesses, and by derknessys it does
away anoies. And we owe^ to thyncke, and bileue that the thing that is
written in holy scryptur, yea though it be hyd either not known, is better and
truer, than yt we moune understood by vss^lfe, and worship fulli and helthfuli
the holy ghost mesurid so holy scripturs* yt in open placis he settid remedi to
our ho^ger, and in dark placis he wipt awei anoies. For almost nothing is
seen in tho dearkenessis, which thing is not founden seid full plainli in
other placis. Therefore, before al things it is nedful y^ a man be co^uertid by
Gods dread, and be mylde by piti either christian religion, and that he ayense^e
not holy Scripture where it be vndursto^de^, though it smite any sinnis of
ours, whether it be not vnderstonde^, as if we moune understand better, either
command, either teach better. By ye yifte of dred and of pity* me comith to
ye degree of ^uning For why, each fruc^uo use man of holy scripturis, exercisith
him self in this thing, and to find none other thing in tho: than forto love
God for God himsilfe, and forto love his neighbor for God. Tha^ thilke dread
by which he thinckith on goddis dome, and thilk pity by which he must nedis
bileue, and give sted to authority of holy bokis: compellith him to biweile
himself, for why, this kunnynge of good hope makyth a man not to auaunte
hymsylfe, but byweyle himsylfe.

And by this affection either good will, he gettith by bysy preyars the
conforte of Godis help, that he be not broken by dispeyre. He bigynith to be
in the fourth degree of gostely strength: in which he hungrith and thyrstith
ryghtfulnes.

Than in the. v. degree, that is in the council of merci: he purgith the soull
that makith noies and vnrestefulnes of couetise and earthly thyngis.

And than he dyspysyth fylthys of soul, and louyth God and neighbors, yea
enemies.

By this he styith to the. vi. degree: where he purgyth the iygh of soul: by
which iygh God may be seen as much as he may be seen, of hem that dyen to
this world, as much as they moune.

For in so much they seen God in here soul, through feyth and love: how much
they dien to this world. And in as mich as they liue^ in this world they seen
not God. And in this degree wherein a man dies to ye world he neither preferrith
nether makyth even him self neither his neiboure with the truth of holy write.
Therefore this holy man shall be so simple and clenne of heart: that neither for
plesau^ce of men he be drawn awey fro truth, neither because to eschew any
harms to him self, that be^ co^trari to this life. Such a child stieth to
very wisdom, which is the last and the seventh: which he vsyth in peace and in
rest. Seint Auste^ seyth all this: in the bigining of the second book of
christen teaching.

Hear is a blyssed entering by these seven virtues to the cuninge of holy
scriptnr in this life to have here rest of soul, and afterward full rest of
body and soul, in heaven wythoute^ end. Alas, what done proud and coueitouse
wretchis at holy scriptur that sekenne the world and f^eshlye ^ase, and wolen
not convert hem fro these curssidnesses.

They dysceyuen heme sylfe and the Puple that guess hemme wise men, when
they ben open foles, and makenne heme felfe deper damnydde, and othere men
also that suen here follye, and Blasphemen Godde.

These worldly folys shoulen wit: that holy life is a lantern to bring a
man to very kunnynge as Chrysostom seith. And the dred and love of Godde, is
the begynynge and perfection and kunnyng of wisdom.

And when these filthy Apys and worldly molde warpys, han neither the
beginning of wisdom neither desyren it: what done they at holy Scripture to
shenshyp of hem self and of other men?

As long as Pride and Couetyse of worldli goodis and honor is rotyde in her
heart: theye maken homage to Satanas, and offerne to him both body and soul
and al her wit and finding

Such folys shoulenne think, that wisdom shall not enter into an iuill wyllyd
soul: neither shall dwell in a body soget to synnys.

And Jesus Christ seyth that the Father of heaven hydyth the priuities of holy
Scripture from wise men and Prudent to the world, and in her own sight, and
she with tho to meke men.

Therefore worldly foles, do ye first penance for your synnis, and forsake
Pride and Couetyes: and be ye meke and dread ye God in all things, and love him
over al othere thingis, and your neiboure as your sylfe, and than you shoulen
profit in study of holy write.

But alas, alas, alas. The most abomination that ever was heard among
christen clerkis: is now purposid in England, by worldli clerks and feynede
relygiouse. And in the chife university of our rewme (as mani true men tellen
with great wey lyng) this horrible and deuilys cursydnes is purposid, of
Christis enymies and traytourys of all christen puple: that no man shall learn
divinity neither holy write, no but he that has done his form in art, that
is, that has co^mencyd in art, and has be regente twoe year after. This
would be. ix year or. x. before that he learn holy write, after that he can
commenlye well his gramer: though he have a good wit and traueile full sore
and have good findyng. ix vere either. x. after his gram mer. This semith
vtterli the Diuils purpose: that few men either none shulen learn and kun
Goddis law. But God seyth by Amos on three great trespasses of Damask: and on
the fourth I shall not convert him. Where Ierom seyth, the first sin is to
think euylis, the. ii. sin is to consent to wey ward thoughtis, the third
sin is to fill in work, the fourth sin is to do not penance after the
sin, and to please him silfe in his sin. But Damask is interpretyde
Drinking either byrlyng blood.

Lord, where Oxenforde drinkyth blood and byrlith blood, by sleaynge of
quick men and doing of Sodomies, in leasiug a part of man's blude whereby a
child might be formid: deem they that known. And where Oxenford drynk blood of
sin, and stir other men of the land to do syn by boldness of clarkis deem
they justly that seen it at eigh and known by experience. Look now, where
Oxenford, is in three orryble synnis, and in the forth, on which God restythe
not till he punyshe it.

Sometime, children and young men Artitars werenne devout and clean as Angeles
in comparyson of other: now men seine they ben full of pride and lecherye, and
dyspytuouse othys nedelesse and false, and dyspyseynge of Goddys hestys.
Sometime Ciuili^ns and Canonistis, weren devout, and so bysy in here learning,
that they token full little rest on bed: now men seyne, that they been full
of pride, and nice araie, envy and couetise, with lecherye, glottonnye and
Idelnes. Sometime Dyuynis werenne full holy and devout, and dyspisyden
utterly the world and lyuyden as angellis, in mekenes, cleenesse, soueraynue
chastytye, and charytye, and taughte^ truly Godds law in werk and word: now
men seine they been as delycate of her mouth and womb and as couetyse as other
worlddlye men, and flatteren and maken leasings in preaching, to eschew
bodylye persecution, and to get benefycys.

The first great sin is generalli in the university (as men dre den and
seen at eigh) the second orible sin is sodomys, and strong meyntenau^ce
thereof, as it is known to many persons, of the rewme. And at the last
parliame^te, alas diuinis, that shulden pass other men in clea nes and holiness
(as an gellis of heaven, passen frele me^ in vertuis) been most slaundred of
this curssed sin ayens kind.

The thryde horible sin is Simonie and for sweryng in the semble house, yt
should be an house of rightfulnes and holiness, where euillis shullen be
redressyd.

This Simonie with purtenau^cis thereof, is much worse and more abominable than
bodily sodomies.

Yet on these three abominations God would graciousely convert clerkis: if they
woollen do very penance and give hem wholly to vertuis.

But on the fourth abomination, purposid no we to letten christian men, yea
priestis and curats, to learn fre ly Gods law, till they han spendyd ix. year
or. x. atarte, that comprehe^dyth many strong errouris of Heathen men ayens
christen believe: it semyth well that God wole not cease of vengeance, til it
and other ben punishid sore. For it semith that worldly clerkis and feynid
religiouse done this: that simple men of wit and fyndyng know not Godis
law, to preach it generally ayens synnis in the rewme.

But wit ye worldly clerkis and feinid relygiouse: that God both can and may
(if it lykyth him) speed simple men out of the University, as much to kunne
holy writ: as masters in the University.

And therefore no great charge though never man of good will, be poysonyde
with Heathen men's errouys nine year either ten, but ever live well and study
holy write by elde Doctouris and New: and preach truly and freely ayens open
synnys to his death.

See therefore what Jerome seyth on Amos.

God before sees Euilys to coming: that men hear and amend hemsilf, and be
delyueryd fro peryle nyghynge.

Either if that they dyspisen: they ben punished iustlyer. And God that before
sees peynes: wole not punish men that synnen, but that they be amendid. Jerome
seyth this in ye end of the first book of Amos. God for his great mercy
grant that clerkis hear the great vengeance manassyd of God, and amend
hemsylfe truly, that God punish not hem.

For if they amend not hemsilfe, they ben Heritykis, made hard in here
synnis. But se what Jerome seyth ayens Heretikis: and in comme^ding of holy
scripture. He seythe thus on Amos.

Heretikis that seruen the womb and Glotonie, been clepid righfully fattest
kyne, or kyne full of shenshipe. We owen to take holy scripture on three manners.

First we owen vndurstonde it by the letter: and to all thyngis that been
commanded to us therein.

The. ii. time by Allegorye, that is gostlye understanding.

And in the thryde time, by bliss of thyngis to coming.

Jerome seyth thus in the second book on Amos, and in the. iiii. Chapter of
Amos. Nethelesse for Lire came late to me: se what he seyth on the
vndurstonding of holy scripture. He ^oriteth thus in the. ii. prolog on the
Bible. John seyth in the fyfth Chapter of Apocalips.

I sygh a book written within and without forth, in the hand of the sytter on
the trone. This book is holy Scripture which is seyde written without forth, as
to the literal understanding, and within, as to the privy and gostly
understanding.

And in the first prologe, he declaryth four vnderstondyngis of holy write in
this manner.

Holy write, has this specyaltye that under oo letter, it conteyneth many
vnderstandyngis. For the principal autour of holy write, is God him self. In
whose power it is not only to use words to signify a thing as men done: but
also he uses thyngis signified by wordis to signify other thyngis.

Therefore by the signifiyng by wordis, is taken the litterall understanding
either historiall of holy scripture: and by the signifiynge which is made by
thyngis, is taken the privy either goftly vndurstondyng which is. iii.
maneris. Allegorike, moral either Tropologike, and Anogogike. If thyngis
signified by wordis ben referrid to signify tho thyngis that owen to be
bileuid in the new testamente: so it is taken the sense of Alegorike. If
thyngis ben referrid to signify tho thyngis which we owen to do: so it is
moral sense either Tropologike. If thyngis ben referred to signify tho thingis
yt shule^ be hopid in bliss to coming: so it is Anagogike sense. The letter
teachith what is done, Allegorye teachith what thou owiste to bileue, Moral
teachith what thou oweste to do. Anagogie teachithe whyther thou owist to go.
And of these. iiii. sensis either vndurstondingis: may be set ensam ple in
this word Jerusalem. For by the litterall understanding, Jerusalem signifies
a City, yt was sometime the chief City of the rewme of Jude. And Jerusalem
was foundid first of Melchisedech, and aftirward it was alargid and made
strong by Solomon. By moral sense, it sig nifieth a faithful soul. By which
sense it is said in the. lii. Chapter of Esaie. Rise thou, rise thou, sit
thou Jerusalem. By sense Allegorike, it signifiethe the church fighting ayens
synnis and fendis, by which sense it is seyde in the* one and twentye of the
Apocalips.

I. sygh the holy City new Jerusalem coming down from heaven, as a spouse
ourned to her housbo^de. By sense Anagogik it signifies ye chirch reignynge in
bliss. By this sense it is seyde in the. iiii. Chapter to Galathies. Thilke
Jerusalem which is above, which is our mother: is fre. And as ensample is set
in oo word, so it might be set in oo reasone. And as in one, so and in other.
Lire seyth all this in ye first prologe on the bible. (:)

The. xiiii. Chapter.
NEtheles, al gostly vndersto^ dings sette^ before either require^, the
litteral vndersto^ding, as the fou^deme^t. For why, as a bilding bowing away
fro ye foundeme^t, is desposid to falling: ^o a gostly exposition that
discordith fro ye litteral sense, owith to be erectid vnse^li and vncouenable,
either les semely and less couenable. And therefore it is nedeful for hem yt
wole^ profit in ye study of holy scriptur, to bigyne at the vndurstondynge of
litteral sense. Most sithe^ by the litteral sense alone, (and not by gostly
sense) may be made an argument, either priefe, to priuyng either declaring of
a doubt, as Auste^ seith in his Epistle to Uince^t Donatiste. S. Isidre in ye
first book of So ueraine good. xx. Chap. settith. vii. rulis to expound holy
scripture. And some clepe^ these rulis, ye keis of scrip tur, for by these
rulis y^ vndersto^ding of scriptur is ope^ed in many thingis.

The first rule is of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his gostly body, which
is holy church. For why, for knyttynge togidir of the head to the body: holy
scripture speakith sometime of euereither under oo reasone, as under oo
person, and passith fro one to an other. In ensample, in. lxi. Chapter of
Esaie it is seyde. He clothide me with clothis of health, and he cumpassid me
with clothingis of ryghtfulnes, as a spoule made fair with a corowne, as a
spousesse ourned with her brochis. For why, this that is seyde as of spouse, is
vnderstonden of Christ. And this yt suith, as spousesse: is vnderstonden of
holy church. Also in the first Chapter of Songis, it is seyde. Kiss he me with
the coss^ of his mouth: for thy tetis ben better than wine. For when it is
seyde, Kiss heme. etc. It is the word of the spousesse desyringe to have the
spouse. And this that suith, for thy tetis. etc. is y^ word of y^ spouse
preysyng the spouses. Wherefore in such things knite so togidir by resone before
seyde: a prudente readar owes to perceive, what accordith to the head, and
what to the dodye. The* ii rule is of the very body and of the feynid body of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For why holy chirch which is the gostly body of Christ,
is a net which is not yet drawn to y^ brynk. Therefore it has euel me^ medlyd
with good men till to the dome, in which these shule^ be departed fro hem. And
therefore in holy scripture: evil men ben preised some time with good men, with
the which they ben medeled. As in the. xi. Chapter of Osee, God seyth thus.
Israel is a child, and I loved him. And ayene ward sometime good men ben
blamed with evil men, as in the first Chapter of Esaias. An Ox knew his Lord,
and an Ass knew the cratch of his Lord but Israel knew not me and my puple
understood not. And sometime in the same reason it is expressyd, what pertains
to good men: and what to evil me^. As in ye. i. chap. of songs it is seid I am
blak but fair, ye daughters of Jerusalem as ye tabernacles of Cedar as ye skins
of Solomon. These ben ye words of ye spouses which for reason of evil me^
co^teinid in ye chirch seith, I am blak, but for reason of good me^: it addith,
But fair. And this y^ suith as for ensample. As ye tabernacles of Ce dar: is
referryd to evil me^. For why Cedar was the son of Ismael as it is seid in
ye. xxv. of Genesis: of who^e Sarace^s came^ forth. And this yt is addid, as ye
skyns of Solomon, is referrid to good me^. Therefore by Solomon, here is
vndersto^den God him silfe: by christian expositours and Hebrus And therefore the
skins of Solomon ben seyde tho with which the tabernacle was hylyd. in which
tabernacle good men worshypen God.

The. iii. rule is of the spryte and of the Letter. This rule is expounyd thus
cominlye: that the hystorial either Lytterall sense and the mystike either
gostlye sense, is taken under the same letter. For why the truth of the
story shall be holde^: and nethelesse it shall be referryd to the gostlye
understanding. This rule may be expounyde also in an other manner that it be
referryd also to the lytteral sense, as other rulys benne. About which thing
it is to se that the same letter has some time double litterall sense, in
ensample in the first book of paralipomeno^ the. xvii. chapter God seyth to
Solomon. Ishal be to him into a father, and he shall be to me into a son. And
this to the letter is vnderstonde^ of Solomon: in as mich as he was y^ son of
God by grace in youth. Therefore N^ than the prophet clepid him amiable to the
lord in the. ii. book of Kyngis xii. chapter. Also the forsayde auto^ytie. I
shall be to him into a father etc. is brought in of Paul, in the first chapter
to Ebrus, as said to the letter of Christ him syl^e. And this is open by this
yt Paul bryngyth in to prive: that Christ is more than Angellis. But such
pryu^nge may not be made by gostli sense: as Austyne seyth ayens Uyncent
Donatiste Forsooth the forsayde autorltie was fyllyd to the letter in Solo mo^.
Netheles perfectly: for he was the son of God only by grace. But it was
fyllyde perfectlyer in Christ that was the son of God by kind.

But nethelesse euereyther exposition is lytterall utterly. Nethelesse the
second exposition, which is of Christ: is gostly and pryuie in some manuer, in
as much as Solomon was the figure of Christ.

The. iiii. rule is of all and of part. For why: scrypcure passyth fro one to
an other: and ay^newarde. As in the. xiii. chapter of Esaie: the scripture
spekyth first ayens Babylon specially, when it is seyde. The byrt^im of
Babylon. And than the scripture passyth to understood the word generallye of
all the world: by this that suyth. The lord comyth fro the hyghnes of heaven:
and the vessellis of his strong vengeance came^, that he distrye all earth.
Afterward the scryptur turnyth ayene to speak ayens Babylon specially: when
it is seyde. Lo, I shall reise on you Medeis: that shulen not seek silver.

For why Darius Medes, with Cirus his cosenne, took Babylon and kyllede
Baltasar, the King of Babylon, as it is seyde in the fyfte chapyter of Danyel.

The. v. rule is of times: which rule byfallyth in. iiii. maners-In oo ma^er,
by a figure clepid Sinodoches: when a part of time is set for all the time. As
it is seyde in the gospel, that Christ lay. iii days in the Sepulcher, and
nethelesse, the first day and the third weren not whole days. In an other
manner this rule byfallyth for small partis of time that been noumbrede
sometime inscripture: and sometime ben left out. And by this the scripture that
spea kyth of some nou^bre of years in many placys: settyth sometime more yers
recknyng the forseyde small partis. In an other place, it settyth fewe^e years:
in leaving out ye small parts. In the third manner this rule byfalleth, for
that the recknyng of yeris begynnith in oo place at the former term, and in an
other place at the latter term. As in the xv. chapyter of Genises, it was said
to Abraham. That his seed shall be a pylgrime by. iiii. hu^drid year. And in
the. xii. Chap. of Exodi, it is said of this pilgrimag that the dwellinge of
the sonnis of Israel in the land of Egypt was of. iiii. hundred year and.
xxx. For the rikenyng of this more noumbre, biginyth at the time, in which it
was seyde to Abraham in thee. xii. of Genesis.

Go out of the land. etc. And the rikening of the less number, biginith at
the nativity of Isaac that was xxx. year aftir the going out of Abraham fro
Aran.

The fourth time, this rule falith, for yt holy scripture speakith of thing to
coming, by ye manner of thing passid. As in the. ix. Chap. of Esaie. A little
child was borne to us etc. And this is to signify the certentie of prophecy
whose bifalling of time coming is so certain, as if it were passid now. And
this is for certenti of godis before knowing, by which the reuelacio^ is made
to y^ prophet. Nethlesse, such manner of spech has no place n^ but in prop
hecie of predestinacion eythere full determinynge of God which Prophecy is
when a thing to coming in none certain to manis knowinge is she wid to the
Prophet in that manner, by which it is in y^ before knowing of God, which
before knowing as God biholdith, so wythouten feailynge thyngis to coming, as
thing is present and passid. But in Prophecy of manassynge, such manner of
speech has no place, which prophecy of manas is, wha^ any peyue worthy to be
brought in on any puple or on a person, is shewid to the prophet. Not by that
y^ it is in the before knowinge of God, but by the order of second causis, as
by the evil deserueyngis of me^. As is that Prophecy of Jonas. iii. chap ter.
Yet fourtye days, and Niniuie shall be distried. For why, the sinnis of that
city hadden deseruid this distriynge. Netherlesse, for such a cause is
chau^gable, therefore sometime the effect (that is pain manassid) sueth not,
as here, for Niniuitis didde^ penance and so the Lord brought not in the
pain manassyd.

The. vi. rule is of recapitulation. That is of rehersing of thyngis done
before. And of Anticipation either before taking, that is setting in of thing
before it is done. For in holy scripture, not every storye and dedis ben
written in the same order in which tho been done. And therefore when latter
thyngis been set before, it is seyde Anticipacio^ either before taking. Wha^
the foremer thingis been set byhinde, it is seyde recapitulacion, either
rehersyng of thing done before. As in the tenth Chapter of Genisis it is seyde
of the Sonnis of Noe.

The Ilis of the heathen folk in here contreys, weren departid of the sons
of Noe: each man by his langage. And within the same. x Chapter it is seyde.
These ^en the sonnis, of Cham, in kynreddes and langagis. And afterward it is
said in the xi. Chapter. The land was of oo langage, and of the same wordis.
Whereof it is open that this that is before seyde of ye departing of langagis,
is seyde by Anticipacion. In like manner in. ii. Chapter of Genesis After that
Moses in. i. Chapter had discreuid the creation either making of naught of
heaven and of earth, and the departing and ourning of y^ world, he said, these
benethe generations of heaven and of earth, in the day in which tho weren
made. Whereof it is open, that this is seyde: by recapitulacion, either
rehersyng of thing done before. The. vii. rule is of y^ deuell and of his body.
For as Gregorye seyth in the tenth. Homely. Certis ye devil is head of al
wicked me^. And all wicked me^ be members of this head.

And therefore the knettynge together of the head to the members, the scrip ture
that speakith of one: passith in ye same knittinge together of reason, to
speak of y^ the other. As in the. xiiii. Chapter of Esaie. Where y^ scripture
weake^h of the king of Babilo^, that was a membre of the devil: it passith to
speak of prince of fendis, when (...) is said there. Lucifer that risidiste
^ly, how feldist thou down fro heaven. And in the. xxviii. chapter of
Ezechiel, where the scriptur speaks of y^ prince of Tire it passith to speak
of the devil, when it is addid. Thou a signet either a printe of y^ lykenes of
God, were full of wisdom and perfect in fayrnes, in the delicite of Paradise
of God. Lire seyth all this in the second prologe of Genesis. Here Lire
rehersyth the sentence of S. Austin and of Isidre in these rulis: and declarith
hem openly by holy Scripture and reasone, and countrith not Austin, but
declarith him full myche to simple men's wit, and addith more by Scripture and
reaso^e, y^ Austine touchith not. Though these rulis and keys of Scripture
bryngin men to great understanding thereof: yet men mote^ take heed what is
seyde of Christ of his godheade, and what by his manheade. For Christ by his
ma^heade, is said less than the father, and by the godhead he is sey de eue^
with the father. And for as much as Christ is boeth God and man, we graunte^
that God was deadly and dyed on the Cross. Not by his godheade, but by the
ma^head of Christ, that was joined in oneheade of person with the godhead.
And we grant, as the Gospel does that man while he was deadly upon earth: was
in heaven, for his godheade was there, and he also by reasone thereof. Also we
moun grant well that a man made both heaven and earth. For Christ by his
godheade, (which Christ is and was man) did thus. Also holy Scriptur tellith
often the thoughtis of men and of the worcester dis and dedis. And wha^ the thoughtis
and wordis and dedis of men ben contrari, oo Gospellar tellith y^ thoughtis, a
another tellith the wordis, and by this equivocation either diverse speakinge,
they been accordid. Yea when they semen contrary in wordis. Also often in
storiall mattir, scripture rehersyth the co^mone opinion of me^, and affirms
not that it was so in deed. In this manner the Gospel seith that Joseph was the
father of Christ: though he never gendrid Christ. For Mary Christis mother was
ever clean virgin. Thus the Gospel seyth, that at the beheadyng of John
Baptiste, Herod was sorry, and yet as doctors seyne, he was full glad thereof.
But he feined him sorry* for the puple, and the puple gessid him sorry. Also
though scriptur do rehearse how holime^ liuiden and, does commend hem grea^li:
it appreuith not all here dedis. For many great sa^ctis erride^ foul in many
points. And though scripture do tell the stories of evil me^ and dampnid, it
repreueth not herefore all thyngis which they dide^. For though they were^
hemsilfe full cursid: they dide^ many good dedis of kind, and sometime
peradventure many good dedis of virtue, if they were^ in grace for a time. At
the last, take ye good head when the scripture speakith by commandment to
all men, and wha^ it gives commandment to certain persons of diverse statis.
In the first point all men moten do as it seith. In the second time, the
personis of statis spicified, mote^ nedis obey. When scripture speakith only
by counsel, men mouue be saved though they do not the counsel: As full many
men and women moune be saved, though they take not virginity neither
continence, neither give all here goodis to poor men. And yet these been here
counsellis of Jesus Christ in the Gospel.

The. xv Chapter.
EOr as much as Christ seith that the gospel shall be prea chid in all the
world, and David seyth of y^ Apostlis and here preaching, ye sown of hem yede
out into each land, and the wordis of hem yeden out into the ends of the
world: and efte David seith, the Lord shall tell in the scriptures of puples,
and of these pryncis yt were^ in it, that is in holy church: as Ie^ome seyth
on that verse, holy write is the scripture of puples, for it is made y^ al
puples shulde^ know it, and the princis of the chirch yt were^ therein, benthe
Apostlis y^ hadde^ authority to written holy write (for by that same that the
Apostlys wryttyden here scripturis by autoryti and confyrmynge of the holy
ghost, it is holy scripture and feyth of christen men) And this dygnitie has
no man aftir hem, be he never so holy, never so ku^nynge (as Jerome wytnessyth
on that verse) also Christ seyth of the Iewis that criden Osanna, to him in
the temple, that though they were^ still, stonis shoulden cry: and by stonis
he vndersto^dith heathen men, that worshipen stonis for here Goddis: and we
English men ben common of heathen men, therefore we ben vnderstonden bithese
stones that shule^ cry holy write, and (as Jews inter pretyd knoleching)
singnifien clerks, that shulden knowlech to Godde by repentance of synnis, and
by voice of Gods heriynge: so our lewide men suing the corner stone Christ,
moun be syngnyfyede by stonys that been hard and abydinge in the fou^deme^t
for though couetouse clarkys been wode by simoni heresy, and mani other
sinnis, and dispisen and stoppen holy write as much as they moune, yet the
lewd puple cryethe after holy wryt to kun it and keep it with great cost and
perile of here life. For these reasones and other, with common charity to
save al me^ in our rewme which God wol have sauide: a simple creature has
translatyde the By ble out of latyne into English.

First this simple creature, had much travail with diverse felowis and helpars
to gather mani eld Bibles and other doctouris and comune glo^is, and to make oo
latin Bible somedell trwe, and than to study it of the new, the text with
the gloss, and other doctors as he might get: and specially Lire on the elde
testamente, that helpyd full miche in his work The third time to Counsel
with elde elde gramariens and elde diuinis, of hard wordis and hard
sentensis, how thy might best be understood and translated. The fourth time,
to translate as cle^rly as he could to ye sentence, and to have many good
felowis and ku^nyng, at the correctinge of the translation. First it is to know
that y^ best transsatyng out of Latyne into Englysh is, to translate after^he
sentence, and not only after the wordis.

So that the sentence be as opyn (either opener) in English as in latyne, and
go not far fro the letter. And if the letter may not be suid in y^
translatynge, let the sentence ever be whole and open. For the wordis owen to
serve to ye entente and sentence: and ellis the wordis been superfluouse either
false. In translatyng into English, many resolusio^s moune make the sentence
open, as an ablatyfe case absolute may he resolved into these three words with
couenable verb the while, for, if, as gramarie^s seine. As thus. The master
reding, Isto^d may be resolved thus, while y^ master readith, I stand. Either
if the master read, either for the master. etc. And sometime it would accord well
with the sentence to be resoluid into when, either into aftirward, thus, wha^ the
master red, Istode. Either, after the master read I stood. And sometime it may
well be resolved into a verb of the same time, as other ben in the same
reason, and into this word et, that is, and, in English, as thus. Aresentibus
hominibus pre timore. That is And men shulen wexe dry for dread. Also a
participle of a present tens, either pretertens of actyfe voicis, either
passife: may be resolved into a verb of the same tens, and a coniu^etion
copulatyfe, as thus. Dicens. that is seeing may be resolved thus, and seythe,
either that seythe. And this wole in many placis make the sentence open: where
to english it after the word, would be derke and doubtful. Also a relatyfe
which may be resoluyd into his anticede^t with a co^iuncio^ copulatife: as
thus, which ren^ith. And he renneth. Also when oo word is once set in a
reasone it may be set forth as often as it is vnderstonde^, either as often as
rea, sone and ^e axen. And this word autem either, vero may stand for
forsooth, either for but. And thus I use co^munlye. And sometime it may sto^de
for and, as elde gramariens seyne. Also when ryghtful construction is lettyd by
relation, I resolve openly thus. Where this reason

Dum formidabunt aduersarii, eius should be englyshid thus by the letter. The
lord his adversaries sholden dred: I english it thus by resolucyon The
adversaries of the lord shulen dread him. And so of other reasons that been
like. At the byginynge I purposyde with Goddys help: to make the sentence as
true and open in english as it is in latin, either more trwe and moore open
than it is in latyne. And I pray for charity and common profit of christen
soulys, that if any wysema^ find any defaut of the truth of translation: let
him set in the true sentence and open the holy write. But look yt he examyne
truly his latin bible: for no doubt he shall find many byblis in latyne full
false, if he look mani. And namely new, and the common latyne bybles han more
need to be correctyd (as many as I have seen in my life) tha^ has the english
bible late tra^ssated. And where the Hebru, by witness of Ierom of Lire and
other expositours dyscordith fro our Latyne biblis: I have set in ye margent by
manner of a gloss what ye Hebreu has and how it is vnderstouden in some
place. And I did this most in the psalter, yt of al our bokis discordith most
fro Hebru For the chirch readith not the psalter by the last transla^tion out
of Hebru into Latin: but an other translacion of other men yt hadde^ mich
less kunninge, and holiness tha^ Jerome had. And in fulfewe bokis the chirch
readith the translacion of Jerome, as it may be preued by the propre
originallis of Jerome which he gloside. And where I have translatid as openly
or openlier in English as in latin^, let wise me^ deem that known well boeth
langagis, and known well ye sentence of holy scripture. And where I have do
thus or nay, ne doubt, they that kunne well the sentence of holy write and
English togider, and wole^ travail with goddis grace there about: moune make
ye bible as true and as opine, yea and opinliar in Englysh than it is in
Latyne. And no doubt to a simple man, with goddis grace and great travail me^
mighten expoune mich ope^lier and shortlier the Bible in englysh: tha^ the elde
great doctors han expou^id it in latin and mich sharp lier and grou^dlier
tha^ mani late Postil latours either expositours han don. But God of his great
merci give to us grace to live well, and to seie y^ truth in couenable manner,
and acceptable to God and his puple, and spil not our time, be it short be it
long at Gods ordinance. But some y^ seme^ wise and holy: seine thus. If me^
now were^ as hol^ as Iero^e was: they mighte^ translate out of latin into
englysh, as he did out of Hebrew and greek into latin, and else they shulde^
not tra^slatte now, as hem thynkith, for defaut of holiness and ku^ing. Thou
this replicacio^ seem colorable: it has no good ground nether reason nether
chariti. For why this replicacio^ is more ayens. s. Ierom, and ayens ye first
lxx. tra^slators and aye^s holy chirch, tha^ aye^s simple me^ that translaten
now into English. For Seinte Jerome was not so holy as the Apostlis and
Euangelestis whose bokis he translatid into Latyne, neither he had so high
yistis of the holy ghost as they hadden. And myche more the. lxx. translatouris
weren not so holy, as Moses, and ye Prophetis, and specially David. Neither
they hadden so great yestis of God, as Moses and the Prophetis hadden.
Forthermore, holy chirch appreueth not only the true translacion of mean
Christen men, stidfast in Christen faith: but also of opine Heretikis, that
dyden aweye many mysteries of Jesus Christ by gyleful translacion, as Jerome
wytnessithe in oo Prologe on Job, and in ye prologe on Daniel. Much more let
the Church of England appreuie the true and holy translacion of simple men,
that woollen for no good in earth by her wyttynge and power put away the lest
truth, yea the lest letter either title of holy write, that bears substance
either charge. And dispute they not of the holiness of me^ now living in this
deadly life: for they known not thero^, and it is reserved only to godis dome.
If they known any notable fault by the translatours either helpars of hem,
let hem blame the defaute by charity, and mercy, and let hem never dampne a
thing that may be done lefully by goddis law. As wearing of a good cloth for
a time, either rydinge on an horse for a great journey: wha^ they wytten not
wherefore it is done. For such thyngis moune be done of simple men, with as
great charity, and virtue: as some yt holde^ hem great and wise, kunnen ride
in a gylte sadle, either use ^uissins and beddis and clothis of gold and of
sylke with other vanities of the world. God grant pity, mercy, and charity
and love of common profit, and put aw ay such domis that been ayens reason and
charity.

Yet worldly clerkis axen greatly, what spirit makith Idiotis hardy to
translate now the bible into English, sethe the four great doctors dursten
never do this. This replication is so lewid that it nedith none answer, no but
stilnes either curties scorn. For these great doctouris weren none English
men, neither they weren conuersaunt among Egleshe men neither in caase they
co^den the langage of English men. But they ceasyde^ never till they hadden
holy write, in here mother tongue of here own puple. For Iero^ that was a
Latyne man of birth translatyd the Bible both out of Hebru and out of Greek
into Latyne, and expounded full much thereto.

And Austyne, and many mo Latins, expouneden the Bible for many partis into
Latyne, to Latyne men, among which they dwellyden. And Latin was a commone
langage to here puple about Rome: and biyandis and on this half: as English
is commone langage to our puple, and yete this day: the common puple in Italye
speakith Latten corrupt, as trwe men seine that han been in Italye. And the
noumber of translatouris out of Greek into Latin: passith man's knowing: as
Austyne witnesses in the. ii book of christen teaching: and seyth thus. The
translatouris out of Hebrew into Greek, moune be noumbred.

But Latyne translatoures, either they yt translatide^ into Latin, moune not
be noumbred in any manner. For in the first times of feyth, each man as a Greek
book came to him and he seemed to himself to have some kun: nynge of Greek and
of Latyne, was hardy to translate. And this thing helped more tha^ lettyd
understanding if readars be not negligente. For why, the biholding of many
bokis, has shewid often either declarid, some derker sente^cis. Thus seyth
Austyne there. Therefore Grosted seyth yt, it was goddis will, that diverse men
translatiden, and that diverse translations be in the church. For where one said
derkly, one either more seyden openly. Lord God, sithin at y^ bigynyng of
feyth so many men translatiden into Latin, and to great profit of Latyne
men: let oo simple creature of God, translate into English for profit of
English me^. For if worldly clarkis loke^, well here Cronicles and bokis, they
shule^ find that Bid translatid the Bible and expowned much in saxon, yt was
English either comone langage of this land in his time. And not only Bid
but also King Alured that founded Oxenforde: translated in his last days, ye
bigining of the Psalter into Saxo^, and would more, if he had lived longer. Also
Frenshme^, Bemers and Britons, han the Bible and other bokis of devotion and of
exposition, translated in here Mother langage. Why shulde^ not English me^,
have the same in here Mother langage? I can not wit. No but for falsenes and
neglegence of clerkis either for our puple is not worthy to have so great
grace and yist e of God in pain of here old sins. God for his mercy amend
these evil causis: and make our puple to have and kunne and keep truly holy
write to life and death. But in translatyng of wordis equiuoke (yt is, that
has many significacio^s under oo letter) may lightly be perile. For Austine
seyth in ye. ii book of chri sten teachinge, yt if equiuoke word is be not
translated into ye sense either understanding of the autoure it is error. As
in that place of y^ Psalter The feet of hem be swyfte to shed out blude: the
greek word is equiuoke to sharp and swyfte. And he that translatyd sharp
feet: erryd. And a book that has sharp feet, is false and mut be amendyd.
As that sentence. Unk^nde young trees shulen not give deep rootis: owes to be
thus. Plantyngis of auoutre: shulen not give deep roots

Austine says this there. Therefore a translatoure has great need to study
well the sentence both before and after: and look that such equiuoke wordys
accord with the sentence. And he has need to live a clean life and be full
devout in prayers, and have not his wit occupied about worldly thyngis, that
the holy spirit, au, toure of wisdom and kunyng and truth: dress him in his
work, and suffer him not for to err. Also this word ex syngnyfyeth sometime
of, and sometime it sygnyfyeth by as Ie rome seyth. And this word Enim.
signyfyeth commonly forsooth, and as Ierom seyth, it syngnifyeth cawese as thus.
For why. And this word Secu^dum. is taken for after, as mani men said and
comonlye. But it sing nyfyeth well: by, either, up, thus. By your word, either
up your word Many such Aduerbis, co^iunctions and prepositio^s: ben set often
one for an othere, and at fre choice of autoris sometime. And now tho shoulenne
be taken: as it accordyth best to the sentence. By this manner with good living
and great traueyle: men mou^e com to truth and clear translatynge, and trwe
understand ing of holy write, seem it never so hard at the begynynge.

God grant to us al to kune well and keep well holy write and suffer ioifully
some pain for it at y^ last.

Amen
Finis

