Barwick bridge: OR ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND COVPLED.

In a Sermon tending to peace and unity.

Preached before the King at Saint ANDREWS in SCOTLAND.

Anno Domini. 1617. Iulij. 13.

By ROBERT WILKINSON Dr. in Divinity, and Chaplain to his Majesty.

ESAIAS 19. 23. In that day there shall be a path from Egypt to Ashur, and Ashur
shall come into Egypt, and Egypt into Ashur, etc. LONDON, Printed by EDWARD
GRIFFIN for William Aspley. 1617.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY JAMES, BY the grace of God, King of great BRITAIN,
FRANCE and IRELAND, etc.
REnowned and Beloved of God and man: As the Wisemen followed the star in the
East, so have we followed your Majesty into the North, at your appointment we
have preached, and now at your command I have put my self into the press; To
which I might have answered, as one of the sons in the Gospel, yea, as one of
your Presbyterian spirits lately answered you; Nolo, in flat terms I will not
obey you; for why should so many men, the choice of two famous Churches, of so
much greater learning of more and more excellent gifts, whom you have heard not
with attention only, but with admiration too, why (I say) should such and so
many escape the publishing, and I only to be set upon the stage? yet I ask it
not of your Majesty, but of my self; and I think I have found the reason of
it, for as Izaak could not but know, that Jacob was better then Esau, and yet
loved Esau for the meat which he brought him, so your Majesty knows that
there be in our society, who like Rebecca can make better venison of a kid,
then I have done of venison, and yet you have thus designed on me; therefore it
was not I, but the argument, even the peace (I spoke of) which so affected you;
especially to hear of peace in Scotland, but more especially to hear of peace
betwixt England and Scotland, the very meat undoubtedly which your soul
loves: and therefore while I seem to publish my Sermon, I print unawares your
Majesty's praise, and make known to the world how highly your Highness
apprizeth peace; yea we have lately seen it with our eyes, that Justice and
Peace are met in you, we have seen you sitting in Parliament ten days
together, and we are witnesses that once you sat from one at noone to ten at
night; so much is Justice beholden to you; And we have hard from your Majesty
nothing here sounding but love and peace, you have in your open Parliament
professed your love to our English Nation; you have proclaimed great punishment
on such as should abuse the meanest of our nation; you have been of nothing
more careful then of our entertainment, and such as have kindly entertained
us, you have openly thanked, you have knighted and honored them for it; that
as the Babylonians said of Cyrus, The King is become a Jew, so your Majesty at
this time has been wholly English but it is your love, as in England to
cherish Scots, so in Scotland to tender us, and every where to be kind to
strangers, and it is your wisdom so to love us both, that your example might
work love and peace in both. And since we are returned in peace, first, with
Jacob we set up a pillar of thanks to him who has kept us in our journey; and
next to your Majesty we give, at least we repay the thanks which you your
self vouchsafed your own Subjects in our behalf* and for those your
Subjects, we rejoice to think that in all this time of our intercourse and
abode amongst them, we have had no combat, but of kinds with them, and in
kindness (we confess) they have euercome us: yea, from the great Lo: Chancellor
of Scotland to the College hals and Burgers houses, we are debtors and
prisoners, and for entertainment of that quality, as if any man shall deprave
it, he is like those men which rail on the Sun, and like the dogs which bark
at the moon; yea, if any man shall embase what we have found so honorable,
if he were partaker of the journey, I say, he is wilfully malicious, but if he
speak by hearsay, his hearsay is heresy, and he is falsely and uncharitably
credulous, yea if Scotland were as barren, as some report, which have not seen
it, we might report it for a wonder, that God has prepared us a table in the
wilderness, for every where we have found cheerful welcome, willing attendance,
and of all things such abundance, as nothing could be complained of, but
excess, or if any thing were worse then that excess, we our selves brought
it with us, it was our own unthankfulness: yea if our beasts could speak, they
would acknowledge fulness of the crib, and say out of the Prophet Esaias, we have
eaten clean prouander winnowed and fanned, and show themselves more thankful
to their benefactors, then many of their owners have been to God. That God,
who has every where abundantly fed us, who has kept us abroad, and brought us
safely home, that God make us thankful to himself, and loving to them who
have well deserved of us, and upon your Majesty (we beseech him) so to derive
the peacemakers blessing here, as you may be called eternally the son of
God hereafter.

Your Majesty's ever most obliged and dutiful Chaplain Robert Wilkinson.

THE PRAISES OF PEACE. A Sermon preached at Saint ANDREWS in Scotland.
PSALM. 133. 1. Behold how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in one.
Most Excellent:
RIght Honorable, Right Reverend, Beloved and Christian Brethren; we are here
assembled a mixed and great assembly of two great Kingdoms; for which cause I
have taken a text of congratulation: and we are met among other reasons (as I
conjecture) to give thanks that we may thus meet, to rejoice in God, and to
be mutually merry, and for that cause I have chosen a text out of a Psalm;
yea, I have chosen a text out of a Psalm, which (as Austin says) is notus and
nominatus, a Psalm well known to every man, and much spoken of in every
mouth; and he says of the text, that it is sonus ita dulcis, so sweet a sound,
as many which knew not the Psalter, yet could sing the verse, and diverse which
could not read, yet had it by rote, Ecce quam bonum etc. Behold how good and
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together. The Psalm was penned by David,
and at that time (as it is thought, when after long war betwixt the two
houses of Saul and David, some of the Tribes taking one part, and some another,
they all came in at last, and swore fealty to David, and made him King; the
sweet sense whereof makes him to write this Psalm, and to break out into this
exclamation, Behold how good and pleasant it is, etc. And it is as if he had
said, Compare the time present with the time past, and see what a change is
made, while you had two Kings, you had them as two swords reuelling in the
bowels of the Kingdoms, but now God has set an union in your divisions, and
quietness in your borders, yea, he has stamped unity upon your coin, Faciam
eos in gentem vnam, all to have one King, and all to make as it were one
Kingdom; while you were divided into parts, one part was still a prey to
another, and as Abner spoke to Ioab, the sword of each devoured other: but now
God has broken your swords into mattocks, and your spears into sithes:
Fighting is now turned to feasting, and force of arms to mutual embracing, so
as now you may safely visit the Coasts, and Countries, and Towns, and Cities,
and Churches, and Universities, and Colleges each of other, Ecce quam bonum,
Behold how good and pleasant this is.

The maine subject of the text is Peace; not the peace betwixt a man and his
own conscience, which Matthew. 11. is called Rest to your souls: nor yet the
peace betwixt God and man, where of Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith we have
peace toward God: but it is the peace betwixt brethren, that is, betwixt man
and man; concerning which we may in the text observe these five things. First,
it is described by a phrase of dwelling together: Secondly, it is limited, only
among brethren. Thirdly, it is commended to be good and to be pleasant.
Fourthly, it is admired, How good and How pleasant. Fifthly, it is poynted at,
Behold how good, and Behold how pleasant: of all which by your patience and
Gods assistance, I will speak in order.

And first of the first; The peace here mentioned is styled a dwelling, and a
dwelling together; and first a dwelling, for peace is as a man settled and
quiet in his own house, which follows not vain pomp and pride, nor yet the
tumults and restless troubles, nor tossing and tumbling up and down the
world, but peace says as God says in the Psalm next before, Hic requies mea,
here will I dwell. But they to whom there is no peace, they are like the
raging sea which cannot rest, Esaias 57. and Prou. 4. they cannot sleep unless
they have done evil; and no marvel; for Satan their head is a ranger, he
dwells no where, but every where, He compasses the earth, and walks in it
Job 1, and 1 Pet. 5. He walks up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom
he may devour: The tyrants of the earth which are his left hand, they dwell or
rest no where, but run out to the North and South, and East and West, and
extend their Dominions over the whole earth. Dan. 8. Again, Pharisees and
false Prophets, which are his right hand, they compass sea and land to make a
man of their profession. yet their diligence makes no warrant for their ill
endeauours; It is said of the harlot Prou. 7. that her feet cannot abide in her
house, but now she is without, and now in the streets, and lies in wait at
every corner. The mystical propagation of schism and seducing heresy: for so
do the Priests, but especially the restles Jesuits, they are no where
settled, but wander up and down like Apostles, and though S. Paul said, that
God had set forth them the last Apostles. 1 Cor. 4. yet they are Apostles
later then the last, and because God will not send them out, they therefore send
out themselves, and run to the Indies East and West, to Mexico and Peru, to
the Moluccoes, and to the great Magueere, and if we may believe their own
reports, they have been in the remote and mighty kingdom of China, they have
been at all Coasts and Capes, and seas and ways, only the way of peace they
have not known. Again, peace is not a dwelling only, but a dwelling
together? together? how! not simul in crimine, like Simeon and Leui, brethren
in iniquity, combined in sin together: nor simul in certamine, as Ephraim and
Manasses; or as of late two popish prelates in England for mere precedence,
and in a Church, flatly by the ears together; but together is here cohabiting
together, in a city, in a house, in a Church together, and sometime as Acts 1.
13. in a chamber together: and which is the morality of all this, of one heart
and soul together. Acts 4. 32. And indeed we see in nature, that the
peaceable and harmless creatures do flock together like doves, and fold
together like sheep: but wolves, and lions, and bears, which lie in wait for
blood, they live in the wilderness and apart, and owls come out in the night
and apart, and make a noise when all the rest of the birds are asleep, but
they are neither good intympano, nor in choro, they sing not in consort, and
when they sing alone, it is the very horror of music; and so it is observed
among men; if a man be too much retired, and solitary, and melancholy, and
hang down his head like Cain, and like Shemaiah become a Recluse and shut up
himself, every man straight will use the proverb upon such an one, Omnis
solitarius aut Deus aut Demon, such a man may be a Saint, and he may as well
be a Devil; It was the advantage which Christ had of John the Baptist, that
he lived in cities and towns, and did eat and drink, and was sociable, so as
he baptized, and all men came to him: Ioh. 3. but John Baptist lived in the
wilderness austerely and sourely, and came neither eating nor drinking, so as
they which knew not the mystery of it, said plainly, that John had a Devil,
Matthew. 11. And we see for the most part that these close and sullen spirits,
look whatsoever way they take, they become by their singularity hurtful; if
they have to do in the state, they become proud and contentions, and breed
factions there: if they have to do in learning, they prove dogmaticall, full
of paradoxes and of opinions there; but if in the Church, they are not only
schismatic, but turbulent and pragmaticall, and with Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, ready to make riot, if all be not to their will; oh how peaceable had
it been for the Church, how strong for the field, and how happy for the whole
world, if such Churchmen had been made soldiers; but every man if he be a
Saint is of the Communion of Saints, and they which be truly brethren, do
dwell, and live, and die together; The word in the text imports more, even to
dwell together in unity, or in one. Now as Bernard says, there be many ways
of one, there is vnitas collectiua, as when many stones make one heap, and
there is vnitas constitutiua, as when many members make one body, and there is
vnitas coniugatiua, as when man and woman make one flesh, and there is vnitas
natiua, as when flesh and spirit make up one man, with diverse other kinds; but
why should I exceed in division pretending to preach peace? but of all the
rest, why should I so infinitely divide that which the holy Ghost contracteth
into one? therefore I find this multiplicity reduced into two heads, either
Habitare in vnum, subiectiuely into one which is God, or Habitare in vno, for
things of less moment, yet (if it be possible) to agree in one; Into God, one
God, one faith we are necessarily grafted as into a stock, without which there
is no peace, no religion, no love, no life; and for other things, though not so
necessary, yet Saint Paul exhorts to be of one mind, and one judgment,
Philip. 2. Therefore if it be possible, let us Habitare in vno, all to follow
one way, one government, one discipline: but howsoever it fall, let us Habitare
in vnum, still to hold our grounds, one Gospel, one Faith, one God: that is,
if we can, let us all agree in an uniformity, but if not so, yet let us still
hold the grounds of unity: yea, and though we cannot Habitare in vno; that is,
to keep all one fashion, yet because we are all of one faith, to hold even our
differences in peace, and to do nothing through contention.

The limiting of peace is only among brethren; which because it is a word of
great equivocation, the distinguishing of the kinds of brethren, will sort out
the diverse kinds of peace; therefore first there be brethren by creation, and
so we be all, as we be all the sons of one God; for as it is Malach. 2: have
we not all one father! has not one God made us all? and thus we are all tied
to peace, so far as peace is taken for a mere cessation from war, for to
that purpose speaks Saint Paul, Romans 12. If it be possible and as much as in
you lies have peace with all men; yea, there is a kind of peace to be
maintained even with Turks, and Infidels, and we have no reason to invade the
possessions of Infidels, only for being Infidels, but rather to live brotherly
and humanely by them, because they be men: Why, but did not the Israelites
invade the land of Canaan? it is true, they did so; yet they had for so doing a
special command from God: but what reason had David to make war upon the
Ammonites? 2. Sam. 12. he had for his warrant a provocation from themselves, 2.
Sam. 10. and in such cases with such brethren it is lawful to break the
peace, but otherwise as Austin says, Cum tu Christianus Paganu^ spolias etc.
When thou a Christian do rob and spoil a Pagan, thou robbest God of a
convert, and as much as in thee lies, thou diuertest a Pagan from being a
Christian. Secondly, there be brethren by blood, either descended all
immediately of one father, as Jacobs sons Genesis 42. We be 12. brethren, the
sons of one father, or else, mediately descended of the same Ancestors, even
as James and John, though but the kins-men of Christ, yet called Math. 13. the
brethren of Christ. And by this brotherhood we are tied to that 2. Pet. 1.
called brotherly kindness: and it was the reason whereby Abraham persuaded Lot
to peace, Genesis 13. Let there be no strife between thee and me, for thou and I
are brethren. For what shall persuade us to live peaceably in the world, if not
this, that we are all descended of one womb, and if such contend in the
world, what can they do more, unless with Jacob and Esau, they return into
the womb, and spurn, and kick, and fight it out there. Thirdly, they are
said to be brethren who are all of one Country, Contrymen. In which sense
God speaks, Deuteronomy. 23. To a Stranger thou may lend on usury, but not unto
thy brother, that is, unto thy fellow Israelite: now the union of such brethren
is the strength of the kingdom, but when such fall off, it is a kingdom
divided, and cannot stand. In the Scisme betwixt Ephraim and Gilead there fell
in one field two and forty thousand, Judge. 12. and the falling away of the ten
Tribes from the two, was occasionally the ruin of both the kingdoms; and he
that reads our Chronicles, shall find that we English and Scots have spent
more blood in domestical broiles, then when one of us in time of hostility
opposed an other, but now it is peace here, and peace at home, and when we
English shall return home, and call to mind how kindly our Scottish brethren
have used us here, we cannot but acknowledge their kindness, and own them as
brethren, yea if national brotherhood could not, yet very shame shall drive us
now to love both them and our selves more mutually at home. Fourthly, they are
said to be brethren who are al of one profession, and in that sense, Kings who
under God divide the earth, do call each other brethren; yea even when the two
kings had newly fought a bloody field, the King of Israel asked concerning the
King of Aram, Is my brother yet alive? 1 King. 20. And there is nothing more
needful either for Church or commonwealth, then that Kings do live peacably,
and as brethren; for when it is otherwise, Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achiui:
great and mighty men run a madding, and the poor Peasant must pay for it,
and while Benhadad sits quaffing in his tent, his Captain and his Soldiers
fall by thousands in the field; and therefore Kings by name must so be prayed
for, as the people may live honestly and quietly under them, 1. Tim. 2. but he
that sows sedition between kings, or hinders their just peace when it is
intended, he is a firebrand between two kingdoms, the fatherless and
widows shall curse him, the blood of the massacred (like the blood of Abell)
shall cry against him, the God of peace shall confound him, and the Devil whom
he serves, in this shall pay him his wages. Again as Kings, so the Apostles
for their like profession did call each other brethren, for so did Peter call
Paul his beloved brother, 2. Pet. 3. and Austin says that this text bred
Monasteries, and brought the Monks and Friars together; but sure he means
the old Monks, and the ancient Friars, for the later breed come not so high
as from the Psalms, but they may rather seek themselves, where Saint Paul
unluckily found himself, Inter falsos fratres, 2. Cor. 11. and as the
Apostles, so we their successors for unity of affection and consent of
judgment, ought all to be as brethren; yet not as brethren in equality, for
the King and his subjects by the mouth of God are all called brethren, Deuteronomy.
17. to teach the King to think of his subjects, as of brethren, and yet he
were a proud subject that should so equalize himself, as out of that text to
call the King brother, so brotherhood in the Church concludes no parity of
Church functions; yea the peace here mentioned is not well maintained in a
parity, for see in the Psalm the propagation of peace, and how it runs, It
begins at the head, it falls down by the beard, and so to the skirts of
the clothing; It begins at the head first, which is the high Priest, the
figure of Christ, it goes down by the beard, the mouth of the Minister, and
so down to the skirts, even to the lowest of the people, and how shall the
people be anointed with peace, when Arons beard is defiled with sedition, or
how shall we build up the people in peace, when our selves like the vale of the
Temple are rent in sunder? yea what ruin and confusion shall not follow the
rupture and disioynting of the Ecclesiastical body? Eusebius says that before
the great and fearful persecution under Dioclesian there was even in the
Churchmen themselves a provoking of God unto it, for they were all one deadly
set against an other, Episcopi in Episcopos, and Pastores repulsa pietatis
norma etc. both Bishops, Priests, and people were all fiered and enflamed one
against another, and then came Dioclesian, as a firebrand cast up out of hell
to burn and consume them all: but let peace begin at the Prelates and Priests
of God, and then no doubt, but the lowest of the people shall be anointed
with it. Fifthly and lastly, they are called brethren who be all of one
religion; and in that sense even Paul, though a Jew and borne at Tarsus in
Cilicia, yet calls the Romans brethren; I beseech you brethren by the mercies
of Christ, etc. Romans 12. and there is no peace like this, yea there is no peace
without this: for let a man not be at peace with God, and he is no brother to
us, there is no dwelling with him: and that befalls two ways, either when
men fail in fundamental points of faith, or when they stray notoriously in
wickedness of life. If any man bring not this doctrine, bid him not God speed
(says S. John) for what comfort is in that peace which is entertained with an
Infidel, an Atheist, and Heretic, or an obstinate Papist, with whom a man
may eat and drink, but not at the holy table; he may be merry with him, but not
sing Psalms with him; he may talk with him, but he cannot pray with him; and
he may walk with him but they must part at the Church door, yea there is no
peace with such, but when we make peace with them, we break peace with God,
for all peace and love is founded first in religion, and in God, and if we
agree not first in religion, all other agreement is horrible in the eyes of
God. Again, though a man profess the same faith, yet if he live a wicked life,
there is no dwelling or living with him. If any that is called a brother be a
fornicator, or a drunkard, or a rayler, with such an one eat not. 1 Cor. 5.
with such an one eat not, that is, converse not; and why? first because it is
uncomfortable, for woe is me (says David) that I dwell in Meshech, etc. Psalm.
120. Secondly, it is not suitable, for righteousness and peace have kissed, but
what fellowship has light with darkness? Thirdly, it is not safe for
infection, for Commisti sunt inter gentes, and dedicerunt opera eorum, says
the Psalmist, even Gods own people were mingled with the Heathen, and learned
their works, and if we sleep with dogs, what marvel is it, if we rise with
fleas? yea, as the coldest iron comes red hot out of the fire, so the best
natures are corrupted by ill company. Lastly, it is not safe for fear of
confusion, for they which dwell in Babylon shall be partakers of her plagues.
Revel. 18. even as the mariners in the ship with Jonas, (though clear of the
sin) yet had their part in the storm.

Now for the commendation of peace, it is first reported good and then
pleasant: First good, quia omnia fundantur in bono, good is the ground of every
thing; and it is good first as Tobit commended Raphael, to be of a good stock:
so Peace has God to her father, who seven times in the Gospel is styled, The
God of Peace: Again, peace is good, as David said of Ahimaaz: a good man and
brings good tidings, So Pax in terris, is the best news that ever came into
the world. Luc. 3. Again, peace is far fetched, for it came from heaven; and
it is dear bought, even by the blood Christ; and if it be so, that is, if
far fetched and dear bought, ye know for whom it is good then; it shall then
befit the greatest Ladies, rather with Pilats wife, to persuade their husbands
to peace, then with Jobs wife and Iezabel, to make them fall out with God and
man: Again, peace is good by divine resemblance, for as God is in persons
three, and in substance one, even so does Christ pray for the Church, that
according to that pattern it may be one. Io. 17. again, peace is good by
natural comparison, for all other creatures are borne with a kind of armor
into the world, either horns to gore, teeth to bite, or nails to rend and
tear, but man (as Job says) is borne naked into the world, to show a
peaceable creature borne into it: Thus God sent peace, heaven bred it, the
Angels brought it, Christ Jesus purchased it, when he died he bequeathed it,
and he died to make it: this must needs be good: But all these praises are
external: peace is good in it self, and In sensu morali, It is good, because
it makes good; for first it builds us into the Church, yea it builds the
very Church; David the soldier might not build the Temple. 1 Chronicles. 28. 3. but
Solomon the peaceable; and Scotland has now felt, that they which write Beati
pacifici, have not been the worst friends and builders of their Church; and
when Solomon built the Temple, there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor iron to
be heard in it, while it was a building. 1 King. 6. The Pharisees and Sadduces
were not yet come with their hammers to deface and pervert the Law, nor Arrius
with his axe to cut off the Godhead of Christ, nor were there either
Marcionists, Manichees, or Nestorians as yet, to make a a noise in the Church;
but all was peace: and as the Temple was built up in peace, so is every
Christian engrafted into the Church in peace, and when we are once in, it is
merely peace, that holds us in, for the unity of the spirit is kept in the
bond of peace. Ephesians. 4 and what good can we do, while we are not in peace?
we come to Church and cannot hear well: for if ye love on another, then are
ye verily my Disciples, says Christ, Ioh. 13. but not else. Again, we pray
worse, if we be not in peace, for we pray for forgiveness with a stop; we say,
Forgive us our trespasses, but dare go no farther: and so we make a full
point, where Christ made but a comma: but without peace we communicate at the
holy table worst of all, for we eat and drink at it even to our own damnation.
but the peaceable man is free from all this, he hears profitably, he
receives comfortably, and he prays devoutly, even for his enemies and
persecutours, for so did Stephen even when the stones and the blood ran down
by his ears. Acts 7. oh see and behold how good peace is. And as there is no
Church, so no Commonwealth without peace, for by peace men multiply into
families, family fill whole Countries, and Countries build up Kingdoms, but
war kills up all: for where in peace the sons commonly bury their fathers,
the fathers in war often bury their sons; yea, war kills up both Laws and
Justice: When Antigonus entered Asia with a strong and mighty army, one salutes
him at his entrance with an eloquent oration in praise of Justice, but
Antigonus told him, he was a fool to speak of Justice to a King with a
drawn sword in his hand; yea, war and contention kill up even conscience it
self; for how many be there, who while they be not stirred, live like Saints
and Angels, but being once heated, they offend God and man, and fall to plots
and foul practices, and become foxes and lions in war, who were lambs in
peace; even as David, who had he not smelt too much of the sword, could never
have conspired against Vriah as he did: but that and other things, did clean
put him by the building of the Temple; yea, war kills even humanity it
self, and takes from many all sense of blood and cruelty: for was it not a
strange speech of Abner to Ioab, Let the young men arise and play: 2 Samuel 2.
and what was their play? they went out twelve to twelve, and fought so long
that all fell down dead: but it was a cruel heart which thought killing but a
play, and it was a miserable play where all were losers: This was naught, but
peace is good.

Yea, peace is not good only, but pleasant too: now good and pleasant to
concur is rare, for many things are pleasant which are not good, even as Job
20. wickedness was sweet in his mouth: again, many things are good which are
not pleasant, yea, few things which are good are pleasant: In medicines the
best are bitter still, and affliction, which David said was good, Psalm. 119.
yet Hebr. 12. is unpleasant for the time, and though it be more blessed and
better to give then to take, Acts 20. yet Lawyers and all trades can tell, it
is much more pleasant to take then to give: but good and pleasant do both meet
here: Now of pleasure, the nearest Judge to us is natural sense, but peace is
pleasant, and delightful to all the senses; As first and for example to the
smell, for which in this Psalm it is compared to a precious ointment, but that
which smells sweet, every man draws nearer to it, even as Cant. 1. Because
of the savor of thy good ointments, we will run after thee. So peace has an
attractiue power, for though men naturally love their own Country best, yet
every man likes best to live and dwell where it is peace; Izaak left Gerar
when they strove with him, and went to Sitnah for peace, and when they strove
with him there, he went to Rehoboth and Beersheba for peace. Genesis 26. and
England can tell, and so I think can Scotland too, what a conflux of French and
Dutch, and other strangers has been to us sometime for the shadow of our
peace, even for that peace which our friends have admired, our enemies envied,
and Satan has often pusht at, but God has so enlarged, as we are become like
Nebuchadnezzars tree, a shade and refuge for all the beasts and fowls of the
field. Secondly, as peace is pleasant in sent so in sight too; David when he
wrote this was not rattling in harness, nor in the horrid aspect of a soldier,
for the garrisons were all dissolved, and the wars now done, but David now was
turned reueller, and with a troop of gallants, thirty thousand picked and
chosen men, he marches before the arc, and sings, and plaieth, and danceth,
and like a Priest puts on a linen Ephod. 2 Samuel 6. oh it was a glorious
sight, and the triumph of their new achieved peace, only Michol scoffed at
it, as many Schismitiques and ill-affected men do now, to see the ornaments and
attires of the Church in the time of her peace; for when the Church came out of
Egypt (whatsoever she wore before and in the days of her bondage) yet then
being freed and settled, God would have her put on silk and scarlet, and fine
twined linen. Exodus 28. and what if Elias and John Baptist living in the
wilderness and lamenting the times, went up and down in haire-cloth, and girt
with lether girdles, must we now do it in the days of our peace? no: but as
Solomon was Christ, and Salomons house the Church of Christ in figure, so are
we in verity the servants of that Solomon, and of that Christ, whose sitting,
and order, and attire (though Michol scoffed at) yet a wiser woman, the Queen
of Sheba admired; 1 King. 10* and we, we I say (for I keep not others vine,
nor meddle with other Churches) but we of the Church of England do serve and
minister to God in white, and yet we neither revive the dead rites of the
Jews, nor temporize with the popish Churches, but we wear white by the Text,
partly to signify the pureness and integrity which should be, as Reu. 19. 8
and partly to give thanks to God, and to testify our rejoicing for the peace
of the Church, which is, according to that which is written Eccles. 9. 8.
Thirdly, peace is pleasant to the ears too; for define peace, and it is but
harmony, and the best harmony is of high and low, and base and mean, etc.
David said Psalm. 101. He would sing of mercy and judgment. A strange kind of
skill to put mercy and judgment both i^ a song, but it was in music, and
David was the sweet singer of Israel. 2 Samuel 23. and the best Musician that
ever was in the world; and as Music is nothing else but harmony or agreement
of disagreeing parts, so is peace. Peace in the body is a due temperature of
contrary humors, peace in the mind is a concurrence of affection with reason,
peace in the man is a body subdued to the soul; peace among men is when the
superiors govern justly, when inferiors obey willingly, and equals love
mutually, and peace in the Church is, when there is one God, one faith, one
heart: when they whom God has placed above, are obeyed as Bishops, and they
beneath are respected as brethren; when one plants, and another waters; when
one preaches a truth, and another comes and confirms it, this is harmony, and
this is peace: but Heretics and Schismatiques still sing out of tune.
Fourthly, peace is pleasant to the feeling too, that is, it is profitable, for
which in this Psalm it is compared to the deaw of Hermon, which made the
mountains fruitful. But war (as one compares it) is like the Basiliske,
which scorcheth and poysoneth the very grass, and the ground whereon he goes,
so war depopulates and destroys all; we need not seek far for witness;
witness in our Scottish and English borders, the woods and forests wasted,
the fields yet untilled, the towns yet unbuilt, and for towns and houses
mere kennels for dogs, shrowdes fit for beasts, but far unfit for men, and
yet we see in our travels no great superfluity of beasts neither, only they
were beasts which made this desolation, and whosoever were captains and
soldiers, the Devil on both sides was leader of the field: Nay, let it be but
a suit in Law, and it is wonderful to see how a man wastes by it; one Lawyer
must be feed, Ne noceat, that he do no hurt, and another takes a fee, and
does in truth a very little good; and money runs while all be run out, and
the fees of the suit exceed many times the benefit of the sentence, and many a
man becomes poor at the victory, who had been rich, if he had forborne the
combat, but in peace men plant and build, and sow, and reap, and grow
exceeding rich, and as in the peaceable days of Solomon, Every man sits under
his vine and his fig tree, and there is none to make afraid. Fifthly and lastly,
peace is pleasant to the taste too: I speak it in the sense of David. Psalm.
34. O taste and see how gracious the Lord is, the taste and relish of a good
conscience; for he that is not in peace, has his conscience full of horror:
If he but see another prosper, he is afflicted at it, but if he see it
continue, he plotteth and practices how to impeach it: yea, Saul was more
troubled at David's rising, then at all which the Philistims did against him;
yea, Haman was not ashamed to confess, that his riches, and his children, and
his honors, and all the grace the King had done him, yet did nothing avail
him, so long as Mardochai was in his eye. Ester 5. oh how ill tasted is that,
which takes away the taste of all other pleasures from us: but the peaceable
minded man is free from all this, he tastes pleasures in his prayers, he
tastes pleasure in his sleep, yea, he lies him down and sleeps in peace. Psalm.
4. he enuieth no man, but says with David, we have wished you good luck, even
to the ten Tribes that were against him. Psalm. 122. he asks not the death of
his enemy, much less contriueth it, but though he have Saul in the cane, yet
he loses his advantage, and lets him go, and he that can do thus, when
he dies shall find it true, which Abigail said to David, It shall be no
grief of mind to thee, that thou have not avenged thy self.

The fourth point general is, that peace is not only commended good, but
admired, behold How good, and How pleasant; for as Di^nysius says of God
appearing in a vision, he that thinks he has seen God non vidit Deum, sed
aliquid Dei, he did not see God, but some glimmering of him, so that peace
whose goodness a man may limit and determine, it is not the true peace, but some
shadow of it, for that peace passes all understanding; and indeed to be
good, is the meanest commendation that can be given to any thing, for God made
nothing, but what was good, and that which is not good is of the Devil: but
the point is here, How good, and How pleasant which is spoken by way of
admiration, and may admit a fourfold interpretation, and first with a
reference to the story, for when we see a thing come to pass, which passes
common power, yea, and our expectation too, we fall a wondering straight, even
so does David here, that Ruben, and Simeon, and Gad, and Asher, and Zebulon,
and Nepthali, and all the Tribes should come in to Judah, and ten submit
themselves to one or two, this was good indeed, but How good? A Domino factum
est istud, this was no wit, nor policy, nor power of man, but a work wrought
by the hand of God; and to draw this to our selves and our own use: when God
at any time has composed any trouble in the state, any faction or persecution
in the Church, or has made any peace which we expected not, how can we do
less, then lift up hearts, and hands, and eyes to God, and wonder at it: or
secondly this strange demonstration, behold How good, is but an excessive kind
of praise: and the highest style of praise is to profess our inability of
expressing, even as the Psalmist uses to speak of God, O how excellent is thy
name, and how great is thy goodness? he could not comprehend the one, nor was
he able to express the other: so since we cannot sufficiently set out the
praise of peace, we will only ask how good it is, and praise it by saying
nothing of it. Or thirdly, this admiration comes in by way of obiurgation, as
if he said, Oh ye that know not how good peace is, behold and consider how
good it is; for we commonly wonder at those things which are unwonted to us,
and since we are such strangers to peace, it is spoken with a kind of check,
that we should learn to know that with admiration, whereof we cannot be
ignorant, but to our great shame. Or else fourthly and lastly this admiration
is mystical, for as David was a figure of Christ, so David's peace was a figure
of the peace in heaven, even of that peace which eye has not seen, ear has
not heard, and which has not entered into the heart of man, but as Austin says
of it, Facilius est consequi quam ennarrare, it shall be easier to attain it,
then to define it: and therefore since we can only ask questions of it, How
good, and How pleasant, but cannot answer, when we have asked, our way is only
to believe it, and so to live, as they that expect and look for it.

And so we come to the last point, Behold, which though in rank and order of
words it stand first, yet arising out of the Text, as an use out of the
doctrine, it comes in good method to be handled last: for peace being so good
and so pleasant, how can we do less then look upon it. Behold how good, etc.
Behold: how! why Behold in contemplation of mind, or behold in experience;
behold in understanding, or behold in sense; Behold it, that is, search or
seek to know it; or else behold it, that is, only look out and see it;
Behold it with the mind first, for it is true in every thing, Quantum
intelligitur tantum diligitur; we love things so far as we know them, but no
man can extend his love beyond his knowledge, The sons of God saw the
daughters of men, and then became enamoured of them, but if they had not seen
them, they had never loved them; and David where he professes to love the
Law, shows the reason of it, for it was his continual meditation, Psalm. 119.
that is, he did nothing but study it, and it is the cause of all profaneness
in the world, that men do not extend their consideration to behold the
goodness of God, and the beauty of virtue; The timbrell, pipe and wine are in
their feasts (says Esaias) but they consider not the works of the Lord. Esa. 5.
But if thou know the gift of God, says Christ to the woman of Samaria. Ioh.
4. and again, had they known the mystery of the Gospel, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. yea, and for peace, Oh if thou had
known (says Christ) the things that belong unto thy peace. Luc. 19. for if
men did behold Peace in her perfect beauty, and consider of what account it
has ever been in the Church, they would not break the peace as they do;
that is, they would not fall out for trifles, nor forsake the unity of the
Church for their own fancies, nor write, nor rail, nor preach one against
another, nor spurn against authority as they do; for the holy Apostles
strained far to keep peace, and saluafide, became all things to all, rather
then to break the peace: and in the primitive Church they professed it less
heinous to sacrifice to Idols, then to break the peace: but now as S. Paul
said to the Church at Corinth: we have all knowledge, and know all things. 1
Cor. 8. we know how to govern the Church, and we know how to make
combustion, and to stir up sedition, and to set both Church and Commonwealth
on fire, but no man beholds or knows how good and how pleasant peace is.
Again, beholding here is not only considering, but David's meaning is to
behold it in sense, for Ishbofeth and he sought both for a kingdom, but they
sought it with their swords, and so lost peace, but now they have recovered it,
especially David for his part, and to that point he speaks, and he speaks it
with his finger, Ecce, Behold in sense, how good peace is; for indeed to behold
it in speculation only, that is, to behold it, and not to have it, what a
beholding call you this? yea, to behold peace, as the beggarly Philosophers did
write their politiques and speculate of Kingdoms, and as poor Mathematicians
turn heaven and earth about in a globe, and then want money to buy a loaf of
bread, this is a cold contemplation: yea, thus to behold peace that is, to see
the goodness of it, and then to want it, oh it is one of the plagues of hell:
but Behold it (says David) that is, behold and see how God has sent it: even
as Luc. 10. Blessed are your eyes, for they see.

And this beholding is with thanks, which if it be not an only cause, yet
ought it to be one use of our meeting in this kingdom; and all the curses of
unthankfulness shall light upon us, if thus beholding peace we be not thankful
for it: and what cause have we of thanks, I refer it to you Lords, Knights,
and Gentlemen, Beloved and Christian brethren of both Kingdoms: Two things in
this Island has bin much and long affected: one especially by us English, that
God would at length combine together the two disagreeing Families of York and
Lancaster, by whose schism and contention such effusion of blood so many
years was made. The other, that God by some good means would reduce and bring
together these two great Kingdoms into one; The former though done before our
days, yet still we enjoy the goodness and pleasure of it: but the other, these
golden days of ours have seen the doing of it: But oh how many consultations
were there before it could be done? It was seen in both Kingdoms for many
reasons good, that is, we beheld it good in speculation, and many motions and
means were made, and much endeavor was to do it, but the Devil who breaks
off all good purposes, and we our selves still backward enough to better
things, found means evermore to stand aloof, and to mischieue one another; and
when truces were taken, yet were they but the binding of Satan for a time, for
time still undid what time had done; but now it is done, and we behold peace
in sight, and see peace, not as our neigbours the States, nor as the Churches
in France, nor as the poor Churches in Greece, who see peace abroad, and want
it at home, and are forced either to stand upon their guard, and to sleep with
their swords under their pillowes, or to prostitute themselves to slavish
conditions: but we have such a peace as our selves desired, and God has so
established, as only our selves shall be able to impeach it; and unless, as
Hierome said of his own time, Nisi nostris peccatis Barbari fortes facti,
unless our sins and unthankfulness give victory to our enemies, the gates
of hell shall not prevail against us,

And we must so behold our peace, as we see God in it; Peace indeed is like a
precious ointment, but it is also like the deaw upon the mountains: the
ointment is powered on by the hand of a man, and our peace is well promoted by
inferior means: but the deaw comes from heaven, and it is God that sends
it, and from God in heaven comes this our peace and union. Who would have said
to Abraham, that Sarah should have borne him a son? Genesis 21. and who of late
when he saw in England, a King with a son and two daughters, all like enough
to live, and leave a royal issue, who would have said to England, that
Scotland even in that age should have bred and brought them up a King? but God,
that God (by whom Kings reign) has thus deuolued it for our good: and if God
have coupled us, who then shall put asunder what God has joined together? yea,
what man either for his own, or for the common good would have this union
sundred? while we were divided into parts, that some followed Tibui, and some
followed Omri, that some were for Saul, and some for David, and one part
English, and another Scottish, we were not strangers only, but enemies too? and
our very names were mutually odious; our borders were like the pillar which
Jacob and Laban pitched up, as a bar to keep the one from the other, a bar
indeed to keep out peace, but what could then debar us from mischeeuing one
another; but God, the God of peace, has now sounded a retraite, for where
before the very ground of one was still a snare to the other, our houses now
are become mutual harbors, our Colleges are reciprocally conferring their
honors, yea, and our pulpits open each for other; ours of late for you, and
yours now for us, for our Prelates, and for our Preachers, and for me also now,
the meanest of ten thousand, to commend and plead for peace; and let the hugest
of these mountains drop down upon his head, which opens his mouth to speak
against it.

Oh you that have traveled far, and seen in your travels the confines and
divisions of other Countries: Tell me, did ye ever see in any two Kingdoms
so little cause of division, yea of distinction, as in ours? There are no huge
Pyrenean hills or mountains to divide us, as betwixt the two Kingdoms of France
and Spain, unless pride of heart stand up as a hill betwixt us: nor are we
severed with wild forests or Herculean woods, as Bohemia is from Germany,
unless our selves grow wood-mad with envy, and envy creep up and down, as a
wild beast betwixt us; nor are we walled asunder as China is from Asia,
unless some Hiel or Bethelite shall arise, and build again the walls of
Jericho, nor is the confusion of Babel fallen upon us, to make us different
language, only one says Sibboleth, and the other Shiboleth, very mean and
insensible differences: and I hope we shall not be so mad (as Ephraim and
Gilead) to fight a field for these; yea, if the Devil do not put more odds
in our hearts, then God has done in our mouths, we shall need no French
comment or interpreter to stand between us, we shall with little help
understand each other, we shall speak, and talk, and converse familiarly, and
love and live together: Lastly, there is no raging Ocean or sea to sunder us,
as betwixt us and the Indies, unless we rage in hatred one against another;
only there runs a pleasant Siloam, or Kedron betwixt us; you call it Tweade,
I think it came from twayed, because by it we are made unkindly two, but when
the bridge is finished, Twayed shall then be Tied, and we shall all be one; we
are not the sons of Hamilcar, who swore Hannibal yet a child, that he
should never be at peace with the Romans, which oath he took at the altar,
and kept to the end, but we are not so; Popish ignorance of old time made us
enemies, and the Pope who makes war and peace (as best may serve his purpose)
he (I think) did little good to make us friends; but we have now shaken of
him, as the Prince of contention and darkness, and being better instructed, we
have done better, and better knowledge has brought forth better fruits; and it
will ever be spoken in the ages to come, that one and the same age has both
freed us from the tyranny of the Pope, and knit us both into one Kingdom: A
Domino factum est istud: this peace is like the deaw, and distilled even from
the hand of God: Blessed be that God that sent it, blessed be the man that
makes it, and blessed be they all which do embrace it: and God Almighty makes
us all so to dwell and live together here, that we may live eternally in the
Kingdom of Christ Jesus hereafter; to whom for our meeting at this time, for
our joyful meeting in this Kingdom, and for all the blessings severally, and
for the peace now jointly bestowed upon us, to him (I say) with the father and
the holy Ghost, be all thanks and praise, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

