LARGE LETTERS. Three in number, containing much necessary matter, for the
instruction and comfort of such, as are distressed in conscience by feeling of
sin, and fear of Gods wrath.

WRITTEN Heretofore by T. W. for some dear friends of his, and now published
and printed for the raising up of such as labor under the heavy burden of an
afflicted Spirit.

PSALM. 42.11. ^^y art thou cast down my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? wait on God: for I will yet give him thanks, he is my present h^lpe
and my God.

AT LONDON Printed by Roger ward, for Thomas Man, 1589.

TO HIS FAITHFVLL friends, and very dear brethren in Christ, Mast* Roger
Ofield, Robert Washborne, George Smith, Thomas Shipton, John Field, Robert
Jones, John Harper, John Hounsell, and all the rest of his Christian
acquaintance in London, as well as though they were particularly named,
together with all those that else where in the land, unfeignedly fear the Lord,
and look for the glorious appearing, of his son and our savior. T. W.
wishes all spiritual goodness and heavenly comfort in this life, and in the
end the eternal glorification of their bodies and souls, in everlasting
bliss through Christ.
MY love in the Lord, and the affections of my heart in him, have bin in some
measure of soundnes, (I humbly thank God for it in Christ) strongly carried
generally toward all the Israel of GOD wheresoever, and more particularlye
toward you my good Breethren: whereof over and besides, the assured
testimony of mine own soul, I have for faithful witnesses, the Lord himself
in heaven, and many of his saints upon earth, and amongst others you your
selves. Causes leading me hereto are many: but as in respect of God, none more
powerful, than his grace and holy spirit, shed abroad into my heart: and as
in regard of you, none more effectual than sundry sincere fruits of your
faith, and the comfortable feeling of the communion of saints, in which holy
fellowship stands, not only the spiritual felicity and good of the whole
body, but the very joy and contentment also, of every sound member therein.
For outward kindnesses that I have received from you, I must and will every
where, acknowledge my self much beholding unto you. And yet this I may with
all boldness profess, that as that is not the only or principal cause,
moueing me to affect you: so though I have been beholding to you all, yet not
to all alike, but to some more than to other some. Which also I rehearse not
now, either to breed any disdain or emulation in you, one of you toward
another, for that were to break the bond of charity and unity of the spirit:
or to less^n any favor though never so small, that I have received from you,
for that were to deprive you of your praise, and to declare my self ingratfull:
nor craftily clavving after the manner of the world, to crave new benefi^es,
for that were nothing else but deceit and flattery to procure mine own good,
from all which corruptions, I have hitherto as in respect of my self and you,
through Gods goodness been graciously freed. But to let you understand, that
your benefits have not been bestowed upon an unskillful or an thankful
person, but upon such a one, as by the light that he has received from God,
has, vveighing them in an equal balance, esteemed of them according to the
goodness of the gift, and the christian affection of the Party giving. The
things indeed, which have most specially lincked me fast in the Lord unto
you, are your precious faith toward God, unfeigned love to the saints,
christian consciences amongst your selves, and holy prayers in presence and
absence, one of you for an other and all of you I am assured, for the holy
causes and faithful members of the whole Church, and amongst the rest, even
for me pore and wretched man that I am. In which duties of yours, as my heart
has greatly reioiced in the lord, for the graces that in great mercy, he has
bin pleased to vouchsafe unto you, and I my self have as in some sort, though
not to the full, in regard of your spiritual favors performed to me, by reason
of weakness and wants in my self, answered them again with the like, (I
write not as a vain glorious boaster): so I doubt not, but that thereby God him
self has received glory at your hands, his children gotten much good, and you
your selves reaped a gracyous measure and increase, of religyous knowledge, and
dutiful obedience. As for the worldly favors that you have showed me, and
bodily benefits that way, I confess my self to be far behind hand with you,
and much indebted in deed, though not in affection surely, and readiness of
good will, for so my heart is very large (in humility I speak it) neither
will I wish better witnesses of it than your selves, yet in regard of action,
wherein still my grief grows great, and increases daily upon me, as well
by the fear that I have of my future wants, as by the feeling of my former and
present disabilities. Howbeit, since this is the Lords doing, and that he is
pleased thereby to sift me, and to sound you (me for my patience and
comfortable enduring of these necessities, and you for your faithful obedience
and unfeigned love) I can not but with some measure of spiritual joy,
undergo mine own lacks, and again recomfort my spirits, because having to
deal with God and his servant, (who have learned from his holy example
greater than all exception, to accept of men according to that they have, and
not according to that they have not) I rest resolved, my good will shall be
accounted as a deed, specially since I am ready every where, without flattery
in my self, or favvning upon you, to acknovveledge to the glory of God, and
the good of his people, the great good turns that by you, I have received even
from the Lords own hands. And yet gladly would I, if I could tell how,
some way recompense, though not all, yet some part and piece thereof. And in
that respect indeed have I long looked and wished for, as some good occasion
from you, wherein it might have pleased you all, or any of you, to have employed
and used me to my pore uttermost: So, some sufficiency in my self, at the
leastwise in some mean measure to have requited that ouerflowing heap, of your
kindness and holy love. But hitherto (I deliver it with my grief of heart, as a
man sensibly seeing and feeling gods hand upon my self, both that and other
ways also) my expectation and hope has been frustrat, and my power very short
and skant. A small thing the Lord was pleased some years ago, to enable me in
two or three Letters, to perform for the comfort of some of my christian
acquaintance, (whose conflicts in conscience were great and many) which lying
by me, with some other simple things that I have done, and I being
earnestly requested to make that common to many, which was written for some
particulars, and lay at it were buried in forgetfulness, by me, the same also
being at the last ouerviewed by some good breethren whom I much love and
reverence in the lord, I was at the length overcome and could not choose but
yield. Wherein though some perhaps may suppose that I labor, in publishing an
unnecessary and impertinent matter, because these ignorant days require
Doctrine for building of men up in knowledge and judgment, and these
careless and contemptuous times, abounding with all manner of loosnes and
levvdnes, crave rebuke rather, and exhortation for care and conscience in the
duties we know, as a more fit and meet argument for this dissolute age^
yet being assured of this, both by mine own knowledge, and other men's
faithful reports, that sundry there are abroad in this land, and amongst the
rest, even some of you and yours, that as in regard of your spiritual combats
and bickerings, and the bitter assaults and temptations you have found
therein, had need of holy and heavenly comfort, I could not but as in a
general care, for all the afflicted ones, to whom I wish all the comforts
of God, as to my own soul: so in particular good vvil toward you your
selves (whose inward comfort, and outvvard joy, I would be glad and ready
to procure at all times, and by all means, if I could tell how, but acquaint
you and them (specially since it is one principal portion of the svveet Manna,
that the lord has provided for you) with such pleasant and delightful
consolations, and that out of the word as God by his spirit has wrought in
me, for the peace of mine own heart, and by me, though unworthy every way,
communicated unto some others. What root they may take or effects they may bring
forth I know not. Sure I am of this, my earnest prayers unto God, as in regard
of his religion and worship, and hearty purpose in my self, as in respect of
Christian good will, is, that all that mourn in our Sion, might reap some
good by the same: which if it cannot be effected, either by means of my
sin that meddle therein, or by reason that the svveet things published, cannot
so seasonablie or for lack of opportunity come to their knowledge, or because
that through diffidence they fore-close the way and passage of consolation
unto themselves, (in all and every of which deserts, I shall surely mourn
much) yet my hope and hearts desire is, that all of you (my good friends)
might receive some vvorthie fruit thereby, as well those amongst you that
have not as yet tasted of this bitter cup, (a matter that you must look for,
and make an account of, if ever you will feel how sweet the Lord is
indeed) while you perceive GOD sitting you, and furnishing you with the best
armor of proof that can be, before the day of battle dravve nigh: as those
that have been or are tried (that being the very state and condition of all
Gods children) God according to your present distresses, providing for you, and
revealing unto you, the present comfortes of his most faithful word, and
infallible truth, that so both the one sort and the other, having the power
of your own sins, in the sufferinges of his son, if not utterly removed
and clean taken away, yet very much lessened, and as it were beaten down,
you might not only the more earnestly, oppose your selves against satan in
his sleights and have an assured hope of a glorious and joyful victory,
against him and his assaults, but also may be enabled to stand, yea to overcome
in the day of evil, and to be more than co^querors through him, that has loved
you and washed you in his blood, who I doubt not shall shortly and mightily
also tread him and all his forces whatsoever, down under your feet. Now the
very god of peace sanctify you and al yours thorowout: and I pray God, that
your whole spirit and soul, and body, may be kept blameles until the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: whereof I doubt not, because he is faithful
which has called you, who also will do it. Good brethren pray for us, that we
may be ready in all things with vnfaignednes to do the Lords will. At London
the tenth of of this December. 1589.

Yours ready and assured ever in Jesus Christ. T. W. the Lord his unworthy
servant.

GRACE AND PEACE from God, etc.
BEcause I have not now a long time, either by writing or by word of mouth
heard from you, (good Sir) I grow into some uncertain imaginations concerning
your estate, (and by means thereof I freely confess it) not only into
neglect of some duty toward your self, (I mean coming to visit you, and
writing unto you such simple comfortes, as God has bin pleased to explicate
unto me, which I call simple, not as of themselves, for so they are high and
excellent, but as I have them in my 2. Cor. 4 7.
earthen vessel) but also into cold performance at the least, of some service
unto God, (I mean my supplications and prayers unto his majesty, The duti^ of
a Christian and faithful friend, toward his friend.
as on your behalf. To pray for you, when God has been pleased to give you,
and in you me (for I take the favors bestowed upon you, to be kindness heaped
up upon my self) through his merciful deliverance of you, a just and holy
occasion to praise his name, should be the sin of mine own soul, because it
were the offering up of a wrong sacrifice, and presenting unto God a Malac. 1.8.
blind beast (as it were) As on the other side, to strive to yield you comfort,
when you have received a rich abundance of the same from God himself,
through his holy word, and blessed spirit, were, as it might be thought to
do a needless and unnecessary work, for where there is fullness and
plenty, scarsitie and barrenness will little appear, and do small good.
From the former, though I would gladly, as in regard of the lack of sound
knowledge touching your present condition, and in respect of the dullness and
heaviness of my soul, as to other good works, so to that particularly,
cease till either from your self or others that are as your self, I should be
faithfully certified of the state wherein you are, that so I might, as a
feeling member with you, either unfeignedly Romans 12.15.
rejoice, in the asswaging of your trobles and trials, or else heartily weep,
and pity you, and pray with you, and for you, in the continuance and increase
of these distresses: yet will not the doubts that I have in me touching the
continuance of these calamities, and the duty that I owe unto you, as in that
behalf let me utterly leave off, but needs I must now and then, (according
to my poor measure) present you before God, and that by name in my requests
and prayers (though poor and faint) In the other surely, I cannot (God ayding
me) but enlarge my self to my uttermost, yea beyond it (if I could tell how)
because I know it to be the Lords assured truth that I shall deliver, and
though not fit perhaps now for your self (by reason of your present comfort
and joy) yet hereafter i may be, of more then necessary use for your self
and others also, when these dark and glomie days of assaults shall again
take hold of you.

In both which respects, as I rest persuaded that my poor pains shall not
utterly perish, so cannot I but thoroughly assure mine own heart, that both the
one and the other, shall be well accepted of you, who are wont much to make of
every thing that comes from me. In consideration whereof, I will the more
willingly assaie (God assisting me) the performance of the matter I purpose,
that is the yielding of you some such comfortes, as 2. Cor. 1.3.4.
the God of all consolation has given unto me, not only for the stay of mine
own conscience, but to the end also that I might acquaint others that are in
tribulation with the same.

The dealings of God with his dearest saints and servants (in this behalf
especially) are as we know, by the light of the world, and by experience in
our selves, and examples of others, that have gone before us, or live with us,
diverse and sundry, he throwing us down, and lifting us up, and psalm. 90.3.
turning us to destruction, and yet saying, return you sons of Adam: whose
ways as every manner of way, so in this respect especially, are much more
unsearchable, and past finding out, than pro. 30, 19
is the way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a serpent upon a stone, or the
way of a ship, going with a right fore wind and full sail, in the midst of
the main sea, till God be pleased in the multitude of his mercies, in some
measure to discover the same unto his servants.

What God will do with you (good sir) after so manifold and long trials is
unknown to me, because neither I, nor any other have Rom, 11, 34
been of his council, in such secret and particular purposes, specially
concerning others, whatsoever we may feel touching our selves. Howbeit, I
cannot otherwise think or be persuaded, but that you have been, are, and so
shall be for ever, and 9.23. Tokens to assure men to be the vessels of mercy.
a vessel of his mercy, wherein I am daily more and more confirmed, not only
by the christian carrying of your self, in the days of your former and
present troubles, you patiently bearing them, and earnestly calling upon God,
for heavenly strength to undergo, and overcome, but even by the very
afflictions themselves, that you felt or feel, God by them setting (as it
were) his own mark upon you, the better to know you for one of his own
sheep and sons, and so conforming you Romans and 8.29
unto the image of his best beloved in his sufferinges, that in the same you
might have a certain pledge of glorification with him.

Manifold and long afflictions a very grievous temptation.
Wherein though I acknowledge that it cannot be but very grievous, to be long
held and much exercised, and the rather because it is not one, but manifold
assaults and temptations, with which you are troubled on every side, yet
doubt I not, but that the issue and end that God shall work of all these, An
answer to it of the end.
shall be exceeding good, not only in regard of 2. Cor. 4.17.
a far most excellent weight of eternal glory, yt I know they pledge up in you
and other of Gods children, but of the effects also that for the time present,
they bring forth in you, Of the effects.
as adding an edge unto your prayers, which for the time, seemed to be cold or
dead rather: lessening, yea beating back the force of many other temptations,
which no doubt might strongly assault, and mightily encounter with you:
conforming you in unfeigned affection, to the obedience of Gods good will (a
worthy work doubtless, and a matter of no small difficulty) filling you, and
that for your self and others also, with the comfortes and consolations which
are from above, Afflictions to the faithful, not so much a cause of
discouragement, as to look to themselves, and to call upon God for aid and
strength.
which hardly but by such means we taste of, or attain unto, with sundry
such like.

In my poor judgment therefore, you may, yea you ought to be so far off
from being discomfited and cast down in this estate, wherein you are, that
you have rather just occasion offered you to Heb. 12.12.
lift up your hands which hang down, and to strengthen your weak knees, yea
to raise up your decayed spirits, assuring your self that howsoever the Lord
lead you along, in manifold and manifest afflictions, and carry you (as it
were) from one sorrow to another, yea howsoever he seem to bring you to the
pits bruicke, and make all the surges, and Psalm. 42.7.
waves of his displeasure, to rise up against you and mount over your head,
that yet I will not 2. Cor. 4 8.
destitute you, nor Heb. 13.5.
fail you for ever, as well because he tries you no otherwise, Two reasons.
nor exercises you no further, than he has done those that have been dear
and precious in his own eyes, as also because he is both faithful and
powerful to perform, both in heaven and in earth, whatsoever he has
promised to the sons of men, much more to his own servants.

Two apt similitudes declaring Gods love toward his children.
Wherein also no doubt he deals no otherwise with you, than earthly parents
do many times with their own dear children, who to make them the more
plainly see, and the more strongly to be persuaded of their fatherly love
toward them, and manlike strength for their deliverance, bring their said
children to the fire side, that so they may feel more than a woonted heat
thereof, and learn to fear it withal.

The like they practice toward them also in another element, namely in water,
not only carrying them all along the edge, brimme, or bancke, of some pond or
river, but now and then making semblance, as if they would throw or thrust
them into the same. And yet we know they love them no whit the less for all
this: nay we are assured of this, the more nigh they are to danger, whether it
arise from the negligence and ignorance of the children themselves, or seem
to be laid upon them from the very loving and natural parents, the more sure
and fast hold they take of them. And shall not we be much more persuaded, I will
not say of the like love, but of far Esaias. 49.15.
more exceeding love in God, toward his sons and daughters? with whose
favor toward his people, and power for his childrens good, no affections,
(...) might (I dare avouch this) not of any, but of all, not men alone, but
fathers and mothers in the world, (though lincked never so straightly unto us)
is no manner of way matchable, nor so much as meet to be thought or spoken of
with it, at the self same time.

Objection, answered by example.
Your troubles in the soul, and you^ dangers that way, cannot seem in any
equal or upright judgment, to be more grievous, or further past recovery, than
Jonas. 2.2. etc.
Jonas his were, when he was in the Whales belly: and yet the Lord commanded
that great fish, to deliver him up again, whose absolute authority he could
not withstand, but as a man that has his stomach surcharged, vomited him out.
And is Gods Esaias 59.1.
hand streitened now, or his power shortened? Psalm 77.8.9.
or his mercy abated, that he can not or will not perform as much for you? Or
rather does not God work then most mightily and mercifully both when in men's
eyes the way is stopped up, not only against a deed, but against hope or heart
to conceive it? To what end tend these comfortable promises, both of the old
and the new testament: Isay 42.16.
I will bring the blind by a way that they know not, and lead them by paths
that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked
things straight: these things will I do unto them, and not forsake the^: and
again: Math. 16.18.
the gates of hell shall not prevail against you: but to confirm us more and
more, A singular comfort far beyond expectation.
in the unchangeableness and certainty of his goodness toward us, and to
let us understand, though there be infinite bars and lets between him and
us, so that his mercy cannot seem to have any passage unto us, that yet he
will break them all to pieces, and overthrow 2. Cor. 10.5.
every high thing, that so we may plainly perceive, and effectually and
comfortablie feel, the incomprehensible treasure of his favor toward us?

If this be not comfortable, I know not what is: in which point of special
consolation, The cause moving to write more largely of this point.
I write now, both the more willingly and largely unto you, because I perceive
by your last (though long since sent unto me, unto which also I then shaped a
short answer, supposing because I heard not from you, yt that had satisfied
you) and by some report of sundry, that love us both in the Lord (to which,
for the further stirring of me up thereto, I add the daily thoughts and fears
of mine own heart concerning your case) that you have not only been terrible
shaken for the time, but and 12.7.
sore buffeted, and that not with some one mean temptation, but with many
great and grievous assaults: the consideration whereof raised up such a thick
mist before your understanding, whilst you dwelt too much, and ouerlong in the
minding thereof, and in the beholding of your own, both unworthiness and
weakness, that as the comfortable sight of Gods grace and goodness toward you
in Jesus Christ, seemed for the time to be vanished from before you, yea
altogether lost, (so you thought) in your self, and would have persuaded
others, that you were utterly condemned and cast away.

But be not any whit at all dismayed, A reason or mean to respect this
temtation.
with the violence and rage of this tempest, but rather comfort your self, yea
assure your self of this, that Satan deals herein no otherwise with you, A
similitude.
than a cruel and bloud-thirstie captain, besieging aninuincible and
irrepugnable hold, who at the first begins temperately and coldly (as you
would say) as well for the sparing of his own forces and charge, as to gain
some little credit with those that are beset: but when he sees that
preuayleth not, he does by little and little increase the fierceness of his
battery, and the bitterness of his assault: but not gayning that way neither,
he puts it al at once upon the last pushe, wherein having taken the foil,
he is glad also to betake himself to a shameful flight. And what though the
cannons roar, yea the double cannons thunder in such sort, that they make
heaven and earth to shake (as it were) and would seem to iumble them
altogether, yet in truth they are nothing else but sure pledges of the wasting
and wearing of your adversaries forces, and dishonorable running away on the
one side, and most comfortable messengers on the other side, of your happy
and joyful deliverance approaching, and even at the doors: which as it plainly
appears by this, A similitude
that even as a little before day break, the darkness is greatest, and then
afterward comes most comfortable light, step by step, and degree by
degree, the Sun with his brightness and heat, chasing away all those thick
mistes and strong smelling fogs so may we be certainly assured of it, by the
manifold examples of the word, and particularly of him that was possessed, Mar.
9.25.26.
with a dumb and deaf devil, out of whom when our savior charged him to
come, and to enter no more into him, he cried and rent him sore, and left him
for dead, taking (as we say) his pe^worthes then upon him because he knew,
that as his time was but short, so he should never after molest or vex him.

For your sins which you complain of, Accusation of conscience for the sight
and giltinesse of sin.
I suppose verily that they are more in your own judgment, than in the sight
of all the world beside, before whom notwithstanding your hard accusing of
your self, you have through Gods goodness lived an upright and unblameable
life, and that not only in the testimony of them that fear God, but in the
witness also of them that 1. Tim 3.7.
are without, which ought notwithstanding the greatness of your assault in
your self, to yield you no small comfort, that in the view not only of those
that can judge rightly: (such as Gods children are, who have their eyes
enlightened by the knowledge of his truth) you have carried your self
christianly, and yet if you had failed, would in the Prou. 10.12. 1. Pet. 4.^.
multitude of love (according to their duty) have covered a multitude of
transgressions, but in the judgment of those, that are led with prying and
malicious eyes (who many times observe in Gods servants, more than they
should, Of the accusation of a tender conscience.
or justly can, and the rather for their profession and troubles sake) have
lead a harmless and irreproueable conversation.

But let us grant that your own heart accuses you much. What then?
Accusation implies not conuictio^, much less condemnation, specially in such
a height as we imagine. And yet withal give me ^eaue to council you, not to
believe it further then it brings the evidence of truth with it. The wicked
have no profitable feeling of their sins.
This I am sure you cannot be ignorant of, that as the wicked want with profit
and continuance that sting of heart (with profit I say, because though they have
it, it does the^ no good: and with continuance, because it is but as a flashe
of lightning in them, raised up for their greater judgment, as soon vanishing
as it does appear) so the godly looking too much upon themselves, The feeling
of the godly.
and their sins, and secluding both from sight and sense, the view and
memory of Gods mercies, lay to hard and heavy burdens upon their own
souls.

Me thinks this rather would be stood upon, that since even from that, that
wounds them most, I mean the continual charging and accusing of themselves,
men that have their minds enlightened from God, may reap singular consolations,
they should labor even from thence to gather strong comfortes unto themselves
against their temptations, which they may do by this holy consideration, that
the heart wounded with the daily sight and sense of sin that is past, is
pushed forward thereby to speedy and unfeigned repentance (God to that end
setting the same before them, that so in the lothsomnesse thereof they might
make haste unto him) which otherwise as in the want thereof, it could not so
much as think upon, much less perform: is strengthened also against sin
that is to come, because hardly have any been found to fall into that which
they have with upright and daily judgment misliked, in themselves principally,
and in others secondarily, the fear of the former, causing them to keep a good
watch over themselves in the latter: and is provoked in and by themselves,
tenderly to pity and earnestly to pray for such, whose state that way forth,
they know and feel by experience in themselves, to be as lamentable and as
much to be regarded as their own. All which bringing with them the glory of
God, their own benefit and other men's good, that even in the least things,
cannot but yield them comfort, that seriously think thereupon, unless they
will deem Gods honor light, or their own comfort base, or the love of the
fa^thfull, and their welfare, a mean, yea a vilde thing.

But we will put the case, that your sins were as huge and as high, as your
self take them to be: yea let us imagine that they had spread themselves,
throughout both heaven and earth, and did reach from the one end of the world
to the other, yet who can, will, or dare deny, but that as God himself, so
his mercies toward us in Jesus Christ, Co. 3.20. The mercy of God in this
life chiefly appears in the forgiveness of sin.
over reaches them every way, and the rather since his means are no way in
this life more evidently manifested, than in the forgiveness of the sins of
his servants? Concerning which truth we may, and ought to be certainly
persuaded, not only by reason, A reason taken of Gods nature, which is
infinite.
taken from the infiniteness of Gods own nature, who being infinite himself
can have nothing in him, but that which is infinite, and therefore his mercy
being in him, must also be infinite, with whom (howsoever) our sins be in
numerable, as in respect of our selves: Psalm. 19.12.
for who understands his iniquity, or is able to account his transgressions?
yet they are finite and certain as in regard of himself, that and 147.4.
counts the number of the stars, and calls them all by their names: but
also from the large and most faithful promises, Of Gods promises.
that in every place almost of his word, for the underpropping of our weak
faith, he has plainly and plentifully propounded unto us: amongst which even
these most sweet sayings, seem not of the least reckoning: and 103.12
As far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins
from us. Again in another place: Isa. 1.18.
Though our sins were as Crimsin, they shall be made white as Snow, though
they were red as Skarlet, they shall be as wool. And again: Romans 5.20.
Where sin has abounded, there grace has more than abounded: with sundry
such like, with which I know you are acquainted, as having laid them up in
your heart, for the peace of the same, and having expressed them with your
mouth for the testification of your joy.

Hitherto I have labored, neither unsoundly, as in regard of Gods truth
propounded, nor unprofitably, as in respect of you afflicted, nor undutifully,
as inconsideration of my self travailing, generally to deliver general
comfortes against general transgressions.

Now it remains that I come, to apply particular consolations, (as if it
were) special medicines and plasters, to those peculiar offenses and griefs,
that you say are in your self, and it has pleased you to acquaint me
withal, to this end (as I take it verily) that of my poor store, and penury
indeed, you might yet receive some spiritual relief and comfort. What
measure of mercy I have received that way, he that has been pleased freely
to give the same unto me, best knows. Howbeit how small or great soever it
be, this does not a little encourage me to a liberal use of the same, that I
know certainly I shall not decrease mine own by that I bestow upon others,
but rather increase the same much, it serving me, (as the widows 2, King. 4,
2. etc.
pitcher of oil did in the days of Elisha, being miraculously increased) not
only to enable me, in some sort to pay my debts, though it be but five
shillinges in the pound (as we say) but the rest being sufficient, for my
self and my children to live upon.

But to those things which you object against your self, and to that first
which you first put down. Objections answered.


You say you are greatly troubled with manifold fears and much doubting. I
believe it to be true. And who would not be of that mind, if they considered
you, but as a man? how much more then, if they behold you as a godly man, in
whom such things are better seen, because natural blindness is somewhat
removed, and more felt, because hardness of heart, and benummednesse is in some
measure taken away? yea I am so far of from thinking these things to be
discomfortable to you (though as fear and doubting are in you, I cannot
approve them, because they are in us tainted through the corruption of nature)
that from the same as I take it, you may reap and receive singular
consolation, not only in this respect, that they bring forth in you good and
gracious effects, of hearty prayer to almighty God, careful watching over
your self, tender pity and compassion toward others etc. and all these in a
greater measure, than you feel and will confess: (and yet herein me thinks
you should do well to give glory to God, and according to grace received yield
his children a notable portion of comfort) but whilst you are herein become
like to ye saints and servants of God who have gone before you in the flesh,
and in the faith, yea even to Jesus christ him self, the eternal son of the
eternal father. David was a 2. Sam. 13.14.
man according to Gods own heart, and upon who^ the Lord had set his eye and
delight for much good: and yet who more afflicted this way the^ he, he
conceiving of God, as of one that was in utter displeasure with him, and that
had clean forgotten him, and quite taken his mercy from him? Of which if you
doubt, may it please you to peruse, Psalm. Psalm. 6. and 38. and 42. and 77. and
88. and 102.
6.38.42.77.88.102. (whither also for shortness sake I do refer you) and I
doubt not but you shall be thoroughly persuaded thereof. Act. 9.15. and 26.18.
Paul was an elect and chosen vessel, and that not only to carry Christ's name
among the gentiles, but even unto eternal life* and yet 2. Cor. 12.7
least he should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of revelations,
there was given unto him a prick in the flesh, and the Angel Satan to buffet
him: which least we should imagine to be peculiar unto him, he does in another
place affirm of him self and the faithful together: Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.
Though we doubt, yet we despair not. But what stand we repeating these petie
examples (which though they be pregnant for the purpose whereunto they are
produced, are not yet matchable with that that follows) since we may most
lively see it in him, who ( though he was compassed about with our flesh, was
yet free from the taint or stain of any corruption, and though he had
natural passions, was utterly void of extremity or sin in them, or any
thing else whatsoever) being the very true and natural son of God, and equal
with the father, was so far humbled and brought low, that he did yet
notwithstanding through fearful feeling of Gods wrath, and extreme anguishe
in himself, demand of his father Mat. 27.46.
why he had forsaken him? Of whom also the Apostle witnesses by the spirit,
Heb. 3.7.
that in the days of his flesh, he did offer up his prayers and supplications,
with strong crying, and tears unto him, that was able to save him from death,
and was heard also in that which he feared. Now if the strength of
temptations could bring our savior to so low an estate, and hard condition,
(as a man would say) so that he seemed, not only to be at the very brinke,
but to be plunged into the pit, not of fear alone, but of doubting and
distrustfulnesse, (as it might seem) who yet notwithstanding was the only
beloved of God, and had received all the graces of the Spirit generally, and
therefore no doubt the spirit of fortitude and power particularly, in most
absolute and full measure: shall we think it strange that the sons and
daughters of God, (who during the time of their mortality upon earth, have
sin dwelling in their brittle bodies: and who also, howsoever they be beloved
of God, are not affected for their own sakes, but for his sake alone: and who
notwithstanding many gifts they have received, for the gathering together and
building up of themselves and of the fellowship of saints, have yet not so
much as a spark or crum of grace, compared with the infinite and
incomprehensible treasures of Gods goodness in Christ) be greatly assaulted,
and daily beaten on every side, yea as seems unto them selves and others,
sometimes overwhelmed? Neither herein alone stands your comfort (good sir)
yea our comfort, that we are Romans 8.19.
conformed and made like unto the servants of God, yea, the only begotten
son of God, in his and their sufferinges: but that as he caused his
almighty 2. Cor. 12 9.
strength to appear in their poor weakness, making 1. Cor. 10.13
an issue out of their temptations for them, that they might escape, that the
l^ke mercy, favor and strength he will show unto us, and in us,
notwithstanding our infirmities: because that as the Esaias. 59.1.
Arm of God, is not (through length of time, or working of wonders any manner
of way) shortened, so is the fatherly affection, that he sets upon his
children utterly unchangeable. Whereof yet we may be the better assured,
because he has performed these great works, not only in some of his
excellent servants, through his grace and strength alone, but in Jesus Christ
our head and Captain, whose victory as in other respects, so in this
particularly is in such sort become ours, that we cannot choose, but in him
become more Romans 8, 37
than conquerours (as the Apostle says.) For if his absolute obedience, be
sufficient to take away our sins, and the imputation of his righteousness,
powerful enough, to make us stand as righteous and innocent, in the presence
of our heavenly father, why should not his vanquishing both of death, and Heb,
2, 14
him that had the power of death, that is the devil, be an assured pledge also
of our ouercomming, since we know and believe that he conquered not for
himself but for us, that we in him might be, (as was even now said a little
before) more than conquerours?

Of great impatience or waywardnes.
The second point that you complain of, as in regard of your self, is, the
great impatience and waywardness, that you find at home, in your own soul,
the same sometimes breaking out so far, that it is not only made manifest
unto God and men, through disquiet behavior, and unsavory words, but many
times also breaks forth into better cursinges.

Answer.
This I cannot choose bu^ acknowledge to be hard and heavy, as in respect of
your self, and the iniquity high and great, as in respect of God. Howbeit
even against this also you shall well perceive and find, A Comfort.
that the Lord has provided comfort for you, yea comfort in his ho^y word:
which word of his, as it far exceeds all human speech and writing, that
ever have bin, are, or shall be, and is indeed to speak propeperly, the only
truth: so doubtless the comfortes therein contained, infinitely surmount all
worldly consolations whatsoever, and are indeed only to be taken for the
true joys.

In which respect I wou d have you not to be afraid, for the magnifying of Gods
singular mercies, and for the extolling of the comfortes of the word, to your
spiritual joy, to urge and pr^^^e against your self, as hard as you can, and
as far as any manner of way you may with truth, your own sin, and yet I
am sure you shall never find it to reach further, than to blaspheme against
the father or the son, to which depth of iniquity for any thing I know it
has not atteined. But suppose it had ascended so high: does not yet our
savior (being truth it self) in the word of all truth assure us, 2 Math.
12.32.
that every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, yea eue^ blasphemy
against the son of God? which yet that we might be the better assured of,
Paul.
we have a comfortable example in Paul, who confesses of himself against
himself, for the plain proof of the truth of this point, that over and
besides that he was 1. Tim. 1 13.
a persecutor, he was a blasphemer, and yet found favor with the Lord to
obtain forgiveness. To which particular example, tending doubtless to no
small comfort of conscience, you may add, for the further not only enlarging,
but strengthening of your own joy, that the sins that you have committed, or
the blasphemy that you have spoken, have not been done or said with a high
hand, or of prepensed malice, but rather of infirmity (though happily against
knowledge) and the same proceeding from a passionate and troubled spirit,
rather than of any wilfulness, which weakness in you Satan by Gods
appointment having you upon the rack (not to fetch any thing from you
against your self, but to make your patience, constancy and faith, plainly
known to others, effectually felt in your self, and graciously accepted in his
own eyes) has used as a mean, more and more to trouble your heart, but yet
not to overthrow your hope. And even this consideration of the manner of
offending, have Gods saints observed in themselves, not so much to lessen
their transgressions (for they know that every sin in it own nature Romans
6.23.
deserves death) but to comfort their consciences in the days of their
distress, without which indeed, they can hardly serve God religiously, or
faythfullie discharge any duty either public or private. And this to be
true, we may amongst others behold it in Paul, who says of himself in the
height and depth of his grievous iniquities, 1. Tim. 1.13.
that he was received to mercy: for that he did it ignorantly through
unbelief. And if this aforded him comfort, I see no reason why it should not
yield you consolation, specially since your sins, (for any thing we know)
are much less than his, and you have to deal with the self same God, who is
now, as then, Psalm. 103 8. Exodus 34.6
slow to wrath, and of great compassion, passing by sins, and forgiving
iniquities, and restoring mercy unto thousands of generations. Neither is that
of less force in my mind, An other testimony to comfort.
to lessen your sin and to increase your comfort, that either before the
offense committed, or in the deed doing, or after it was performed, you had a
spirit within you, that did not only tell you it was evil, but checked you
and controlled you, in and about the action it self: whereunto also though you
were drawn, and did for the time sleep, and delight therein, yet would it not
g^ue you rest, till such time as it had caused you, vnfeignedlie to hate it,
humbly to confess it, and in a notable measure of 2. Cor. 7.10.
godly sorrow, soundly to repent you of the same, which thing as the wicked
doubtless, The wicked hate not their sins.
seldom (or not at all) atteine unto, for they notwi^hstanding the ugliness
of sin love it, A special grace to gods children to hate their sins.
and hide their transgressions continually: so are they special graces,
bestowed upon such penitent sinners, as God is pleased, through his mercy in
Christ, to call unto himself: which as it may appear by many particular
examples of the holy scripture, so seems it to me to be iustificable, by
these words of the Apostle. Gal. 5. i7.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so
that you cannot do the same things you would. And in another place, Romans 7.19.
what I would that do I not but what I hate, that do I.

Pull up your heart therefore (I pray you) and be of good comfort, An
exhortation.
s^^h that from the sins that you have co^^^tted, specially in the manner of
the doing of them, and from your self specially in the wrestling affections
that you (...) in your self against sin, God and his word would have you to
reap comfort and consolation.

And as for your part^^^lar case of a troublous heart, and disq^^^^t spirit,
what is it else I pray you, but even that that has taken hold of Gods saints,
as well as of you? does not Iere^^ah himself curse (as it were) himself, and
the mother that bare him, and brought him into the world, when he says:
Iere. 1^.^0.
Woe is me, my mother that thou have born me a man of contention to all this
land: And does not Jonah, when God debated with him about the withering of the
gourd, that God prepared to be a shadow over his head, and to shelter him from
heat, and demanded of him, Iona. 4.9.
whether he did well to be angry for the gourd, did not he (I say) answer
and say I do well to be angry unto death? And yet these were excellent men
and worthy prophets, and such as had received rare grace from God: no
marvel then though men of less savor fall more? But most plainly shall
you see this in Job, of whom I pray you give me leave to write largely for
your good. He opened his mouth so wide, that he bitterly cursed the night
wherein he was conceived, Job. 3.1. etc.
and the day wherein he was borne: yea, he thundered out execrations against many
excellent creatures of God, which could not be but blasphemy against the
Creator himself, whose glory is not only much joined with, but greatly
appears in the work of his own hands, as we may perceive by this that
Solomon says: Pro. 17. and 14.31.
he that oppresses the poor (or as it is in an other place) mocketh him,
reprooueth or reprocheth him that made him. Yea if we read his Book with
judgment, we shall see that he does not only thus indirectlie (as a man
would say) in his words, oppose himself against God, while he hudleth out
heaps of curses against his works, but proceeds so far, that he seemed
not either affrayde or ashamed, to take God (even God himself) by the face,
and to accuse him, (though most faslie) of injustice, as may evidently
appear, as well by Iobes own words, and discourses, in many places of his
said book, as by the Lords own voice and answer, out of the whyrlewinde,
Chapter Job. 38. and 39.
38.39. And yet notwithstanding, this man found favor with the Lord, not only
to be restored to a far better estate in worldly respects than before he
had, but also to have the iniquity of his heart and mouth freely pardoned,
yea he himself, and that by the holy Ghost himself, to be made a worthy
pattern and example, to all ages to come, as of many virtues, so particularly
of patience, which you say you lack: for proof whereof remember what Saint
James says of him: Iame. 5.11.
ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the Lord
made: for the Lord is very pitiful and merciful. Where mark I pray you,
that he notwithstanding all his frowardness against his friends, who came (no
doubt with a mind) to visit and comfort him howsoever, either through his own
corruption, or their evil, he was provoked to say, ^ b 16.2.
miserable comforts are you, all the sort of you: notwithstanding his horrible
execration of the good creatures of god, which never did him hurt, but many
wai^s tended to profit, and pleasure him, for ease, comfort, health, and
strength: notwithstanding all his inward impatience and fretting against God,
and outward fury, and open charging of him, to do him injury and wrong, is
yet set before us as a worthy pattern of patience, and a mirror of a mild and
quiet spirit.

These things perhaps may seem strange to you, and you in your imagination
may suppose, that they can hardly agree well together. The work of
regeneration o^ reformation.


But if you will labor wisely to discern the work of reformation and
regeneration that God has in his children from the remaynders of their own
corruption, that being always good and excellent in it self, and th^s naught
and abominable, yea many times also much darkenening the other: and consider
that notwithstanding our sins, God is mercifully pleased in Jesus Christ, to
cure and to cover them all, and to receive us unto himself in him, not only
as though we had never sinned, but as if we had actually and really fulfilled
all righteousness: and have received through the holy ministry of the word,
and the gracious working of of the spirit, the eye of faith to see, and the
hand of faith to lay hold of, and to apply this particularly unto your own
self, in the state and condition wherein you are, you shall easily know in
your understanding, faithfully feel in your soul, steadfastly believe in
your heart, and frankly confess with your mouth this worthy difference,
and most comfortable point, wherein also for the better instruction, or
persuasion of you, or both, I will (by your good patience) spend a line or two.

Of joy and fear in one person, and at one time.
Joy and fear doubtless, in human judgment seem one of them to be set
against another: and yet in the holy gospel, it is reported of the women,
which went to see Christ's sepulcher, that upon the glorious apparition of Gods
angel at that place, and the declaration of Christ's resurrection, Math. 28.8.
they departed quickly from the sepulcher, with fear and great joy: fear as I
take it, at the strangeness of the sight, and much joy, for the comfortable
and gladsome tidinges that they had heard. And what I pray you is indeed more
contrary one unto another, than belief and unbelief? The like of belief,
and unbelief.
And yet the father of the sick child in the Gospel, having received this
comfortable speech from our Savior himself, Mark. 23.24.
that all things are possible unto him that believes, cried out with tears,
and that when he prayed, Lord I believe, help my unbelief, calling and
counting, that beginning of faith, that God had wrought in him belief, and the
doubtfulnesse and distrust of his own heart, unbelief. And if it have been so
in him and others, and we stedfast^y believe the same, because we see it is
revealed unto us in the written word of God, why should we not persuade our
selves, that the like is, and may be in us, because Gods works are this way,
now as then, all alike.

But we are hyndered from the comfortable sight, and the joyful feeling
hereof, one while by suffering of our minds to be wholly taken up, with
the beholding of our own sins only, forgetting in the mean while the
graces and favors, that God has been pleased freely to bestow upon us, for
his glory and our good: and an other while by imagining, that whilst we have
not perfection of mercy and goodness, here we have received no acceptable
measure of grace and love: the former of these be^ing dangerous, utterly to
ouerwhelme us with distrust, and the latter pressed and ready to cause us to
deface Gods mercies in us, but both of them powerful, to deteyne and withhold
us, from yielding due glory to God, whilst which way soever we look, we
think we have nothing (having yet received something) and so yield him not
holy praise and thanks, Psalm 50.14.23. and 69.32. and 11.16.12.13.
the best and only sacrifice, that he requires at our hands for all his
favors.

As for that which seems herein most to wound you, namely, your blasphemy
against God (as you call it) or speaking evil of him, I would pray you, over
and besides that that has bin said already, to weigh this following, and see
whether it may not satisfy you, concerning that great doubt, yea or no. A
comparison or similitude.


Put the case that some one, that had borne you singular good will, not only
for worldly considerations, but in the truth also: and as a sound testimony
thereof, had every where as occasion had been offered, given you a due and
just commendation, for the good parts that be in you: and yet afterward
puffed up in a haughty imagination of h^s own heart, or forgetting your great
favors showed him, or his own former friendship professed and practiced, or
mislead by some lewd and hypocritical company, (as al and every one of these
things, are strong and mighty (no doubt) to carry men away) should either
by himself, or together with them in company, either think or speak evil
of you: Tell me I pray you how you would behave your self toward such a
one, specially if he should unfeignedly confess his offense, and protest
sincere sorrowfulness of heart for his sin? surely I doubt not but the Romans
5.5.
love of God shed abroad into your heart, would make you ready and willing,
with a sound affection, to forget and to forgive and to reciue him even as
though he had not fallen. And shall or can you, (which in respect of Gods
infinite favor toward you, have not so much as a crum of love toward men)
show yet notwithstanding, such a larges of the same? and god 1. Ioh. 4.8.
who is love it self (as the Apostle says) be skant and pinching, as in this
respect? for mine own part, rather than I would think or say so, I would hold
and affirm, that the bottomless depths of the huge and great Ocean, might be
dried up and want water, before the ponds and the cesternes, that in a parched
land men have dug unto themselves, or any thing that is more absurd and
unreasonable than this, if any such can be found.

Doubting of his election to eternal life.
The last but yet that not of the least importance, wherewith your heart is
troubled, is that you cannot feel your self to be one of those, whom God
has marked out to eternal life.

Wherein I would first have you to know, and persuade your heart of this, that
as the miseries of the reprobate, The reprobate cannot truly conceive, much
less feel their condemnation.
and their condemnation also, is more, I will not say than is well felt, for
feeling they have little or none, but well conceived their hearts not being fit
to think either of their sin, or judgment due unto them for the same: so
many times the favor of God is certainly much more, toward and in his
servants, than either they themselves, or others for them can well perceive.
For as it is most true, that natural blindness, and benummednesse of heart,
with a sensual delight the wicked take in sin, pursuing all manner of
iniquity with pleasure, will not suffer the^ to see their damnable estate, at
the least wise to dwell upon the contemplation of it with fruit, because
through impenitencie of heart, they be 2. Tim. 2.26.
held captives of Satan at his pleasure: so it is as certain, that by reason
of the remaynders of a dark mind, which rests even in the godly (as yet) in
part, unreformed, they be sometimes as far off from conceiving spiritual
favors from God. And no marvel, because being spiritual things, they must
be 1. Cor. 2.14
spiritually discerued: and we know, that as other graces, so that of a
disc^^^ing spirit, is not only in us in part, but ma^^e times seems to be
quenched in us, and hidden from others through the ashes of our corruption. And
what reason can be showed to the contrary, but that if want of sight and
feeling in the wicked can for the time (though not for ever) put out fear and
pa^ne, and all sense of the same: but also that the relics of sin in the
righteous, and the sight they have of it, and the ^eare and grief of heart
that they conceive for it, should for the time, though not always, bleare and
deface, the hope and the joy, that God would ha^^ them to conceive, Satan also
in his make^ working no doubt in all these temp^ations of the wicked, and the
godly, that ^o he might (if he could t^^l how) prevail upon all, both good
and bad.

By which you may well perceive, that in this most high, What the godly in such
a case, ought to do.
yet most comfortable point, you are to go beyond your own reach and
feeling yea to depart from your self: (who by reason, sometimes of blindness,
and so^etimes of partiality, are unfit to be a judge in th^s cause) that so
being spoiled o^ trust and donfidence in your self, o^ in the Iere. 17.5
arm of flesh and blood ^ls where you may repair unto him, th^^ alone is the
God of all strength, both ou^ward and inward, and who will indeed for you and
all his, effect that, which shall be most meet for his glory, and your eternal
comforts.

And this is the second thing that I would pray you well to weigh, namely, that
as according to the truth of the holy scriptures, God has pleased, through
the infinite mult^tude of his mercies, in Jesus Christ, to elect you to li^e
everlasting, Eph^s. 1 4
before the founda^ions of the world were laid: so has he in time plainly
manifested unto you, and by you unto others, that his great grace of your
eternal etettion, first in vouchsafing you, (though unworthy of your self,
yet for Christ Jesus his sake) through the ministry of his holy word, and by
the powerful working of his blessed spirit, an effectual calling, so yt he
Act. 13.48. and 16.14.
no sooner spoke unto you, but withal pearsed your ears, and boared your heart
to understand and believe, he working in you also this readiness, with
unfeigned affection to say, 1. Sam 3.10.
speak Lord for thy servant hears: God dealing with you herein for your
soul, The spiritual means of Gods mercy.
as he has done always with you for your body, that is bestowing upon you,
the spiritual means of his mercy, and making them mighty in you, to work
his will, not unto judgment, as in the wicked, but to eternal salvation, as
in his saints and servants. And this I take to be that, which the Apostle
says. Roman. 8. Romans 8.30.
Whom he predestinate, them also he called. Secondly by giving you care and
conscience, to adorn these excellent graces, of his eternal election from
before all times, and effectual vocation in time, with the fruits of faith,
and the deeds of blessed obedience, and that both in the services of piety
toward his majesty, The duties of piety.
you having a mind to be often and earnest with him in prayer and
thanksgiving, adjoining thereto for your better direction therein, daily
reading of the word, deep meditation, and christian confeference therein: and
also in the duties of charity toward men, Of charity.
you not only not deteming from any, that which belongs unto them, but
rendering unto every one that which is right and equal, and specially having
care of the communion of saints, Romans 12.15
weeping there with them that weep, and rejoicing with the^ that teioyce. And
this is that that the Apostle says in another place, that Ephesians. 1.4
God has chosen us in Christ, that we should be holy and without blame before
him in love. And again: 2. Tim 2.19.
The strong foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, the lord
knows who are his: and let every one that calls on the name of Christ
depart from iniquity. In which respect also it is, that Peter admonishes us,
peter. 1.10. Why these duties are propounded to us in the word.
to give diligence to make our calling and election sure, by good works.

Not that either the one or the other, either as in respect of God, are
uncertain, Romans 11.29.
for his gifts and calling are such, as he repent him not thereof: are unsure,
as in regard of our selves, because we have found through his goodness in us
(though not that that we should, yet) a mind bowable and ready to harken
unto, to love and obey the fatherly voice and calling of our gracious God. But
therefore are these things propounded unto us in the word, on the one side to
stop the mouths of careless blasphemers, who in the vain imagination of
their own hearts, fear not to affirm, that if they he elected, they may
live as they list: and on the other side to lift up the weakened spirits of
many of Gods dear servants, who finding either the faith of their election,
or the fruits following the same, few and skant in them, begin to call
their election into question: wherein over and besides the discomfortes and
discouragementes, that causelessly they cast upon themselves, they do great
injury to God, whilst they make him that is certain in his purposes and
acts, to be Number. 23.29. Isa. 51.8. I^a. 1.17.
as wavering as mutable man, and then to be subject to alteration and change
when they idessie fantasy or imagine the same. Yea they speak contrary to
common sense and reason: for if the sins that are from our selves, may (as they
ought indeed) justly cast us down, shall not the graces that are in us from
god, be much more mighty to raise us up? What, is God become less than man?
or are his mercies inferior to man's transgressions?

But we will put the case that we failed in those good works, that that
hitherto has bin put down, and that out of the very word of truth,
concerning the fruits of our faith were false: yet see, what even in such a
case also, if it were so, the holy Ghost says, for our full persuasion and
resolute comfort: e It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, The
whole work of s^luation depends altogether on Gods mercy in Jesus Christ.
but in God, that shows mercy, that so the whole work of our salvation, and
every part and piece of it be ascribed only and wholly, to his free favor
toward us in Jesus Christ. For as this is sure, that God saves not us for
our good works, be they never so many or excellent, because he shall have
always some thing for matter, or manner or end and all, to say against them,
and us for their sakes, and to hold that, were indeed to euamate Gods free
mercy, and to annihilate Christ's sufferings, and to puff up flesh and blood
beyond all measure and truth: so he will not condemn us (us I say, and not
men) because of our eu^ll works, though they be never so many and grievous
(always provided that no man abuse this doctrine of truth and comfort, to
licenciousnesse and carnalitie, nor extend it beyond the persons of whom we
mean it: namely the elect and faithful, who as they have received this sweet
promise from God, and 8.^.
that to them that are in Christ there is no condemnation, so they have this
given unto them that they walk not after the fl^she, but after the spirit)
Exodus 33.19. Rom 9.^.
For he will have mercy on him, to whom he will show mercy, and he will
have compassion on him, on whom h^e will show compassion. And this is it that
the Lord him self says in Esaiah: Isa. 43 25.
I even I am he that puts away their iniquities for mine own sake, and
will not remember their sins. And in Jeremiah, establishi^g (as ^t were) a
new contract with his Servants, he make Jesus a principal part of the
covenant: I^re. 31.34. He^. 8.12.
That he will forgive all their iniquities, and remember their sins no more:
or as it is al^eadged by the holy Ghost in the eight Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will remember
their sins, and their iniquities no more, using all these words, of
unrighteousness, sins, iniquities, etc. to assure us, that neither the
heynousnesse, nor the multitude of our transgressions, shall for ever separate
between the Lord and us, but that of his infinite mercy, he will receive us,
and though we had not offended.

A comparison or similitude.
Of which we may be the better assured by this, that if we would give credit
unto the word of an earthly man, specially if we had some experience of his
fidelity, and that in matter of great importance (and yet we know me^ to be
but men, that is frail and inconstant) we should much more believe the truth
of the eternal our God (confirmed unto us by the death and bloudsheding of his
son, the best pledge of immutabil^^^ that can be, and that in causes of
greatest weight concerning us) who alwais Mala 3.6.
remains like unto himself, and who rather than he will fail us in his
promise, or falter with us in the performance of the same, giving us less the
he has said, will enlarge himself, (I cannot say, beyond his word and
truth, for that remains always as large as himself, and God the God of
truth shall never be found a lier) but beyond our heart and hope I am sure.

And surely for your self, in my mind this is one point that much persuades
me, and may yield you comfort, that never can be utterly taken away (howsoever
it may for the time be somewhat lessened, that you belong unto the election of
God, and are (as it were) Isa 49.16.
graven upon the palm of his right hand, that you have not only patiently
sustained, (which is a rare virtue) but mightily vanquished and subdued (which
is a greater grace doubtless) in him that is the God of your strength, many
and the same long and bitter temptations, which had you not belonged to God,
and he himself had not reserved you for days and times not only of comfort
in this life: but of eternal joy, you could not have endured, much less
overcome: for as this is a certain truth, yt Psalm 34.19^
many are the miseries of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all, and that h^s children are conquerours over many assaults, by the strength
and power that they have received from John. ^6 33. Rom 8.37.
him: lo our only temptation, and the same as short and small as may be, is
able to quail the strongest Gia^t, amongst the reprobate and to throw him
down headlong, into the bottomless pit of hell, as experience of the wicked
(who in this respect to withstand, a^t weaker then wa^er) and sundry
particular examples of former ages, and of our present time, do plainly p^oue
unto us, if I thought it convenient to allege them.

Thus you see my mind, and poor judgment, concerning your scruples, in such
measure and manner deli^^red, as God has enabled me. Where also I must confess
I would gladly end, as being almost weary in my self, and tedious (I fear
me) unto you, saving that the duty of holy love that I bear you, will not
suffer me to let slip a nece^sarie admonition, that even now comes to
mind, and saving also, that your present distressed estate (as I fear)
calls for the enlarging of my self, so far as I may accomplish some more
particular course of comfort, than as yet I have delivered.

Touching the former of these two, An admonition.
let me entreat you, (I beseech you) as the truth is, not to imagine as I
know some do, that there are always like effects and fruits of Gods grace
in the hearts, and conversation of his people, I mean either as in regard of
feeling, or action, for we know by that, that we have noted in others, and
observed in our selves (if ever God gave us grace to mark the one, or the
other) that there is every day, yea almost every hour in a day, an
intercourse of the same, God by his spirit many times moving us to good
things, and ouerruling in the strength thereof, our corruption: and sometimes
again the power of our iniquity, preuayling, and always getting the upper
hand, the Lord (no doubt) thereby providing, for his glory, whilst we
attribute all the praise of our well doing unto him, (to whom indeed alone
all praise and honor belongs) and for our good and that in a double respect,
not only whilst by this means we are made humble and lowly, before him and
men, and in our own eyes especially, having special recourse unto him by
prayer, for heavenly strength, and coming to our brethren, for such spiritual
aid, as they have received from him: but also whilst we learn, on the one
side to loath that which is from our selves, as corrupt and defiled, and on the
other side to cherish and foster that which is from him, as good and pure,
according to that rule of the Apostle, 1. These. 5.19 20.
Quench not the spirits, despise not prophecy.

A similitude.
The Sun it self a very glorious creature, is not, no not in the summer
time, always alike hot and bright, but sometimes is covered with clouds,
that keep back the brightness, and hinder the heat of the same from us. The
like may we say of another celestial body, the moon it self, An other.
which over and besides ye ordinary eclipses that it does endure, sometimes
ascends higher, sometimes comes sower, and is many times in the winter
season, Others.
especially kept from us, by thick mists and dark fogs. Neither need we for
this to look so high, for from terrestrial or earthly bodies may we perceive
the same. The trees in the fields, and the plants and herbs in the gardens,
all winter long not only want any good fruit, but seem not so much as to
have a leaf on them, yea the very truncke and stock it self makes show in
man's eyes to be dead, and to lack that life, that we call vegetative. And yet
there is a sap or natural moisture, that lies hid in the root, which when
it is refreshed with the heat of the sin, and comforted as it were, with the
dew that falls from heaven, will yet notwithstanding in due time prove unto
us, that the tree, plant, or herb, was never dead whatsoever we supposed. But
what need we to go out of our selves, and from our own bodies, to view this
matter? we have as plain a demonstration as may be. Our bodies to day fresh
and lusty, and to morrow wythered and dried up, Psalm. 118.83.
as a skin bottle that hangs in the smoke: Another.
and yet in time raised up again to have natural moisture, and to perform
with strength and agilitie, as worthy deeds as before.

And even such doubtless for a while is the state of the children of God, The
application of these similitudes.
who through the heinous offenses that they have committed, and the strength of
temptations, that they do endure (speecially when they are pressed upon them
by the sting of their own heart, or Satan's malice) and wherein oftentimes
through the power of natural corruption, they lie sleeping and snorting (as it
were) a great while, appear unto men (yea very many think and say so of
themselves) as persons forsaken of God, and remedy less in this life, and
past hope of recovery for that which is to come. It is true that such men's
cases are (for the time) specially before men and in themselves, hard and
heavy. And if we should say or think otherwise, we should contradict Gods
truth, which tells us that Heb. 12.1^
no afflictions (much less this great one) is for the present ioious* but
grievous rather, and stand up against common sense and reason, which plainly
proves to our faces their condition to be pitiful.

And yet for all this, it is not as they affirm, desperate and unrecoverable,
but rather thought not as in respect of it self yet as in regard of the
consolations that God intermingl^th with it, and the good fruits that he
brings forth by it, very comfortable.

And therefore how ought you, A consolation
and such as you are to be raised up (I come now to the second point, namely
consolation) upon whom the Lord himself has set such infallible notes of
your adoption and election unto eternal life in Jesus Christ? that no cloud
that the enemy has interposed betwixt you and God, or no mist that in
imagination you have raised up in your self, to stop the comfortable
Sunshine of Gods favor unto you, nor no extreme frost or cold of winter,
howsoever it be hard or sharp for the time, and sensibly felt of you, can
kill the seed that is sown in your heart, by Gods word and spirit, or
disanull the 1 John. 2.27.
annoynting, Ephesians. 4.30
wherewith you are sealed against the day of Christ: so loving, so faithful
and powerful is God, in and for his Saints, and that not only when they are
assaulted with foreign forces, but when they are assayed from within, and
have (as a man would say) the motions of their own mind, and the imaginations
of their own hearts and heads, not only to conspire against them, but even to
betraie them into the hands of their most cruel and deadly enemies.
Objections answered.
Howbeit, it may be that you will say, your self thinks otherwise of of
your self.

But be not your own judge I pray you, as well because judgment in ye
especially, belongs not to you, but unto god, t. Cor. 4 4
to who^ only it appertains to pronounce a right sentence: as also because
the way is slipperie here, and men (yea otherwise good men) may easily be
deceived.

For as in persons that are sick in the body, it sundry times falls out, A
similitude.
that of some melancholic conceit in themselves, or fear that they have to
die, they receive the sentence of death in themselves, yea and sometimes the
Physicians give him over, and they are ready to take their lean of them, and
yet God the Lord of life, says they shall live, and as a proof of his power,
restores them from deaths door: so is it many times, with Gods children, in
this spiritual disease and sickness of their soul, wherein as it is much
more easy to be misled, than in bodily sickness, so many times when al have
^orsaken us, and we have destituted our selves, and failed in our own spirits,
yet God the 2. Cor. 1.3
God of all mercy, and father of all comfort, renueth his unspeakable favor
upon us and calls us back again (as if it were) from death to life. Again,
Another.
as men that in their own judgments seem sick unto death, and are so far
from hoping after health, that they can not so much as think of it, even with
imagination, as many times wast and wear away, and be brought to deaths
door and yet for all that, the standers by, as learned physicians, and
faith^ull friends for certain and undoubted tokens of happy health, and good
recovery, even such doubtless is the state and condition of many distressed in
conscience: and amongst the rest, your case particularly, wherein whatsoever
you say of your self, or utter against your self, yet I ^t many other,
(though not the best physicians, yet your unfeigned familiars) that have now a
long time known you in God, and his truth, have seen in you, since the day
and hour of our first acquaintance until this present time, and yet still
do beho de such euidencie and clearnes of the graces of Gods spirit
(notwithstanding your long and continual complaints) as all the smoke
^muther, mystes and fogges, and whatsoever else else that Satan by him self and
his suppostes, has or can cast out against you, shall never be able to take
away the clear sight of them from us, or move us so much as once to doubt, of
the comfortable reviving of them in you, even unto eternal life. And I hope
we have the spirit of God, and by the grace thereof, as also by the light of
his Word, and experience that he has given us, are able to deserve some
thing in this behalf, though not so well in others, as in our selves (for
that shall we never be able to do) yet in others also.

Wherefore to make an end where I began, Be of good comfort (good sir) I
beseech you, and wait with patience the Lords joyful appearing, whose you are
doubtless, and whereof you may be assured, because you have him Romans 8.31.
on your side, and therefore not fear, who shall or can be against you: and
because also you have his children standing with you and for you, not only
suffering the same afflictions in body and soul, that you do and so learning
by themselves to remember you in bonds, as those that are bound with you, but
with all holy comfort, as in respect of your self, and with all earnest
prayer, as in regard of the Lord, ayding you to their uttermost: yea because
he, that James. 1.17 Gracs from God bestowed on his elect.
is free from shaddowe of tyranny, has bestowed so many excellent graces of
his his upon you, as sound knowledge, steadfast faith, unfeigned love, christian
patience, and a notable measure of holy obedience to his blessed truth,
although that in some of these, many go before you yet, in all of them I hardly
know any of my godly acquaintance in Christ, that goes beyond you. And yet
farther you may the more certainly persuade your self of the truth of this
point, because you have cast him so dear a piece, even the heart blood of his
best beloved son, whom he has given, as for the testification of his
singular love toward man, so to this end also, John. 3.16
that every one that beleeth in him shall not perish but have eternal life.
And if that which men buy dear, they esteem, precious, and cannot abide at any
hand to have it perish, surely God will not see that lost, that he loves so
tenderly, and which he has redeemed to him self with so great and high a
ransom, 1. Pet. 1.18
yea with such and excellent an most precious jewel. To all which if you will
ad the manifold victories that here to fo^e he has given you, against sin
and satan, and all their cruel and craft^e assaults, he even then (as it
we^e) most miraculously delivering you, when neither you nor any for you, could
so much as once dream of a way (much less behold it) how you might escape,
certainly you may take it, as the voice of God from heaven, that he will not
now (specially since he has vouchsafed you so many merciful means of a
ioifull deliverance,) throw you off or taste you away: but deal rather with
you as he does with other his servants, Phillip. 1.6
make perf^ct in you, the good thing that he has begun in you, even until
the day of Jesus Christ, and cause you Act. 24.22
through manifold tribulations to enter into his own kingdom, 1. Cor. 9.25. 2.
Tim 4.8 I^mes. 1.12. 1. pet. 5.4
and crown you there with eternal glory.

And what though you think it long, before the Lord come in comfort to you,
yet know, 2. pet 3.
that the Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slacknes,
but that he that will come, will come quickly, and will not tarry. His nature
is not psalm 103.9
always to be chiding, neither will he keep his anger for ever, (as the
Prophet says) Joseph would not continually dissemble, his tender affection,
toward his unkind brethren, but must of necessity Genesis 43 30.
break forth into tea^es, and weep upon Beniamins neck. And shall we think
that the Lord is less compassionate? If we do so, we belie God and dally
with, yea, deceive our own souls,

I deny not, but he may for a time indeed, h^de his loving countenance from
us, Ex^d. 33 23.
and show us after a sort (as it were) his dark parts, and that the better
either to prove our patience, in trying how we can for a while forbear
that, which we exceedingly desire, and (as it were) hunger and thirst after,
or else to cause us the more highly to esteem of the same: For this is
naturally in us, in the continuance of Gods favors, to make little account
thereof.

Howbeit, this we may assure our se^^ues of that though psalm, 30, 5
weeping may abide at evening, yet joy shall come in the morning, psalm, 89, 2^
and that his loving kindness he will not take from us for ever, nor
falsify the word, yea the oath that is gone out off his mouth.

And me thinks that hereof you, not only amongst, but above many other,
should be thoroughly persuaded, as well by the view of your own estate, as
by the consideration of his most gracious nature: we believe his mercies, yea,
you believe them, to be so great, yea so infinite that they cannot be (as a
man would say) contained within himself, but must of necessity ere long,
(even as continual springing fountains, that will ouerflowe all, and make
every thing fruitful and pleasant where they come) break forth and show
themselves not only generally to all, but in a special manner to some,
chiefly Esaias. 66.2
to those that are poor, and of contrite spirits tremble at his word, and 62.3
and mourn in Sion, for to such is it in very deed that the Lord will look
and have a special regard.

Amongst the which, since (if I know any) you your self may justly be
numbered: you can not but believe, that you shall have a plentiful portion, of
this ouerflowing favor, because you be as certaynelye enrolled in that
number, as if your name were particulerlye put down.

And as for your state, you and we together know it to be long, tedious, and
hard, where in notwithstanding you ought to comfort your self, because you are
assured of this, and that not only by diligent observation of natural courses,
that there is no tempest or storm so great, but there insueth even in the
neck of it, (as a man would say) a very quiet calm, nor any winter so cold
and deadlye, but there comes both a springing time, and summer also after:
neither yet by the examples of some worthy partitular persons alone, as
Abraham, Job, David, and such like, whose ends and issues you have heard off,
to be comfortable and (as it were) heavenly, but by manifold experiences in
your self, the Lord making you in your own heart to find that to be true,
which as he had promised in his word, so he faithfullye performed to his
servants in all ages, and has accomplished to and in you, that 1. Cor. 10.13.
he will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able, (to wit, to bear
through him) but will even give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be
able to bear it.

Wait therefore with all christian patience, for the Lords Springtime and
harvest, wherein he will come himself being reconciled unto in Jesus Christ,
and comfortablie call you forth, yea take you (as it were) by the hand, and
walk with you into the fields and say, Cant. 2.11
Arise my love, my f^ire one, and come thy way, for behold vvinter is past,
the rain is changed and gone away: the flovvers appear in the earth, the time
of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our
land: meaning under these earthly similitudes and comparisons, all
spiritutuall and heavenly graces, together with the excellent fruits and
effects that by the same he will work in you.

Concerning which, as you must not be discouraged, either with the length of
time, in which they are withhelde from you, or the hardness and sharpness, of
the instruments and means, whereby they are brought to pass in you: so must
you assure your self, that at the length they will come, because he is
faith^ull, and willing and able to perform that has promised, and their
delaie doubtless will be recompensed, with all manner of spiritual abundance.

For even as in husbandry, the daily moisture, hard frostes and thick
snowes that fall in the winter season, do indeed nothing else, but season the
ground, mellowing it and making it fit for the better receiving and bringing
forth also of that, which is committed to it, and shall be sown in it,
howesoeuer it seem contrary sometimes unto man's judgment: So no doubt, the
rain, the frostes, the snow, and the ise of your afflictions, are (as it were)
not only prepaparatiues, for the ground of your heart and soul, fitting you
for, yea filling you with the pleasant fruits of righteousness and religion,
which are (as it were) Gods summer and harvest phil. 1.11
fruits and so in Christ, shallbe accounted and accomplished in you.

Till which time come, assure your self of this, that as he Ioh. 14, 18.
will not leave you (always or utterly, no not very long co^fortles, for so he
has faithfully promised in his blessed word, but when you seem most in
danger and dystresse, will visit you, and replenish you with all heavenly and
holy comfort, that being a most proper and fit time for him to work in,
for the manifestation of his power in the eyes of the wicked, and the
declaration of his love toward his own people: so he will not destitute you
of all necessary strength, both to undergo and to overcome too, whatsoever it
shall please him as your most merciful father, now or else at any time
hereafter, to lay upon you, or to exercise you withal.

As for me, loo^e what due^ye it shall please you to prescribe, and God shall
vouchsafe in mercy to enable ^e to perform, I will not (God aiding me) fay^e
therein: yea, I say unto you, not only use me, but command me in the same,
and if you find me not therein ready to my uttermost, I am content you shall
write me up with such dissembling and faithless friends, as abound almost
every where.

This I promise, and by his strength, that must perform all in all, I hope I
shall accomplish that I will not cease in my poor measure to pray for you,
till such time, as I shall understand, that as by many other means, so
particularly by that, God himself shall be pleased, to bestow upon you your
full deliverance: and I have occasion to yield him humble thanks, for
granting the graces that I and others, as on your behalf, have soundly
(though in weakness and wantes) prayed unto him for.

And thus with hearty thanks for your manifold and continual kindnesses
toward me and mine, and humble salutations in Christ, unto you, and your good
bedfellowe mistress H. I do unfeignedly commend you to the Lord Jesus, whose
since you wholly are, and to whom since your heavenly father, has given you to
be kept, I doubt not but you shall continue fast and remain sure, ^^en unto the
end, not only because he ^o whom you are committed for custody, Math. 28.18,
Math, 28, 18
has al power given unto him, both in heaven and earth, but also because we
know, in the truth of his word that is the truth it self, John 10.12
that he loses none of those, that are committed unto him, and 6.37.
nor casts any such away as come unto him. At London the last of this May.
1589.

Your worships, as bounden, so ready always in all that he may. T.W. the
Lords most unworthy servant.

GRACE AND PEACE from God, etc.
WE have (right honorable) if my poor judgment deceive me not, The
afflictions of the spirit most grievous.
manifold proofs of this point that the afflictions ^f the spirit, are much
more great and grievous than the diseases or trou^les of the outward man. For
first the ^olie Ghost himself in plain terms ^ffirmeth it, saying: Prou.
18.14.
The spirit of ^ man will sustain his infirmity, mea^ing thereby, his
outward pains and griefs of what nature or kind soever, ^ut a wounded
spirit who can bear ^: understanding thereby the troubles ^f the heart or
soul, speaking as though ^ee should say it is not only a very ^ard thing to
perform, but that very ^^we also are found, that can indeed endure it, yea
none but such, as are endued with some special grace from God himself.
Secondly, the very lamentable complaints and earnest prayers, that Gods
Children (who indeed are most, I had almost said only exercised that way,
this I am sure of, with fruit and profit) have especially in that distressed
case, made and powered forth, do plainly prove it. Take David and Paul, in
stead of many, or all if you will: the one auouching that there Psalm. 38.3.
was nothing sound in his flesh because of Gods anger, neither rest in his
bones by reason of his sin: and the other crying out, Romans 7.24.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
By fearful effects.
Thirdly the fearful effects, that the one brings forth more than the
other, it taking for the time, appetite from the stomach, sleep from the eye,
hearing from the ear, and all manner of delight, lawful and unlawful, outward
and inward from the whole man, as particular examples of Gods saints do
manifestly show (for which see the places quoted in the margin, Psalm.
77.2.3.4. etc. Psalm. 102.3.4 5.6.7. etc.
and some such like) and experience in our selves (if ever we have been in that
estate) or the condition of other men (if we have heedily observed it) will
sufficiently warrant the same unto us.

Neither yet are these things propounded, to dismaie and discourage those that
are after that sort exercised, for surely their afflictions and troubles, be
hard and heavy enough, and indeed do rather crave all manner of comfort, than
any depressing at all their sin, and the sight of the same, with the
apprehension of Gods justice and judgment against them for it, being as the
Prophet says in another Psalm (vz. 38.4. gone over their head, and become as
a weighty burden, to heavy for the^ to bear: or to throw down above
measure when they come to it, such as have not entered into that course or
combat. For howsoever as yet, they have not felt weakness or wantes in
themselves, or Gods strength assisting them against sin, yet then shall they
find that true that the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10.13
that God is faithull and will not suffer them to be tempted above that they
are able, but will even give the issue with the temptation that they may be
able to bear it: or to stop any from striving, to yield to particular persons
in that distress, any relief or comfort that God has given them themselves,
for that were to cause them to neglect, the best duties of holy love toward
men in their misery, we being enjoined by the Lord, to Galat. 6.2
bear one an others burden, Romans 12, 15
and to weep with them that weep, and to deprive themselves of comfort, in
the days of the like danger, for how can they look to be pitied, that have
had no care to express the same to others.

But rather to comfort them that are afflicted, and that even in the greatness
of their grief whilst they see no ^. Cor, 10, 13
other temptation to have taken hold of them, but such as appertains to man,
yea to the best men that have been in this life, which also the greater they
are, the more are they therein conformed unto the Rom, 8.17
image of the son of God Jesus Christ in his sufferinges: who patiently
underwent, and mightily overcame (not only for himself, but for us) all that
that we bear but in part, and yet shall at the last through him, be in and of
the same 29
more than conquerours: and to prepare others before they come into those
conflicts, that so, neither an imagination of their own strength never as yet
assaied, nor a conceit of the weak force of the foe, never well felt, nor the
vnwontednesse of the troubles that they must endure, nor the greatness or
length of the trials that they are to sustain, Ephesians, 6.10 11. etc.
nor any other thing whatsoever may cast the^ down, much less overcome them,
but provoke the^ rather to be prepared in the strength of God, the power of his
word, and the might of his spirit, valiantly to encounter with ye same Luke,
21, 2^
lifting up their heads and hearts knowing that the time of their redemption
draws nigh: and to excite and stir up the last sort, in all christian pity
and bowels of compassion, to enlarge themselves to their uttermost, yea beyond,
it, if they could tell how, toward such afflicted souls, that so according
to the 2. Cor. 1.4.
consolations, which they themselves have received from God, they may minister
comfort unto others distressed, persuading themselves further of this that the
more hard the cure and work is, (specially if they feel the same left them,
as a spur to prick them forward) the more glory shall thereby rebound unto
God (the Phillip. 2.13. James. 1.17.
only worker and giver of all good things) and the more comfort to
themselves, whom God has bin pleased to use, as worthy instruments, and
that not in some mean affair or business, but in this great duty of
comforting the distressed, Iud. 23.
and saving them with fear, pulling them out of the fire.

Now as by that which has bin already delivered, we may sensibly see a
difference between bodily afflictions, and the inward sorrows of a troubled
spirit: so it is not to be doubted, but that even amongst those inward griefs,
temptations and assaults, that such endure, some are more sharp, and sore
than other some, though indeed the least and shortest of them, be very
grievous to flesh and blood (or to speak as the Apostle does Heb. 12, 11
no chastisement for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous rather) I
will not say to bear, for I suppose verily every man will confess it, but
even to think of: which were the point doubtful we might labor to prove but
being a manifest and confessed truth, it shall not be amiss to spare that
pains, and to travail in that, which is somewhat more hard, and may be of much
better use.

Amongst those troubles of the inward man that are greatest indeed, none in
my simple judgment, fitteth more nigh to, or pincheth or presses more hard
the hearts of the dear saints and servants of God, in the days of their
flesh and combating, than the sight or memory of the fearful sins that
they have committed against his blessed majesty: which also as they aggrauate
unto themselves, not only in their own nature, that is to say, as they are
sins, and violations or breaches of the law of God, but in the circumstances
of time, place, persons, and manner of doing, as that they were committed in the
days of knowledge, publicly, and by men of great note and name etc. all which
does add unto iniquity, and causes the same to be more grievous, so they
increase it unto themselves, as in regard of ye bitter effects they bring
forth, as separation between God and man, a taint and curse upon the creatures,
horror of heart in our selves, infirmities upon the flesh, temporal and
eternal death both of body and soul, without great grace and singular favor
from almighty god, etc. in all which respects, the weak heart had need to be
Can. 2.5 1 Thessalonians. 5.14
stayed, least it faint and fall down without hope of rising up, and the
wounded spirit calls indeed, for some of the wine and oil of God to be
powered thereinto, least otherwise it fester and become irrecouerable.

But against al and every one of these (though sore, assaults I confess) we
shall see that we have singular and special consolations, and that not few in
number alone, and these weak and feeble also, but many and the same very
mighty, yea every one of them strong and sufficient it self, to beat back
this assault, though it were much more powerful and forcible, then it is,
that so being compassed about, and as it were backed with such a Heb. 12.1
cloud of witnesses, our hearts might be the more steadfastly up held not only
in present comfort, but in hope of all good things to come.

I say therefore, that whether we respect the father himself, who otherwise 1,
Tim. 6, 16
dwelling in light, that no man can come unto, has yet notwithstanding
plentifully and plainly revealed himself unto us in his word: or by the eye
of a steadfast faith look upon Jesus Christ his son and our savior, who is
also the brightness of the glory and the Hebrew. i. 3.
engraven form of his person: or regard the blessed word of almighty God, in
all the parts and pieces of it, but specially in the promises thereof
propounded for our comfort: or consider as we should and are bound, The
Sacrament. 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3. etc. Rom, 4.11.
the holy sacraments that he has given us in this world, as pledges of his
goodness toward us, and seals of the faith, that he has wrought in us, or
might well as we ought, that right order of discipline and government,
Discipline of the Church.
that he has established in his Church, for the repressing of evil, or
maintenance of all well doing: or diligently mark the singular favors that
he has plentifully shed out upon those, that have gone before us in the
flesh, and in the faith: or see and feel the great graces, that he of his
own good will has bestowed upon us our selves poor and miserable wretches
that we are: or behold with a sound judgment sin it self, specially, as in
regard of the good, that God makes to flow from it (howsoever it be odious
and ugly in it self) we shall certainly find, that from all and every one
of these, we may without doubt gather strong arguments and forcible reasons,
assured and continual comfort, for the forgiveness of all our sins, and by
consequent also for the sound and Christian peace of our own hearts.

Now to the end, that that which has been generally spoken, and shortly
delivered may yet appear to be as true and certain, so plentiful and large,
let us come more particularly, and at length (as it were) yet without
tediousness, to deduct and lay out these points.

For the first we have the very merciful nature, Of the nature of God
himself.
and ready inclination of almighty God in himself to show pity and
compassion, to those that are humbled, who howsoever he declare himself in word
and deed armed, and that with justice against the proud Pharisee, or benumbed
and senseless professor, as he has good cause indeed, for their continuance
in sin, and want of a trembling spirit, stands yet notwithstanding, in his
fatherly compassion and love, most graciously affected, to such as quake and
sloupe before him. Which that we might be the better persuaded of, he has been
pleased plainly to tell us, and that in his holy word also that he has no
desire that Ezech. 18, 23
the wicked should die, but rather that he should live: and again, that he
is the Exodus 34, 6, 7
Lord, strong, merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant to
goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquittes and
transgressions, etc. and that he will give to such as Isaiah, 61.3
mourn in Sion, beauty for ashes, and the oil of joy for mourning, and the
garment of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness, or as it is in the prophet
Ezechiell Ezekiel. 9, 4, etc.
a mark, by which they shall be known and freed from the common calamity and
destruction of the wicked.

Of the truth of all which we may be the better assured, because it is the
word, not of a mortal man, who will in the hypocrisy and corruption of his
heart doubt and dissemble, but of the eternal God, (who as he is not deceived
so does he not deceive, and who being of an unchangeable nature remains
fast and sure) and the same with a clear voice, and in words of much
euidencie published and proclaimed, not once and away (for then perhaps in the
distrustfulnesse of our own hearts we might quickly call it into question)
Psalm. 86, 5, ^^ Psalm. 103.8.9 The son of God and mediator.
but sundry times, and in many places of his holy word.

Secondly, who sees not, that even in Jesus Christ, we have a merciful
measure of spiritual comfort, pressed down and running ever against this
sharp temptation and sore assault? and that not only, because as he is God,
he is Math. 9.5
able to forgive sins, and as man being Heb. 2, 17
made like unto his brethren, he is pitiful and ready for that and all other
good works, but also because in him dwells, Colloss. 2, 9
all the fullness of ye godhead bodily, we having in him Colloss. 1, 14
redemption through his blood, that as the forgiveness of sins, in whom
likewise 2, Cor, ^, 20
all the promises of God, are yea and amen, he himself being made of God unto
us 1, Cor, 1, 30
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption: who alone was
Isaiah, 53, 5
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquity, bearing ye
chastisment of our peace, and healing us through his stripes he himself and
now other and 63.3
treading the wine press of gods wrath against us for our sins: whom since
God has been pleased to Romans 8.32.
give unto death for us all: how shall he not together with him give us all
things also? If all things, why not then the free pardon, and full forgiveness
of all our sins? Shall you imagine that God will say al, and give us but some?
that were to make him a lier, who is not Romans 3.4
only true, but truth it self. Or shall we deem that for the testification
of the largeness of his liberality, he will vouchsafe us some pety favors, and
withhold graces of much greater excellency? that were to make god deal worse
with his dear children, then earthly princes do, with their dutiful servants.
I say therefore again if all things, why not remission of sins, specially
since in him are hid (yet so as they daily are plainly, and in good time
shall be plentifully displaied, and abundantly, yea perfectly communicated
unto his people) Colloss. 2, 3
all the treasures of wisdom, knowledge, mercy, and whatsoever else is
excellent in God, as in respect of himself, or comfortable and profitable, as
in regard of us.

Thirdly, the blessed book of God it self, does in the holy commandementes
of it call us, and in the comfortable promises thereunto adjoined, and
contained therein allow us, that notwithstanding the haynousnesse and
heaviness of our sins, yea the rather for that (because without the sense of
it, neither can we well perceive our own estate and misery, nor effectually
feel the excellency and riches of Gods mercy and favor) to James. 4.
draw nigh unto God that so he may draw nigh unto us, who never thrusts them
back, much less drives them away that come unto him.

In the old testament none seems unto me more plain and pregnant, then
these yt are in the book of ye prophet I say, ye holy ghost there saying: Isay.
i 18
Come now and let us reason together says the lord: though your sins were as
crymosin, they shall be made white as snow: though they were red as Scarlet,
they shall be as wool. And in an other place Isay. 55.1.
bids every one that is thirsty, come ye to the waters: and ye that have no
silver, come buy and eat: Come I say, buy wine and milk without silver, and
without money.

In the new Test.
And in the new Testament, these of our savior Christ which is the eternal
wisdom of the eternal father are most comfortable and sweet sayings, Math.
7.7
Ask, and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find, knock and it shall
be opened unto you: and again Math. 11.28.
: Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you:
Take my yoke on you, etc. and you shall find rest unto your souls, for my yoke
is easy, and my burden light. What can be more lightfull or delightful? By
this commandment we know, that our coming to him, shall be accepted of him,
for he commands not the doing of that which he abhors: And by the
promises we are encouraged, yea assured to receive, because Mat. 5.^1
no one jot or title of his word, much less his faithful promises shall fall
to the ground, and it is yet more and more confirmed unto us, in the person of
of him that speaks it, I mean Jesus Christ, who being John. 1.18
in the bosom of the father, has fully revealed him and al his will unto us.

As for the sacraments, The Sacraments and the end why the they were ordained.
the very cause and end of their institution, does propound comfort unto us in
this point, they being ordained by God, and appointed to be administered in his
Church, not only to put us in mind of him and his graces, but to be as helps
and aides to guide our weak faith to Christ himsel^e, yea to make us partakers
of him, and all his merits, specially the forgiveness of our sins. In who^ since
there is not only of himself all fullness, but that that also is true, John
1* ^6
which is else where spoken in the Scripture of him, that of his fullness we
have all received, and grace for grace, that is, grace upon grace, or graces
heaped one upon another, or (as a man would say) all abundance of all
manner of grace, we may assure our selves, that with him and in him, we shall
find this grace of the forgiveness of sins, and eternal life also, because
as there is no other sacrifice, for remission of sins, but he alone as the
Apostle plainly proves in the epistle to the Hebrews, so there is no other
Act 4. i2.
name given under heaven wherein men must be saved, but the name of Jesus.

That which is spoken indefinitlie of both the sacraments together, shall better
appear in the particular considerat^on of them by themselves, and a part.

Concerning baptism, Gods spirit in many places affirms, that it Baptism.
saves us (which yet least any should ty to the deed done, Mark. 16.16.
it adioineth with it faith, the Titus 3.5
renewing that is wrought in us by the holy ghost, and terms it, 1. Peter 3.21
not a putting away of the filth of the flesh, but a confident demanding, yt a
good conscience makes to god) which yet it could not do without forgiveness of
sins before going, ^. Cor. 15.50
for flesh and blood cannot inherit eternal life: but to what end we urge this
since Peter Acts 2 says, be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins.

And that which the servant says (yet by the spirit of God) touching
Baptism, that the master himself ( John. 4.34 The Supper.
who has not the spirit by measure) avouches in plain terms touching the
supper, saiing: Math. 26.28
this is my blood of the new testament, that is shed for many, for the
remission of sins.

And that the holy Discipline of the Church it self, Discipline of the Church.
should afford us much comfort against this temptation, who is it that either
can, will, or dare deny, that will either consider the author of it, even God
himself in Jesus Christ, Psalm. 56.5.15
most inclinable to mercy and of great goodness? or the ends whereunto it was
ordained, it being appointed not only for the prevention of evil, 2. These.
3.14
in the several members and whole body, but for the 1. Tim. 5.20
gaining of men unto God, even after sin and transgression, has en^red or
prevailed, they being 1. Cor, 5.5
chastised a little in this life, that their souls might be saved in the day
of Christ: or the persons exercising or executing the same, that is the Church,
and such worthy men therein as the Church from among themselves, for their
rare excellent graces bestowed upon them from God, have choout unto themselves,
who having not only the promise of the presence of god, that is, that Mark.
18.20
whersoeuer two or three are gathered together in his name, he is in the
midst of them, but also the assistance and direction thereof, for where the
spirit is, there is power also, ready to receive and admit upon repentance,
even as the Lord himself: whereof that we our selves might be the better
assured, the holy ghost has bin pleased to commit into their hands, and to
give unto them power also John. 20.23.
to absolve, and to loose such as are bruised in spirit, and touched with a
godly sorrow for their sin: yea for the further strengthening of our weak
faith therein, he has not only granted them and us together with them, his
most certain promise, Mat. 18.18
that whatsoever they loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven, he meaning
thereby a most sufficient and full confirmation thereof, ratifieng it as
verelie to our spirits, even as though we had heard his own voice speaking
unto us out of the clouds, but also has left us some example of it in the
Word, and that not of one man committing some small transgression, or petie
sinor offense (as we say) but such 1. Cor. 5.1
iniquity as is not heard of, no not among the Gentiles, that one should have
his Fathers wife: Concerning which fact, and reconciliation upon repentance
for the same, the Apostle says else where, 2. Cor. 6.72
It is sufficient for the same man, that he was rebuked of many: so that now
contrariwise you ought rather to forgive him, and to comfort him, least the
same should be swallowed up with over much heaviness, wherefore I pray you
that you would confirm your love toward him.

In the holy scriptures or word of God, we have infinite store of examples,
Examples of Gods mercy,
and be compassed about on every side, (as it were) Heb. 12.1
with a thick cloud of witnesses, which both for their multitude, and for
their faithfulness, are greater then al expectation, and to whom for
themselves, and in whom for others, God has been pleased plentifully to
declare as the riches of his mercy generally, so particularly, that he Deuteronomy.
7.9 2 Chronicles. 6.5
has kept faith and truth with them, and will do so for ever with all those
that succeed them in faith and a Iame. 1.17
good conscience, that so our hope and heart might rely upon him alone, with
whom is no variableness, neither shall never turn. Let two very worthy and
plain (one whereof is in the old, and the other in the new Testament) serve
for all? Psalm. 32.5 Psalm. 1^ 3.3
David from an unfeigned heart acknowledges it, and that more then once, that
the Lord in the multitude of his mercies, forgave both the punishment of his
sin, and all his iniquity whatsoever. And Paul with a frank and free mouth
openly confesses, and that others might hear it and believe it, says. 1.
Timoh. 1.15
This is a faithful saying, and worthy by all means to be received, that
Ie^us Christ came into the world to save ^^^ers, of whom I am chief.

And if we respect their persons ^^ey were men notwithstanding their ^^^^s,
dearly beloved of God: the one taken Psalm. 8.7^,
by the Lord from the sh^p^^^d, and following the ewes with young, to ^eed his
people in Jacob, and the other pulled from persecuting the church, to preach
and to carry the Lords name among the gentil^s. Act. 9.15


If we consider the sins that they speak of, we shall find them no less 2. Sam
^1
than adultery, murder, 2 Samuel 24.
pride, ^. T^^. 1.1^.
blasphemy, persecution, oppression, and sundry such like. If we regard the
sou^dnes and sincerity of their hear^s, they speaking and delivering that, as
without a mind doubtless to deceive ot^e^s, so without partiality and respect
as in regard of themselves, and even as they fe^t Go^s favor for themselves,
and for others, we cannot choose but believe it, and that we have our part and
portion in it, and the rath^r because God has given us th^se and (...) like
holy examples to be (as it were) seals set unto the promises, for the more
strong establishing of the same in our hearts, we persuading our selves, that
as we may and ought to profit by the presidents of gods 1. Cor. 10.11
judgment, to work in us unfeigned fear and reverence of his majesty, and
care of a better course, the^ ever we have practiced: Romans 15.4
so we shall make use of examples of his mercy, to styr us up, and to make in us
a holy feeling of all spiritual comfort and heavenly joy. And that the graces
of Gods holy spirit, The ^^^ces of ^ods spirit.
which he himself in Christ has bin pleased plentifully to bestow upon us,
and mo^e particularly, that our Jude. 20.
precious and holy fa th, together with the s^u^rall fru^ts and ef^^cts that
flow from the sam^, should pledge unto us this great favor of God in the
forgiveness of our si^s, through the death and obedience of his son, it ^s as
clear as the sun in his glory and brightness: and that not only beca^se,
if that which is from sin, and from our selves, may justly discourage us and
beat us down, then that which proceeds from God who is d greater than all,
and e only good, can not choose, but being lively felt and sensibly
perceived, but raise us up again, also because the scripture it self, in terms
that will admit no dark or doubtful interpretation aduoucheth that God 2,
Cor, 8.12
accepts us according to that we have, and not according to that we have
not.

For faith, we have amongst others that comfortabl^ promise of holy writ.
O^ Faith.
Haba^. 2.4 Rom 1.17
The just shall live by faith, which cannot be understood of life here, as well
because it speaks of ye tune to come as also because as in respect of brea^^
and being in this world, the wicked have ^t as well as the godly, and we know
that it was the Lords purpose by his sp^r^^, in that speech to discern
between Ez^ch. 22.26
the precious and the vile.

If we well consider, Unfeigned l^ue
either the love that God has wrought in our hearts toward his saints, or
the v^^^ygned mind, that through his great goodness we find in our selves, to
forget and forgive other men's trespasses, we shall find that to the one and
the other may give us firm hope, and assured comfort of the forgiveness of our
own sins: the holy ghost affirming of the former, that by this we 1. John. 3.14
know we are translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren:
and for the other, our savior himself, not only teaching us to say, Math. 6.12
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us but also
declaring in plain terms, that except we forgive from our hearts each one
to his brother his trespasses, Math. 18 3i
there is no forgiveness of ours before God, declaring withal, that where that is,
the other cannot be wanting, because God is not only much more ready, but
infinitely much more able, to show sinners that notable favor then men are so
manifest it one to another.

Wherein it shall not be amiss for us to mark this further, Of merits.
that howsoever all the good things we are enabled to no, cannot as they come
from us nor yet of themselves in that respect mer^te Gods mercy because Esaias
64.6
al our righteousnesses are as filthy and stained cloutes before him, and
Luke. 17.10
when we have done all that we can, we are yet unprofitable servants) much
less any one of the^ separated from the rest, the weakness whereof arising, not
from the good things themselves in their own nature, and as they come from
God, (for so they are and must be very strong, and exceeding good) but by
reason of our corruption, and the imperfection ye through the same cleaves
thereto, yet all of them together, and every one of them selves may be
effectual pledges unto us, as of Gods great favor shed abroad into our hearts,
so of ye crowning of those his graces in us with wonde^ful honor, and glorious
immortality at the last.

Lastly it seems unto me, Of sin it self.
that even from sin it self, though not in it own nature, for so it is
abominable in the Lords sight, Ha^a^. 1.13
whose pure eyes cannot s^e evil, neither yet in the, effects that commonly it
brings forth, for so is it always bitter, making a fearful Isaiah. 59.2.
separation between the Lord and us, and having for the Romans 6.2^
wages of it, eternal death and damnation, yet even in the heynousnes and
heyght thereof, being accompanied with gods favor in the forgiveness of the
same, we should and may reap an invincible argument, of much consolation and
singular comfort.

For wherein shall or can the mercy of God in this life, so much appear toward
his people, as in pardoning the sins of his servants? To whom had they not
offended neither could gods mercy that way forth, have bin declared, nor
Christ for the^ have bin 1. Tim. 3.16.
God manifested in the flesh, who therefore came into the world, not to call
Math. 9.13.
the righteous, but sinners to repentance, and did therefore appear amongst
men, not only that he might 1, Ioh. 3.5.8.
loose the works of the devil, but also that he might take away our sins.

Outward tokens of Gods favor.
All the outward favors that we have in this life, if we should reckon the^
up, one by one, as for example creation, preservation, health, wealth, etc. or
bind them all in a bundle together, cannot so sensibly set before us Gods
love, because some of them are in some sort common to other creatures with men,
and reach but to the body for the most part, and this time present only, the
wicked many times being before Gods saints in some of the same, God also Ps
17.14
filling their bellies with his hid treasure, their children having enough, and
leaving enough of their substance for their children. Spiritual graces.


Nay, I will say more, many of those spiritual graces that God vouchsaseth
unto his Church, as h s word, sacraments and prayer, of which the holy ghost
says, he Psalm. 147.19
shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel, and
he has not dealt so with every nation, do not so plain^iy ex^r^sse the
favor and love of the Lord toward his people, as the free pardon and full
forgiveness of their transgressions: the reason is, because Math 22.14
many are called, and few are chosen, and diverse be in the Church, that be
not of the Church: This grace also extending it s^^e, not only to body and
soul in says life, carrying with it comfort and the peace of a good conscience
here, but reaching even unto the life that is to come, eternal salvation and
life everlasting, being an inseparable companion, to the forgiveness of our
sins.

And that we might the better be persuaded that this is a very special
favor, God himself takes upon himself as a principal point of his glory,
this great work of forgiving, laying ^saiah. 42.25
I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for my own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. And in an other Prophet rehearsing the graces, that he
will vouchsafe unto his people in the new Testament, he reckons up this as
the last and chiefest, Iere 31 34.
I will forgive their iniquity Romans 5.20
, and remember their sin no more, that being true here, that the Apostle
says, that where sin abounded there grace abounded much more.

To conclude then (good Madam) out of all that is gone before. The conclusion.
S^^h in this point of the forgiveness of sins God who is greater than al is
Rom, 8, 3
on our side, and therefore we need not care who be against us: Jesus Christ
stands for us, who is Math, 3, 17
his dearly beloved son, in whom only he is well pleased, and through
whom he has 2, Cor, 3, 19
reconciled the world unto himself. the word generally and part^cularly the
promises in the same, which are in Jesus Christ 2, Cor, 1, 20
yea and amen speak comfo^table things unto us: the holy sacraments ordained
by God for the strengthening of our weak faith, seal up that great and
gracious favor unto us: the dis^pline and voice of the Church, which is the 1,
Tim, 3, 16
pillar and ground of truth, and (as it were) Gods own voice from heaven,
confirms it: the particular examples o^ his saints, having in former time
found it and felt it true, do ratify and confirm the same: the peculiar
fauo^s that God has given us our selves in this life, and namely faith 2,
These, 3, 2
(which all men have not) with the sound tru^tes thereof, do pledge it up: and
that god that makes the Psalm, 76, 10
rage of men to turn to his praise, and in the beginning comma^nded 2, Cor. 4,
6,
the light to shine out of darkness, now makes sin to serve, for the
magnifying and manifesting of his mercy, and the comfort and good of his
children who is it that can distrust? or rather who has not just cause, with
the Apostles and saints of God, to sing and say, 1. Cor. 15.54.55.56.57
death is swallowed up into victory, O death where is thy sting? O grave
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the law. But thanks be to God, which has given us victory, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. And again: Romans 8, 38, 39.
I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels nor principalities, nor
powers nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor dep^h, nor
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Thus (good Madame) I have (as your honor sees) plainly delivered my poor
judgment, in this worthy point, touching the comfortable feeling of the
forgiveness of sins, and some such assured seals and pledges of the same,
as by Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19, Joshua. 1, 8 Psalm. 1.2. John, 5, 39,
daily reading of the holy scriptures, and continual meditation in the same,
(holy duties that I and all other christians, of what quality or calling so
ever, are bound unto by Gods word to perform: and would to God all did it, as
may know and confess it) the Lord in much favor, I freely confess it, has
been pleased in the days of my distress, to manifest to me, miserable man
that I am, and that not only for instruction and comfort unto my self alone
(for God never bestows any grace upon us, much less such excellent favors,
to that end only) but for the good and consolation of others, who being, 2,
Cor. 1, 3 4,
the father of mercies and God of all comfort, does not only comfort us in all
our tribulations, but also inableth us to comfort them, which are in any
affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of him, what
it is I will not affirm, because the holy Ghost has taught me saying:
Prouer. 27.2
let an other man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger and not
thine own lips, yet sure I am of this that Gods truth it is, and upon the
certain persuasion that I have thereof, I shall be ready (the Lord assisting
me) not only to confess it wholly and in all places, and before all persons,
but Christ Jesus guiding me, and assisting me John. 15.5
without whom I cannot do any thing to lay down my self, and to seal (as if
it were) with my blood the certainty of the same.

What effect it may bring forth in your honor (at whose religious request I was
unfeignedly forward and willing to undertake these travails, which also I have
accomplished in the simple measure and manner that you see, for the
testification of my christian affection) or what it may work in the afflicted
party (for whose good I doubt not, it was, and is of us both, in all sincerity
and soundness performed, 2. Cor. 2.17.
even as in the sight of God) I know not.

This I am sure of, we be used as Gods instruments to Philip. 2.12.
plant and to water, but it is he alone, 1, Cor. 3.6
who working in us both the will and the deed according to his good pleasure,
must also of his singular favor grant the increase, 1, Cor, 10, 13
and with the temptation give the issue also, that we may be able to bear and
overcome, which I beseech him heartily, even for Jesus Christ's sake, to
vouchsafe, as generally to all his saints, so particularly to that his
distressed servant, that as we have learned Romans 12.15
to weep with him in his affliction, so in the effectual feeling of the
communion of saints, we may learn to rejoice with him in his spiritual joy.

Your Hon. much bounden, and ready always in Jesus Christ. Tho. Wilcockes,
the Lords most vnworthe servant.

GRACE AND PEACE from God, etc.
AS I cannot but rejoice (good sir) in your godly love, and holy care, love
toward me, that it will please you to use me your poor friend, and one that
is and will be ready according to my small ability, for any duty you shall
enjoin me: and care toward your self, in seeking for your seek in the
midst of your troubles and t^^a^les, some Christian comforce and instruction,
both which are pla^^^e manifested, in those two rec^^^rie questions that by you
in your letter were pr^^ounded unto me: so I (...) so^^what, Two qu^stions
propounded to ^e answered.
I must confess it, seized w^^^ sorrow, partly for that providing for my
public p^ace, lack of leisure, w^^l (...) now let me, and partly, for that
want of ability, to wade into such weighty causes sufficiently, will not
suffer me to deal therein, as gladly I would in respect of sincere affection
toward you, and as religiously I ought, both in regard of the worthiness of
the causes themselves and of the peace of mine own heart.

Howbeit this somewhat recomforteth me that as I rest persuaded, yt you will
accept whatsoever I shall deliver, specially since in the same I shoot at your
sprituall consolation and good: so I hope that God whose cause it is that I
deal in, and whose glory I would gladly, principally aim at in the same,
will by his blessed spirit so guide me, that I shall propound nothing but the
truth, from embracing whereof though you may be somewhat hindered, because it
is delivered in a simple and mean, both manner and mean, as I my self deny
not, yet let the glory of the truth it self (which needs no man's colors to
adorn and bewtifie the same) so far prevail with you, (I beseech you) that
both for judgment and feeling, it may find a blessed entertainment in you.

The first of the difference of the fear of the wicked and the fear of the
godly.
Concerning your first question, about the difference that is betwixt the fear
of the wicked, and the fear of the godly, I suppose it shall not be much
amiss to know this, that fear being a passion of the heart, and arising not
so much from touching, Natural fear what it is.
(for that properly respecting the body and outward man, rather breeds pain)
as from cogitation and thought, which directly concerning the mind and inward
man, does more lively strike the same according unto which also, the body it
self (by reason of the sympathy or fellow-feeling, that the one has with the
other) is for the most part affected, cannot of it self, and simply
considered, be vicious and evil. The reason whereof is very plain and
evident, because it being of nature simple: and the same infused, or put, or
pow^ed into us, by ^^ration from God, who can not be evil unless we wou^d
hold that God made some thing evil (which were horrible bla^phemie, and quite
and clean contrary to the fullness of goodness, that is in himself, and
communicated unto all his works, but specially unto man.

I further taking it in it self, to be no more evil, to have fear in the
heart, than to have pain in the flesh: nor that passion of fear to be no more
sin in the soul, than appetite in the stomach, to eat and drink, or
disposition in the body to sleep etc. and such like natural affections and
passions.

Besides if this and other natural passions, were simply and of themselves
faulty, then this would ensue thereupon, that the creatures, specially those
that we call sensitive (many of them as effectually in their kind feeling
this and other passions also, as man himself) should of themselves carry
about in themselves, a lump of iniquity, which indeed cannot be true, both
because as in regard of their creation they were good, the Genesis 1.3.
scripture affirming it after Gods own view of them (whose judgment cannot be
deceived) that they were exceedingly good, and also because if they had sin
in themselves and of themselves, either they must have a reconciler, to pass
between God and them, who also partaking of their nature, must in the nature
that had sinned satisfy Gods wrath against sin (but it is too too beastly to
say, either that our Savior Christ had their nature, or that he dyed for
brute beasts) or else they must of necessity, perish under condemnation for
sin, because the Rom, 6.23.
hier of sin in whomsoever, (without a price to satisfy it) is eternal
death: and there is no mean we are sure between these two.

But which is most notoriously evil, absurd, and erroneous above all the rest:
Our savior Jesus Christ himself, should by this means, be polluted with
same, not only because according to the scriptures, we generally know and
believe that he was Heb. 2.17, and ^, 15.
very man in every respect like unto us, (sin only excepted) but also
because the Apostle speaking, even of this particular huma^ie affection in him
plainly says, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that he was ^ 5, 7.
heard in the things which he feared.

Now to say that he was touched or tainted any manner of way, with any,
though never so small spot of sin, what is it else but to gainesay the holy
scriptures, which in Isa. 53.9. Ioh. 8, 46. 1 Pet. 2, 22.
many places affirm him, and that most rightly, to be void of iniquity? yea
to make him no fit savior for sin, because he that must redeem others from
in^quities and transgressions must be himself shameless, otherwise he cannot
be a price of reconciliation? and (which touches us also to the quick, and
imports us as nigh as life and death) by consequent to deprive our selves of
full pardon and forgiveness of all our sins, because if Christ died not the
1. Pet. 3.18,
just for the unjust, we remain under transgression, and being alive Ephesians,
2.5.
are dead in trespasses and sins, and so under eternal death. Here then is
required, a right deserning spirit, yea a heart indeed that is endued with a
notable portion of heavenly wisdom and spiritual grace from above that so yt
which is not of it self evil (though I speak particularly of the passion of
fear, yet it shall not be amiss to practice it in all of the like nature)
may through the great work of the sanctfiication of the word and spirit of
God, grow every day better and better, with mighty increases from an high.

The sight and knowledge of al which as it cannot but strike much terror, yea
horror into the hearts of the wicked and ungodly, because through the strength
and power of their own sin, they have made the light that was in them (which
in my mind may not unfitly be resembled to the dawning of the day, and was and
is sufficient to make them without excuse or defense before God) to become
darkness, and by that means are plunged into obscurity as gross (if not
more gross) as that of Egypt: so should it be very comfortable to those, in
whom the Lord himself has been pleased by his own hand, and ordinance to
advance that worthy work of regeneration, and that not only while they do
not as the wicked, sin in all manner of extremity of natural passions,
adding drunkenness unto thirst) and through the corruption of nature and Satan's
deadly and insatiable malice, defacing their own light, and so are become
stocks and void of all sense of the same: but also while they have nature it
self so enlightened by the truth of the word, and reformed by daily addition of
grace from above, that in continual wrestling and striving against it,
specially the corruptions of it, they gain so much, that they cause even that
as other things also to tend to the advancement of his glory that is Lord of
nature, and has it at command, and to their own comfort, and the good of
others, whereat those sparks and remainders of nature, that are yet in us
undefaced, do in some sort aim, how much more may they attain unto it, not
only when they are accompanied, but when they are aided thereto, with the
graces of God in us.

But to come somewhat more nigh to the point we are to deal in, and yet it
cannot be denied, but that that which has been already delivered, does
properly concern the same methinketh we may between the two fe ^res, which you
desire to be satisfied in, observe a double difference: the one as in respect
of the causes, I say causes, neither let ye seem strange unto you, that there
are and may be many causes of one and the self same thing, from whence it
comes and proceeds, though some in the same be more principal working
causes, than other, as every petie logician will redily acknowledge) the other
as in regard of the effects and fruits that they bring forth in the several
parties and persons diversely, (according to the diversity of the fears
themselves) affected therewith.

Of the fear of the wicked. Whence it rises.
That fear which is in the wicked arises, either from some conceit that they
have within them, of shame and disgrace before men, in whose sight, with them
themselves, it is a great and grievous judgment, and goes to their heart, as
cold as the panges of death, to be clothed with confusion, for being men and no
more but natural men, as they like well of themselves, so they would gladly
be highly esteemed of their likes: Grows.
or else, (being bitten or stoong with the knowledge of some evil, either
conceived or performed) from some impression, and sense that they have, of
punishment before god for the same, whose infinite justice, as they have most
heynously offended, so they certainly know, that they cannot by any means
withstand and avoid, Continues.
this being engraven in their hearts by the light of nature that sin and his
punishment must always go, (as it were) arm in arm, or else from some other
odd imagination, and carnal conceit of their own (as Iere. 17.19,
man's heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it:) and
that still in self love toward themselves only, for this never moves them
that by their iniquities, they have pulled wrath and displeasure upon other
men, from almighty GOD: all and every one whereof, (no doubt) are much
furthered in them, not only through abuse of natural fear, and also by
means of their melancholic constitution, or complexion, as we say (a mean
that God himself has been pleased to appoint and use, even in his justice
against the wicked, greatly to increase their terrors and fears) but also by
the horrible distrustfulnesse of their own hearts, Other causes thereof.
they finding no matter of true and steadfast joy in themselves (as who in the
stinging testimony of their own souls, are convicted of most grievous
transgressions, and eternal judgment for the same, and how is it then
possible for them to have sound peace?) nor seeing any sure comfort from
others, either in heaven above, or in earth beneath among men, who if they
cannot when, and as they would afford themselves consolation, much less may
those other look to receive it at their hands because as in others, so in this
respect charitable relief begins with a man's own self: nor beholding any
joyful favor, to them selves from God, whose displeasure rather in him self,
and his creatures, they have highly provoked against them, through infinite
iniquities, and therefore must look not only to have his back parts given
them, but all the vessels and vials of his wrath in time, and in a full measure
to be powered forth upon them.

But the fear of the godly, is in them not only as a natural passion (for
so that condition they have common with the wicked of the world, Of the fear
of the Godly
and some of the creatures of God, Where it ^^seth.
as has in part been proved already,) but prooceedeth also from an unfeigned
love, and a sincere reverence of God, his majesty, and whatsoever generally
is in him, and more particularly his judgments, grows.
being shead abroad into their hearts, and effectually planted, continued
and increased in them, through the holy exercises of his word, and powerful
working of his blessed spirit accompanieng the same, they being also styrred
up thereto, not for worldly respects or carnal considerations, Continues
as shame before men or outward punishment that they must undergo for sin
committed, or transitory glory, which they must forgo and loose, etc. as the
wicked and ungodly, but upon holy regardes, even as well be seems Gods
saints and servants, no^ only professing, but sincerely embracing
godliness: namely, for that they have set God against them selves, not as a
judge sharp and severe, but as a most loving and tender father, the
remembrance whereof, even in that respect as unto them, as if it were the darts
of death and the sensible feeling for the time, of the very panges and pains
of hell, and the state of the damned, there being little or no difference
between the one and the other, but as in regard of length of time, of this
life present, and the causes moving such distress: in also which they are
lead not so much to respect themselves (for many of them in unfeigned love to
others have after a sort desired their own destruction) as the glory of God
their most gracious father, the honor of that blessed religion which they
profess, and love of others, that not only in the flesh, but also in the
faith, are dear and precious unto them, fearing indeed, least all or any of
these, should in them or by them, be any manner of way, though never so
smallie, wounded or hurt: having always, and that in such a portion as God
sees fit for his glory, and their good (notwithstanding their manifold wantes
and vnwoorthynesse) that precious gift of faith, which as it comes from God
alone, and is begun, continued, and increased in his children, by the
ministry of preaching, perticipation of the sacraments, and powerful
working of his own spirit, so is it peculiar to the elect only, to
appropriate Gods mercies unto them selves, for the comfort of their own souls,
and to sanctify as other things ^o them, so this natural fear within them,
and to keep it in so, that it b^eake not forth, either into sin against God,
or offense before men. And as concerning the effects or fruits the which they
yield and bring forth (which is the second difference between them,) we
shall find as great ods, and diversity as in the causes, whereof also there is
good reason, because such as the cause is, such is the effect (which who is it
almost that knows not?) and then the causes being sundry, the effects
likewise must be so too.

Concerning the fear that is in the wicked, it either makes them frefull in
themselves, as we may see by that little quietness they have, whether they be
at home or abroad, sleep^ng or waking in sickness or in health, The effects of
fe^^^ (...) the wi^ked.
their life being nothing else but a sea of continual troubles, which fire
though they seem for a time to rake up under the ashes of counterfeyt rest and
dissembled ease, In themselves
yet will it at the length break forth as a mighty flame to consume them: or
else causes them, to be much disquiet toward others, ^owards o^^ers.
they plainly bewraying the same either by some hard words, or sharp
deeds, or furious countenances, and that many times, not only against them
whom they cannot abide, but against them also that in manifold respects,
should be dear unto them, as their wives that lie in their bosoms, the^r
children that issue out of their loins, their friends that be as themselves,
their servants that have walked dutifullie toward them. etc. Impacience or
murmuring against God.
Or provoke them to be impatient and murmuring even against God himself,
not only because his hand for sin lies hard and heavy upon them, but also
because they can see or find no way, how either to soften, or to shift, or to
avoid the same. For though they seek to run away, and would gladly fly if they
could tell how, from the face and presence of his eternal majesty, (as we may
see in our first Genesis 3.8
parents Adam and Heuah, and in the practice of all ages, and even of this
present time) who bitten (as it were) with the teeth, and wounded with the dart
of this deadly fear, do not only faint in themselves, and Dan. 5.6.
strike their knees together, but manifest to men by sorrowful sighs,
lamentable complaints, yea and desperate dealings also, sometimes against their
own souls and bodies and that without any remorse of heart, or godly grief
at all, whereof we have manyfold examples (both in the holy scrpitures and
other writers also) known I am sure unto you, so well exercised in the word
(as I take and judge you to be) yet they know there is no way to escape his
revenging hand against them for their sins, and Romans 2.5
heart that cannot repent, and that is it that increases their fear, and
augmenteth their woe, and causes them to enter into these furious both words
and deeds.

Th'effectes of fear in the godly.
But the ^e^e that is in the godly (being yet notwithstanding mingled, both with
hope and joy, as we may perceive by the Apostles words, who speaking of the
faithfull-saith, 2. Cor. 4 8
We are afflicted on every side yet are we not in distress, we are in doubt,
but yet we despair not: and by that which is reported in the gospel, of the
women which came to Christ's sepul^h^e, of whom the Euange^ st Matthew
affirms, that Math 28.8.
they d^parted with fear, In themselves
and great joy) makes them in the days of their prosperity (considering in
what a ticklysh estate In the days of prosperity,
they are, and how easily carried into pride, against men, I time of a^uersitie,
and forgetfulness of God) careful and watchful over themselves, ta walk in
a good conscience before God and men, according to the measure of mercies both
past and present, that they have received from God: and causes them in the
midd^st of their distresses (weighing how quickly by the remainders of since,
they may be thrust into impatienc^e) to labor the attaining of a quiet spirit
within themselves, bee^ng assured, that R^m ^.28
all things shall work toge her to the best for them that love and fear God:
yea, it provoke them, to be humble and lowly, yea and that in all sound
manner, toward others, before whom, Toward others.
and to who^ they practice that, and that also for good example, encouragement
and comfort (I mean humblenes of mind proceeding from a qu^et heart) that they
have had from others in such like times performed unto the themselves. Ne there
staieth it here, but proceeds further, inabling them according to the grace
that they have received from God, Luke 21.19 What doubtfulnes is in the godly.
in patience to possess their own souls before him, in what estate or
condition soever it shall please him to place them, wherein howsoever they be
sometimes seized with doubt, not of God verily (whose infinite power and good
will toward them, they know by the truth of his word, and particular
experience that they them selves have had, to be incomprehensible and
unchangeable) but of themselves by reason of the weakness and want which they
carry about with the^, which also by manifold trials in themselves and others,
they have learned and not without cause, justly to suspect) yet they have at
the length recourse unto him, by earnest prayer made in faith, and so at the
last are heard in the things that they prayed for, according to his will in
christ's obeience being of his singular mercy either utterly freed from the
things that they feared, or else having strength, patience and comfort
communicated unto them from above, to undergo and to overcome also (but yet by
such holy means as God has appointed, and at such times as he has set with
himself from before all times) not only that which presently lies upon them,
but whatsoever afterward may pynch, or press down.

And this much for this present touching this question, wherein I could have
willingly been contented, further to have enlarged my self, but that paper
and time skanting me, I am constrained to finish, hoping that whatsoever is
wanting now, may be supplied some other time hereafter, either by word of
mouth, or writing, or both, as God shall be pleased by you to give occasion, and
for you and some others (to whom I wish all good in Jesus Christ) to furnish
me with ability.

In the mean while I hope this shall be well accepted of you, which whether it
be the sum of that, that I delivered when we were ^^st together by word of
mouth, and you desired me to put down in writing, I do not certayneke know:
howbeit, the truth, I rest persuaded, it is: and though it may differ
something from it in form and manner, yet I am resolved that it is the same, in
substance and matter: which if perhaps written it affect you not, as when it
was spoken, lay not the blame thereof upon your self (as you are wont to do)
charging yea surcharging your self with dullness of comprehension: for
doubtless God has given you a great grace, compared with many other of his
servants to conceive the truth: neither accuse the point it self with
darkness and difficulty, for it is ^s the rest of gods truth is, plain and
evident unto them that are enlightened in Sion, but impute the fault of it unto
me, who either through the ignorance of the cause in my heart cannot, or by
reason of negligence, or through the want of a stayed mind perhaps have not so
plainly unfolded my self, nor waded into the cause according to the weight
thereof, as were to be wished.

In the discourse whereof, I have not (as y^u see) quoted many places of
scripture, for neither indeed is that my manner, howsoever some do too much
affect it (unless some urgent c use, or the earnest request of my good
friends draw me thereto) neither think I that the truth stands so much
upon the multitude of allegations or words of text it self, as upon sound
reasons deduced from the same.

But if happily you are desirous to see sentences of scriptur^s for these
points, you may look upon the Concordances and tables that be already
published upon the o^de and new Testament, which in the title of Fe^re will
afford you store, whether also for breuities sake, I send you to peruse them,
at your leisure, and at your pleasure, ^s you shall think good.

One or two points, and that with places out of the word, ^s my memory would
help, I cou d not, ^or all that is written before le^ p^sse, as this first,
that fear is not cont^^r^e to says and hope, which is proved Phil p. 2.11.
Hebrews 3.14. 1. Peter. 3.17. Secondly that God by his word, Godly fear not
contrary to faith.
has appointed men, sundry good means to remove it, and amongst the rest,
these, as minding of Gods former favors, for which see Deuteronomy. 7.18.19.20.
earnest prayer and calling upon his name, for which see, Means to remove the
grief of fear.
Genis. 32.7.9.13. Thirdly that the fear of the faithful, is so far from
bringing miseries with it, that it has attending upon it, as an inseperable
companion, blessedness from God, for which see, Proverb. 28.14.

The second question of the boldness of the wicked and the godly.
Touching your second question, concerning the d^^ference that is betwixt the
boldness of the godly, and that which the wicked seem to have, I trust (the
pr^^^ses considered) I shall not need to spend labor, or take any pain
therein, because these things being one of them contrary to the other, and
contrary being opposed (as we say) do more plainly appear, they may be an
enterviewe (as it were) and by comparing them one with another, be easily
discerned.

Notwithstanding, if you shall not think this sufficient, do but signify so
much in a line or two, and you shall (God willing) with convenient speed, hear
from me.

And so hoping that you will assist me, with your hearty prayers unto the
almighty, not only for a sanctified use of such favors as I have received,
but for a blessed continuance and mighty increase of the same, for the glory
of him that gives them, for the peace of mine own heart, for the profit of
his people, and amongst them for your good: I take my leave hastily. At
Broingdon, the 24. of this December. 1588.

Yours assured and ready always in Jesus Christ, Thomas VVilcocks, the Lords
unworthy servant.

To the Christian Reader.
I beseech thee (good reader) pardon these scapes committed, and amend with thy
pen, these faults following, or whatsoever thou, according to the judgment and
light that thou have received, shall find amiss herein.

Page 1. line 17. for explicat, read communicate. page 4. line, 25. for world,
read word. Page 8. line 10. l. read he. page 13, line, 10. for irrepugnable,
read impregnable. page 19. lin. 3. means. read mercies. page 36. line 19.
comforts, read comforters. page 48. line 8. repent, read repents. page 49
line 19. after works, add, and. page 50. line 5. after it, add might, and line
14. for euamate, euacuat. Page 51. line 1^. for make Jesus, read makes this.
page 54. line 4. for our, read one. page 55. line 26. put out always. page 61.
line 10. for him, read them. page 62 line 4. put out as, and line 8. for for,
read see. page 63. line 22 after therefore, add need page 64. line 8. for
tyranny, read turning. 19. for cast, read cost. and line 20. for piece, read
price. pa^. 66. line 13. would, read could. page 67. line 6. naturally, read
natural. page 68. line 8 after spirite^, add, and. page 70. line 1. after
unto, add you. page 74. line 9. for 1589. read 1579. p^g. 89. line 6. for
might, read we^gh. page 96, line ^. for expectation, read exception, line 15.
for neither shall never turn, nor shaddowe by turning. page 98, line 10, ^o^
m^^e, ^ead work, pa. 100. lin, 1. for to, read both. page 108. line 9, for
self, read li^e.


