A CHRISTIAN AND LEARNED EXPOSITION, upon certain verses of that eight chapter
of the Episile of that blessed Apostle PAVLE to the Romans, and namely, upon
verse, 18.19.20.21.22.23.

WRITTEN LONG AGO, BY T.W. FOR a most dear friend of his in CHRIST, and now
lately published in print, for the benefit and good of GODS people wheresoever.

printer's device with bird GOD IS MY HELPER.


AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue, for Thomas Man. 1587.

TO HIS VERY dear friends and good brethren in Christ, master Ed. Benlois,
master Ri. Walter, master Ralfe Manning, and others of common and christian
acquaintance, within the city of London, even as well as though they were
named, Th. VV. wishes abundance of al goodness both bodily and spiritual in
this life, and the eternal salvation of their souls in the life that is to
come, through Christ.
IF men, nay, if we our selves (brethren) that profes godliness, had any,
either hearts to conceive, or eyes to see, or mouths to speak, we can not
choose but believe, behold and confess the vvonderfull goodness of Almighty GOD
toward this last, and yet vvorst age of the world, vvherin we live, he
having plentifully poured forth upon it, so many excellent and great graces,
specially spiritual, as no time heretofore has bin endued with better:
VVherof had we nothing else to bear witness, but that huge heap of light and
religion, that GOD has made to break forth amongst us, it were sufficient not
only to justify and approve this truth, but to condemn the world of horrible
ingratitude, in not thankefully receiving, and of cursed carelesnes, either in
abusing or not profiting by such singular favor, some as we see,
notvvithstanding the sunshine of GODS blessed word, vveltring and vvallovving
in the blindness and ignorance of their own hearts, not knovving what a
precious jewel it is; others in prophanenes and atheism horribly scoffing
and scorning at the same, notvvithstanding the excellency thereof; others
talking of it for vain iangling, but without care of obedience, polluting by
a lewd life that which is most holy of it self; othersome making that which
is indeed spiritual, and as a man may say, heavenly, a stepping-stone of
preferment and vvorldly glory; whereunto being once lifted up, they fall to
fostring of pride in themselves, and disdainful carping at others; some as
satan's servants and instruments, using, or abusing it rather, for the
maintenance of erroneous and heretical opinions, etc. So that a man may safly
and certainly conclude, that though the light of GOD be come into the world,
and has indeed gloriously appeared amongst us, yet men have loved, and daily
do affect darkness rather than light.

But howsoever the strength of this impiety do most plainly and plentifully
appear in the desperate wicked of the world, the poison of this infection,
having spread it self abroad, from the very heart of the ungodly into all their
veins and sinnevvs, so that all the parts of their bodies, and powers of
their souls are polluted therevvith, yet shall vvesee, that by reason of the
remainders of original iniquity, some stinch of the same has burst forth,
even in the sons and servants of God, though not to defile them with such
fearful transgressions as the wicked of the world are overtaken vvithall,
yet to hinder them from the doing of such holy duties, as whereunto, in
piety toward GOD, and in charity toward men, they are (if my judgment
fail me not) straightly bound, vvhilest some of them, considering men's setlednes
in sin, and how hard they are frozen in the dregs of their iniquity, and
having fevv or no arguments of doing good, labor little or nothing at all;
othersome again vveighing the worthiness of gods graces, and being loath to
offer the glorious mysteries of the Lord to open despite, and so thereby to
increase the condemnation of the wicked, do leave off all means almost to
reclaim men from wickedness, and to win them to GOD.

What I write now, the godly of the land vvil witness with me I think, and
the small labors public or private, of men otherwise well qualified, and the
little fruit flowing from the same, vvil yield sufficient proof: yea, as I
know by practice and experience in some, so I feel the same by assaults and
suggestions in my self, to which, though mine own natural corruption, and
the world of wickedness that is within me, do bid me gladly consent, yet that
poor portion of grace (I account it so, not as it comes from GOD, but as it
is tainted through my sin) that God has bin pleased to bestovv upon me, vvil
hardly suffer me to yield, because I see no reason in truth, why other men's
sins, or the imperfections of GODS children should utterly discourage them from
doing the duties that GOD has laid upon them, for if we should so do, we
should never perform any service to GOD, men, or our selves, because there will
be always wickedness in the world, and manifold weaknesses and wants, even
in the dearst saints and servants of GOD.

The thing that I rather vvish with all my heart, is, that every one of us, and
my self especially, in due examination of our own souls, might through Gods
great goodness toward us in Christ, find our selves fit, not only in affection
and good vvil, but in all heavenly strength and spiritual knowledge also, our
manifold transgressions being removed and done away, according to our measure
of graces received, in this behalf, to do good unto many. For mine own part,
I willingly acknovvledge my self the meanest and the basest of many my good
brethren in the ministry of GOD: yea so far off am I from presuming any thing
as of my self, that I do asvvell in the sight of my sins before GOD, and
feeling vvithal of his hand of justice and judgment upon me for the same, as
in the acquaintance that I have with mine insufficiency ye ignorance before
men (both which (no doubt) may justly cause me to be dull and heavy in every
good duty) think (and so do unfeignedly confess) my self unfit and unmeet for
such worthy works. And yet I cannot but lay forth this much, that relying
upon the goodness of the cause, and hoping (though it seem almost against
hope) that GOD will give a greater blessing to the careful and christian
labors of his servants, than we can see with the eye of flesh and blood, I
have bin bold to publish this little treaty, vvherby, if the mouths of such
enemies of GOD, as bark against his holy truth, may in some sort be stopped, and
the comfort and instruction of his people provided for, I shall have vvherin to
rejoice, as for the common good, so on your behalf (my very dear friends) of
whom I am asvvell persuaded as of my self, and to some of whom (I freely
confess it) I owe in Christ more than my self, if I could tell how to pay it.
But not being able to perform that, and vvithall unwilling to continue still
in my unthankfulness (I must confess it) toward you, I have thought meet now
at the length, to offer unto you in print that which I once vvrote, for the
best and dearest private friend, next unto my natural parents, that ever I had
in this world, that as GOD has stirred you up, to succeed him in kindness
toward me, so I might make you (as those whom I love much in Christ)
partakers of those poor labors and love that I performed toward him. In
which respect also I am willingly content to let it come abroad to behold the
light, not only desiring you and every of you to accept it, as a small token of
my unfeigned goodvvill, which when it can offer no better presentiments that it
has, but also praying the Lord to make it powerful to advance his own
work of salvation in his servants, and of judgment and confusion, in all his
and their obstinate enemies.

The 30. of October. 1587. Your poor friend and wel-willer, yet assured
always in Christ Jesus to his uttermost, Th. VV. the Lords most unworthy
servant.

AN EXPOSITION Upon certain verses of Roman. 8.
AMongst many evidences that the LORD has given us, for the proo^fe of the
certainty and credit of his holy word, written against all the Atheists and
Papists in the world, who for sundry respects, seek to debase and deface the
same; namely, the one sort, that they might bring in all brutishness and
sensuality, and the other, that they might establishe and make equal with the
word (if not prefer before it) men's traditions and unwritten verities (as
they call them) those, as I think, are most excellent and substantial, that are
fetched from the very word it self, and the untainted testimonies of the same.
For though it be true, that amongst earthly men in worldly matters, no man's
testimony is to be allowed or received, as sufficient proof or witness in his
own cause, by reason of that partiality that cleaves unto us, always
favoring our selves in our own affairs, yet in heavenly and spiritual
things, the like course in deed has no place, because that the author and
giver of the word, is free from all humane affections, and therefore the word
also proceeding from him, must of necessity be clear from all parcialitie.
Neither is there any cause or reason why that, if the credit of humane
constitutions, depending partly upon the authority of the lawmakers, and
partly upon the goodness, certainty, and necessity of the laws themselves,
having not approbation from elsewhere, the same may not, yea ought not, in all
equity and truth, to be much more forcible, as in regard of the commandments
and statutes of almighty God, who both in himself and in his laws also, is
altogether void of those corruptions, that stick fast to earthly lawe-makers,
and their civil constitutions.

Now amongst the manifold testimonies, which are taken even from the word it
self, this in my mind, is not of the least importance, that whether it speak
of it self, or others, it always proceeds with an upright foot, free from
all parcialitie, and all worldly respects whatsoever. The truth whereof, that
it might the better appear, even then when it speaks of the dearest saints
and servants of God, it spares not to lay out, and that without mitigation or
minsing of their transgressions, their several sins committed against God and
men, both before their calling and after their calling also, as Moses his
murmuring, Aaron his idolatry, David his adultry and murder, Peter's denial
and dissimulation, Paul's persecution, and an infinite number of such like. And
when it speaks of it self, yet even then also it spares not to deliver,
things touching it self, that in the judgment of flesh and blood, seem not
only to differ, one of them from an other, but to be quite and clean
contrary. Of this sort is it, that in some places the holy scripture affirms,
Gods word to be plain and easy, Psalm. 19.7, 8.
Giving wisdom to the simple, and light to the eyes, and in other places
again it plainly says, that they be obscure and dark, and hard to be
understood, as also the Apostle Peter in the last chapter of his second
epistle, does particularly affirm the same, of some things, 2. Pet. 3.16.
In the vvritings of saint Paul.

These things verily God himself, the very author of the word affirms
touching the same. But what is his mind therein? Certainly not to cast any
discredit upon it, by some contradiction that seems to be in it, since he has
every where given such excellent and large commendations of it: neither yet to
discourage men in the darkness of it, from drawing nigh thereunto, since he does
so often and so earnestly provoke all sorts of men, to the continual hearing,
reading, and meditation thereof: neither yet again, on the other side, in the
perspicuitie and plainnes of it, to let men grow into contempt, or carelesnes
thereof, since he himself in many places tells us, that we must have better
eyes, Matt. 16.17
than the eyes of flesh and blood, or the light of reason, to see into the
holy mysteries contained therein: nay rather God has an other purpose
therein; to wit, in the outward show of contradiction in the word, to teach
us, first to take heed, that we yield not therein to the subtle suggestions
of Satan and his servants, who labor thereby to cause us, to cast it utterly
from us: John 15.26.
and then, since we know and believe, that it was written by one spirit (who is
The spirit of unity and verity) that we should according to the measure of
the grace of the spirit received, stir up our selves to reconcile and make
to agree, those places that seem to jar, and yet not stay there, but
endeavor to convey that light over unto others also, that God has bestowed
upon us, because that the gifts of the spirit of God should not be
smothered or quenched in our selves or others, but ought to break forth
rather, to the greatest glory of God the giver, and the greatest comfort and
instruction of our selves and others, that possibly may be in this life.

And in the obscurity and hardness of holy scripture, the Lord minds even
mightily to meet wythall, yea to humble and throw down, to their amendment
if it may be, or else to break in pieces to their utter confusion, a certain
sort of proud conceited men, who in an ouerweening that they have of their
own wits and graces received, suppose that they may easily, and (as we say)
with small ado, perce into the wonderful secrets of Gods holy law; he meaning
also thereby not only to remove from men, that carelessness of heart, that
clingeth and cleaves fast unto them, in the handling and hearing thereof, but
withal to stir them up that be his, with more reverence, attention and
heed, to hear and speak such things, as GOD has propounded there unto them,
least otherwise they loose their labor, as in respect of themselves, and
become unprofitable to others, as in regard of their negligent travails, and
so both the one and the other, to be made utterly void of excuse before God.

Again, in the perspicuitie and plainness of the scripture, the Lord has
by a strong confutation, not only incountred with, but ouerthrown, those his
enemies, and the enemies also of man's salvation, that in the spirit of error
and doctrine of diuelles, 1. Tim. 4.1.
have ouersaucely forbidden his people, to search into that, wherewithal God,
in the largeness of his love toward them, and carefulnes of their salvation,
would have them most familiarly acquainted. Yea GOD has thereby mercifully
provided for the good of his own children, who though they be many times,
either in the sight of their own weakness and wants, or in the beholding of the
incomprehensible mysteries therein contained, greatly dismayed, and after a
sort, quite discouraged, from drawyng nigh to so high and holy things, are yet
notwithstanding, again lifted up in this, that God in many things, abacing
himself to their capacities, does as a nurse at the first, stut and stammer as
a man would say, for their instruction and learning, they also upon good
grounds and hope persuading themselves of this, that in process of time, that
which at their first entrance, by reason of their own blindness is dark and
hard, shall when they have received more light from God, become very easy and
familiar to them.

All which well considered, and deeply weighed indeed, should not only make
us thankful to almighty GOD, who in the riches of his mercy, has been
pleased, to stoop down to our weakness, and by delivering his truth in such
sort, to prevent the poisoning of our souls, by no way more subtly and
dangerously attempted, of his and our deadly ennimies, than by debarring us the
light of his truth, but also should draw us to a religious acceptance of his
graces, by his word offered unto us, Preferring the same before all things,
Psalm. 119.72
and to a reverent and right use of the same truth, referryng it always to
the selfsame ends and purposes, whereunto he himself has ordained it,
that is, to the banishyng of the clouds and mists of darkness and
ignorance, from our understanding, and to the stopping of the floudes and
course of our own corruption, that swell, and roar, and ouerflowe, all the
parts and pieces of our natural life, that so we might be made before him a
reformed people, not only in the knowledge, but much more in the belief and
obedience of every good work and way, that he himself has prepared for us
to walk in, and to that end has manifested them in his word: we never
using our knowledge to vain iangling, or ostentation of man's eloquence and
learning, making it a stepping stone to promotion, and a very firebrand to the
stirring up and maintainaunce of curious and frivolous questions, as many
vain people in the world do, nor abusing our holy faith and steadfast
persuasion, to licenciousnesse and security, a vice that the careless age
wherein we live, does too too much practice: neither yet making that small
portion of obedience, that GOD makes us to yield, a mean either of merit
before him (for what is more blasphemous?) or of hypocritical vauntyng before
men (for what is more beastly and shameless?) but referring all that we have
received, how little or how much soever it be, to the glory of him, that has
given us the same (as there is good reason in godliness we should) and to
the good of those, even his faithful people I mean, (as in christian charity
we are bound) even for whose sakes also, as well as for our own, we our
selves were made, and GOD has vouchsafed to bestow upon us, the graces that
we have; which things as they must be watchfully regarded, and carefully
observed, in all scripture generally, so it behooves us to have an especial
eye, to the practice and performance of them, in those places principally,
which be of the greatest difficulty, because in them, by reason of our own
blindness and ignorance, we may soonest be deceived, and by Satan's malice, be
most easly driven and drawn (without some singular grace and assistance from
GOD) into all manner of extremity, either of discouragement to intermeddle
with them, by reason of the deapth and difficulty therein; to which if we
add, the world, not of weakness and wants only, but of wickedness also
that we find in our selves, it will be much increased in us; or else of pride
and presumption, we being carried headlong as it were with a violent tempest
or whirle-winde, by an over weening persuasion, that we have of some small
graces in our selves, in all curious and triflyng sort, to deal with matters
of most weight, and greatest importance, whereby we shall not only offer
dishonor to GOD, in the contempt or neglect of those most excellent things,
that he minds to deliver to us, but the same shall redound also, to our own
hurt and harm, both in body and soul, a matter that would be well thought
of before hand, for fear of after-claps as we say, yea we shall be
instruments, either by carelessness to corrupt, or by curiousness and pride to
pervert others, and that unto their eternal condemnation, without exceeding
great grace from God, a fearful point doubtless, and a matter that would be
well weighed, as being most against the holy love of gods saints, amongst all
the sins that in this life we can commit one of us against an other.

All hitherto propounded, has been delivered, partly to confute our
adversaries, blasphemouslie doubtless impugning the truth and certainty of the
written word, and partly also to add an edge unto our own care and reverence,
in hearing and handling of the holy scripture^ of God. Yea particularly to
make us, and that in both respects attentive and watchful over our s^^^es in
the place that we are now to intreat^^; which is taken out of the eight
chapter of the epistle that the apostle Paul wrote unto the Romans, beginning
at the eighteenth verse of the said chapter, and so on forward unto the end
of the three and twentieth verse, in these words: Verse. 18. For I count that the
afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be
shevved unto us. Verse. 19 For the fervent desire of the creature, vvaiteth
when the sons of God shall be revealed. Verse. 20 Because the creature is
subject to vanity, not of it own will, but by reason of him, which has
subdued it under hope. Verse. 21 Because the creature also shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. Verse. 22 For we know that every creature groaneth with us also, and
trauelleth in pain together unto this present. Verse. 23 And not only the
creature, but we also which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we do
sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body.

As men's minds are diversely affected (brethren) so there are concerning this
one place diverse judgments, and that not only as in regard of several senses
of the same, but also touching the very words themselves, some supposing them
to be marvelous easy and plain, othersome taking them to be wonderful
intricat, dark, and hard. Of a truth, freely to speak my mind in this behalf
what I think; there is not to me any place, specially in the books of the new
testament (I except always many things in the Revelation of S. John) more
dark and difficult, and that not so much by reason of it self, either as in
regard of the words, wherein it is expressed, or the matter therein contained
(though I deny not, but that both those ways it is very hard) as partly by
those corrupt gloses that some have made upon it, and partly also by such
curious questions, as othersome have moved out of it, and lastly by such
vnresolute resolute conclusions, as many fantastical men, have labored to
raise and gather out of the same. All which, or any of which almost, if a man
should stand, either to rehearse, answer, or confute, it would be both
tedious and unprofitable also.

Neither utter I this with a dispitefull heart, to twite men for their
corruption and sins, or with the just dispraise of some, to purchase an unjust
commendation to my self, or in declaring the hardness of the word, to hunt
after worldly praise, in the curious handling thereof (vices and foul faults,
that are too rife and common in the world nowadayes) but rather dutifully to
stir up my self, and all the faithful of God, not only in this, but in all such
like places whatsoever, to attain, and that with unwearied labor and study,
to the sound and sincere meaning thereof. Whereunto, because we are altogether
unfit, as well by reason of the natural blindness that is in us before
regeneration, as of the remainders of our corruption, even after some measure
of light and knowledge received, and we know, that without some special grace
from God, we can never reach thereto, that therefore we should be earnest with
the Lord by prayer, not only, by the bright beams of his blessed spirit, to
chase away, the darkness and dulnes of our own understandings, but even to
induce us after a sort, as it were, with extraordinary judgment and wisdom of
heart, and utterance of mouth and words, in as much as the places which we deal
with are more than ordinarily or commonly heard. The want or neglect of which
duty, makes many of us (the Lord be merciful unto us in the forgiveness of all
our sins) to have the word, when it is read and taught unto us, Isai. 29.11.
to be as it were the words of a book that is sealed up, and when we come to
handle it, we deal with it irreverently, as in regard of God, and unrightly
as in regard of it self, and coldly and carelessly, as in respect of our selves,
and unfruitfully altogether and unprofitably, as in consideration of the
people: so that a man may safly say, and that without offense either of god or
good men, I assure you (the more is the pity) that there is little difference
between some of our sermons, and the bare reading of the ignorant ministers.

But to the matter it self, in the diducting and laying out whereof, we will
keep this course, as first, propound the Apostle his general drift, and
purpose, as it were, and then afterward come more particularly to handle the
very words in order as they lie, delivering the sense, and observing such
doctrines out of the same, as it shall please god to make manifest unto us.

The apostle Romans 8. does most fruitfully entreat of many notable points, and
namely amongst the rest of such assured testimonies, both outward and inward as
god has bin plesed to give to his faithful people, for the certainty of their
election and that eternal life of theyrs, that God has in Christ laid up for
them with himself, before the foundations of the world were laid. The outward
witness thereof, are the infallible fruits of sanctification, that god frames us
unto by his word outwardly, and the powerful working of his holy spirit
inwardly. The inward witness, is that same vndeceuable record of the spirit, 2.
Cor. 1.22 Ephesians. 4.30.
that God has given into our hearts, by which we are sealed up to everlasting
life, against the day of our redemption, he declaring yet further, that through
Gods mere grace toward us in Christ only, we are become, Romans 8.
not Gods servant alone, but his sons, and not his sons only, but
heirs also, and not only his heirs, but even fellovv-heirs together with
our savior Christ, so that we are sure we shall enjoy, the selfsame
eternal blessedness in heaven, John 4.2, 3.
that he now does, VVhither he is gone before hand to prepare a place for us,
and to take possession of it, to our use and behalf, that where he is, as the
head, we might also be as the members. Great graces certainly, if either we
consider our own wretchedness on the one side, or the person of the giver on
the other side, or the excellency of the things, bestowed upon us in the third
place, we the most miserable and wretched of all his creatures (excepting
always the devils and damned spirits) not so much as in regard of our
creation, for that way forth we are the chefest of all his works, but as in
respect of transgression and sin, which has pulled all manner of judgment,
both upon our selves, and the rest of the creatures for our sins sake.

Neither does this circumstance of our own baseness and unworthiness, extol
the excellency and worthiness of the gift, but his person also, that has
bestowed the same upon us, Psalm. 50.1 1. Tim 6.15
who being God of gods, and King of kings, having all power in his own hand,
with the least blast of his mouth to ouerwhelme us with all manner of
judgments, has been pleased notwithstanding rather to manifest in us, the
riches of his infinite grace, in the saving of our souls, than otherwise to
declare against us, the testimonies and tokens of his wrath to eternal
condemnation. Yea the very excellency of that life it self, does serve to
the wonderful commendation of that his unspeakable goodness toward us, it
being so far passing all the things of this life, though otherwise never so
glorious and glittering, that they are not in deed and truth so much as a
shadow of the good things to come. Nay which is more, man, Psalm. 8.5, 6
the lord of all, though the thoughts of his heart may be extended very far:
nay I will say more, godly men, though in the meditations of their mind, they
comprise great and excellent things, yet can they never attain in this life,
to the exquisitnes and excellency thereof, God having reserved that rather,
for the days and times of a better state and condition.

And all these things before recited, are plainly affirmed and proved also,
even from the very beginning of this eight chapter, until you come to these
words of the seventeenth verse, if so be that we suffer with him, etc. Where
he begins to show and declare, by what ways and steps as it were, Gods
children must come to the enjoying of that everlasting felicity, to wit, by
treading the same path, and running the same race, Hebr. 12.2.
that Christ The author and finisher of our faith, himself did, that is, by
manifold crosses, and grievous afflictions, in this life, for so it pleased God
to Consecrate, both to himself, Hebr. 2.10.
and to us, the prince of our salvation even through afflictions, we also
thereby thus far-foorth making our profit, that if It have been done thus in
a green tree, Luke 23.31.
we should not much marvel, if it be so In dried branches, neither be
dismayed, that if after the wicked and ungodly have reviled the master of the
household, and done to him whatsoever they listed, they practice the same
against his servant and friends. Now, forasmuch as for The present time,
Hebr. 12.11
no chastising seems to be joyous, but grievous rather, as the Apostle says,
whereof this may be one reason amongst many, because that is laid upon men
which they like not, but abhor and would gladly flee from: and forasmuch also
as, that not only men, but even godly men likewise, as well by the relics and
remainders of sin in themselves, as also by the greatness and greeuousnes of
the afflictions, that they ate subject unto (this being their common case in
the world, that the more godly they are, the more they are molested and
troubled) cannot without some special comforts undergo the burden of the
cross, being so heavy and weighty, as indeed it is, the Apostle therefore for
the sweetning of that bitter cup of the cross, intermingleth with that that
seems unto us, as bitter as gall or wormwood, that which is in it self, and
of it self, a thousand fold more sweeter than the honey or honey comb, that is
the most pleasant promises of eternal life.

Neither is he spare or pinching in propounding comforts, but deals in that
respect very liberally and plentifully with us, that so in the multitude of
our consolations, we might both with patience for the time bear, and through
faith and constancy, at the last for ever overcome that great swarm as it
were of our sorrows and griefs.

And first he tells us, that we are not alone in that case and conflict, but
have Christ our head and captain not only a common companion, as you would
say with us in those afflictions, but one that has gone before us in that path
and straight way, as having broken as you would say, the ice for us, and
before us, that so we might go on forward with the less danger and the
(...) boldenes.

In worldly warfare doubtless it adds no small courage unto the common
souldior, that he has other with him to sustain the hard assaults of the
enemy: yet if he have a valiant and courageous captain, he is much more
cheered and hartned, because soldiers look not so much one of the^ upon
another, as have all their eyes bent upon the ringleader to the rest: and if
they be persuaded, that he is such a one that can as it were, with a word or
countenance confound their adversaries, how valiantly do they not only give
the first onset, but mightily hold on to the end of the field, that so every
one of the^ may at the end of the skirmish or pight battle, carry away with
them some notable ensign, or token of the victory. Oh how much more ought
this, to comfort us, in spiritual combats and conflicts, that we come not alone
to the field, but have with us, besides the rest of Gods saints, and infinite
number of holy angels, God and all his graces, to be as it were a brazen wall
unto us; yea Christ Jesus himself, the head of men and angels, who has not
only all creatures at commandment, to use for our good, and the hurt of his
and our ennimies, Ioh. 18.4.6
but with the least breath of his mouth, is able to overthrow them, as he did
those that came to take him, and with the meanest spark of his majesty, to
confound and abolish them, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8
as he shall do Antichrist with the brightness of his coming.

Against which though our natural corruption, may seem to say somewhat, when
it obiecteth this fleshly reason, how can we suffer with Christ, seeing he is
in heaven, and we in earth, or how can we be partakers of his spiritual
graces and infinite power, seeing we our selves are earthly, and tied to a
place; yet if we weigh either that spiritual union, that is betwixt him, as
the head, and us as the members, the effectual feeling whereof is to be
perceived, only by a true, a lively, and a steadfast faith, grounded generally
upon the canonical scriptures, but more particularly, upon the sweet and
gracious promises therein contained, specially such as concern, the free
pardon and full forgiveness of all our sins through Christ, and in him also the
assured hope of eternal salvation: or regard those plain places of the word,
uttered not by men only endued with Gods spirit, but by Jesus Christ himself,
the eternal son of the eternal father, and that for the comfort of the
godly, and the terror of the wicked, wherein this is aduouched, Iuke 10.16.
Matt. 10.40
that Injury offered to his, is accounted as if it were done to his own
blessed person, and kindness showed to them, is esteemed as if it had been
practiced unto himself, though indeed he stands not in need of any such
thing: or respect the nature and strength of holy faith, that makes things,
past, present, and things to come, as if we had them in possession, yea that
most effectually joins things together, though they be as far asunder as
heaven and earth, otherwise how could we be partakers of Christ's death, to the
forgiveness of our sins, or of his righteousness, to the possession of the
eternal inheritance, or of everlasting life, all of them being matters that
we must of necessity, be familiarly acquainted withal? We shall clearly see
with ease enough, to answer this argument, that the blindness of flesh and
blood would seem to make against the truth it self.

Me thinks rather, that since in this reason of the Apostle, the holy ghost
alludeth to the common custom of men, and after a sort, as a man would say,
stoupeth down to their weakness, who if they have companions with them in
their afflictions, do more comfortably for the most part, and patiently carry
the same, persuading themselves, that a burden divided, is more easy and
light, than when the whole weight of it, lies al upon one man's shoulders, that
therefore we should much more comfort our selves, not only that we have one to
bear some part with us, but ra her that bears al for us; and who, if we
suffer or endure any thing, specially for his sake, and the profession of his
truth, will give us as it were his strength, making us thereby not only able
to continue and hold out, but to overcome, and be conquerors, yea more than
earthly conquerors, Romans 8.37.
as the apostle himself speaks in the later end of this eight chapter, there
being always this one special difference betwixt us and them, that though
they overcome to day, yet they may, through the sudden alteration, change, and
inconstancy of the things of this life, be subdued to morrow, or the next
day, as you would say, whereas those that are made partakers of the eternal
victory that Christ has gotten against al his and our enemies, both bodily
and spiritual, shall never be vanquished and overcome again. And though that
our adversaries in their continual malice, may attempt many matters against
us, and perhaps now and then also give us some blows and wounds, yet here
is the glory and comfort of christians, that even in the midst of fiery
flames, and all other grievous trialles whatsoever, that the wicked according to
the will of God, lay upon us, 1. Pet. 4.16.
we are still more than conquerors, even then when we seem to be overcome,
which no worldly honor can attain unto, no not then, when it is, at the top
and height as you would say, of the prosperity and flourishing thereof.

An other reason that the apostle uses, to comfort the saints and servant of
God withal, in the days of their distres and grievous afflictions, is taken fi
o^ that glory, that we suffering with him, shall have perfectly together with
him, when he shall appear in great power and glory, to judge the quick and
the dead. And the force of this argument is contained in these words, that we
may also be glorified with him: whereof there is likewise very good reason;
namely, that forasmuch as the cross and christian profession are companions,
that seldom or never are found asunder, in this life amongst the children of
God, the truth whereof appears, by the manifold testimonies of Gods holy
word, 2. Tim 3.12 Acts 14.22
and the infinite examples of his sons and servants, who in the days of their
flesh have in this behalf bin made excellent mirrors, or looking-glasses, for
the rest to behold themselves in: and forasmuch also, as the cup of
afflictions, that the Lord makes his servants to drink of here, is, though not
always, as in regard of it self, it being many times a just deserved
punishment, laid upon us in Gods judgment, as a correction for our sins,
yet as well in respect of God, who by his almighty power commanding the light
to shine out of darkness, 2. Cor. 4.6
has sanctified the same to that end, as also in respect of the fruits and
effects, that it brings forth in Gods children, as patience, constancy,
mortification, and many such excellent things, is, as I was about to say, a
most certain pledge, of a far better estate in an other life, 2. Tim. 2.12
that therefore also we should even assure our selves in our sufferings for
Christ, that we shall likewise be glorified with him; for if mighty men of
the earth, as princes and others, forget not to satisfy such as have been
partakers with them of their trialles and troubles, and attended upon them in
their sickenesses, griefs, and such like, but think it great dishonor to
their states and dignities, if they do not recompense them according to their
trauelles only, but even in a frank and liberal mind, that they have many
times beyond the same, much less will or can Christ Jesus our savior, be
either unmindful of, or leave unrewarded: those men, or those sufferings, that
they or we have endured, as for his sake, and the holy profession of his
blessed truth: and the rather because he is not as a man, or as the sons of
men that make, yea that are overtaken with the sin of pride or disdain toward
other, when he himself is exalted, or of forgetfulness of penury, in the
days of peace and plenty, or of hardness of heart, when the bowelles of
compassion are to be displaied, or of a wavering and an unconstant mind,
loving now, and hating anon, but always continues like unto himself, in every
thing becoming familiar, and as you would say, debasing himself unto his
own, having them in continual remembrance for their good, manifesting all
kindness and tenderness of heart toward them, and that in most bountiful
manner in all graces both bodily and spiritual, temporal and eternal, John
13.1.
loving them also even unto the end) as the scripture says.

And this kind of argument is used, not only here, but in many other places
of holy scripture, the Apostle affirming elsewhere, 1. Cor. 11.32.
that we are therefore chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the world; the selfsame Apostle telling us in an other place, 2. Tim
2.12
that if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Whereunto no
doubt our savior Christ himself likewise has a special respect, in these
words of that excellent prayer, which he makes in the seventeenth chapter of
the gospel according to Saint John, John 17.24.
Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with me even where I
am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. And this also
is the more urged every where almost, not only for the declaration, of the
excellency and certainty of the thing it felfe, that so we might be brought to
be in continual love and liking of the same, Phillip. 3 8.
counting all things loss and dung, as in regard thereof, but also because
that we that are dull of heart and slovve to believe, Luke 24.25.
specially the things that be so far beyond the reach of our reason and wit,
and remain so high and glorious, as eternal life and blessedness is, might
every day more than other be thereby strengthened, in the assured apprehension
and application of the same, unto our own souls, that so we might in the
midst of all our troubles and trials, either outward or inward, both spend
and end the days of the poor pilgrimage, that we have in this life, in the
peace of a good heart, through the lively feeling of the incorruptible crown of
everlasting glory. Oh a thousand, yea ten thousand times blessed and happy are
they, on whom god has bestowed that grace and mercy: and infinitely miserably
on the other side, and wretched are they that are not made partakers of so
excellent goodness.

I will say but this only, touching this point; men shall never endure with
christian comfort, and true patience indeed, any affliction of the flesh, or
any assaults of the mind (much less shall they be able to combat and fight
with hope of a conquest against either the one or the other) without the sweet
tasting of this, at the least in some measure, or except they have some
goodness and grace in this behalf powered forth upon them from GOD: Yea
sunder this (if it could be) which is the accomplishment of all, from all other
the mercies of God toward us in Christ, and his merits, and then what good as
a man would say, can they do us? For if we respect worldly things, as meat,
drink, health, and such like, what are they without this, though otherwise
they seem never so delightful and pleasant unto us, but so many instruments and
means to fat us, as stall-feede oxen against the day of our slaughter? And
though it be true, Romans 4.25.
that we might have through Christ his death, the forgiveness of our sins,
through his resurrection, the imputation of his righteousness, and be enabled
so, to stand before God, as pure and clean, being clothed with his holiness
and innocence, yet if we should not come to that eternal inheritance, through
the strength and power of his glorious ascension, but live here upon the
earth, subject to so many infirmities of our own, both in body and mind, as we
continually carry about with us, and lie open to the buffetings of Satan, and
the blows of the wicked as his servant (who in the rage of their spirits,
are ready every minute of an hour, with violence, death, and destruction, to
rush in and fall upon us) what were it else but after a sort, to be as it were,
even in the pains and torments of hell it self? Let us therefore stick fast to
this, think upon it often, and make much of it, as a notable bulwark or
buttresse to our faith, patience, and all other the particular fruits thereof
whatsoever.

There follows a third argument, for comfort in afflictions and troubles,
even in the very beginning of this text, that we have now taken in hand to
interpret, namely in the eighteenth verse and these words, For I account that
the afflictions of this present time, etc. Which as it is drawn from the great
odds as you would say, that is between the pains that we endure in this
world, and the eternal joys that are prepared for us in the life to come, the
one sort being in it own nature finite) as all things in this life are) though
perhaps innumerable as in regard of us: the other both as in respect of God the
creator, as also in respect of it self being infinite and unmeasurable: so does
it not only well, but necessarily also depend even upon both the former resons,
and may fitly be fastened unto them in this sort; that whereas he had in the
former made mention partly of manifold afflictions, and partly of heavenly
glory, now in this he laboreth to show, that though our troubles and trialles
be never so great or many, that yet it should not any whit at all discourage
us, in as much as there is, a far more excellent glory, by infinite degrees
laid up for us in heaven than al our sufferings can amount unto, whatsoever
they be or can be, and so delivers unto us a singular commendation of the
wonderful excellency and infiniteness of the said glory.

Men we see by daily experience, will force themselves far for worldly
preferment, for from whence comes it, that in games, yea and those of no
value to speak of, men take such extraordinary pains, Psalm. 127.^
and in ordinary trades travel, rising up early, lying down late, cating
the bread of sorrovve, and running through fire and water, as you would say, but
for some hope that they have, either of gain or of glory, the marks commonly
that men set before them, to aim at and hit? Yea the more excellent the price
is that is prefixed before the^, or the reward that they promise unto
themselves, or is promised them by others, as thend of their travels, the more
they strive and strain themselves: and why should not that add sharpening as
it were, and give a notable edge unto our courage and constancy, in the time of
our conflicts and distresses, whether they be of body or of soul, there being
as no comparison at all, between our earthly afflictions, and heavenly ioies,
so much less (if less may be) between earthly and heavenly rewards. 1. Cor.
9.25
Every man (says thapostle in an other place) that proves masteries
abstaineth from all things, and they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but
we for an incorruptible. Whereunto, that he might the better excite and
stir up the people to whom he wrote, he does in the same place set before
them his own example, who did so run, but not as uncertainly, and did
fight, but yet not as one that beats the air, but did take down his body
and bring it into subjection to the spirit, that so he might be the more fit
for the performaunce of those his spiritual exercises.

In all this doubtless we may plainly see and behold, two special points well
worth the weighing: as first our own backewardnes, dulnes, unaptness, and
inabilitie to good things: which also appears by this, that we have need of
so many spurs to provoke us thereto, as admonitions, exhortations,
reprehensions, consolations, godly men's examples, and many such like, and yet
all of them little or nothing prevail with us; a matter which being rightly
looked into, should make us so far off, from the proud thoughts of any desire
in our wills, or ability in our power, to wish or to do any thing good,
that if we were truly humbled before the lord and our brethren, as we ought
to be, would make us go continually with moornful hearts, and countenances cast
down, til such time, as God had both reformed our wills and given us power also,
for it is he alone that works in us both the vvil and the deed of every good
thing, ^p. 2.13.
and that according to his own good pleasure.

Secondly, we may here after a sort feel the greatest love and singular
kindness of our God toward us, who though he might by his sovereign authority
over us, command us, and if we did not yield obedience, might not only
threaten us, but punish us also, and that with all manner of plagues both
temporal and eternal, as who has the fulness and several sorts of them pressed
and ready in his own power, to pour them forth, when it pleases him, is yet
notwithstanding pleased, by gentle words to entreat us, and by promises of al
sorts to allure us, yea by the very example of his sons and servant to draw
us on to that, which indeed, does most directly tend to our own good, and
whereunto, though indeed we had none of all these things to move us, yet if
we were but led by the light of reason, we should carefully and earnestly
strive and labor.

Neither does this great and unspeakable bountifulnes of God, once only and
no more deal after this sort with us, but stands continually knocking as it
were at the door of our conscience, and waiting when by the comforts of his
promises, he may have a free entrance and joyful passage into our several
souls. For proof of this, we may see the self-same argument touching the
great and incomprehensible joy of the kingdom of heaven, alleged and handled
by the selfsame apostle, in an other place, but yet to the same end, that he
does here, to wit, for comfort in trouble, affirming, that our light
affliction which is but for a moment, 1. Cor. 4.17
causes unto us a far most excellent and eternal weight of glory: Yea the
like shall we find in many other places of holy scripture, all tending to
teach us, that that excellent estate of everlasting life, is described unto us
in the word, in such sort as we may comprehend somewhat of it (though in truth
as in respect of it self, it does far exceed al earthly, yea spiritual
resemblances whatsoever) as well to comfort us over our heauinesses, a matter
that we stand much in need of, specially if we be once truly and indeed
humbled, as also to make us with earnestness and feruencie, to hunger and
thirst after the same, specially considering how much every one of us is tied,
and as a man would say, glewed to the pleasures and profits, of this present
evil world.

By all which also we may see that they are too too injurious to the children of
God, that restrain the comfortable feeling of the ioies of heaven, only to
the world that is to come. True it is, that both the excellent perfection, and
real possession of the same is reserved for that life, but yet that hinders
not, but that by faith and hope, we may have even in this life, some
effectual taste thereof. And whosoever thinks otherwise, is not only as much
as in him lies, discomfortable to others (for what better argument have we of
joy than that?) but hurtful and injurious to himself also, while he depriueth
himself of that, which of al other things, is most deliteful and pleasant; yea
he after a sort condemns the sufferings of the saints and servants of God in
time heretofore, either of folly or senslesnes, who though they have bin
somewhat in couraged, by the goodness of the causes that they sealed with their
blood, in faith and patience to undergo the same, yet have they no doubt bin
greatly furthered also in their afflictions, by the true taste and feeling of
those unspeakable ioies, which have made them, in the midst of fiery flames,
and the most cruel torments, that the adversaries could devise, to be much
more pacient and joyful, than ever they were in the days of their greatest
health and prosperity.

And yet because every delay of a thing, specially, if the thing it self, be
of it self excellent, and in regard thereof much desired to, is tedious and
grievous to the flesh, as the apostle no doubt did by acquaintance that he had,
of the common corruption of our nature, and the particular experience that he
had in himself, well felt in himself, he does therefore in these verses
following, namely, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. add another argument for comfort in
afflictions, taken from the example of all, even the very unreasonable and
insensible creatures: of whom in these verses he affirms two special
things; first, that they travel in pain, and groan after a fort, under the
burden of their miseries, as men do; the other is, that they do with a
singular patience, as a man would say, wait for a time of joyful deliverance.
By which the apostle certainly would have us to know and learn, not only that
in respect of our miseries, we have a common lot and portion, with the rest of
the creatures, but also that even by their example we should patiently tarry
the time, that God has set with himself (and is not in our own power) for
our full deliverance out of those anguishes and troubles. Which yet that we may
the better understand it shall not be amiss in my mind, in a few words, to
lay out the apostles reason, who as I'take it argues thus.

All the creatures do very well perceive, that they are subject to vanity and
corruption, and yet notwithstandiug hope as it were, that in good time and
convenient season they shall be received and restored; therefore we also,
though we feel our selves greatly beaten down with diverse calamities, yea
and as it were oppressed and overwhelmed with the same, ought notwithstanding
steadfastly to believe, that through Gods godnesse toward us in Christ, we
shall not miscarrie in this life, the Apostle bearing record unto us, 2. Cor
4.8, 9
That though we are afflicted on every side, yet we are not in distress,
and though we be cast down, yet we perish not, but that we shall have and
enjoy at the length, when the wearisome days of our pilgrimage shall be
finished, most excellent glory and blessedness for evermore. And no doubt,
but of this the Apostles reason, there is very great and good reason also, yea
even declared by the Apostle himself, in his own words: for if the creatures
subject to this corruption, not by their own accord, but by Gods appointment,
as a punishment upon them for the sin of mankind, do yet notwithstanding,
that they be void of reason, in their kind, and after their manner, as you
would say, both patiently bear that burden, and earnestly expect a
deliverance from the same, when God will, how much more should the faithful
do both the one and the other, the Lord having endued them not only with
reason, a common gift bestowed upon all men, but filled them after a sort with
faith also, Phil. 1.29. 2. These. 3.2.
a proper and peculiar grace unto his elected ones only, from which as from a
clear and pure fountain, they must of necessity flow, in some measure, both
christian patience, and many other good virtues likewise, whereof also there is
even this reason amongst many other, that look upon whomsoever GOD has
bestowed store of any of his graces, either bodily or spiritual, that even
at their hands he looks for a more liberal and plentiful yield, than of
those, with whom he has not dealt, in so great a larges of his mercy, the
variety of graces also, that God has bestowed upon men, specially good men,
craving the same at their hands. For to what end else has God given the same,
but that in the lawful and liberal use of them, the giver principally might
receive more glory, and the vser more comfort and profit, and others also
reap great good by them, not only in this life, but in the life to come.

Hitherto, as you see, we have been occupied principally, and I hope not
vprofitably also, in propounding the Apostles general drift: out of which
though we may indeed, in some measure understand, the true and natural sense of
these words, and so perhaps may think, that we need not any further travel;
yet to the end we may more clearly perceive his mind and meaning herein, and
so receive more spiritual sweetness from him, I will not spare particularly to
examine the very verses and words as they lie, braying as it were, and beating
again, and that al to pieces, the sweet perfumes, that so we may have all our
senses seized, and wholly taken up, not only with the wholesome, but with the
most pleasant and delightful smell thereof (I mean spiritually) that is to
say, that so we may come at the length, to the full meaning thereof, and to
the fit observation of such profitable doctrines as do arise, and may rightly
be gathered out of the same.

Verse. 18 (For I count, etc.) The very word wherewith the apostle begins
this verse, being a particle causall, as we use to say, does sufficiently
prove, that it is a reason of the premises, or things before going, of which,
because we have spoken sufficient already, we shall not now need to stand
much upon it here.

And when the Apostle says (I) he means it not of himself only; for it is
the common judgment and belief of all the faithful, and the whole church of
God also, who being enlightened by the same spirit, either be of that mind
together with him, or should so be, because in this point, he speaks not by
his own light, but according to the truth and power of the spirit. Neither yet
does he speak it of himself, as of a natural man, for the thing that he
vttreth is far beyond nature, yea altogether contrary to the same; for what
worldly wise natural minded man, can either see in afflictions, the glory that
the sons and servants of God behold and fall in the same, or else can oppose the
incomprehensible ioys of eternal life, against those exceeding hardnesses and
great distresses? They rather suppose all things to be directed by secondarie
causes, or to speak as they themselves say, by the course of nature, or
direction of fortune, who indeed are so far off, from perceiving these
heavenly ioys and comforts, that they are carried away with conceits, either to
use unlawful means, to free them from afflictions, or else fearfully fall
into all muttering and repining against God, or to all impaciencie before men,
the reason is, because they are not acquainted with the comforts of Gods
children, nor have no feeling of the ioys of the life that is to come. Alas,
alas, they know not indeed, what either the one or the other means: 1. Cor.
2.14.
for these things are spiritual, but they themselves are carnal, sold under
sin, and therefore unmeet to discern of the same, Romans 7.14.
because they must be spiritually judged.

Out of all which laid together, we may learn sundry good lessons; as first,
that howsoever we do either for the expressing of our own feelings, or the
better fructifieng of the word in the hearts of those to whom it is directed,
speak particularly of our selves, or as it might seem in our own names, yet
that we never swerve from that truth of doctrine, that is commended vnro us in
the word written, and is sealed up in our hearts, by the pledge of the spirit,
and is approved by the common consent of the church of God. The neglect of
this, specially whilst men go about to magnify their own persons, and
opinions, has been the mean heretofore of many heresies, sects, and errors
in the church of God, and may bring forth the same bitter fruits hereafter,
except it pleased God to give men better grace to look unto themselves.

Secondly, it teaches us, that so soon as God begins to lay upon us, his
rods and crosses of trial, that then we should learn, not only in the spirit
of patience and comfort to submit our selves under his mighty hand, but with
alferuency of prayer, to crave the clearing of our understanding, James 1.5.
and all holy vvisdome also, as S. James calls it, that we may both see his
ways in his works, and learn to epsy out and feel the consolations and
comforts, that he has provided for us, that so we sincke not down under the
burden of our calamities, but be raised up rather to al feeling hope. A point
that we had need to strive unto, by all holy means possible, as well by reason
of the blindness and blockishnes of our own nature, and the diffidence and
distrust of our own hearts, as also because of Satan's continual malice, who
labors at all times, but specially in the days of our greatest heaviness,
our most fearful destruction.

And whereas the apostle says (I count) he means, that he comes with an
upright judgment, in an even pair of balance and scales, as it were, having
rightly and religiosly examined resons on both sides, and gathering all into a
just sum, to weigh the troubles of this world, and the ioies of heaven
together, not dealing therein as either the worldly man does, who regards
nothing but his miseries and afflictions, by means whereof he becomes not
only impacient and waiward, but past all hope of admitting comfort and
consolation, nor playing the part of the profane and insensible Stoiks, who
again on the other side, by reason of their beastly blockishnes, that they
get unto themselves, having both their souls and bodies benumbed as it were,
are no whit at all touched with the sense of the same; nor yet being so rapt
and ravished with these eternal joys, that they utterly forget, or feel not
at all the miseries and afflictions of this life, a matter that the
contemplative persons, in their traunces, dreams, and revelations, make the
height and top of all perfection in this world, but as wise physicians, yea as
good christians, intermingling sweet things and sour things together, and
comparing one of them so with an other, that as they see in their afflictions,
an evident pattern of the misery and mortality of their own lives, and a
plain proof of the justice and judgment of God against sin, so they make
the same a profitable mean to themselves, not only in a christian and
comfortable death, but in an holy life also, so long as GOD will have them to
live upon the face of the earth, to meet with the Lord, and to glorify his
most blessed name.

And this does teach us, uprightly to weigh and to examine, as all things
generally, so specially and particularly spiritual points. Which indeed, by
reason that they be more excellent, than bodily matters, and in that respect
also, in their own nature, more removed from our comprehension than the rest,
had therefore need most deeply to be looked into, for though by the line and
light of our reason, we may be somewhat helped to wade into worldly things, yet
in matters of faith and religion, we cannot, not only not perse any thing at
all, by the light and sight of our own understanding, but shall be much hurt
and hindered thereby from the same, if we yield to follow it; yea many
times, even in the things of this life, we are so blockish and deuoide of
judgment, that what by reason of colors cast upon worldly things, and what
by the blindness and ignorance of our own heart on the one side, and the
parcialitie that is in us on the other side; yea after that we see the truth
manifested, specially if it concern our selves, or others, that we affect as
our selves, we call good evil and evil good, Isai. 5.20. Piou. 17.15.
and so pull a fearful woe upon our selves, and justify the wicked and
condemn the righteous, a sin that the holy ghost has long ago forbidden, and
noted with a brand as abomination in his sight. How much more easly then may
we be overtaken, in blind, corrupted, and partial judgment, as in respect of
spiritual causes. The consideration whereof, should not only make us wary
and watchefull over our selves, suspecting continually our slipperinesse into
this sin, but should provoke us also to labor to attain, by all pains
possible, the true light and heavenly judgment; which indeed is not
elsewhere to be had or found, but in the only will of God revealed in his
word, as wherein alone consists, Ierem 5.9, Deuteronomy 4.6.
all our true wisdom and understanding whatsouer.

It follows, That the afflictions of this present time] The word afflictions
imports, all the troubles and calamities that Gods children do suffer in this
life, whether they be outward in body, as sickness, poverty, nakedness,
banishment, persecution, and such like, or whether they be inward in the mind,
as temptations from our corrupted nature, assaults from Satan's malice, grief
of heart for sin, fear of judgment in this life, or in that that is to come,
and all the rest of that sort whatsoever. And yet he restrains as it were, that
general term, by these words following when he calls them, the afflictions
of this present time, mening, that longer than this life they last not, neither
indeed can last in the children of God, because that by our death, God does not
only wipe al tears from our eyes, ends our miseries, and utterly kills the
strength and body of sin, but not leaving there, 2. Tim. 4.8.
begins and perfecteth our blessedness, where there are unspeakable ioies,
and crowns of incomprehensible glory laid up for us, and for all those that
do vnfamedly love him and look for his coming. And yet not affirming neither
for all that, that they always endure and continue so long; for though it be
true, that this is the common cord and portion, of al Gods servants in this
life, Acts 14.22
by manifoid tribulations to enter into the kingdom of God, yet as we see,
both by former and present expecience, the Lord sometimes having regard, to the
weakness of those that are his, does for the manifestation of his love toward
them give them a breathing time, as it were, and sometimes aga^ne, for the
declaration of his power and justice against the wicked, beats them down,
and raises up his own children; all this being done, ^^al. 225.^
That the rod of the wicked might not rest on the lot of the righteous,
least either the righteous themselves, should put forth their hand unto
wickedness, or the ungodly wax intollerablie insolent, and proud above
measure.

This rather is the Apostles mind, to oppose, as we may plainly perceive,
the afflictions of this world, against the ioys of the other life, and that in
a double antithesis or comparison as it were. First setting afflictions against
glory, the one being very base and bitter, Hebr. 12.^
as no affliction for the time present is joyous, but grievous rather, the other
being very excellent and sweet, which though it be delaied for a while, is yet
sufficient to comfort Gods children, for the time present, and to confirm them
in the hope that is to come. Secondly, opposing this time present with that
that is to come, meaning by both those times, the several states and
conditions, that then the children of God shall be partakers of, proposing this
also even to comfort such as fuffer in Sion, in that their afflictions shall
last no longer, at the furthest, than their natural life, but their ioys and
glory, shall be beyond and without all time, even for ever and ever.

And even out of these words we may gather a singular comfort against
afflictions, to wit, that though they be many times great and grievous, yet
they are not always long and continual. Which consolation is not urged here
only, but in diverse other places of the holy Scriptures. Take one or two
most plain for the proof of this point, in stead of an infinite number. In
the thirty p^alme, Psalm. 30.5
the prophet tells us, that the Lord indureth a small season in his anger,
but in his favor is life for eu rmore: and weeping may abide at evening, but
joy comes in the morning. And the Apostle agreeable thereunto tells us, 2.
Cor 4.17.
in the fourth chapter of his second epistle to the Corinthians, That our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, or most sharp season, causes unto us
a far more excellent, and eternal weight of glory. In the often repetition
whereof, the Lord doubtless did not only regard the excellency and
necessity of this doctrine in it self, but also provided notably for our
good, who besides that we are dull of heart, Luke 24.25.
and slow to learn, and therefore had need to have the promises pressed upon
us again and again, wax also not only weary of afflictions, if they lie
long of heavy upon us, but even pleasures themselves, specially in the
continuance of them with us, do many times by reason of our newfangled and
inconstant nature, grow tedious and loathsome. Good reason therefore is there,
that we should set this unto our hearts, and make our special profit by it,
against the times of our trial.

The Apostle adds, are not vvorthie of the glory, his meaning in this place,
and in these words, is in my mind plain and simple, who does not here
compare the dignity and worthiness either of our sufferings, or of eternal
glory together, as some have phantasticallie conceived, and more wickedly
propounded, but labors to mitigate the greatness of our afflictions, by
opposing and setting against the same the greatness, yea the infiniteness of
that joy and glory, that is laid up for us in the life to come, we knowing
and confessing, that there is no proportion between finite and infinite. And
though this be most true, yet notwithstanding Satan, in several sorts of his
servants, as in the schoolmen heretofore, has out of this place gone about
to maintain that devilish distinction, of meritum congrui and condigni, as
they call it, and in our Romish Rhemists also, in their late annotations upon
the new Testament, and namely upon this very place, would make the sufferings
of the saints in this life, meritorious and worthy of eternal salvation. But
in one word generally, to answer them both together first, and then
afterward more particularly, to deal with either of them by themselves. We
fear not to affirm, that these beastly opinions spring from a foul and
filthy fountain, and bring forth most bitter fruits and effects. For the
first of these two we say, that it flows from following of a wrong
translation in this place, I mean that that they call, their old vulgar Latin
text, which renders the Greek word (...), being a simple word, by the
compound Latin word, condignae, worthy, together, as you would say; which
whether it be not contrary to the fidelity and upright dealing of a good
translator, let even all the world judge, that have attained to a crumme
either of sound learning or godly wisdom. And if this course may be kept,
that compounde words may be used for sinople words, we shall quickly turn
vpside down all certainty of the written word, all truth of religion, and
all honest and faithful dealing amongst men. All the Greek copies that ever I
could see, read it in the simple, and so does Saint Ignatius himself
allege it, in his epistle to Marie; and it is the first epistle in his book
of epistles, yea and their own Arrius Montanus, a man of less corruption (I
had almost said, more vprightnes) in translating the word than they all,
though otherwise popish, convicted by the evidence and truth of this point,
renders it rightly in his interlineall text, howsoever for fashion sake he set
the vulgar reading in the margin. Saint Augustine, in his book of eighty and
three quekions, quest. 67. reads not condignae, as these men do, but
indignae, that is, unworthy. And in his fifth book of the city of God, chap.
18. where he does of purpose show, how far off christians ought to be from
boasting, if they had done any thing for love of the eternal country, he
alleges even this very text of the Apostle thus: Ind gnae sunt passiones
huius temporis, etc. The sufferings of this time are unworthy the glory which
shall be revealed in us. And so does some other of the ancient fathers
translate it, as if I delited in multitude of allegations, I could easly show.
By whith we may not only see, the true and natural meaning of the Apostle in
this text, that is to debase our sinterings, and to magnify eternal life, but
also that that vulgar translation, is not either so old as they pretend, or
else was not in those days of sitche credit, as they would have it now, in
as much as we see the ancient fathers, either using some other, or swaruing
greatly from that.

And no doubt but as the spring is puddlelie and corrupted from whence this
poisonfull doctrine proceeds: so the second thing above mentioned, to wit,
the fruits that flow from it, be much more evil and dangerous, whether we
respect the eternal God himself, or Christ Jesus his son our savior, or
our selves and other men whatsoever. For as for God, his mercy is greatly
obscured (if not utterly euacuated and disanulled) by this, in as much as man's
supposed merits and deserts (which indeed are nothing but death and damnation)
are not only matched with the same, to the great disgrace and discontinuance
thereof, there being as great odds between them, as between the most
glorious thing of the world, and the filthiest dirt or dung that can be, but
after a sort preferred before it, and that not only in the eyes of men (a
matter that should make us all to blush, and hang down our heads for shame) but
(if it might be accepted for current coin and lawful payment) tendered at the
exchequor of the most high king, yea brought forth into the very sight and
presence, and pleaded and alleged at no worse bar, than at the very throne
and judgment seat of almighty God himself.

And concerning Christ our Savior, his merits generally, and particularly
those of his death, resurrection, and ascension, are quite and clean
dedefaced, yea utterly abolished, when ^^^^es works are magnified, and our
deeds are exalted, who has not appeared unto any other end, than to
destroy the works of Satan, 1. John 3 2
nor given up himself, to the death, yea even to the death of the cross,
for any other purpose, Phillip. 2.8.
than to satisfy for all our sins whatsoever, neither is risen from the dead
and ascended up into heaven, for any other effect than to bring life, and
mortality to light, to communicate unto us his own righteousness, and fully
and wholly to reconcile us unto God, which things he has not exactly performed
if we by any or al of our works, have in part or in whole promerited Gods
favor, because either all the glory of that most excellent work must be
attributed unto him alone, or else no piece of it, for Christ minds not to
part stakes with us, as we say.

Lastly, if we would consider either our selves or others, of whom this is
affirmed, and to whom this doctrine is propounded and delivered, we shall well
perceive that by means hereof, we have not only our gross humors fed, and
our itching ears tickled, we delighting always to have some thing wherein to
glory, both before men and God also, whereas in truth we should cover our
faces for shame, in the sight both of the one and of the other, but also that
we are puffed up thereby in all manner of intolerable pride, disdain, and
emulation amongst men, every man thinking better of himself and his own
works, than of all man's else, and set upon the pinnacle of most dangerous
presumption before GOD, we clayming at his hands, not with christian boldness,
but with whorish impudency, all good things both of this life, and of that
that is to come, not of free favor and mercy, through Christ's obedience only,
but of due debt, as a man would say, being ready if God should deny us the
same (as generally for all our sins, and especially for this, he has good
occasion offered him) to revile him to his face, and to accuse him of injustice
and wrong.

But to come more particularly to the points themselves indeed. And concerning
the first, it shall not be amiss to know, both their distinction of meritum
congrui and condigni, and also what they mean by the several branches
thereof, that so we may put down a more plain and certain confutation.

By meritum congrui, or desert of congruence, as you would say, they understand
such works, as do not of their own nature, truly and indeed deserve
salvation, otherwise than as it has pleased God of some certain goodness in
himself, to promise the same thereto: and of this sort they will have all
moral actions to be, specially such as are done before regeneration and
justification.

And by meritum condigni, that is, desert of woorthines, they mean such works,
as to which there is wholly and altogether a reward due, not so much by reason
of the gracious promises of god, as in respect of the acts or deeds done; and
of this sort they make the works of the godly after regeneration.

But for answer, both to the terms and matter we say, that neither the
words of this distinction, nor the distinction it self, nor the matter meant
under the distinction, is contained in the canonical scriptures, but rather
all is overthrown thereby, as shall hereafter plainly appear.

True it is, that their vulgar Latin has in diverse places thrust in a Latin
word that signifies to merit or deserve, but without any warrant of the
original text, either of the Hebrew in the old, or of the Greek in the new
Testament, as Genesis 4.13. in the speech that Caine had to God touching his
sin, or the punishment laid upon him for the same, they turn it thus; My
iniquity is greater than that I can deserve pardon, where howsoever the Hebrew
word, that they turn deserve pardon, be of diverse significations (as if any
in that tongue be, no doubt that is one) being put for to be are, to lift up, to
spare, to swear, and such like very many, yet not one or all of the best
Hebricians amongst them is able to allege one place throughout all the old
Testament, where it is used for to merit or deserve.

In the new Testament they deal as corruptly, and namely, Hebr. 13. verse. 16.
not only darkly turning the place thus; And beneficence and communication do
not forget, for with such hosts God is promerited, but swaruing, as from the
Greek, which imports that with such sacrifices God is well plesed, so from
men of their own side, as Arias Montanus by name, the flower of their garland
for learning, who turns the Greek word (...), been placet sibi, that is,
well delighted himself, and not promeretur, that is, is promerited or deserved.

And the like treachery may we perceive in the other term, condignum, not
only in this eight of the Romans, as before, but also Esther 6. verse 11.
where the foresaid vulgar Latin text, has foisted in again, this term of
condignus; but altogether not only without, but wholly against the Hebrew
verity, as even their own man Arias Montanus before named in his interlineall
translation, by turning it according to the Hebrew has well declared.

And as for the members and matter of this Popish distinction, drawn from the
dirt and puddle of the schoolmen, we have learned long since, and that out of
the word of God, first, that all moral duties performed, before it has
pleased the Lord to purify our hearts by faith, Acts 15 9.
and to make us in some acceptable measure partakers of the fruits and effects
of Christ his son, are so far off from deserving any thing at his hand,
that they are most great and grievous transgressions in his sight, because the
scripture it self tells us, Hebr. 11.6.
that without faith it is impossible to please God. And again, Romans 14.2^.
whatsoever is not of faith, that selfsame is sin. The evil of these works
flowing, not so much from the deeds themselves, for good things of themselves
are always good, howsoever they be euillie done, and so become hurtful to the
doers thereof: neither yet from the goodness or profit, that others by such
means may receive from them, because so even evil many times (and therefore
much more good) may through gods secret and merciful direction ( who brings
light out of darkness, 2. Cor. 4.6^
and makes the rage of men to turn to his praise) tend to good also; by which
also we may see, Psalm. 76.10.
that works well weighed, and simply considered in themselves, and referred
to others, may after a sort be counted lawful and good: as rising from that
general taint and corruption of our nature, through the stinch of original
sin, that we have drawn from our first parents Adam and Heuah, by means
whereof it falls out, to be altogether impossible, as in regard of man, that
such rot^en, barren, and sruitlesse trees as we are, should bring forth any
thing that good is, and more specially from that palpable blindness, and
gross ignorance of God and godliness, that is in us, by means whereof also,
the actions themselves, wanting a good ground and sure foundation for the
performaunce of them (which indeed we can never have, till we know and
believe, the will of God, as it is revealed in his word) are become even in
that respect also, evil and displeasing in his sight. Wherewith also Augustine
that ancient doctor of the church, even alleged by Thomas of Aquine himself,
Quest. lib. 2. De gratia Christi. artic. 6. in conclus. very well agrees, who
proves against the Pelagians, that grace can not fall under merit, because
that before grace, there are no deserts, but such as are evil, because a man
before grace received is wicked, and to wicked men's merits, not grace, but
punishment is due. And quoating the place in the margin, he says it is lib.
De bono persevere. cap. 2. and many other such like tom. 7. By which also we may
see that it was the uniform judgment of this holy doctor.

And if this doctrine of merit of congruence may be admitted for true, I see no
reason why we may not with Origin hold, that al men at the least shall be
saved, since there have none lived so beastly or profanely, but they have had
not care alone to perform, but have indeed performed moral duties: for
which, though not as in regard of themselves, yet as in respect of GODS
promises, they might claim eternal life by this popish assertion.

But it may be, that they will except against this, the poor infidelles and
idolatrous people of the world, because they were never yet well acquainted
with the promises of God. Be it so, because I suppose they dare not hold, that
men's moral deeds may merit without relation had to Gods gracious and great
promises. But put the case of those, that being outwardly gathered into the
bosom or lap of the church, or made partakers at the least in outward hearing
of the graces and mercies of God bequeathed unto the same: tell us, whether
they may be, in any better state and condition by this your doctrine. If you
will affirm it, the evidence of truth exclaimeth against you, because it is
most unreasonable to hold, that the promises of themselves without application
of them to men's hearts and consciences, should effect that work for them. You
might before men as well maintain, that maimes and wounds might be cured
without medicine and salve, or a natural life vpheld without meat, drink,
sleep, and such like, as defend that the promises of God, without application
of them to our souls, may become effectual unto men, because they indeed be,
the only plasters of our souls, and the only spiritual food unto our
souls. Neither is this uttered to weaken the excellency and power of Gods
promises, either as in regard of God the promise-maker, or as in regard of
the things promised, for so they be always good, holy, excellent, powerful,
and what not? Neither were it requisite, that the worthiness thereof should
depend upon our apprehension and application of the same, for that were to
subject GOD and most excellent things, to us that be most base and vile, but
spoken as in consideration of men, to whom they ought to be applied, for want
whereof also it falls out, that they are become a dead letter or unprofitable
word to them, tending almost to no other end, but to magnify and manifest,
the riches of Gods goodness, with greater grief unto our own souls, in as
much as we see most excellent things offered us, and yet cannot find or feel,
that we have any part or portion therein.

Secondly, as touching works done after regeneration, we freely confess,
that though at the first blush they may seem very glorious, yea, and be
indeed and truth good, specially as they come from GOD, and be wrought in us
by the spirit of Christ that dwells in our hearts: yet as they come from us,
and be tainted with the remainders of our corruption, they are so far off
from meriting or deserving before God, that if he do indeed examine and weigh
them, in the most notable exactnes and vprightnes of his justice, he shall
always find matter enough in them, not only to reject the things themselves,
though otherwise well done, but also to condemn us the workers thereof, and
that not only for the imperfections and wants, that cleaves unto them, we
assuring our selves by the truth of christian religion, that no imperfect thing
can of it self please him, that is most perfect, but even for our natural
filthiness and corruption, that clingeth and sticks as fast thereto, as the
skin to the flesh, or the flesh to the bones.

And for the proof of this point, we have two plain places of holy
Scripture amongst many other, the one taken out of the old Testament, the
other out of the new, that so also in alleging them, and comparing one of
them with an other, we may see the most comely conformity and agreement that
is in those most excellent writings of the spirit of God.

The prophet Isaiah, in the three score and fourth chapter of the book of his
visions, and in the sixth verse of the same chapter, speaking to the Lord in his
own name, and in the name of the rest of the people of God, siath, Isai. 64.6.
that we have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as
filthy clovvts. In which sentence certainly, there is never a word wanting
weight, for the proof of the particular point for which it is brought forth,
specially if we look upon it, as it is in the original text; for first he
says not all men generally, which yet perhaps to some might seem strange,
because of that fond conceit. that has crept into men's minds, that all men
are not alike tainted in Adam, but all we, me aning all the faithful and elect
people, including also himself (though otherwise a very holy and godly man)
in the number: which yet is more strong, if we consider that this that the
prophet delivers, is not only the common case of all the faithful, but even
of the best sort of them (if any amongst them be better than other) so that if
there were any to be excepted, they most chefly, and rather than others, and
yet notwithstanding, God by the prophet wrappeth and foldeth them up together
(not excepting any one, of, or amongst, them all) as filthy and unclean, by
means whereof also, they deserved separation from God and men, filthy and
unclean things not being used, as we see by the truth of the word, either for
gods service, or about common affairs till such time as they were purified,
yea we knowing further by the law, that they did not only carry the note of
pollution, Leoit. 11.39.
and uncleanness in themselves, but tainted such others therewyth also (if
they came nigh thereto) as touched the same: our state and condition, being
wholly and altogether like unto the same, by reason of the world of
wickedness that rests in us, we having defiled by means of our sins not
our selves only, but the rest of the creatures, Zeph. 1.3. Job 15.15.
Yea the very heavens thereby are after a sort become impure and unclean in
Gods sight.

And yet the Prophet staieth not there, but as though he could find neither
words nor matter, sufficient enough to describe our naughtiness by, he adds
further, all our righteousness, or as it is in the Hebrew text, righteousnesses,
it being a word of the plural number, he meaning also thereby, and that
according to the propriety of that tongue, which uses such words both to note
number and excellency, that all and every grace, how many and how notable
soever they be, or can be in this life, are not (though not as of themselves,
nor as they come from God, for so they are always, and must needs continually
be good) yet as they are tainted with the corruption of our nature, and by
reason of our imperfection and defects, such as may come into accounts before
God, in the exactness of his righteousness. By which also we may well
perceive and learn, that neither the glory and glittering, nor the number of
our good works, are, or can be such (specially as they proceed from us) as
may commend us to GOD, much less merit at his hands of themselves and for
themselves, but as they are accepted before him, in and for an others sake
only: without the which indeed, they are rather matters of abomination
before God.

And that the truth of this, might yet more plainly appear, the prophet
compares them, not to things meanly, base, filthy, and vile, but either to
the defiled clowts of a monstrous woman, as their own vulgate turns it; or
to the clowts occupied about them that be sick and diseased, which Symmachus
calls patientium, according to the physicians phrase, but it should be, as I
think, parientium rather, that is, of them that bring forth children into the
world: or as Aquila turns it, the clowts ^^^^tnesses, Deue, 22.15
meaning thereby such signs and tokens as were given of virginity, in the
first performance of the marriage bed; or like unto a patched garment made of
pieces and shreads of very old and ouer-worne cloths, as David, Kmichi, and
some other of the Jewish rabbis will have it: or as Jonathan in his Thargum
expounds it, as an abject garment, or a garment that for the filthiness of it,
is fit to be floong from us; all and every one of these, noting such things, as
both eye and heart abhors. And in truth, if herein a man should stand to
allege, the several interpretations, that men have given of that word, we
might quickly grow tedious: a matter that I for mine own part like not of,
neither indeed would I therein have bin so large at this present, but that al
men might see, both Jewish and christian expositors, concurring as it were, and
consenting together, to resemble our best things, to most base and vile
matters, yea to such things as are loathsome to be looked on, and grievous many
times to be thought of, so far off have they bin from ever approving or
allowing the merit of man's works before God, and specially as in respect of
eternal life and salvation.

And least any man should think, that this were but the voice of a mortal man
obscurely and darkly uttered in the old Testament, touching this point, let us
hear what the eternal son of the eternal father (who neither deceives nor is
deceived) has under the gospel in a most audible voice spoken concerning this
matter, that so we may the more readily receive the truth, and detest al
contrary falshoode whatsoever.

In the seventh of Luke he teaches us, both by similitude and plain
doctrine, Luke 17.10.
to confess, that we are unprofitable servants, even then when we have done
the things that are commanded us to do, we having performed no more but that
which we ought: not that Christ means thereby, that it is possible for us
poor and miserable men that we are, to fulfill the law of God, and to obey
all and every one of his holy commandments, as some would corruptly
conclude thereupon, for that doctrine is altogether contrary to the truth of
the written word, as appears Acts 15.10. and Romans 8.3. and tends
maruellously to puff up flesh and blood. Neither yet that he would teach us
in a certain kind of monkish humility, to conceive or speak more modestly of
our doings, than they of themselves deserve, for that were dalliance,
hypocrisy, and false witnes-bearing: besides that, it were a robbing of God of
his glory, who is then defaced, when his graces and good works are debased
beyond measure and truth. And what a fearful thing were it also, to make our
savior a teacher of such vanity and corruption, we thereby subiecting himself
to sin, who was altogether free from sin, and by that means likewise spoiling
our selves of al grace, goodness, and comfort, that otherwise we might fetch
from him, who could not be the price and ransom of our sin, if he were any
manner of way tainted with any, yea the least sin whatsoever, a matter that
might wound us, and every one of us, unto eternal death. But rather to teach
us, that though we had exactly and in every point, kept the whole law of God
(which indeed no man as man has ever performed or can perform, I always
except Christ Jesus God and man in one person) that yet we should be so far
off, from thinking or dreaming of deserts, specially at Gods hands that we
should not, as our savior Christ shows, by the similitude and plain words of
the same, so much as look for thanks, much less for merit.

And that we may yet more plainly perceive this point, let us a little weigh
even our savior Christ's own words. He tells us, that though earthly
servants perform to their earthly masters all the duties that they lay upon
them, that yet their masters will not for all that, so much as in words give
them thanks for the things done? Which matter being expressed in such a
manner as our Savior delivers it wythall, does yet serve more to explane and
prove the point, he not simply affirming, that the master in the
accomplishement of services prescribed, does not yield the servant thanks,
but interrogatiuely speaking it says: Does he give that servant thanks,
for doing the thing which he commanded him? as though he should say, no
certainly, for such a force has that interrogation or demand. And yet our
Savior adding an answer to that question, and in these words, I trovve not,
vehemently affirming that no master uses it, does more and more thereby
confirm and strengthen the matter he had in hand, which is the utter
abolishing of all opinion of merit; for if earthly servant do not then
deserve, at their earthly masters hands, so much as thanks, much less a
reward (which all men will confess, to be greater and more, in as much as
works excel words, the one also being more easlie and with less cost
performed, than the other) when they have accomplished the things that their
lords and masters inioyed them, how can we hope or look for, either thanks or
merit, at the hands of our heavenly father, in the performance of spiritual
services, the thinking, knowing, and doing whereof, is not only much more
difficult and hard, than the doing of worldly duties (by how much spiritual
things be more excellent than worldly) but also because the things themselves,
though they be performed, do by reason of defects cleaving unto them, through our
corruptions (we failing either in the matter, manner, end, or some such other
point) become as it were displeasing in the sight of almighty God.

Is there any man so sottish, that will deny the truth of this point? If they
be, I doubt not to aduouch, that in the blindness of their own hearts, they
regard not the great odds, that both in nature and authority, is between our
heanenly Lord, and our earthly masters, nor weigh the wonderful difference,
that is between their several commandments, neither yet consider their own
weakness and wants. For first God as the creator of al things is infinite, and
man as his creature is infinite and circumscriptible. God again is spiritual
and heavenly, man on the other side is corporal and earthly. There being then
no proportion between finite and infinite, spiritual and corporal, earthly
and heavenly, how can men exactly and absolutely perform the infinite and
spiritual duties, that such an infinite and spiritual majesty prescribes?
And if they cannot perform all, but fail in the most, or any one, how can
they claim of duty? Much more marvelous is it, that they dare challenge of
desert. On the other side, if we compare man to man, we shall then easlie
perceive, that howsoever they differ somewhat, as in respect of their several
places and callings: yet one God has made all of that kind of one blood, Acts
17.26.
even to dvvell upon the face of the earth: and therefore there being by that
means, not only a certain similitude or likeness between them, but
equality after a sort, they may, yea do many times, more readily yield to
the things or duties that one of them exacteth of an other, or the chiefest of
them all, at the hands of all the rest.

And if we look upon the difference of either of their laws, we shall yet
more plainly behold, and as a man would say, have all our senses satisfied in
the truth of this point. For as touching the laws we know by experience, and
believe in faith, that they are such, as the lawmakers themselves are: GOD
therefore being spiritual, his also are spiritual, requiring inward and most
excellent things, whereas man being bodily and outward, demands by his law,
but outward and bodily obedience. To this latter, we are and may be much
helped, by the ripenes of our wits, the actiuitie and nimblenes of our bodies,
the light of nature, continual custom, daily exercise, and many such like.
But to the former, nothing neither without us, neither within us (till GOD has
quite and clean altered us) can any manner of way further us, but hinder us
rather, 1. Cor. 2.14
because the natural man (as the Apostle tells us) perceives not the things
of the spirit of God. Romans 8.7.
And again in an other place, That the wisdom of the flesh (meaning thereby
whatsoever is most excellent in it, as of it self) is enmity against God, for
it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. And therefore
good reason have we why we should refuse these dotages and conceits.

Now then to conclude this controversy; if neither our works before
regeneration nor after regeneration, are able to purchase any good thing from
God, as we have already sufficiently proved the same: and we have no works
at all, but they must of necessity be comprised, under the one or the other
number of this division; then it plainly and truly follows heerevpon, that
no deeds of ours whatsoever, do or can merit or deserve any good thing at
Gods hands, much less eternal life, the chiefest good of all; and by
consequent also, that these popish distinctions are both blind and blasphemous.

Nether are these things spoken, as to crack the credit of the good works,
that God inableth his children to do (for what are we miserable wretches, that
we should debase or deface his graces, in our selves or others) or to discorage
men from the performance of the same (whom we ought and that by the warrant of
the word and christian charity, Hebr. 3.13.
to draw on by all means possible to the doing of them) but rather to teach us
willingly, to take shame and confusion of face upon our selves, by reason of
the imperfection and defects that cleueth to our good deeds, that so God in our
debasing may receive all glory of goodness, to whom indeed and alone it
belongs: yea and so to profit by these our wants and weaknesses, that it may
appear both to our selves and others, that we have not received, the truth of
this doctrine in vain, but referred it to the right ends, the Lord using it
not only as a notable mean to humble us before him, in whose sight all flesh
must stoop and be abased, how righteous and innocent soever they seem to be
before men, but also to cause us with more speed and earnestnes to look up to
Christ, and to repair to him that is the only mean to cure our
transgressions, and to cover al our imperfections whatsoever, which of a truth
none perform that any manner of way (how little or much soever it be) will plead
merit or desert, in Gods sight, setting up notwithstanding before us, Hebr. 6.1.
Perfection as a butte or mark to aim at, though we cannot hit it, or attain
to it in this life, making notwithstanding our care and conscience to appear,
in a lawful striving toward it, as much as we may, always assuring our selves
of this, that God continually accepts those that are his, in his well-beloved
son, and their only savior Christ, According to that they have, 2. Cor. 8.12.
and not according to that they have not. And let this suffice for a just
confutation of their conceit, or dotage of deserts.

Now we come to our Rhemists, and their assertions; all that they say being of
truth, scarce worth the answering, neither indeed need we to travel in it,
were it not, least they should wax insolent, in the fond imaginations of their
hearts, or should through their own corruption carry men headlong through the
blindness of their understandings, to error and heresy.

They tell us in their notes here, that we dare not much aduouch, that Christ's
passions be not meritorious of his glory. To which we answer, that what we
dare aduouch concerning Christ's passions, they do not well know, because they
will not, or dare not be acquainted with our doctrine and writings, absenting
themselves from our public assemblies, and forbidding all of their faction
(some few only excepted) to read our works. If we dare not much aduouch
Christ's sufferings not to be meritorious, is there any marvel, since it is a
doctrine never propounded in the word, nor delivered by the fathers of right
faith and religion? Papists think that all assertions are to be rejected,
that are not warranted either by the scriptures, or by the consent and
authority of reverend antiquity. And why may not we then upon the same
grounds, refuse this conclusion, since it has not for it such proppes and
foundations? And if we dare not aduouch much, against the merits of Christ's
sufferings, as they say, why do they here, and elsewhere in many places labor
largely to confute that, that is so fearfully affirmed, and namely Philip. 2.
where they say, that we wickedly and unlearnedly deny Christ, to have deserved
for himself. Belike our doctrine has bitten them by the heart, or else they
would not make so long and often Apologies, in so bad and desparate causes.
Surely, one of these two must of necessity follow, either, that in vain
imaginations, they do fight against their own shadows, a point of extreme
folly, specially if we dare not, or do not affirm that which they say we
hold: or else utter gross contradictions in themselves, who in other places
as before, charge us wickedly and unlearnedly to defend the same that they
impugn.

But to the point, we for our parts fear not plainly to express, and that to
the eyes and ears of all the godly (yea to the wicked themselves, that so
they may be either converted or confounded by the glory of truth) what we
hold and maintain herein; first, that this point of doctrine propounded by
them, is not crowned with the glorious garland of holy truth, and reverend
antiquity. For proof whereof we bid them show us, if they can, any plain
text of scripture, or formal place out of the vncounterfeited writings of the
sound fathers. Those that have bin produced we have looked upon, and find them
very vnsauerly alleged at the least: and if they have none more pregnant and
pithie than they, we tell them they are ouerfeeble for us to fasten our faith
upon. And if they send us to Peter Lombard, Thomas of Aquine, and the rest of
the school doctors, that do more curiously than christianly wade into these
points, we frankely and freely confess, that we dare not give them the
authority, to be stampers and coiners of new doctrine in the church, because
we have learned out of the word, that there is but one only lavv-giuer, God,
James 4.12.
which is able to save and to destroy, nor may not any manner of way, stay and
settle our conscience upon them, nor upon those that be much better than they,
because Gods word alone, and not man's imaginations, is the only ground and
object thereof.

Secondly, though we should grant, that they speak herein no false or
erroneous matter, yet we affirm, that this idle and unprofitable thought, of
our own hearts and heads, ought to be abolished, not only in as much as it has
no good foundation, to stand upon, but also because it does wonderfully
darken, if not utterly euacuate and take away, both the love of God, and
Christ's grace and favor also toward us; for we know and have learned out
of the scriptures, and therefore do believe it too, that God so loved the
world, John 3 16. Romans 8.32.
that he gave his only begotten son unto the death for us all, to the end
that every one of those which believe in him, should not perish but have
everlasting life: which rich love of his toward us, could not have so
plentifully and plainly appeared, if he had therein as well provided for his
sons profit, as for our good. And Christ's grace can not but be greatly obscured
thereby, while we fantastically imagine, that he came into the world, and
suffered al manner of villainy at the hands of the wicked, for some other cause
good for himself, rather than for the work of our salvation. Whereas we are
sure, that when the Scripture will magnify his love toward us, Romans 5, 6.10
it tells us, that he died for us when we were his utter enemies, giving
us thereby to understand, that he had no regard or consideration of himself
at all, but only of us, yea he himself says, John 17.19
in the gospel after John, that for our sakes he sanctified himself, etc. by
which he plainly declares, that he did not only sanctify himself for our
sakes alone, but also that he derived, the fruit and benefit of his own
holiness over unto us, purchasing nothing thereby unto himself. And no doubt
but this is the meaning, as of the whole Scripture generally, so specially of
the Prophets and Apostles when they say, Unto us a child is borne, Isai. 9.6.
and unto us a son is given. And again, that he died for our sins, Romans 4.25
and rose for our righteousness; these words (us) and (ours) being so
emphaticall and forcible, yea after a sort so particularizing the matter and
persons that they show, that for us and our sakes only, and for nothing to
himself, he became man, and took upon him the shape of a servant, which had
it not been wholly and altogether true, it had been as easy a matter for the
holy ghost, or holy men inspired by the spirit of God, to have said, that
he did it, as well for himself as for us: but no such phrase can be found, and
therefore he minds to restrain Christ's humbling, and the fruits and
effects of it (which indeed are all his merits) wholly and altogether to us.

Thirdly, it may seem strange in reason to all men, if it be not erroneous in
religion amongst Christians, that the merits of Christ's sufferings, should
have a larger reach, and be extended further than his passions and sufferings
themselves, especially since that they themselves make his sufferings the causes
of his merits, and his merits the effects of those causes. In common sense we
know, that as a cause is before the effect, for an effect can not be before
there be a cause working the same effect: so it is, and must of necessity also
be, as large at the least, as the effect it self, if not more large, in as
much as it must not only give life and being to the things for the present time
produced, but also preserve a continual life in it self, for the bringing out
of the like effects still. And they themselves have a rule in philosophy;
that whatsoever works or brings forth such a thing as the thing it self
is, that works or brings forth, that thing that brings forth is in the
same kind; much more such a thing, than that which is brought forth. Shall
Christ then by his death merit for himself? and shall he not in his death
die for himself? But that Christ suffered for himself they dare not aduouch,
for the scripture affirms the contrary, saying, 1 Pet. 3.18.
that the just suffered for the unjust, and that were to make also Christ a
transgressor, whereas the word tells us, that he did no sin, neither was
there any guile found in his mouth, 1. Pet 2 22. Isaiah. 53.9
yea it were to leave our selves in our sins, because a sinner though he should
suffer never so much, cannot clear himself, much less others from sin, or
the punishment due unto the same. And therefore also there is no reason, why
they should hold that Christ merited for himself.

Certainly, touching this point, this is my persuasion, and I rest resolved,
that all good men will easly consent with me in the same, to wit, that this
forgerie (that Christ suffered on the cross, that so by the merit of his
work he might get unto himself, some thing which before he had not, came
without all doubt even from Satan himself, who labored by this (as by many
other the like corruptions) to cast a thick mist or fogge before the most
excellent glory and grace of our Savior, that so the same being dimmed at the
first, though not in the whole, yet in some small part of it, he might in the
end by a little taint, and discredit the whole. And whosoever they are that
see Satan's subtilties indeed, do not only perceive this to be most true, but
have their hearts also through Gods goodness enlightened to know, to what end
Satan does it, namely, to bring them, by doubting of some part of Christ's
great glory, at the least to distrust the whole, and so by consequence to
suffer him, yea and that willingly also to hold us captives in unbelief, at
his pleasure. We had need therefore, not only to look well about us, least
we be ignorantly, or at unawares supprised of him in his grinnes, but also to
hearken and that attentively and carefully, to the voice of the holy ghost,
speaking unto us in the written word, which oftentimes tells us, that in
Christ's death and suffering, we should not labor to see, taste, think,
feel, or know any thing else, but Gods mere grace and goodness only, and
such great and inestimable love of our Savior Christ, to usward, that he (as
a man would say) quite and clean forgetting himself, and looking at nothing
but our good, was contented to take his life in his hands, and willingly to
lay it down for us all: Ioh. 10.17, 18
yea we shall see, that whenever the scripture speaks of the sufferings of
our savior in plain words and terms, it determines that the fruit and
benefit thereof redoundeth wholly and only unto us, affirming, that by it,
eternal life is purchased unto us, and heaven gates set open for us, we being
thereby not only purged from our filthiness, but wholly reconciled to God, and
restored to righteousness: for which purpose amongst many other, see one plain
place Hebrews 10. verse. 14, 15, 16, etc.

But if they will needs have and hold, that our savior Christ did merit for
himself, then let them tell us we pray them, first at what time he did it,
because works of such excellency, had a time also wherein they were performed.

Secondly, let them declare, whether in his whole person, or in either of his
natures distinctly and by it self, he purchased that, which they say he
merited; for if we know not that, we can not tell what to believe, because that
whatsoever Christ has done, either for himself or for us, he has performed
it, either in his whole person, or in one of his natures.

Thirdly, let them certainly show us, what it was, that he merited, for it is
not meet that a work of so great excellency to him, and of such singular
profit to us, as these men would bear the world in hand, this point brings
with it, should be buried under some general knowledge of the same.

Touching the first we say, that the men, that so much urge this point, have
not yet among themselves certainly concluded, what time Christ merited, for as
for them that tie this, to the time of his passion only, or to the very act
and deed of his sufferings (of which mind our Rhemists seem to be, both in
their annotations upon this place, and in sundry other of their notes upon the
new Testament) we say, that they are not well advised what they speak: not
only because they contradict and gainsay their own master of the sentences,
Peter Lombard I mean, who lib. 3. Did. 18. affirms in plain and evident
terms, that Christ even from the very time of his conception, did by his
conception deserve that, which he did by his passion, but thwart also their
angelical doctor Thomas Aquinas, who lib. quest. de gratia Christi act. 8. and
in conclus. though he recite two opinions concerning this point, some holding,
that he did not deserve in the first instant of his conception, but anon
after, and othersome that he did deserve in the very first moment thereof (so
well do Papists agree in the material points of their religion) does yet
notwithstanding approve of the latter, as more reasonable. Yea they cross the
very truth and reason it self, because our Savior did many notable things
besides his sufferings and before his death, which also might as his death,
justly merit before God, both for himself and others, even as his death did:
for example his earnest and continual prayers, his daily and paineful
preachings, his marvelous and infinite miracles, and many other good deeds:
whereof also this is a very good and strong reason, that if the good works of
men do after regeneration, ex condigno, as they say, merit both for themselves
and others, the^ much more Christ's good deeds must have that power, in as much
as in all innocence, holiness, and perfection, his works did and do far
exceed, not only the good deeds of some good men, but all the good deeds of
all the good men that have bin, are, or shall be.

And as for those that maintain, that in his conception, and by the same he
merited as much at the first, as he did afterward by enduring martyrdom (of
which mind is the master of the sentences, in the place above alleged and
some others) we affirm, that besides that they agree not with those that tie
or bind his sufferings to the time of his passion only, (of whom you have
heard before) they swerve also even as the former, from truth of religion and
humane reason; for first merit presupposes a good action or holy affection,
that has in it self power and ability to deserve, already past, for I
suppose they will not hold, that without either the one or the other, or both,
there can be any desert. But we fear not to affirm, that our Savior had not
(and yet we speak without any prejudice at all, to his blessed person or
natures) any such thing in the very moment of his conception, no, nor long time
after, for any thing we can perceive. If he had, let them show us what it
was, and then they shall hear our minds further in that behalf.

And as it is more absurd by much to ascribe his meriting, to the action of his
conception, because that that was not his proper and peculiar deed, but the
work, partly of the holy ghost, and partly of the virgin Marye, these two
only being employed in the conception, incarnation, and birth of our Savior,
and not Christ himself being the thing conceived, incarnate, and borne, unless
they will say, either that one person of the godhead can purchase grace and
favor for another, and so make God like unto man, as they do by their doltish
distinction before confuted, which is most horrible blasphemy, because of the
three several and distinct persons of the godhead, none is better, more great,
or worthy than an other, or else, that earthly mothers may merit for their
sons, and that in the act of generation and conception, which besides that it
is too gross and carnal, stands up against the mercy of God, which must be
in all respects free, or else it is no mercy at all, and is directly against
the scripture, and namely, Ezech. 18.4 10
Ezech. 18. where it is affirmed, that a good fathers holiness or justice shall
no manner of way stand his ungracious child in stead.

Touching the second we say, that they dare not aduouch that his whole person
merited, because there is no such thing warranted by the authority of Gods
word, nor by the judgment of right believing fathers. Nay their own doctors
are against that, as for example Peter Lombard in the place before alleged,
where he affirms out of Augustine upon the second chapter of Paul's epistles
to the Philippians, that all this was done, in the form of a servant: and
Thomas of Aquine also, Quest. part. 2. quest. de gratia Christi, art. 7. and in
conclus. is of the very same mind, saying, that Christ merited not, but in
respect that he was man, though in that respect he was more worthy than other
men.

If they will maintain, that in his godhead he merited, then one of these two
absurdities must of necessity ensue upon the dangerous assertion, namely,
either that the godhead has merited more than it had, which is to make it
subject to imperfections and defects, and by consequent God himself likewise,
to become subject to more and less, and so to alteration and change, than the
which nothing is or can be more blasphemous, we knowing and believing that God
is most perfect, and remains always like unto himself; or else that the
godhead is passible (for the question is here now of meriting by suffering)
which is also as false and heretical, as possibly can be, we having learned
both by the warrant of the word, and the whole truth of christian religion,
that the godhead is altogether impassible and can suffer nothing, because it
has bin always of it self, is, and shall be for ever and ever, a spiritual
and eternal substance utterly freed from al such affections and passions.

If they hold that in his other nature, to wit, his manhood, he has merited,
as indeed it is their common assertion, then yet we say, that that is absurd
and erroneous likewise, because his manhood is a creature, even as we our
selves are (though he be freed from sin) and hard is it, yea it was yet never
heard of, that creatures could indeed deserve at the hands of the creator, who
has endued them with breath and being, and filled them of his own free favor,
with the fulness and riches of al his mercies. For what can the creator, by his
infinite liberality, goodness, wisdom, and whatsoever else is excellent and
high in him, purchase at the hands of his creatures, more than by well-doing
toward them, to deserve their love and obedience again toward him, and so
they with an unfeigned affection, embrace, love, and honor him? David a man
according to Gods own heart, was content to confess, Psalm. 16.2.
O Lord, my voel-dooing extends not to thee. And in an other place, Psalm.
116.12
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits to me, as if he should
say, I cannot tell what. Of a truth I have nothing that will answer the least
of them, much less deserve the best.

And if they will say, that he had the fulness of goodness in himself, we
answer that that will nothing help them. For though that be true, yet he
had it not as from his manhood, though it were in his manhood, but from the
fulness of the sanctifieng spirit, and the excellency of his eternal godhead,
which did so plentifully, replenish his humane nature, with all manner of grace
and goodness, John 1.16.
that of his fulness we have all received even grace for grace, and yet
notwithstanding he has never a whit the less in himself, no more than God by
induing us with immortal souls, or giving us wisdom, righteousness, and such
like, has either spoiled himself of, or diminished his own immortality,
justice, wisdom, and other essential properties in him.

Now then if Christ have not merited, neither in his person, nor in his
several and distinct natures, as we have already sufficiently proved I hope:
and we know not, neither believe any more in Christ, than his person and
natures to work by, either they must of necessity let this curious dotage, of
Christ's meriting for himself pass and vanish away like smoke in the air, and
so embrace the contrary truth together with us, or else show something besides
in him, which has performed this so high and excellent work, that they will
have every man, and that not only for avoiding suspicion of heresy, but upon
pain of condemnation of their souls unfeignedly to believe.

In the third point, namely concerning the matter he merited to himself, they
are as hardely distressed, and as much at their wits end: yea and at as great
iarres and contentions also amongst them selves, touching the same, as they
were in the former; some affirming that he merited immortality to his body,
and impassibilitie as they call it to his soul; and of this mind is the
master of the sentences, in the place above quoated; othersome that he merited
life everlasting, and the glory of heaven, as our Rhemists upon Romans 8. and
othersome again, that he merited all and every one of these matters
together. For answer whereunto, and to take no advantage of this, that they
can not agree nor resolve, what it is certainly that he merited to himself
(saving that by this we may perceive, that we have little hope that they will
consent with us in truth, that be at daggers drawing among them selves in
falshoode, because he verily will hardly agree with any, that diffenteth from
himself) we tell them, that he merited, neither any one of these things
severally, nor all these things jointly, and that therefore whatsoever they
hold herein, is but some swimming imaginations of their own heads.

For first, touching the immortality of his body, and the impassibilitie of
his soul: if they say he deserved these before his sufferings, why had he not
then his due deserts given him, and that in due time. For the thing deserving
being once performed, the merit presently grows due, and if there be any
delay made, there is injury and injustice offered, to the party deserving, by
the party that should recompense, in as much as he deteineth and uses that
which is proper to another. And so by this doctrine, the Lord is found both
greatly in debt to man, and iniust to all those, whose wel-dooings he
rewards not, even presently after the work is performed. But to us, over and
besides the reason before alleged, it seems impossible, that he could
deserve either the one or the other of them, specially since the articles of our
religion teach us to believe, that he was dead and buried, and the scripture
assures us, that he sustained most grievous pangs and passions in his soul,
specially when he affirmed, that his soul was heavy even unto death: Mat.
26.38.
and again when he cried out upon the cross, in the anguish and bitterness
of his spirit, My God, Mar. 15.34.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? What, was not God of power to perform
that which Christ had deserved? Or was he not willing to satisfy and pay that
which his only son had merited? Do you not see that these absurdities,
errors, yea blasphemies, must of necessity follow upon these lewse and lewd
conclusions.

What, will you say he had these graces bestowed upon him after his death and
resurrection, by the power of his passion? I answer, that then you say as
much, as if indeed you had said nothing at all: first, because that the
withholding of his deserts before touched remains notwithstanding still
unsatisfied, and not taken away. Secondly, because that if he merited those
things, by his conception (as the master holds) it is unseasonable to ascribe
these merits or things deserved to an other matter. Thirdly, because that in
that meriting, what had Christ, that we have not, I mean the faithful? For
after natural death they have as in respect of their souls, Revel. 7.17.
all tears wiped away from their eyes, and be freed from the sufferings of
this present world, and the torments of that that is to come; and at the
resurrection, their base and vile bodies (though otherwise dissolved into dust
and powder) shall according to the mighty power, Philip. 3.21.
whereby Christ is able even to subdue all things unto himself; be raised
again, and be made mortal and glorious, as the scripture plainly teaches in
many places, and namely, 1. Cor. 15. Whereupon also it will follow directly,
that as men in their doctrine may merit, so they may merit as much to
themselves as Christ did for himself. But of a truth, the mortality of
Christ's body stands not, as they suppose, upon Christ's meriting of it, but
upon the truth and certainetie of the promises passed long before he was clad
with our flesh. Psalm. 16.10.
The prophet saying, Thou vvilt not leave my soul in the grave, neither vvilt
thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Which place the apostle Peter does
notably expound in the Acts, in plain and evident terms, Acts 2.24.
telling us, that it was impossible that he should be held down of the
sorrovves of death: this impossibility arising, not from the strength of his
merits, but from the power of God, raising him up mightily again from the
dead. And the like may be said for the impassibilitie of his soul.

As for they that affirm, that our Savior merited heaven and eternal glory
by his sufferings, we fear not to tell them, and that to their faces, that
(either in the pride or ignorance of their hearts) they speak they wot not
what, and in the lightness of their brain, and idleness of their head, they
babble out things directly contrary to the word, and to the judgment also of
some of the best of their sides. Can a man in time deserve that which he had
from before all times? Our Savior I am sure in their judgments (if he
merited any way) merited as man. And does not he himself pray the Father,
John 17.5.
To glorify him with himself, and that with that glory which he had
with him before the world was? They are not so past shame or grace I hope,
that they will make our Savior ( who is the way, the life, John 14.6.
and the truth) a liar. Does not Melchios Canus one of the doubtiest divines,
being convicted with the evidence of this truth confess the same? Will they go
against the plain words of Christ? And will they thwarte the judgment of
their best friends? It is fearful, but specially in matters of falshoode
and untruth, to do either the one or the other: for to cross their
acquaintance, is to weaken and discredit their own cause and dealing: and to
oppose themselves against Christ, is to pull judgment and condemnation upon
themselves, because he is the stone, Mat. 21.44.
which whosoever shall fall on shall be broken, and on vvhomsoeuer it shall
fall, it shall grind him to powder. But both these mischiefs and
inconveniences, they must of necessity fall into, that will uphold and defend
such falshoodes and uncertainties.

And if their errors had stayed here and gone no further, than to magnify
Christ and his merits (though indeed they have done it beyond al truth and
reason) it had bin less evil for themselves, and more profitable for us, who
might by that means have spared a great deal both of labor and time, that we
must of necessity now bestow, least their poison should infect the souls of
men. But as one iniquity is ready to bring forth another, so they have
proceeded to tell us, that men also by their sufferings may merit eternal
life. But who sees not how infinitely absurd in reason this is, to argue from
Christ, Mat. 3.17. 2. Cor. 5.19.
free from sin, and the person in whom alone God was well pleased, and
reconciled the world unto himself, and had in him full and absolute justice,
yea such abundance of it, that he has communicated, holiness, innocence,
and righteousness, unto all believers, to men, tainted with all manner of
iniquity, who neither ca^ please god for themselves, nor others; who also when
they have done all that can be done in this life, are yet notwithstanding
clogged with defects and wants, by means whereof they cannot, not only
procure unto themselves any good things, but purchase eternal confusion and
everlasting death, as has bin already plainly enough and sufficiently proved.

And as absurd and unreasonable certainly is that their marginall note, wherein
they affirm, that all sufferings in this life is nothing in comparison of the
heavenly glory, and yet that it is meritorious and worthy of the same. For do
not all men, even by the very light of reason see and know, that there is, and
must of necessity be, a certain analogy and proportion between the thing
deserving, and the thing deserved, or else the party deserving cannot claim as
of duty, but of benevolence, unless they will extort and wring forth more than
they have merited. Ca^ nothing deserve any thing, or a matter of small industry
and labor merit a kingdom or earthly crown? Of a truth no: much less then
can that which they themselves call nothing (and would to God they thought it
nothing indeed, then would they let the cause and question about nothing fall
to the ground) deserve so excellent a thing, as the incorruptible crown, and
the heavenly kingdom of eternal life is. No, that (as the apostle teaches
us) is the free gift of God. And if it be free, Romans 6.23.
it must be in all parts, and in all respects free, or else not at all, as on
the other side, merits must be altogether merits, or else no merits at all,
because if there be the least part of the thing deserved, exceeding our
deserts, then are they so dashed and defaced that they cannot in any upright
judgment stand up before God or man to merit any thing. For even as the
Apostle reasons, and that rightly of works and grace, affirming, that if
Gods election be of grace, Romans 11.6.
it is no more of works, or else were grace no more grace: or if it be of
works, it is no more of grace, or else were works no more works: so may
we safely affirm of Gods goodness, and man's merits, namely, that if eternal
life in the whole, and every part of it, be a free gift, grace, and goodness
of God bestowed upon us in Christ, then it is not of desert or merit, for then
Gods grace, gift, and goodness, shall be no more grace, gift, and goodness; and
if it be of merit and desert, then it can not be of grace and goodness, because
then merit and desert can be no more merit and desert.

Sure I am of this, and I hope every good man, that is acquainted with the
truth of the word, and has particular experience of his own corruption,
will with me confess this to be true, that there is no more contrariety in
the matter and question of free justification before God in Christ, between
the grace of God and the works of the law, than there is betwixt Gods free
goodness, in the matter of eternal life, and the supposed merits that man must
bring with him to the obtaining thereof. And therefore if the argument be of
force in the one, it must also of necessity conclude, and that rightly in the
other.

As for that which they object touching the Greek phrase, it will no whit at al
uphold their weak cause and rotten building, it being indeed a childish
logomachie or contention about words; and that not only besides the Apostles
purpose and meaning, but also contrary to their own note, the speech it self,
being not a comparatiue speech, as they fondly imagine, but a plain and flat
denial, yea a denial after a sort, as a man would say, by divination, rather
than by comparison; as if he should say, they are in no case machable or
comparable, this also being the Apostles special purpose, not to reason of the
value or price of such afflictions, as the faithful endure or suffer for
Christ's sake in this life, but to show rather, that whether we respect the
quality or quantity of them (as a man would say) and compare the same with
eternal life and salvation, we may easily yet gather thereupon, that we shall
be infinitely more blessed with Christ, when we shall in the kingdom of heaven,
be gathered unto him, and united with him, as our true and only head, than
ever we were miserable, while we lived here upon the face of the earth. And
the truth of this may appear not only by the plain words, and very drift
and purpose of the apostle as before, but also by his manner of speech, he
speaking not co^paratiuely, specially in extolling of our sufferings (which he
greatly debaseth, by affirming them no manner of way worthy of eternal glory)
but rather in magnifieng of everlasting lise. Yea the word it self (...),
being used in his right and proper signification (which as the grammarians do
well witness, is affirmed of those things, that being weighed one with another,
are found to be of equal poise or weight) with a negative particle put before
it, to abolish the credit that we would carry with our selves and before
others, in and about our sufferings and to extol the wonderful excellency of
the heavenly kingdom, can not choose but euince and gain this point at their
hands.

Touching other allegations, as namely, that out of Proverbs 3. and 2.
Corinthians 4. (for we mind not to stand upon places alleged out of the
books called Apocrypha, as Ecclesiasticus, Tobie, and such like) in as much as
they are but produced only for the phrase, and yet prove not the matter, for
which they are brought forth, we shall (God willing) answer the same in some
more convenient place, specially since we have been long already in this
confutation, this being sufficient for this present, to let the world
understand, that they are brought forth very impertinently, and only to no
purpose, but contrary to truth also.

There remains only one reason, that seems to have some pith in it, to wit,
that we may as well affirm, that the works of sin demerit not damnation, as
that the sufferings of Gods saints, deserve not eternal salvation) but this
indeed as the former, has neither bones, nor marrowe, nor sinnows, nor flesh,
nor any thing else, that may give it force or strength. For howsoever arguments
taken from contraries, may be strong in humane reason (and yet there they be
not so universal, but that something may be justly objected against the same)
yet in matters of religion, faith, and the service of God, they have not any
such sure footing, as these men fantasy. That righteousness and sin be
contraries, as also salvation and damnation, no man in his right wits I think
will deny, but that the one should arise from man, as well as the other, no man
unless he be stark mad and insensible, yea peeuishly heretical, Mat. 7.16.
will ever affirm. Do men gather grapes of thorns, James 3.11.
or figs of thistles. Does a fountain send forth at one place svveet water
and bitter. Can not only the barren, but the brierie heart of man yield such
good fruit, as the olives and figs of Gods righteousness? Or can that
flourishing tree of eternal goodness in the Lord bring forth briers and
brambles? Their own vulgate translation in a place of the prophet Hosea
affirms the contrary saying, Hosea. 13 9.
Destruction is thine O Israel, only in me is thy help. As though he should
say, men by means of their sin pull judgments and destruction upon
themselves, but if they attain to health and salvation, they can no where
find it, but in the Lord only: by which exclusive term also we may see,
that salvation is not to be looked for, or to be found, either in our selves or
in others, but in the Lord alone, who justifies the wicked, Romans 4.5.
and shows mercy to whom it pleases him. Romans 9.15.
And does not the Lord himself most plainly propound this truth, saying in
the prophet, I, even I am the Lord, Isai. 43.11.
and beside me there is no savior. Cast away from you for shame, these gross
conceits of your own, and in time humble your selves to the truth of the Lord
(O ye his adversaries) which in many places of the same confuteth you, and
justifies our assertion. Out of an infinite number take one place, which is so
plain and evident, that though you your selves labor to darken it, by an
obscure translation, and would wring your selves out of the snares that it has
cast upon you, by your corrupt gloses, yet can you never shift it, I mean that
last verse of the sixth of the Romans, where he tells us in the first place,
that the wages of sin is death: Romans 6.13.
not only natural (for that all must taste of, Hebr. 9.27.
God having appointed that all men shall once die, and after that comes the
judgment) but eternal proper and peculiar to the condemned only; and
consequently shows us, that eternal life (which he opposes against
eternal death and damnation) is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, setting there-against man's sin and corruption, not man's imagined
righteousness, as they would have it, but Gods great gift and goodness bestowed
upon us, in, and for Christ Jesus sake only, without which of a truth, not
only no one man could ever be saved, but all flesh must of necessity perish.

In logike there is a rule, which also they themselves approve of, namely,
that as we have great scarcity of true differences for many things, so the
reason of that want is not in the natural things themselves (for no doubt but
every several kind has his right difference) but in that lack of light,
judgment, and experience, which lies lurking in every one of our selves. The
like we can not pretend here, both because God is more perfect than nature, as
who is Lord thereof, and also because he has enlarged himself so, that we may
plainly perceive and see the truth of this point. And if natural things may by
their several differences be certainly deserved, one of them from an other,
how much more truly and surely may we distinguish God from men, and the works
of his holiness and grace, from the deeds of our cursed corruption? Why do we
not deal herein as we do in worldly affairs? If we will rightly discern of
them, we will oppose things that be contrary indeed one of them against
another, as black against white, war against peace, etc. Because we rest
persuaded, that so they may be best discerned, no man in this case dealing so
fondly, as to compare yellow and black together, or to resemble a color, with
a thing that is not in the order of nature, which our adversaries do, in
opposing man's supposed righteousness (which indeed is not at all, and therefore
their dealings more absurd in that behalf) against man's sin, the evidence
whereof is so notorions, that it is most lively painted out unto us, by the
light of the word, by the stinging testimony of our own hearts, and by that
great flood of all manner of wickedness, which as heretofore, so presently
ouerfloweth all. Wherefore if ever men manifested ignora unce in discerning, or
else faulted foulie, in matter of opposing contraries one of them to an other,
our adversaries in this behalf be most shamefully overtaken, who though they
do set life against death, and salvation against damnation, have not yet in the
working and performance of these things, learned to set God against man, and
his grace and goodness, against man's perverseness and evil, whereby also
these inconveniences fall out, not only that men are puffed up in pride
above measure, and that in their own eyes, before GOD and their brethren, but
the infinite riches of GODS grace and goodness also, is as much (as they may)
utterly obscured and darkened, which does not in any, nor in all things
whatsoever, more plentifully and plainly show forth it self, than in the
forgiveness of the sins of his servants, through the death and obedience of his
son Christ, and the bringing of them to everlasting life and blessedness,
through his powerful resurrection, and glorious ascension, notwithstanding
that by the means of their iniquities, they have deserved the contrary, to
wit, everlasting condemnation both of body and soul, with the devil and his
angels, in that lake of fire and brimstone that burns for ever.

One thing more there is in their notes upon this place, which I cannot well
let pass, because it is a branch of their corrupted doctrine, and sauoreth as
much of error and heresy as the former points, to wit, that they affirm, that
the value of Christ's actions, rises out of the length or greatness of them in
themselves, but of the worthiness of the person. What if we yield to this, as
to a truth? What shall you gain thereby? or what will you infer thereupon?
Forsooth, that so the value of our actions rises of the grace of our adoption.
But we tell you it is a non sequitur, as they say in schools. Will you always
plovve with an ox and an ass? Deuteronomy. 22 10 11
And will you continually wear a garment of linsey wolsey? And will you never
learn for all that has been said, to compare and resemble, either quite
contrary things, or right equal and like things together? Why do you not
infer (for so you should have done, if you would have dealt plainly) that the
price of our works rises from the worthiness of our persons also? But this you
knew was blasphemous, and contrary to the written word of God, which in many
places rejects both us, and our good deeds, specially when they are done,
with an opinion or mind to merit, and that before God, as has been already
plainly proved, and therefore you will smooth it over with the grace of
adoption. To which we tell you in few words, that we our selves do in truth
and sincerity attribute more to the grace of Gods adoption, than you that
babble so much of it, and under such colors go about to deceive the hearts of
the simple. And yet notwithstanding all this, afterward you blush not to say,
that good works which be meritorious proceed from the child of God.

But deal plainly with us and the world we beseech you, and tell us, but yet
in no dark speeches, whether the merit of man's works proceed from the grace
of adoption only, yea or no? Or else whether the merit of them flows from
men alone, as they are Gods adopted children? Or else whether from God and man
together, as working causes of merit? For our own parts we fear not to
affirm, that whatsoever you will put down in this case, is, and must be
accounted in the judgment of truth merely absurd and erroneous. For to
ascribe it unto the grace of adoption by it self, sundred from man and his
merits, that you dare not, because it is flatly opposite to the whole doctrine
of popery, and to your own assertions in many places agreeable therewith:
Besides the grace of adoption, is a free gift of God, and not a merit; for of
whom (I pray you) should God deserve it for our sakes? And to cast it upon men
alone, without the grace and favor of God, is not only presumptuous, as in
regard of man, John 25.5.
who without him can do nothing; and yet against him will have heaven, whether
he will or no, if that be once yielded unto, but is bla phemous to God, whose
grace and goodness must needs be utterly euacuated, if that assertion be
established. And if you will say it proceeds from both together, that also is
as unreasonable and false, because one and the selfsame stream alone, as for
example your matter of merits here, which is but one thing, can not proceed
from two several heads, specially so opposite one of them to another, as god
and man are, yea and it has bin hardly heard of, that even in natural things,
there should be two principal efficient causes, concurring to the constitution
of one and the self same subject.

Of a truth we can not but tell you in all plainness and simplicity, that
if you will hold, that the merit of man's works comes from man, as of, and
from himself alone, or as coupled with an other, that then the whole word
written, the certainty of religion yielded to in all ages, and testimony of
truth in former time declared, will cry out against you, blasphemy, and
intolerable presumption: yea all the world that is of sound judgment cannot
but condemn you, for matching unequal things together, yea for mingling most
clean, and most filthy things one of them with another. For though we might
grant, that the grace of adoption, as it proceeds from God, being also a
perfect work (as nothing coming from him can be imperfect) might as in
respect of it self (if it were not defiled with our corruptions and
imperfections) merit something before God, yet there is no cause at all why we
should yield to it, when our works be joined therewith, considering how much
we taint and deface even the best graces of God in us, or bestowed upon us.

To conclude this point of confutation (wherein we confess we have bin very
long, but our adversaries importunity and tediousnes has drawn us thereto)
with a notable testimony or two of some one of the docto is of the church in
stead of many, (though I do not greatly delight I confess, in the allegation
of them, because the truth of the word without them is strong enough, as
which has not his credit and authority from men, but from the Lord
himself) that so it may appear how much they have, both in sense and
doctrine, perverted this place, and swarued from the godly judgment of former
times. Jerome I mean and Augustine, whose words are most plain and pithie.
Jerome even upon this place that we have now in hand, says thus. Hic vult
futuram gloriam commendare, vt praesentes pressuras facilius tolleremus. Et
reuera nihil possit homo condignum pati gloria coelesti, etiamsi talis esset
illa, qualis modo est vita. Quicquid enim passi^s fuerit a morte. plus non est,
quam etiam peccatis suis antea moerebatur. Nunc autem and peccata donantur: and
tunc vita aeterna praestabitur, consortium angelorum splendour solis, etc. quae
sanctis legimus repromissa, that is to say; The apostle minds in this place
to commend the glory that is to come, that so we might the more easily bear
the present troubles and afflictions. And certainly, man is able to suffer
nothing, that is worthy of, or in worthiness answerable to the heavenly glory;
yea though that that were but such, as this life now is, for whatsoever he
shall suffer by death, or at deaths hand, it is no more than that which he had
even before deserved through his sins. But now both our sins are forgiven
us, and then eternal life shall be bestowed upon us, the company of the Angels,
the brightness of the sun, etc. which we read are again promised to the
saints.

And Augustine De verbis Apostoli, sermo. 15. Pro nihilo (inquit) saluos facies
illos, etc. For nothing (says one) thou shall save them; what is meant by
these words for nothing thou shall save them? This is the meaning; thou find
nothing in them wherefore thou should save them, and yet thou sauest them.
Thou give freely; thou sauest freely; yea thou give altogether freely,
and sauest freely; even thou I say do this, which find nothing wherefore
thou should save men, but find much, wherefore thou should condemn
them.

And thus far for this point; now it follows in the Apostle (which shall
be shevved unto us.) Every word here carries with it force to persuade the
truth propounded, to wit, the excellency of the joys of that life that is
laid up, for the sons and servants of God: and serves also to teach all the
faithful in all manner of holy patience to attend and look for that, that
shall in good time be made manifest unto them, yea the full fruition and
possession whereof, they themselves shall have. That word (shall be)
instructs all of us, with faith and patience to expect the manifestation
thereof, not doubting, but steadfastly believing, that though there be some
delay of the accomplishment of this, yea and though our present afflictions be
never so many, great, and grievous, that yet notwithstanding a time will come,
when they shall be utterly removed, and taken away from us, and we our selves
put into actual and real possession, of eternal joys promised, the
faithful performaunce whereof, we did and yet do, in some measure of a sound
hope look after.

Neither doubt I, but even in this behalf, namely, touching the delay of the
things promised, there do and will arise by means of their natural corruption
many temptations in the minds of Gods children, and those also increased, not
only by Satan's malice, who labors to make us believe, that either GOD can
not or will not be as good as his word, but fostred and fed, by texts of
scripture also not well understood or rightly applied, as when the holy ghost
shall say, Prou. 13.12.
The hope that is deferred is the fainting of the heart, etc. But against these
we must learn, in all blessed wisdom of the spirit, and mighty power of the
word, to set such comforts, as it shall please God out of the holy scriptures,
to manifest unto us. Amongst which these following, are in my poor judgment,
though not of the greatest force, as some may perhaps think, yet of some good
effect doubtless, to repress such assaults of diffidence. In worldly matters,
when men deal with men, yet are they not dismayed with delays, but rather
raise up their hope herein, that the deferring of the things promised, is not a
taking away of the same, or else persuade themselves, that the length of time
shall be recompensed, either with the excellency and fulness of the things
themselves, or with some one consideration or other an other way. How much more
should we be comforted, not only in this that we deal not with man, who is even
as the wind and weather wavering and uncertain, but with God, who always
continues like unto himself, and have from him the assured promises, as of al
benefits generally, so of such blessings in the life to come particularly, as
with the least whereof, all the delights and pleasures of this world whatsoever,
no though they were al laid together, and bestowed upon one man, were any
manner of way matchable, specially, since that GOD knowing our hearts and state,
better than we do our selves, does therefore many times put off the performaunce
of such excellent things, that so he might make us the more reverently to
esteem of them, when we receive them, and the more earnestly to desire them,
when we want them, that are so exceedingly comfortable and profitable for
every one of us.

Neither does god dally with us herein as men do who will either give fair
words, and do no good deeds or else many times show us good things a far off,
that so they might seem more fair and beautiful, and by that means, as a
man would say, set our teeth on edge upon them, and yet notwithstanding, not
bestow them upon us neither, when they have done, or give us any other good
thing in stead thereof, that so in some testimonies of favor, we might have
our hope vpheld, in obtaining of matters of greater importance in time to come,
but deals far otherwise with us, not only giving us a sight, but a
sensible feeling sometimes, as of many outward benefits and blessings
pertaining to this life, so of sundry and singular spiritual graces, but
specially of those incomprehensible joys, that in heaven are hidden for us in
Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid. Whereof that we might
be the better persuaded, yea even then when he lets us for a little while,
want our former comforts, he does yet vouchsafe us innumerable tokens and
pledges of his most constant love, and that not only in bodily benefits, as
health, wealth, liberty, etc. but, as was said before, in spiritual blessings
also, as in his word, sacraments, prayer, and a great number such like
effectual means, to bring us in good time, to that quiet haven of heaven and
eternal rest, that we in the midst of the manifold tossings and turmoils of
this wretched life, have often and earnestly wished for.

And yet this faith, may be fostered and fed in us, by an other word in the
text, namely, when he says, that it shall be shevved, declaring thereby the
certainty and assuredness of those joys, and the great good will of God, in
satisfieng, as it were, our senses, with the same, putting one of them, to wit,
our sight, (for that is said to be showed us, that we see and behold) and the
same, one of the most sure senses, for the rest, this also being comfortable,
even in worldly things, that we do with more patience abide the delays of our
hope, when we persuade our selves, that our senses shall be satisfied, and that
yet at the length, we shall not be frustrate, but obtain; which ought much
more to comfort and encourage us in spiritual things, in as much as of their
own nature, they are not only far more excellent than the other, but more
sure also, as which the moath cannot eat, nor the canker corrnpt, Matthew. 6.19
nor thieves take away, as our Savior says, nor we be deprived of them by
any means or matter whatsoever. In which respect also even that Scripture that
follows immediately upon that which was before alleged out of the
Proverbs, ought greatly to comfort us, namely, that when the desire comes,
Prou. 13.12
it is as a tree of life.

Yea and to the same purpose also serves it, in that the apostle does after a
sort specify the persons, that shall be partakers of those great joys,
saying, Ephesians. 1.4.
To us (meaning thereby the faithful and elect people of God) whom God in
Christ has ordained before the foundations of the world were laid, 1 Pet.
1.4
to an inheritance, mortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in heaven for us. Whereby he would give us also to understand, that even as
the decree of Gods election is immutable, and his graces and gifts without
repentance, Romans 11.29
so it is most certain that the persons whom he has appointed thereto, to,
shall in time be made perfect partakers thereof; which yet is more comfortable,
if we do but well weigh this, that if we knew there were all joy in the
kingdom of God, and that the same is most certain and sure, and that it
should be reucaled and set before us, yet that we should not be heirs of
it, that it would rather grieve us, to forgo or want so excellent a grace, than
add comfort, consolation or courage unto us in our distresses. But now since we
know, that it can not be sundred from us, nor we from it, (because as that is
the thing, so we are the persons that must partake it) there is good cause why
we should rejoice in the Lord always, ^hilip. 4.4.
and continually to stir up one an other to rejoice again and again.
Concerning all which points together, S. John me thinks speaks most
excellently saying; ^. John 3.2.
Derely b^loued, now are we the sons of God indeed, but yet it does not
appear what we shall be, howbeit we know, that when he shall appear,
we shall b like him for we shall see him as he is. And this much for this
matter. Now let us proceed in the rest of the apostles words following, and in
order as they be.

Verse. 19 (For the fervent desire, etc.) That word (For) does suffic^ently
show, that it is an other reason of comfort in affliction annexed to the
former, taken (as we have heard before) even from the example of the creatures
themselves, who notwithstanding the miserable estate and condition, that by the
means of man's sin, and his profane abusing of them they are subject unto,
do yet still in their kind, though with groaning, yet with patience also, wait
for a time, wherein they shall be freed from that vanity. And if they that
want wit and reason, do yet notwithstanding perform this, how much more
should men, yea godly men do it? who besides that they are endued with a
reasonable soul (in which also they differ from brute beasts and insensible
creatures) have the great gift of of christian knowledge and holy faith
bestowed upon them, by which they are distinguished from themselves, as in
regard of the natural blindness of their heart, and from al other men also,
that as yet through Gods judgment in a punishment upon them for their sins,
do remain still in the filth and puddle of their own corruption.

Now whereas he attributes fervent desire unto the creatures, and that may
seem strange to us, who know by common sense and daily experience, that they
have no such reasonable affections, we are to understand that the Apostle
does it by that figure, which the rhetoricians call prosopopoeia, that is when
there is ascribed unto dumb, unreasonable, or senseless things, such a
person, speech, or action, as indeed and properly does belong unto men, and
such other creatures as have sens and life in the^; which kind of delivery and
propounding matters, is common in all writers profane and divine. So do Virgil
and Homer attribute a person to Fame; Tully likewise brings in the country or
co^monwelth, debating the matter with Catiline the conspirator: and the
self-same is used, as in this place of scripture (wherein reasonable affections
for example, desire, waiting, groaning, traveling in pain, etc. are
attributed to unreasonable creatures. Chrysostom also an ancient doctor of the
Greek church affirming the same here) so in many other of the old and new
testament.

The prophet David in one of his psalms says, that at the coming of Israel
out of Egypt, Psalm. 114.1.4
the mountains leaped like rams, and the hills as lambs. The prophet
Jeremiah attributeh weeping and moorning to Rahell one of Jacobs wives, Iere
31.15.
who was dead many hundred years before his time. Yea our Savior himself
says to the sea, Mar. 4.39.
Peace and be still, whereas we know that the sea has no ears, understanding,
or sense, but did it rather to show, that his power pierced even to the dumb
and deaf elements. And this selfsame apostle uses the same likewise, when
after a sort he attributes speech, to the foot, and to the ear, saying; 1.
Cor. 12.15 16
If the foot would say, because I am not the head, I am not of the body, is
it therefore not of the body? And if the ear vvoulde say, because I am not
the eye, I am not of the body, is it not therefore of the body?

Wherein we are to note, that the holy ghost does not use this manner of
dealing, as in a vain affectation or imitation of humane eloquence, for
besides that he delights not in such courses, he has no need to use them,
Hebr. 4.13.
but rather knowing (as indeed all things are naked in his sight) that such
manner of speeches are not only delightful, as in regard of variety, but
profitable also mightily to stir up the minds of the hearers (a matter that
we have need to respect, specially where there is such wearisomnesse and
backwardness to good things, as there is in man's heart) he uses therefore
the same, to cause his truth more deeply to sincke into their souls and
hearts, for whose sake it is propounded and delivered, the case notwithstanding
going hard on our sides, as in respect of our corruption, who must (as it were)
go to school, to bruit breasts and insensible creatures, to Iearne even of
them our duty, and obedience toward God: and yet being well with us in
another respect, that rather than we should lack learning, as you would say,
the Lord will give us all means whereby we might attain to the sound
knowledge, steadfast belief, and holy obedience of his blessed will.

Neither can I let pass, the very forcible and excellent signification of that
Greek word that the Apostle uses to deliver this matter withal, which
though it be in some sense reasonably well rendered by these words of fervent
desire, yet because they do not altogether express the nature of the same, nor
come so fully and wholly to the drift and purpose of the Apostle in this place,
it shall not be amiss even here also a little, to enlarge our selves in this
behalf; the word imports a most earnest and greedy desire, to have the
thing that is looked for, it being a double compound word, in the Greek
tongue, to wit, of the preposition (...), which in that language signifies, of,
from, or a far off, and of (...), an old word in use amongst them, which
betokens the head, and sometimes the whole face and countenance, and the
verb (...), which signifies to see, appear, observe, or wait for; as though
the Apostle should say, that though the deliverance that the creature longs
after, be somewhat far off, yet do they with a certain kind of egernesse
and greediness, as it were, wait and look for the accomplishment thereof,
even as a man that would feign have a thing or person, that he desires,
lifts up his head, and his eyes to see, whether he can behold the man or the
matter, that he desires or wishes, coming toward him, though it be as a
man would say, far off, he hoping notwithstanding, that though there be some
large distance of place, between him and them, yea and great likelihoode also,
that through length of time their meeting shall be a little delayed, that yet
for all that, he shall in the end comfortably enjoy the same, since they are,
as we say, within the compass of a kenning. All which tends not only to
manifest the Apostles meaning, as in regard of the words, in the exposition
also whereof, we have the judgment and consent of the best learned in that
language, both old and new, as Sindas, and others, but withal to teach us,
both how earnestly we should look for the end of our hope, and how carefully
we should labor to sustain and uphold the same in us, though there be many
difficulties and dangers between us and the possession thereof, assuring our
selves, that herein shall gods strength most plainly appear in our weakness, and
the power of our faith, be most manifested, if we can with Abraham the father
of the faithful, Romans 4.18
in hope believe against hope.

It follows, (of the creature) that is to say, every creature, as appears by
the 22 verse following: And yet here he speaks of the^ al, as if they were but
one, not only by reason of that notable harmoni and consent that was amongst
the^ by creation, and so should have continued, had not our sin hindered the
same, but because they do al, as it were with one breath desire one thing, to
wit, deliverance from that vain estate, to which they are now constrained to be
subject: the Apostle meaning also by the name creature, every thing that was
created, which we call by the name of the world, and the whole frame and
workmanship thereof, consisting (as the philosophers use to speak) of these
two parts, namely, the ecclesiastical or upper region, and the terrestiall or
inferior; Genes. 2.1
or as the scripture says, of heaven and earth and all the host of them. Both
which, howsoever they were at the first created in a most glorious estate, and
that to serve man's holy uses (who was created for gods glories sake) yet now
by reason of man's sin, they are so debased, that whether we regard the one
or the other, we shall find them maruellously altered and changed. For if we
look upon the upper region, which they call celestial, and the notable
bodies that be therein contained, as the sun, moon, stars, etc. though
they be indeed as a man would say, incredibly beautiful, yet notwithstanding
we shall well perceive, that they are not freed from vanity. For besides that
the Scripture affirms, that even the heavens, Job 15.15.
are not clear in gods sight, we see by daily and continual experience, that
many times they have a more pleasant aspect, and cast a more favorable
countenance (by a manner of speech) upon the wicked of the world (who are
enemies to God and al good men) and serve their turns far better than they
do, the children of God. And if we regard and consider well the inferior
region, with the wonderful variety of creatures therein contained, as
beasts, birds, fishes, trees, etc. and of them again almost infinite and
innumerable several sorts, we shall find both by proof and practice, and by
the truth of the word also, That the earth is accursed unto us for our sins
sake, Genes. 3.17 18
and that not only, in that it is become barren by the means thereof, but also
brings forth many hurtful and noisome things, besides that many of the
creatures that live upon the same, are not only become rebellious and
disobedient against us, but ready with open mouth, and piercing teeth, to
break us al in pieces, and to devour us quite, flesh, blood and bone. And yet
if these things were not so, neither in the heavens, nor the earth, nor in the
creatures therein contained, but that whereas now every thing that we can
cast our eye upon, is a sensible document unto us, of the wonderful taint and
corruption of our sin, and Gods judgment against us for the same, the
selfsame things might preach unto us notwithstanding, righteousness, peace,
and love from God, yet forasmuch as the word it self, does in sundry places
affirm, that even all those things, in that great and last day of the Lords
judgment shall be destroyed, we can not also but even therein behold and see
that present estate of theirs, in which they are now, and from which they hope
then to be freed. Psai. 102.25 26
David tells us, that God in the beginning laid the soundations of the
earth, and the heavens were the works of his hands, howbeit that they
should perish, and that they should all wax old as does a garment, and that
as a vesture God should change them, and they should be changed. According
whereunto saint Peter also in the new Testament, using it as an argument to
persuade us, 1. Pet. 3.10, 11 12
in all holy conversation and godliness, to look for the coming of the Lord,
declares, that the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements
shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall
be burnt up.

And though this be most true, that the Apostle understands by that word
creature, heaven and earth with all creatures therein contained, yet we must
notwithstanding except from that general, and that for the causes and reasons
following also, these particulars ensuing, namely, the holy and elect
angels, the faithful and godly people of the world, the diuelles and
damned spirits, as also the wicked and ungodly of the earth spirits, as also
the wicked and ungodly of the earth. For as for the angels, they have
already the full fruition of the thing it self, our Savior himself
affirming, that they alvvayes behold the face of God in heaven. Mar 18.10.
And they can not be well said to wish for that, that they have in continual
and most assured possession.

If any man will object against this truth, 1. Pet. 1.12.
that that Saint Peter says, to wit, that the very Angels desire to behold
the publishing of the gospel in this life, and the inioyeng that which the
gospel promises in the life to come. I answer that that is not spoken,
neither must or can be understood, of their own wants, as though they wished
that for themselves, for as was said before, they have all fullness, but as in
regard of their zeal to the glory of GOD (which shall then be perfected, when
the wicked shall be trodden down for ever, and the godly continually exalted)
and as in respect of unfeigned love to us and our salvation, which is so dear
and precious unto them, that as they are always ready according to the
appointment and good will of God, what they can to advance and further the
same, so doubtless they do much rejoice therein, of which our Savior
himself bears witness in an other place saying, ^uke 15 10.
that there is joy in the presence of the angels of God for one sinner that
conuerteth.

And as for the elect and faithful people, seeing they are of two sorts, and
yet al making but one body, that is to say, some whom the Lord has taken to
himself, and finished the days of their pilgrimage here, and othersome that
do and must tarry the Lords good leisure, for the time of their dissolution
and departure hence, we fear not to affirm, that either of these may justly,
in a true and holy meaning, and upon very good reasons and causes also be
excepted from being comprised under this general term creature; for as for
the first sort, they being in that state and condition that the Angels are,
that is, always beholding the face of God in heaven, they can not nor do not
any more wish the same than they. And if at any time they seem as the
Angels before are said to do the same, and for, and in regard of the same
considerations and causes, they finding also now that they are in heaven, that
to believe in themselves, which while they were on the earth, they did as in
regard of the forefathers of their faith believe to be true, because the holy
ghost has spoken it, That they without us can not be perfect. Hebr. 11.40
And the latter must needs be excepted likewise, as who are by the spirit of
God, in the mouth and pen of the Apostle excepted, in the 22. and 23. verses
following, Philip. 1.23.
who daily desire, even in this life, to be loosed from hence, and to be with
Christ, which is best of all, and continually sigh and groan, 2. Cor. 5.2
that they may be clothed with their house which is from heaven.

As for the devils and damned spirits which are the third in number, that are
excepted from this, we have also good reason to except them, both because that
in their perverseness against God and man, they do not only not carry that
love toward the adauncement of Gods glory, or the accomplishment of the number
of Gods elect and their salvation, that the Angels and faithful people do,
but rather would if they could tell how, to the uttermost of their power,
continually deface both the one and the other, and also because that they know,
that when that time comes, then there shall fall upon them, in most dreadful
manner, the fullness and perpetuity indeed of their endless condemnation, they
themselves after a sort confessing the truth of this, when they said to our
Savior Christ, Art thou come to torment us before the time. Mat. 8.29


Lastly, that the wicked themselves should be excepted, there is a double
reason likewise; one is, because they are so far off from desiring that day,
that they do rather profanely scoff and scorn at, as al truth universally,
so particularly that which is delivered, touching the general judgment, and
the day of the restoration of all things. Of whom S. Peter speaks notably,
calling them mockers, 2. Pet. 3.3, 4.
and men that will walk after their own lusts, which say, where is the
promise of his coming, for since the fathers died, all things continue alike
from the beginning of the creation; the other, because they labor as much as in
them lies, partly by the manifold pleasures, that they possess in this
life, and partly by benummednesse of heart, and growing into forgetfulness, to
put far from them the evil day, wishing, that either it might never come, or
else, that it might be de ferred, as long as possibly might be. That we may say
nothing of this, that even they themselves, as the devils likewise (whose
slaves and servants they are) do in the sight of their sin, and the fear of the
punishment that they know they have deserved for it, tremble and quake, we
knowing this also to be true, by common experience, that no malefactor wishes
the day of his arraignement, much less the time of his execution; for if he
might be left to his liberty, or put to his choice, he would be glad rather
to live, though it were in all misery: and that therefore neither the diuelles
nor the wicked, can, or will desire that time that shall be unto them, not so
dreadful as death only, but so fearful and terrible, both for bodies and
souls, and that for ever and ever world without end, as cannot be either
thought or expressed.

In these exceptions, I have freely according to my poor measure delivered my
mind, not meaning yet therein, either to attribute perfection to my own
words, or to bar or stop up the way to other (who in these deep points may
certainly see and say more than I do) from adding hereunto. Only in this behalf
as in all other, let us look to utter that we do, upon good grounds and
warrants of the word only.

It follows (vvaiteth) to wit, as it were with a certain kind of patience
and quietness; for howsoever the burden be grievous unto them, yet
notwithstanding they bear it still, in hope of that time that shall utterly
free them from the same. And surely in that the holy ghost uses, in this
place, and so in the verses following, so many and such significant words,
attributed to the creatures, we may be bold to say, that he has not done it in
vain, but rather, that he would thereby give us to understand, that though
they wait not, or hope not, as we do, yet that there is in them some certain
instinct given them from God, by which they are carried, even as it were by a
certain earnest desire, to look for their restoration. If any man think
this strange, let him but consider, the nature of the magnes or lodestone (as
we call it) we see by experience, that if we touch with the same stone the
pin or point of a dial or compass, and set the needle or compass upon it,
it will not ceas, til it cause it to stand directly South. And this is generally
observed in all places of the known or habitable world, whether a man be at sea,
or upon the land, or in places under the earth; and yet the magnes has not any
reason, neither the point of a dial or compass any sense. Now then, if this
be true, that the needle or compass, by reason that the pin or point thereof
is touched with the magnes, is (as a man would say) by a certain affection and
willingly, as it were carried, so that it staieth not till it point directly
to the South, shall we think it strange, that creatures though void of reason
(having yet a secret instinct given them from GOD) should be carried forward to
desire their own restitution, as the holy ghost affirms in this place? Nay
which is more, does not the Lord himself in many places of his word declare,
that there is through his almighty working, not only a wonderful difference
of creatures, and several sorts of them, but sundry and several instincts
also put into them, by his own holy order and appointment. Otherwise if all
creatures were of like constitution and qualities (which we know to be false,
by natural reason and experience) why does not the Lord send the sluggards as
well to other creatures, as to the small emmet, Prou. 6.6
or the blockish and brutish Israelites, Isaiah 1.3
as well to other beasts as to the ox and the ass, or the ignorant and
careless people of Gods judgments, Ierem. 8.7
as well to other fowls, as to the storke, turtle, crane, and swallow.

The apostle adds (when the sons of God shall be revealed) that is the
time wherein they that are indeed Gods children, shall not only be manifest
and known, but also the blessedness of their estate shall then appear, when
having put off corruption and mortality, they shall be clothed with heavenly
glory and eternal life: So that he speaks this, not of this life present,
as we may well perceive, in that he speaks of the time to come, as also
because that here, partly by reason of the infinite swarms, and innumerable
multitudes of the wicked, the godly cannot easily be perceived, partly also
because of the manifold persecutions and troubles, that they do, and must
sustain, they are ouer-couered with darkness and blackness, and driven into
holes and dens, and therefore not easily, neither to be descried, but chiefly
by reason of a huge heap of hypocrites, that are shuffled in the church of
God, together with the good (who in outward duties many times are matchable
with the best, if not exceed them) Gods children can hardly, if at all, be
discerned, but of that most blessed life to come, of both which together S.
John says evidently, that we are now the sons of GOD indeed, 1. John
3.2
but yet it is not made manifest what we shall be, but we know, that when
our head and Savior shall be manifested, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is.

And this (no doubt) serves every manner of way, for the setting forth of
Gods great mercy, and the strengthening also of our weak faith and hope: his
mercy appeering in a double respect, not only in that he has in this life
given into our hearts the pledge of the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15
by which we cry Abba, O father, but also because he has reserved a crown
of incorruptible glory for us, in the life that is to come: for though
certainly it is, and must be accounted a great comfort to feel God our
father, and that we may with christian and holy boldness have acces to the
throne of grace, during the time of our pilgrimage here, and be heard also,
through the name and mediation of Christ, in the things that we stand in need
of, and pray for according to faith. Yet doubtless it is a greater grace, and a
matter of more singular consolation, to make us heirs of eternal life, yea
fellow-heires with our savior himself. And as for our faith, that likewise is
confirmed, not only in the truth and strength of the promise it self (a
principal proppe unto our persuasion) but also by the excellency and
worthiness of the thing promised, to wit, eternal life through Christ: in the
delay whereof, though we be greatly grieved (as what good man either weary of
sin here, or desirous of everlasting perfection in that life, will not moan
and wail in the want thereof) yet this should again comfort us, that it
shall at the length be recompensed with the fulness of all joy for evermore.

The Apostle adds in the next verse following, that is to say,

Verse. 20. (Because the creature) In this, and the verse following, the Apostle
shows two causes, why the creatures wait, for the time of the revealing of
the sons of God. That which is contained in this verse, respects the pains
and troubles that they are subject to, here in this world. That which is
comprehended in the other verse, touches the hope that they have, of freedom
from this fearful bondage, they patiently sustaining the one, and earnestly
looking for the other, because that until then, they are, and must of
necessity, by Gods ordinance, and the end of their creation also, be subject
to death and corruption; which thing being once performed and finished, they
shall be no more subject to that wretched and painful estate, but utterly and
altogether freed from the same. The word creature here, is taken in the same
sense that it was before, ver. 19. of this chapter, whereof also, there is
great reason, since the Apostle continues his speech of the selfsame matter.

He adds (is subject to vanity) that is, not only unto man who is vanity,
Psalm. 62.9.
yea lighter than vanity it self, laid upon the balance with it (as the
prophet in plain terms affirms) and his vain delights, but to vanishing,
flitting, weak, and unsound estate. Of both which points we need no great or
long proof, because our own daily and continual experience, does again and
again, sufficiently declare the same unto us. For what do the murrens,
sicknesses, and infinite diseases, and at the last death also, attending upon
the creatures preach else unto us? And what can we see else in the excessive
abuse of the creatures, throughout the whole course of men's lives, some in
apparel abusing them to pride and newefanglednes, othersome in eating and
drinking, turning them to lust, wantonness, glutonie, and drunkenness, othersome
by a hoarding of them up, and having no use of them, subiecting them to moaths,
worms, rust, and rottennes, depriving, as themselves so others, and specially
the church and commonwealth of the free and christian use of them, no man
almost among ten thousand striving, or caring, religiously and in
sanctification to use them. (Not of it own will.) The reason is, because if
the creature could choose, it would not be subject to that poor estate. By
which we may see, that he means then, that it is unwillingly in respect of it
self, brought under this condition, and yet notwithstanding by the means of
man's sin subdued to this thraldom and slavery. And seeing we know that such
creaturs have no sens or wit, though for our rudenes sake such things are
ascribed to them, let us therefore understand that (vvil) in this place, must be
taken for some natural inclination in the creatures, against which they are
subject, as before, and not otherwise. And the rather let us yield to this,
because we see by the light of humane reason, that eueri thing does by a natural
instinct aim at the preservation of it self, what it can: and if it can not
effect it, it is not for want of care or love in themselves, for themselves,
but by reason of some more strong working cause, either inward or outward, to
which they are constrained to give place.

(But by reason of him) that is to say, by reason of god and his holy
ordinance, who has mercifully appointed, that notwithstanding man's great sin
(which indeed was the first cause of tainting of the creaturs, for by creation
they were exceeding good, Genes. 1.31 Genes. 3.17.
and when sin once entered, the Lord cursed the earth and all things therein
for man's sin sake) and the contrary inclination of the creature, that still
they should be subject unto us, though not in so large a measure and
plentiful sort, as before the fall of man, yet in such abundance as might
serve for the manifesting of Gods great mercy toward us poor and miserable
men that we are, and might tend to the maintenance and upholding of our
natural life, not only with things of necessity or profit, but of pleasure
and delight also. All which should teach us to be humbly thankful unto him
(that has dealte with us in so large a hand) and that not only in the words
of our mouths, but also in the reverent souls and sanctified use of his
creatures, and that the rather, because, whereas he might for our sins have
justly deprived us, not of some one of them alone, but of all of them, and by
consequent of our natural life also, he has been pleased to leave to us a
most large and liberal portion, as before has been said.

VVhich] to wit God alone, for none other can do it but he, and such as he
shall appoint, and furnishe with gifts for the doing of the same. For besides
that we see many of the mighty creatures untameable, and every one of them in
their rage ready to fall upon men, to their utter ruin, as we may see in
lions, bears, woolues, tigers, and an infinite number such like, specially such
as be at liberty in the wild woods and wildernesses, we know by the light
of the word, and trial of our times, that if God will furnish, but the least
of his army or creatures with power, that not men only, but that not all the
men in the world can withstand, much less subdue the same. Why could not
Pharao hinder the cralling of frogs in his own chamber, Psalm. 105.30 31
nor let the svvarmes of flies and lice that were in all the quarters of his
land? Why be not we our selves able to avoid the darts of death, the grief
of the grave? Nay what speak I of such great things? Why do we not shun, if
we could, the stinging of bees and waspes, the bitings of gnats, flies, and
sundry such like. We see then, that this must needs be understood of God
alone, because it is as a man would say, a certain description of him: For in
whose hand and power is it else, to cause the creatures to tremble and quake at
his presence, and to walk in obedience unto his good pleasure, but in the
Lords alone.

Let us proceed, (has subdued) to wit, by his almighty power, and by the
force of his eternal word, ordinance, and decree; which, as it was strong in
the beginning, to make all things of nothing, and has been powerful ever
since the creation, in the strength of that blessing that the Lord did give
unto the works of his own hands, to multiply, increase, preserve, and
uphold all that he created, so no doubt, it is, and shall be, mighty and
effectual (notwithstanding that man, by the means of his sin did what he
could to hinder it) to cause all the creatures to stoop and bend, to that use
of man that the Lord would have them subject unto. Otherwise certainly
neither could the creatures be brought under, nor continue in that their
subjection.

He adds (it) that is to say, the creature or all creatures, calling them al
as it were by the name of one, both for the excellency of him, that is the
one, and the only creator, and also for the singular harmony and consent,
which is amongst all the creatures them selves, howsoever that now and then
through the corruption that cleaves unto them by man's sin, they seem to
jar one of them with an other, and to be hurtful and noisome one to an
other, but of this somewhat has been said before, and therefore we stay not
upon it now, but go forward.

(under hope) To wit, of restitution, to that excellent estate, which they had
by creation, and of delivery from that miserable and slavish estate, wherein
they presently are, and not under hope, either of perpetuity or use, as some
dote and dream; of both which points, and some others also, we will speak
hereafter God willing, but yet no otherwise by gods grace, then as we have
learned out of gods word. In the mean while let us mark, that in these
words, the Apostle minds to give us to understand, that God never purposed,
for man's sin, to subject his creatures, to a continual course, or such a
punishment, as should never be done away, but has given them some hope, that
they shall be freed from the same. Which thing ought notably in my mind, to
glade the heart, and strengthen the persuasions of the sons of God, that in as
much as the creatutes shall be freed from the course of sin, much more they
also shall be delivered, in as much as God cares much more for them, and much
more tenderlye loves them, by how much he has given unto them more infinyte
and evident testimonies of his favor and more excellent promises, for the life
present and that that is to come,

Verse. 21. (Because the creature also) Here is the second cause, why the
creatures do earnestly wait, for the time of the reueiling of the sons of
God, namely, because they have hope, that then and not till then, they shall be
fully freed from all that corruption that lies upon them, by means of man's
sin and transgression, through the appointment of God. The word creature, is
used here in the same sense, that it is in the other two verses before going
(shall be delivered) that is, freed and quite and clean discharged, to wit, also
in that great day of the Lord, and not before, for till then it is the lords
ordinance and apointment, ( who makes his sun to shine, Mat. 5.45.
and his rain to rain upon the just and unjust) that both good and bad shall be
pertakers of his rich mercy, though it be true, that the one sort shall have
it to comfort and consolation both of body and soul in this world, and in the
world to come, and the other to terror and judgment, both outward and inward,
both here and there also. And the word of delivering that the Apostle uses,
would be marked, as by which he notes the free estate, that they shall be
brought unto, which also the greek word it self does very elegantly import,
containing in it self, and expressing in the use of it this much, that they
shall be delivered from the wretched estate of bond-slaues or bondmen, into the
glorious and comfortable condition of free servants, as you would say, being
excepted from that unjust tyranny or government, that the wicked exercised
over them, and freed also from that fearful estate, to which they were
constrainedly subject [from the bondage of corruption] that is, from that same
corruptible, flitting, and vanishing estate, whereunto they are now subject,
and which lies upon them, as a most heavy burden, or yoke of bondage, which
they are still constrained daily to draw in and bear (as bondslaues do their
state) till it shall please GOD to give them a better and more free condition.

(Into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.) He means not, that they
shall be partakers of the same eternal glory with Gods children; for if that
were true, then what difference should there be, betwixt Gods faithful
servants, and bruit beasts? Besides, we all know and believe, that without
faith there is, as no purifieng of hearts, so no entrance into heaven: and that
gift of belief unreasonable creatures, shall never attain unto: neither yet
all men, because as the Apostle says, Faith is not of all men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2
it being a peculiar grace bestowed only upon Gods elect and chosen children.

If any would say, that this might serve mightily for the manifestation of
Gods mercy, I answe are, first, that God knows best, when, where, and upon
whom also to disclose his goodness without light or instruction from us: next,
that they should more plainly appear, in saving reasonable creatures, even
the very reprobate and wicked, than in saving these dumb and insensible
things. And if Gods mercy were to be revealed that way, why not in saving that
that was furthest from salvation, I mean the devil and damned spirits, who
both by reason of their sin, and in that they are past hope of a better
condition, are further sundred from eternal life, than the senseless and
brutish creatures: that I may say nothing of the excellency of their nature,
as it was by creation, being far more fit in that respect, for eternal life,
than the carnal and gross nature and constitution of beasts and other things.
But that is impossible, both as in regard of God, who has revealed the
contrary in his word, and also as in respect of us, to whom we know and
believe, that all things are impossible, that God has declared by his truth
shall not be done, and therefore also the other but a fond conceit of men's idle
heads. This rather as I take it, he means, that in their kind and manner,
they shall be made pertakers of a far better estate, then they had, while the
world endured, because that God shall fully and wholye restore the world,
being fallen into corruption, through the transgression and sin of mankind,
which yet as seems to me may more plainly appear, in that amplifieng by
the contraries, he opposes subsequent liberty, against former bondage, which
that he might the more enlarge, he calls it not simply freedom or
liberty, but liberty of glory, as it is in the greek text, meaning thereby
according to the phrase and propriety of the Hebrew tongue, glorious liberty
or liberty that brings glory with it, under which term of glory he
compriseth, the excellent estate, that they shall be in, after their delivery
from their former baseness and servitude.

As for the words following, namly, of the sons of God, to which we must
refer glorious liberty before mentioned, they must be understood as it
were by a certain proportion or similitude thus: that as in that great day
and not before, gods children shall be graciously freed, from all dangers and
distresses of this life whatsoever, either in body or soul, and on the other
side made perfect pertakers of eternal blessedness: so the creatures then and
not before, shall be delivered from the vanity of man, and their own
corruption, and restored to a far better estate, then presently they enjoy:
which also may appear by the words that the Apostle uses, setting glorious
liberty, deliverance, and freedom, against servile bondage and slavery.

Verse. 22. (For we know) If any man would demand how this could be
proved, Paul and the faithful together with him, run to the holy
testimony of their own conscience, and the assured persuasion that they have
there of the matter, speaking as if it were thus: Our own hearts tell us, that
we sigh and groan; they tell us also, that for as much as the creatures, by
means of sin, suffer as we suffer, that therefore under that burden, they do
in their kind sigh and groan together with us. I say in their kind, because
that all these things, are attributed unto them, by that figure or kind of
speech which is before rehearsed.

Neither does the Apostle mean hereby to give any warrantize or strength to
the od speculations, dreams, dotages, and revelations of fanatical spirits, as
of the Montanists, Euthrusiasts, Mahometists, and others heretofore, or of the
Anabaptists, family of love, and Papists, and amongst them their monks in
these our days. For first and foremost, he declares nothing here but that
which he had received, as truth, in the certainty of the spirit, and that also
grounded and settled upon the immovable rock of the word, and upon that same
particular feeling experience, that in the holy use of the creatures, he
himself and other faithful together with him, had religiously observed, and
so commended the same unto all ages of the world in writing, by authority of
the holy spirit of God to serve for their instruction and comfort, as all
other scripture does, upon whom the ends of the world should come. And
what serves this then, for the upholding or establishing of such doctrines, as
neither have the seal of the spirit, nor the warrant of the word into the
trial of truth? Nay, which is more, besides that they are without any such
ground or foundation as before, we shall find them as directlye contrary to
the wholesome doctrine of the spirit and word, as darkness is to light, and
hell is to heaven, of which sort, indeed are those things which the
heretics abouenamed, and particularly the Papists, would under the pretext
of traditions, and unwritten verities, thrust upon the unthankful and
ignorant world.

Again, we say, that for as much as we believe, that there is most absolute
perfection, both for the duties of piety to Godward, and of charity also
toward men, as well for knowledge as belief and obedience, contained in that
blessed book that we call the Bible, or holy scriptures of Gods and that
Christ our Savior himself has therefore appeered and come into the world, as
for many other causes, so particularly for this, that he might actually
perform, that that God had after a sort, and in shadows signified and set
out, by the law and the prophets, and fully opened his fathers will, unto the
world, putting an end now unto al revelations and visions whatsoever, as the
Apostle plainly proves in the first chapter to the Hebrews: and since that
Paul also in the holy spirit of truth tells us, Gall. 1.8
that though he or his fellovv-ministers, or an angel from heaven should
preach otherwise, or any other doctrine unto the church, than that which they
had preached already, that they might then safely hold all such accursed,
that therefore we are sure, it was never the Apostles meaning or purpose,
either to propound, or to establish any thing, that might at any hand (no not
in the least show) seem to uphold the dotages of men's idle heads and hearts.

He adds (that every creature) I take the word to be as large, as of it self
it seems to import, to wit, that it should comprehend, beasts, fishes,
fowls, trees, plants, herbs, and all other things, which the Lord has made
for man's use, excepting, and that for the reasons before alleged, in the
explication of verse. 19. those things which are there already excepted; not
that they are not creatures, for if they were not creatures, they should be
God, because there is no mean thing betwixt these two, a creator and a
creature, the name creator appertaining properly and only to God, and
creature, to all other things beside whatsoever, how excellent soever they are,
or may seem to be, but because they are justly, and upon very good reason
excepted, as may well appear by those things which are above specified.

It follows [groaneth with us also] that is to say, that as we sighe and
groan under the burden of our miseries, and would gladly be delivered from
them: so do they under theirs: which what it is, has bin declared before, as
in the verse following shall be showed (God willing) what the sighs and
groans of the faithful are? (and travail in pain together) to wit, with us,
or as well as we. He uses a metaphore, taken as it should seem, from women
with child, written by S. Luke, is very plain and pregnant, Act 3.21.
when the day of judgment is called the time vvherin all things shall be
restored. Which little could not truly be attributed unto it, unless that there
should be a restoration of them. To the same purpose also appertains that,
which in the third chapter of the 2. Epistle of S. Peter, and in other passages
mo, 2. Pet. 3.13. Reave. 21.1.
is mentioned, touching the renewing of the heavens and the earth. Provided
always that we be wise according to sobriety, and in the sobernes of our
minds stay our selves only upon the truth of the word, and the evidence
thereof, standing only generally upon the renouation and restoration of the
world, and entringe not either curiously to search what parts of the world
shall be restored, what place shall contain them, what actions they shall have,
what proprieties they shall be iudued with, and such like. The neglect whereof
has in time past, and at this present also, because men have not been soberlie
minded, cast them into beastly errors, and made men fowlie to ouershoote
themselves, as in many uncertain and dangerous points, so principally in two
respects: first that they dare affirm, that after this great restitution, the
creatures shall be durable, and remain as it were immortal. The other is, that
at that time also there shall be use of them; Neither were the old heretics, I
mean Cerinthus and the Chiliastae overtaken only, which these beastly
dotages and conceits, but even some of the fathers of greatest antiquity, yea
and other of late days, though otherwise in many points, of very sound
judgment, have inclined to much that way, though not in iumping altogether
with them. Concerning which points, in truth I could say nothing, had they with
the length of time, and continuance of ages, worn away, and perished to
rottenness, as one that thinks it better not to stire such filthe, least the
stincke of it, might not only breed trouble, but infect and defile many
also, saving that even in this last age of the world; Satan has stirred up
many lewd instruments, afreshe, to set abroach these corruptions, and amongst
the rest one R. E. I spare to put down his name wholly as yet, for it may
be, that God at some one time or other, may pull him out of that great puddle
of corruption, into which, through many errors, if not heresies, he is deeply
suncke, and bring him again into the way of truth and salvation, from which
he has straied. But leaving the persons, let us come to the points.

Concerning the first to wit, that the creatures after their restitution and
reuocation, at the general resurrection, shall continue and remain for ever,
me thincketh this reason should carry some force and weight with it, against
the same: namely, that for as much as all men, some few only excepted, do
confidenthe and groundedlie affirm, that after the general resurrection,
there shall be no use of the creatures, that therefore also there should be no
eternal durablenesse or continuance of them; For if in the first creation
when GOD in his almighty and everlasting knowledge, fore-sawe that confusion
through sin, should enter into the world, he did yet notwithstanding create
nothing, but very good, and that to excellent use and purpose it should seem,
not only probable, but certain, that since now as then he does in his
eternal wisdom foresee, that singular perfection, that by his most mighty
power in their restitution, they shall be restored to, that either they must of
necessity be subjected to some holy and necessary uses, or else that their
immortality, shall be bestowed upon them in vain: which were to accuse God,
either of less care, or less power, or both, in this notable work of the
restoration of his creatures, he drawing them as it were out of that, into
which they have been dissolved, than he had at the first creation of them, when
he made them all of nothing, as christian religion and the word do plainly
propound unto us. But if against this, they will object, that gods glory shall
thereby be wonderfullye manifested, I answer, that his power and glory, shall
be greatly provided for and exceedingly declared in that great, general, yea
and sudden restoration of them, though they endure but a small while, or no
whitte all, I call it great and general, because that in the end of the
world it shall be as great and universal a work, as the work of creation at the
beginning (if not more large) in as much as not only the several sorts and
kinds of things created, but all that have been, are, or shall be unto the end,
shall then stand forth in a most excellent estate and condition, even as
glorious and good, as they were at the first before sin entered, in as much as
at that day, even sin it self shall cease, and be as it were destroyed. And
I name the same sudden also, because as the Lords coming and the
resurrection of the dead, shall be in a moment and pinch of time, or in the
turning of a hand, as you would say, or the tvvinckling of an eye, 1. Cor. 15.
as the scripture speaks: so shall also this great work of the restitutition,
the Lord not taking many days, as at the beginning of creation, for the
performaunce of this noble deed, but doing it quickly, and upon the sudden,
for the further manifestation of his almighty power and glory.

But because we are fallen into speech of gods glory, and the glorifieng of
his name: I would feign know this of them, that now so much urge it, to wit,
who they are, that the creatures restored shall stir up, to glorify GOD in
the sight and beholding of them. Of god himself, they dare not affirm it, I
suppose, because as in respect of his own most excellent essence and being,
he has no need by such means to be provoked, to seek his own glory,
which also has from all eternity been, is, and ever shall be so great, that
not they alone, but not all the creatures, either heavenly or earthly, shall be
able to add thereto, so much as a shadow or most small spark. If they will
maintain it of the angels, either elect or reprobate, that is as unsound
also, for as for the elect Angels, they in the integrity of their nature,
promooting already Gods glory, and that in all perfection, though not of it,
yet of them selves, can not then have that desire any whit increased in them,
the perfection whereof, they have already through Gods goodness attained unto,
and unto perfection we know that nothing can be added; Besides that being
simply and only of spiritual natures, it may be called into question,
whether that by such outward things, they may be furthered in such holy
duties; And as for the reprobated Angels, and damned spirits, because they
are continually carried away, through the corruption of their nature, as with
malice toward man, whose salvation they would hinder, to the uttermost, so
with envy and disdain toward GOD, the increase of whose glory is an
addition to their torments, they cannot (though there might be some such
force in the creatures restored, which yet is not proved) or at the least wise
they will not be provoked thereby to give glory to GOD, because that the more
that he is glorified, the more grievously and greatly, are they them selves
tormented, that I may say nothing of that impossibility that is in them to
perform this duty, as well by reason of the deprauation of their nature, as that
irreuocable and most certain sentence of condemnation for ever, that the LORD
the most just judge has already determined, and after a sort pronounced upon
them all: There rests none now but men, which are of two sorts, good and
bad, damned, and saved, concerning either of which to affirm it, is absurd
and unreasonable as the former. For as for the wicked, is there any
likelihoode, that they that in this life, Psalm 17.
had their bellies filled with the hidden treasures of God, and inioyed both
sea and land, and had infinite occasions given them to glorify his name, in the
liberal allowance and continual use of his creatures, and yet for all this were
blind to see gods glory, and dumb or tongue-tyed, to speak unto his praise,
shall in the life to come, where they shall not only have no use of those
blessings, but a full measure of condemnation lying upon them, as for all
their sins generally, so particularly for the abuse of so many excellent
graces, that they should then and there glorify his name? Naie we fear not
to affirm on the other side, that they shall be so far off, from seeing or
confessing gods glory in them at that time, that being in the state of
eternal condemnation, far separated also from the place, where the creatures
restored shall be, that they shall have their hearts, bodies, souls, and all
continually seized, with the feeling of their own torments, and their mouths
always replenished, partlye with all manner of lamentation and mourning, by
reason of the most miserable and everlasting pains they endure, and partly
with all kind of blasphemy, cursing and contempt of Gods eternal Majesty
and themselves. And as for the faithful, and godly, being then in the
kingdom of heaven, (a place marueilouslie much distant, from that place that
the restored creatures shall be in) and being filled also with the fullness of
the joys of GOD, they shall be so far off from fixing their eyes, upon any
of the creatures, from whom they shall be sundered further by many degrees,
then man's eyes can well descrie, in as much as the space between heaven which
they shall possess, and the earth, that the restored creatures shall occupy,
is exceedingly great, that they shall not have neither sight nor senses moved,
much less busied in beholding such things, but rather shall have all the
thoughts of their hearts, all the words of their mouths, and all the
actions and parts of their bodies, and affections and powers of their souls
continually taken up and occupied, in the contemplation of GOD, the
fountain of all goodness, alvvayes praising of him also, that sits upon
the thrown, Reave. 7.23.
and in serving of him for evermore.

Now then if that neither GOD, nor Angels, nor damned spyrites, nor elected
men, nor the wicked condemned, shall have use of the creatures, this way
forth, to stir them up to glorify GOD, and Gods glory can not be, but
as in respect either of all these, or some one of these, it must directly
follow, in my mind, that this is but a dotage or dream, that these men
propound, concerning the continuance of the creatures, after the restitution,
specially as they will have it, for the manifestation and enlarging of the
glory of God.

That was indeed we must acknowledge it, Psalm. 19.1.
the end wherefore God created them at the first, and the Lord himself had
appointed them, to serve unto that use in this life, and so long as the world
lasts, that thereby the very wicked might be without excuse, Romans 1.20.
and the godly provoked more and more to praise him; but for as much as this
natural life shall cease, 2. Pet. 3.10.
And the world with all that is therein shall be purged and consumed by
fire, there is no likelihoode, that then they shall stand us in stead that
way at all. Besides all this, if it be true, that the creatures shall be
eternal and mortal, by means of their restitution, I would feign know then
what privilege man shall have, above the creatures, by that most reverend,
noble, yea miraculous work of his rising again, and what difference there
shall be, between him in his resurrection, and them in their restoration?
Surely I can see very small or none at all. For if they will affirm, that the
creature, have for a time (as a man would say) forborne their immortality:
has not man as in respect of his body also, committed to the ground and
dissolved into dust, and to which also the resurrection does properly belong,
borne that as well as they, and had a common lot and portion that way forth,
together with them? The truth of this is so plain, that besides religion,
reason it self will easily persuade it.

In all that hitherto I have delivered touching this first point, I would
willingly be taken as I mean, I having put down the same, not as though I
were of this mind, that the creatures after their restitution should quickly
vanish away, though in my persuasion, there be greater likelihoode of
presumption, in all show of reason and truth, for this, than for that other,
but thus rather stands my judgment, that forasmuch as god has not reucaled
in his word, for aught that I either know or have read in the same, what shall
be the state of his creatures, either durable or flitting, I will rather in all
holy understanding according to sobriety, leave the matter in his own hands,
to dispose of them according to his own good pleasure, than in presuming to
know above that which is meet to know and understand, Romans 12.3.
determine either on the one side or on the other. And if this holy measure
had been faithfully observed in the days of our fathers, there had not so many
subtle points entered into men's hearts and heads, as have been disputed upon,
with, and against, as they say, specially amongst the popish scholasticall
divines, as they call them: or were it yet at this day put in practice as it
ought to be, we should not have so many, not only curious and vain, but
wicked and ungodly questions also, irreuerently tossed too and fro, in the
mouths of profane people, and that not only amongst the unlearned, but the
learned ones also, the more is the pity, and the greater I fear me is our
sin.

Thus having, touching the first point shortly, yet soundly, I trust,
delivered my mind, and justly censured it, if not condemned it, of the crime
of curiosity at the least, as pronouncing and concluding more, than by the
warrant of the word men are able, I come to the second matter, and give a new
charge, or a fresh onset upon the same, assaulting it, yea battering it, and
beating it down to the ground as it were with a most righteous accusation of
manifest falshoode and untruth. For to affirm, that we shall have the use of
the creatures, after their restitution, and our most glorious resurrection
stands up directly against the truth of Gods word, which plainly
aduoucheth, that in, Mat. 22.30.
and after the resurrection we shall be as the Angels of GOD in heaven,
neither marrying vviues, nor having vviues bestovved in marriage upon us, nor
doing such actions of a natural life, or using such means for the upholding
of the same, as we did while we lived upon the face of the earth, we know,
belceue, and confess, that the Angels are now of their own nature, by that
creation which they had from GOD, invisible, spiritual, and immortal
substances: and this we fear not to acknowledge, because we have learned it
out of the written word. We know again on the other side, that visible,
corruptible, and bodily sustenance, can not be fit food, for such
heavenly and excellent creatures; reason it self, besides religion or without
it, having taught us this, that there must be a certain proportion, likelihode
and consent between the nature and disposition of the food, and the thing
that is to be fed or norished thereby. Very notable, as seems to me, for
this purpose, and the proof of this point, is the speech of the Angel that
appeered to Manoach and his wife, Sampsons parents, when they would have
stayed him, till they had made ready a kidde for him, Indg. 13.16
the Angel answering thus: Though thou should detain me, yet vvoulde I not
eat of thy meat: if thou vvilt prepare a burnt offering, thou shall offer it
unto to he Lord. As though he should say; there are but two ends of
preparing and setting forth meat: the one, that it may be eaten up after the
manner of men, the other, that it may be dedicated unto GOD, and unto his
service.

In the first consideration, there is no need to present it to me, because I
live not by such food, this being rather my meat to nourishe me, in all
ready and holy obedience, to perform the things, that the Lord himself
inioineth me to do, either for the good of his children, or the punishment of
the wicked. If thou offer it in the other respect, know that thou must offer
it up unto the Lord only, because unto him alone, and none other in heaven
or earth, belong these solemn services and sacrifices, as may appear by
prescribing and commanding the same in his law, there being not any mention
at all, of offering sacrifices of any sort whatsoever, to Angel, or other
creatures.

If any will object against this truth, that great example in Genesis the
eighteenth chapter, where it is said, that the Angels whom Abraham stayed,
Gene 18.8.
did eat, I answer, that though in outward show and words, it seems to
make against my assertion, that yet in the true and natural meaning of it, it
does no whit at all thwart it, but confirm it rather.

All the Scripture of GOD, which in the bare letter of it, contains either an
absurdity in reason, or an error in religion, must of necessity have an other
sense than the words seem to import, or else we should make god the author of
al wisdom, yea the only wise God, and wisdom it self, 1. Tim. 1.
the father of folly, and the word which is a most pure fountain of all truth
and sincerity, a filthy puddle of error, corruption, and lies. And if for the
saluing up of men's slippes and sliddes, in the words of their lips and mouths,
we will admit so many goodly gloses, as they themselves or others for them can
devise or bring, and yet perhaps few or none of them to purpose or effect,
if they might be well scanned and weighed; why may we not? naie why should
we not take those assured grounds of christian religion, that God has
revealed in his word (against which no exception can any manner of way be
put) and use them as means, not to free God from forgerie or deceit, for he is
always just and holy, though we be corrupt, nor to clear his word from error,
which indeed in it self, is al plainness and truth, but as very good
helpers and aiders, to cause us in an understanding heart, to behold,
conceive, and believe such things as to the sound knowledge whereof otherwise
we could no manner of way attain or reach? I say then, that for as much as
the place in the bare words of it, crosses the principles of christian faith:
and that for as much also as the doctrine of the word teaches us, that such
celestial substances, and altogether spiritual creatures, as Angels can
do, no such earthly duty, as is here mentioned, nor perform the actions of
a natural body, that therefore the meaning of this place, must of necessity
be this, that for our weakness sake that is attributed to them, or spoken of
them, which in deed and truth, and as in respect of their own excellent
natures cannot be verified in them. For the strengthening whereof also me
thinks this may somewhat serve, namely, that as they seemed for the time, to
have the shape of men, and to take upon them the proportion of their bodies,
and yet were not men indeed, but always very Angels, and heavenly
spirits; so they did sometimes seem to use the actions of humane life, and
yet used them not at all.

Indeed I both know and confess, that not only Scotus, and the popish
schoolmen, are against me in this point, but Augustine, Peter Martyr, and
other men also of singular judgment, both new and old. Howbeit I rest
persuaded that even they themselves, if they were living, and the godly reader
whosoever he be, will bear with me dissenting from them upon good reason, yea
even upon their own reason. For if they may say, and that upon just cause,
that Angels took upon them the shape of men's bodies for a time, (not by any
power in themselves for that work, but by Gods appointment thereto) and yet
were not men, but Angels continually, I hope that other men may say, and that
upon as good grounds, that they might seem sometimes to perform the actions
of men, and yet not do them indeed. Whereunto also I do the more willingly
incline, because I am sure of this, that nothing here is to be feared as
erroneous, or doubted as dangerous, unless some lightheaded fellow should
object and say, that this faining to do a thing, and not doing of it, were
evil. To whom for answer I say this much, that I heartily desire all of that
mind, to beware and take heed what they speak in that behalf, because thereby
they shall not only accuse those creatures of sin, whom the Lord has freed
from that corruption, and the taint thereof, I mean the holy, blessed, and
elect Angels, but even Jesus Christ the son of God himself, of whom we
read in the gospel after Luke, that traveling after his resurrection toward
Emaus with two of his disciples, he made as though he vvoulde have gone
further, Luke 24.28.
and yet offended not therein, because he never committed sin, 1. Pet. 2.22.
neither was there ever guile found in his mouth.

In a word to deliver what I think; for any man to conclude that every
fiction either in word or deed were evil, should be not only very hard and
peremptory, but utterly false and untrue. The parables that the prophets of
God have used, and particularly that of Nathan in the first of Samu. and twelfe
chap. verse. 1, 2, 3, etc. and of Hos. 1. verse. 2, 3, etc. and of others, should
so be proved falshoode and lying, which we cannot rightly or safly affirm,
for as much as they used them, by authority and warrant from the Lord. And
yet I mind not to tolerate, much less to allow, of that wicked license and
devilish liberty, that the praters and ianglers of our days take unto
themselves in this behalf, both by word and writing. For I have learned to
put a difference between such as Angels and holy men have by authority
from GOD, with some glory unto his name, and good of his people, and void of
ostentation or of affection as in respect of themselves used, and those that
profane persons do printe and coin, sometimes for to manifest their wits,
and sometimes for to obtain credit thereby, but always with dishonor unto
GOD, and hurt unto themselves, and hinderaunces unto others, as in some
particulars, and that by rearefull effects, I could well show, were I so
disposed.

But to the point indeed. Let this stand as a resolved truth; that for as
much as Angels eat not bodily or earthly food, and we after the
resurrection, shall in that and many other such like respects, be as the
Angels of GOD, that therefore we shall have no use of the restored
creatures, as for meat and sustenaunce: and that therefore again, they fight
directly against the word of GOD, that dare bolt out such bold and beastly
conclusions: besides also, that they do utterly euert and destroy the nature
and condition of a glorified body: for if this be right, 1. Cor. 15.44 53
that our natural bodies shall become spiritual bodies, (not that the body
shall be altered in respect of substance, but as in regard of earthly
qualities onclie) And that which is mortal must put on immortality; and
this be true also and sound, Phil. 3 21.
that our base and vile bodies shall be fashioned like unto the glorious body
of our Savior Christ, it must of necessity follow, that if they have food
to use or to feed upon, it must be other food than earthly or corruptible
meat, such as our Savior himself speaks of, saying; My meat is that I may
do the will of him that sent me, and finish his work; John 4.32.
for which also he exhorts us to traueil, saying; John 6.27.
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat that indureth to
everlasting life, or else they must confess, that our Savior CHRIST, since
his ascension into heaven, and glorification, has had in respect of his
humanity or manhood, the use of earthly and corruptible things, than the
which what can be almost a more gross or intolerable blasphemy?

But letting these vain speculations, and odd conceits pass, let us see what
profitable doctrines, either for instructions or comfort, we may learn out of
this discourse that the Apostle makes, touching the creatures and their
restitution. First, in that God here sends us unto the creatures, for our
better instruction to learn of them, he would thereby set out unto us, our
blockishenesse, unaptness, and inabilitie to good things. Neither does the
Lord here only observe this order, but in many other places of his word,
giving us thereby to understand, both how hard a thing it is, as in respect of
our corruption, and how necessary for our good, to repress and beat down
in us, that great ouer-weening which we have of our selves; as for example we
see it used in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 31.1. Isaiah 1 2.3 Ierem. 2.12. Micah. 6.2.
and in the books of the Prophets oftentimes, as in Isaiah, Jeremiah, Micah,
and sundry others, and yet for all this, we will not be humbled, but many of us
in the height of our imaginations suppose, that we of our selves are apt and
able to great matters, whereas the Scripture shows the clean contrary
affirming, 2. Cor. 3.5
that we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God: And again, that it is God that
works in us both the will and the deed, phil. 2.13.
and that of his good pleasure onclie, assuring us in an other place, that the
natural man, perceives not the things of the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.14.
and in this very chapter telling us in plain terms, Romans 8.7.
that the wisdom of the flesh is enimitie against GOD, for it is not
subject to the law of GOD, neither indeed can be. All which may teach us,
to hate and condemn, and that from the bottom of our hearts, the dotages of
Pelagians and Semipelagians, as Papists, and such others, who either in whole
or in part stand so stifelie for the maintenance of man's free will, and that
in this mere naturalles, as they call it, and may instruct us again to walk
in the simplicity and humblenes of our hearts before GOD, as men that see
nothing but botches and biles, and all manner of corruption and weakness and
wantes in our selves, that so we may be cured of him, that only can heal
us, and be strengthened and supplied from him, that is the GOD of all might and
power, and has all power in his own hands, to bestow plentifully upon them
that in faith, James 1.
and lovvlinesse of mind dravve nigh unto him, and yet never upbraid them
with it neither.

Secondly, in as much as the creatures, are become subject to the vain use of
man, and to a flitting and vanishing estate, as in respect of themselves, and
all this is brought to pass, by the means of sin, we may learn, not only what
stincke and corruption hangs upon iniquity, as which tainteth both the
parties committing the same, and infecteth as it were all the rest of the whole
order of nature, but also, that for as much as transgression brings forth these
pestilent fruits and effects, and namely, that besides other manifold
inconveniences (as gods dishonor, slander of his truth, offense of his
children, grief of our own souls, etc.) it makes the very creatures
unclean and unprofitable unto us, that therefore we should learn to fly from
sin, as from the face of a serpent, and never to use Gods creaturs, but in all
humble and unfeigned confession of our sins on the one side, and in reverent
reading, hearing, and meditation of his word, 1. Tim 4.
and in hearty prayer unto his majesty, for the sanctifieng of them unto us,
on the other side, that so the pollution of sin, being taken away, and holiness
from God being communicated unto us, his creatures may be profitable to nourish
our outward man, not only in some outward duties of this life, but in all
obedience of his blessed truth through Christ.

Thirdly, me thinks we may here very plainly behold and see Gods great and
unspeakable mercy toward us poor and miserable men, that we are, Psalm. 8
for whereas by the means of transgression, we had justly deprived our selves,
both of that sovereignty over all the creatures mentioned many times in the
word, and of the use of them also, making them what we could thereby
altogether vnproficable unto us, it was, and is yet notwithstanding his good
pleasure (who has prepared the hope of a better life for us, to allow us, and
let us have even in this life, not only a sober and reverend, but even a most
large and liberal use of the^, that so we being by them for a while fostered
and fed here, we might in the end come to the full fruition of that glory
which he has laid up for us in the heavens, which rich and abundant kindness
of his, bestowed even then upon us, when we were his deadly ennimies, should
provoke us, not only to humble thankfulness toward his majesty, both in word
and deed for his infinite mercy, but should instruct us to strive with care and
conscience to walk even in the days of this our flitting and transitory life,
worthy so great grace bestowed upon us. Yea it should further teach us, in a
frantike and free heart, not only to use, as in respect of our selves, but to
communicate to al others, and particularly to our enemies, according to the
measure of mercy that GOD has dealt with us, and as their necessity shall
require, any of the blessings that the Lord has powered upon us, according to
that holy commandment; Romans 12.20. Prou. 25.21.
If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink.

Lastly, we may here plainly see, to the wonderful joy and peace of our
bodies and of our souls, into what great excellency of glory, GODS children
at the resurrection shall be advanced, for the illustrating and enlarging
whereof all the creatures shall then be renewed and restored, even as they were
at the beginning made also for them. And this should teach us all to spend
the days of our pilgrimage here in fear and trembling, that at the length we
may, thorough the goodness of GOD in his Christ, be gathered home into our
eternal tabernacles, there to reign with him for ever.

He that will give and gather any other, either sense or doctrine, out of this
place, than as before, may show himself to be drunken with vain speculations,
yea drowned in them, but shall never attain to that edification which is of
God, and whereunto indeed they that are of God should strive, setting aside all
vain iangling, and curious questions whatsoever, not determinable by the rule
of the word.

Hitherto for this matter, which being concluded as before, let us come to that
verse which remains of this text, wherein the Apostle affirms that which he
had done before, touching the groanings of the creatures, and the sighs and
sobs (as it were) of the children of God. And yet this is no vain tantologie
or idle repetition, but a more vehement affirmation of that which went before,
which may appear in that the Apostle uses this term (not only) and a more
plain and particular declaration of that which he had somewhat darkely
expressed before, namely, in the 22. verse, affirming, that the creatures with
us did groan and travel in pain together, not only showing here, what he
meant by that term (us) which he expounds in these words, we which have
received the first fruits of the spirit, but also what it is, that we both
sighe and wait for, to wit, our adoption, that is the full manifestation and
declaration of it, which shall then indeed (and not before) be perfectly
accomplished. When that our bodies shall be raised again out of the dust of
death, and untied to their own souls, and so we both in body and soul made
perfect partakers of eternal life and blessedness But let us more
particularly examine the words, and observe some doctrines out of the same,
that so also we may come to the end of this treaty.

Verse. 23. (And not only the creature)

To wit, groaneth and trauelleth in pain, as before, verse 23. understanding
the word Creature here as there. True it is, that the word (creature) is not
in the Greek text, but yet it is well supplied, both by reason he had made
mention of it before twice or thrice, and minding also by amplification to
enlarge the point, by that term (not only) he shows that that affection
is not proper to them alone, but that the sons and servant of God have it, in
greater excellency by much, than the creatures themselves. If any man therefore
should not think well of laying that word to the rest, he has his answer
before; and yet may the better bear it also, because it is done for evidence
and explanation sake. Neither should any man think this short kind of
speaking strange; since it is usual in our own tongue, and very rife and common
with the Apostle, as in other his writings, so in this his epistle to the
Romans, for proof whereof the learned reader may look upon Romans 5.3.11. Romans
9.10.

But we also I take it to be as much as if he should say, even we our selves do
perform the self-same duty that the rest of the creatures do, although (as was
said before) in a more excellent sort and manner, and that this should be the
Apostles meaning, we have not only this reason for it, because they do it not
by others, neither indeed can others besides them perform it for them, but
also because the Apostle himself does afterward emphatically as we say
repeat the same again in this verse, saying; even we do sigh in our selves.
By which also the Apostle would teach us, both how necessary this duty is,
and how careful we our selves should be to do the same. But alas we are so
far off from the practice of it, that our thoughts are not busied about it or
any such other good matter, but rather as the Prophet says; Our hearts goes
after our covetousness.

(Which have the first fruits of the spirit)

He means by that word have, Ezec. 33.31
not only the receiving of those graces, but even the very actual and present
possession of them, yea the perpetual possession of them, which may appear by
this, that he uses a participle of the present tense, noting as it were
thereby, not only the beginning, but even as it were the continuance of them.
The knowledge whereof is not only profitable to confute such as suppose that
the spirit it self and the graces of it, go and come, according to the
several state of goodness and evil wherein men are, by reason of their
sins, and their disposition to better things, as they imagine, but also
comfortable for such as through the erroneous opinions of other men, and the
want of feeling in their own souls, are greatly distressed and beat down,
as in that respect.

Now whereas he adds the first fruits of the spirit, we are to know, that
it is a metaphor borrowed from the ceremonial law. The Lord appointing, that
the first fruits of all their increase, should be dedicated as a holy thing
unto his majesty, and serve for these two ends specially, the one was the
maintenance of the priests, and the other to be a pledge, that the remainder
that was left in the hands of the owners for their lawful use, was now
sanctified unto them, in as much as God the author of holiness had
vouchsafed to receive a portion of it, for his own service and other holy
uses: all which is plainly put down in many places of the books of the
law, and namely in Leuiticus and Deuteronomie. From which we may learn, many
good and profitable instructions, as first in that the first fruits of every
thing were consecrated to the Lord, that therefore in the service of our GOD
we should imploie, not only the meanest things that we have (a fault, as
heretofore, so now, Mal. 1.8.9. etc
too common in this unthankful world, either in contempt will yield GOD
nothing, or in carelessness offer him the woorst of all the flock) but even
the best we possess and inioye, if we have any thing better than an other,
either within us or without. Neither was this obscurely only figured in the
law by this ceremony, but plainly and expressly put down in these terms;
Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul
and with all thy mind, we knowing and confessing, that we have nothing more
excellent than our inward parts, as wherein consists all our affection,
reason, yea, and natural life it self.

Secondly, in that the Lord in this behalf demanded nothing of them, that was
in their own power to perform, but that which he had commanded the earth to
yield them, even as his own special blessing upon the earth and them also
(for though their labor might seem somewhat, and the earth naturally to give
her increase, yet we know on the one side, that it is in vain for men to
rise early, and to lie down late, Psalm. 1^^.^ ^.
and to eat the bread of affliction or sorrovv, and on the other side, that
it is the Lords blessing that makes men rich and prosperous, (...) 10.^^.
with which also he adds no sorrovves, as the Holie-ghost tells us) he
would hereby teach us, not only how unapt and unable we are to the
performance of good and holy duties before him, a matter which ought to humble
us greatly in our own eyes, but also that he will not refuse, but accept
rather, the best good grace that he himself has given us, though sometimes it
savor of the naughtiness of our nature and the great defects of our hearts, as
he does of the fruits of the earth, Gene. 3.17
notvvithstanding the same be accursed for man's sin: a point that may comfort
us greatly in those assaults, that the children of God feel in themselnes, by
reason of the corruptions and imperfections that cling and cleave unto the best
things they do. Whereof also this is the reason, not that GOD delights in
imperfections, for that is contrary to his nature, which is most absolute and
perfect in it self: but because if men, not only in holy, but worldly
wisdom also have learned, now and then to put a difference between good
and evil, yea between their own good things that other men have of theirs,
and those men ill, liking notwithstanding their own good, though other men's
corruptions be intermingled therewith, much more shall and will God perform
this, not only in as much as he is better able to discern than they between
good and evil, but more, yea most staide in his judgment, not varieng or
turning as they: to which also this may be added, even as in respect of the
graces themfelues, that though men's good things may be marred by other men's
evil, and not only the qualities, but the natures of them changed, yet Gods
graces cannot be so perverted. And therefore good reason why we should comfort
our selves.

Thirdly, it is as seems unto me very comfortable in an other respect,
namely, that as that of the first fruits that was dedicated to the Lord, was a
pledge of the sanctification of that that remained behind, though it were
employed but to ordinary and common uses, yea was a continual seal of
sanctification to the people of God, that both they themselves and all theirs,
were vessels unto honor sanctified and meet for the Lord and prepared unto
every good work, I use now the Apostles words: 2. Tim. 2.21
so even the beginning of Gods graces in his children should assure them, of
continuance and grows in the same, notwithstanding their weakness and
wants: the reason is, because God deals not as man putting his hand to an
excellent work, and by leaving off, but accomplishing and making perfect,
Phil. 1.6.
and that until the day of Christ Jesus the good things that he has begone
in them. Wherein though we be much wounded, because we feel not so much as
we would, yet should this comfort us greatly again, that we deal with God,
who is always like himself, and has all, both goodness and power in his own
hands, to dispense unto us, so many, or so much of his graces, as to his own
wisdom (which knows what is best) seems good for his own glory, our
comfort, and the profit of his church.

All this we have spoken by occasion of these terms first fruits, the Apostle
naming them yet further for the more excellency of them, the first fruits of
the spirit, both because they are indeed of their own nature spiritual
graces, and also because that they flow and proceed from the spirit of God,
and are wrought in us, by his powerful working in our hearts. Which teaches
us not only the more reverently to regard them, as coming from so
sanctified and holy a fountain, but the more carefully, 2. Cor. 7.1.
to purge our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and the spirit, and to
grovve up into full holiness in the fear of God, that so the spirit of GOD
may take pleasure to abide in us, 1. These. 5.19
which delyghteth not to dvvell in an vnpure soul: always taking heed, that
we neither quench the graces of the spirit in our selves or in others, nor in
carelessness and contempt drive the same away from us, but that we foster it,
and make much of it, that so Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, through his
spirit, he may make us fruitful to every good work.

It follows (even we do sigh in our selves.) He had spoken this before
verse. 22. saving that here he does somewhat more largely affirm the same,
there being this difference, further, that whereas there he said, the
creatures together groaned with us, here he affirms, that the faithful do
it among them selves, showing thereby, that neither the doctrine of Gods word,
nor the instructions that God will have us fetch from his works, are
unprofitable to his children, to whom they are directed, but serve to much
good, and stand in great use, as to many good purposes generallye, so
particularlye to bring them out of love and liking with the pleasurs and
profits of this present evil world, and to make them earnestly to hunger and
thirst after eternal blessedness and everlasting life through Christ.

Every word that the Apostle uses here, carries with it also some weight
and force, and offers unto us occasion of some necessary doctrine or other;
for first, that manner of speech, even we, he repeating again or eftsoons
naming the persons, does teach us, not only how necessary it is and meet to
speak plain, that so we may be the better understood of those that we are
to deal with, but also that we should not neglect any good mean or way that
may cause the parties, to whom our speech is directed, to conceive and
understand the things that are propounded to them, wherein, though after
repeating of one and the selfsame point, may seem either to them, or to us
our selves needelesse and superfluous: yet if we will weigh with an upright
judgment, either the hardness and excellency of the things that the word
delivers, or the manifold difficulties and lets that are in men to embrace
the same, or the punishment of God upon the sins of them that speak them, we
shall well perceive, that it ought not to be grievous unto us, Philip. 3.1.
to write or speak the same things unto the people of GOD, specially also
since it is a sure and profitable thing for them: neither that we our selves
should be negligent to put them alvvayes in remembrance of such things, 2. Pet.
1.12.
though they have knowledge, and be established in the present truth. For
besides that we forget the things that we have learned, we had need to be
stirred up, in the things that we know,

And whereas the Apostle adds, that we do sigh, we are to know, that he
reherseth this again more fully to declare this fervent desire that the godly
have, yea the very sens and feeling that is in them, not only of the miseries
and calamities of this life, but of the joys of heaven, and the hope of
eternal salvation, which does not only cause him, to say a desire, but a
sighing, for where there is either a sense of misery, or a feeling of mercy,
there cannot but be both sighs and groans, to be freed from the one, and to
be filled with the other. Me thinks that that which the apostle writes in
another place is fit for the exposition of this point, he tells us, that if
our earthly house of this tabernacle, 2. Cor. 5.1.2. etc.
were once destroyed, we have a building given us of God, that is an house,
not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens: for which also we sigh,
desiring to be clothed with our house which is from heaven, because that if
we be clothed we shall not be found naked. For in deed we that are in
this tabernacle sigh, and are burdened, because we would not be unclothed,
but would be clothed upon, that immortality might be svvallovved up of
life. What can be more plain? does he not in evident terms affirm, that the
faithful are so far off, from sticking fast to this earthly tabernacle, that
they do not only wish to be removed from it, but even as a man would say,
with sighs and sobs desire rather that heavenly tabernacle. Certainly he
uses the very selfsame words in both places, and entreats of the
selfsame matter, and therefore good reason, that one of them should serve for
the faithful exposition of the other. The Apostle yet notwithstanding
treating of this doctrine in several places of his Epistles, to several
people, teaching us, that it is and ought to be a common doctrine for the whole
Church, and for every member of it, and accordingly to be propounded, 1.
Cor. 15.19.
as most fit and comfortable for them, for if here be our hope only, we
are of all men the most miserable: as who besides the common calamities of our
natural life, are through the malice of the wicked, for gods sake, Psalm 44 22.
Romans 8.36.
and the profession of truth, and well doing, are killed all day long, and
counted as sheep for the slaughter. But we look for a continuing city, Heb
13.14.
and seek for one that is to come even eternal in the heavens.

The Apostle says further that the faithful do after this sort, sighe and
sobbe in them selves, not meaning thereby only that these sighinges are secret
and inward alone, though that no doubt be some part of his meaning, and the
experience that the godly find in them selves, shows this to be most true,
but also that they are owtwarde, yet so as they do proceed from the bottom
of their hearts, and as a man would say, from the very bowelles of their
souls. By which the Apostle would teach us, what earnest longing as it were
there ought to be in all of gods children, for the manifestation of that time,
wherein they shall not only be freed from all miseries, but made pertakers
of all felicity, and eternal blessedness. Yea, the Appostle would instruct
us, that we should not only strive to have this effectual feeling within, a
matter which no doubt may give much peace to our hearts, because the inward
comfort and joy of the spirit is most effectual, and full of heavenly
delight, as which has even so rapt and ravished many of the saints and
servant of GOD, in this life, that it has made them, to forget as a man
would say, themselves, and all the pleasures and profits of this world
whatsoever, yea and willingly to forgo them all, but also that we should
according to the measure of grace received, labor to lay it out, and to
express it so in our words, countenaunces, deeds, and behauiours, that other
men by our examples, may be stirred up to the like felowlike feeling, and to
the expressing and declaring of the same toward others, as they have found
and seen in others over and besides them selves. Provided always that yet
notwithstanding we do both the one and the other in some measure of a sound
mind not making vain shows, as the manner of hipocrites is, of such things as
we have not within us in deed, for that is nothing else, but daliance with the
Lord, and deceitfulnes toward our selves and others, but having that in
truth and effect, namely, that we pretend outwardly, which also is a notable
mean, to approve the feeling of our souls to be from God, that so also we
our selves may therein be comforted, and other men, according to the good will
and pleasure of God be greatly profited. And all these doctrines, and
particulerlie this last, does rightly arise out of these words of the
Apostle, do sigh in our selves, that is to say, inwardly and outwardly,
earnestly also, and from the bottom of good hearts, we perform this
duty, and therefore others by our examples should labor to do the like.

It follows, (waiting for the adoption) under that term of waiting, he
expresses the patient abiding, that the faithful have, noting thereby that
they do not earnestly, wish for it, which was expressed before, in the
terms of sighing and grooning but that in patience possessing their own
souls, according to the commandment of Christ, they do with quietness of
^pirite, and comfort of heart, expect not only the thing it self, but the
time also wherein that shall be disclosed, not murmuring against GOD, though it
please him to delay the fruition of that, which they most delight in and
long after.

And this should teach us in all things generally, and particularly in this,
that the Apostle speaks of here, to be so consourmed unto the obedience of
Gods will, that we can with earnestness and an unfeigned mind, say, as our
Savior teaches us; Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven, upholding
our hope in this, that if GOD yield not at the first, yet we will in christian
patience attend his leisure and good pleasure also, persuading our selves
hereof, that they whenever his graces come, they shall come in a time most
acceptable, and best even for us, (though perhaps we our selves think not so)
because he that knows what is better for us then we our selves, knows also
what time they are most fit for us, from whence also we should learn, to
shake and cast from us, these cursed corruptions that clyng unto us, and do
dyrectlie fight against the truth of this doctrine: sometimes we setting GOD
a time, which in deed sauoureth of intolerable presumption, prescribing to
him that is LORD over all: and sometimes again not so reuerentlye esteeming
his benefits as we should, because we have them not, when we our selves
would, which also bewrays wonderful waiewardnesse and perverseness in us,
we practicing and approouing that against our father and Lord, which we will
tolerate, in our children and servants toward us. Let us learn rather to be
so conformed unto the obedience of gods will, that whether we have his
blessings presently powered forth upon us, ot that they be for a while wiih
holden from us, yet notwithstanding we will both with the one and the other be
heartily well content.

Now whereas the Apostle uses the word Adoption, we are to see what he
means by that. It is a word of the civil law, and whereof they have a
little in the institutes, by which they note, that choice that a man makes of
some one (who is himself before the choice made destitute and in some misery)
to be unto him as a son or child, if he have none of his own, or else if
he have of his own (for even such also might addopt) to add him unto that
number, and to provide for him, though perhaps not in so high a degree, as for
a natural son, yet very plentifully and liberally, not only as in
respect of that poor estate wherein the party addopted was before, but to
prefer him before all his servant, how tenderly so ever he loved them, or
provided carefully for them: so that the adopted children, seemed to be in a
mean estate between the natural sons and daughters, and these that were in
the condition of servant. This term the Apostle takes and applies to
Christian religion, and namely to note out, the free choice of god, adopting
and taking us unto him self then, when we were in most extreme misery, a
large and notable discourse whereof we may read Ezechi, 16-3.4.5. etc. He not
only choosing us unto him self as servant, but as sons, whose sons
(though we be not by nature and substance, for so Jesus Christ is the only
son of God, begotten of the substance of the father before all worlds,
whereas we are contrariewise, (by nature the children of wrath.) Yet are we
so by the grace of adoption, by which also we have such privilege that we are
not advanced into the honor of sons only, but of heirs also, yea heirs
of God, and fellow heirs annexed with our Savior Christ as this our
Apostle declares in this eight Chapter to the Romans. All which should teach
us as on the one side, to see our own misery and wretchedness, that so it may
be a profitable mean continually to humble us before our God, so on the other
side, also to look upon the great love and singular favor of God, in this
free choice of us unto himself, that so it may effectually stir us up, to
walk worthy of so great grace, making our election sure in our selves, and to
others also by good works.

He adds (even the redemption of our bodies) showing as it were more
plainly what he meant by the true adoption, to wit, not only that free
grace of God in choosing us to be his sons and servant, but even the full
manifestation and perfection of it, yea even the enjoying of the fruit of it
that is the saving of our souls in the day of Christ, yea the saving of our
whole man in that same great day. But perhaps some will say here is no
mention made of the soul. What then? the certainty of that was so plain and
evident that the Apostle needed not to labor in the proof of it: that that
seemed more dificulte and hard to believe, as the restoration of the bodies of
the faithful (of which some had been devoured by wild beasts, other some
consumed in the fire, other some swallowed up of the sea etc, which how they
should be brought again, seems very hard, if not impossible, specially to
flesh and blood) was most of all to be traueiled in; He putting therefore one
part for the whole, deals most specially with the part, that seemed to have
most difficulty in it, specially for the restoration of it.

But some man will think again, that this spech is prejudicial to the death
of Christ, who by that sacrifice of his body offered once for all upon the
cross, has perfectly performed the work of the redemption, both of our
souls and bodies. We answer, that though that be most true that is put down,
that yet for all that, we enjoy not the full benefit thereof in this life,
neither in deed shall, until that the Lord having delivered us, from this base
and contemptible estate wherein we are, have by the rising again from the
dead, made us perfect pertakers of his eternal glory. This perfection of our
blessedness the scripture calls in many places by sundry names, as sometimes
our quickening, our inheritance, our glory, Philip. 5.21.
sometimes our changing, as Phillippians 5.21. where the Apostle tells us,
that Christ shall change the bodies of our baseness, 1. Cor. 15.53.
and make them like unto his glorious body: and in the Corinthians also, where
he names it, changing from a fleshly and earthly condition, to a spiritual
and heavenly state, that that was before mortal, being clothed with
immortality. By all which you may see, that we do not only understand it,
as some do, if the sundring of the soul from the body only (which we
confess to be in part the Apostles meaning, but yet not his whole meaning)
but also of the glorious restitution of our bodies, as which does not only
best agree, with the grounds of christian religion, but most aptly serves
for the Apostles purpose in this place, as who deals here not so much with
the dissolution of bodies, as with the restitution of them to that eternal
immortality, that shall free them from dust and powder, and set them in estate
of eternal incorruption.

In a word to conclude this holy treaty; we see what the Apostles purpose
is, namely, to teach the people of God to long and sigh after their life, that
is prepared and laid up for them in heaven. The creatures in their kind do
it, therefore ought we much more that profess faith and godliness do it; who
besides their example have many other means set before us to effect this work
in us; as the earnest and often admonition of the word, teaching us, to use
this world, as though we used it not, the manifold afflictions, that both in
body and soul we are subject unto in this life, the great and grievous
persecutions that we sustain for our holy profession at the hands of the
wicked, the Lord at that time and not before fully manifesting his righteous
judgment in recompensing to them that trouble us, 2. These. 1.6.7.8.
tribulation and to us that are troubled, rest with the faithful, when the
Lord Jesus shall show him self from heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God.

FINIS.

