ELIAH'S WISH: A PRAYER FOR DEATH.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Right Honorable Viscount Sudbury,
Lord BAYNING.

By To: WILLAN D. D. Chaplain to his Majesty.

Vita vitae mortalis, spes vitae immortalis. Aug. Printed at London for I. S.
Hypo Bibliothecary of Syon College, and are to be sold by Rich^rd Royston, at
his shop in Iuie-Lane. 1630.

To the Right Honorable ANNE, Viscountesse of Sudbury, etc.
Right Honorable:
THis exiguous Tract belongs unto you by a manifold Right: First, it is a
Sermon of Elias, and whither should Elias go for succor but unto the widow
of Sareptah? such an one are you, a Noble Patroness of the Prophets; besides
you have a sad interest in it, as being preached for him, who when he obtained
the Laurel left you the Cypres; not to lament him, (for it is a kind of envy
to bewail those in happiness) but your own hard condition under the
miserable title of a widow. Last of all, as the Egiptian law made women
Recluses, forbidding them to go abroad, so custom barring noble widows from
ceremonial and solemn sorrow, confining them to closset mourning (secret
grief is most sharp, and tears shed in private as they fall less visible,
so less forced) it had been inhumanity in me to deny you reading of what you
could not hear. Accept then these lines wherein you may behold so true a
Portrayture of your deceased Lord, that those which enuyed him cannot object
flattery, nor such as loved and honored him, detraction to the Pencill. Thus
having full filled your desired wish, I fall to my own wishes, which are, that
whether you remain in the disconsolate estate you are as Anna did, or God has
designed you to be a Ruth, the fundatresse of another Noble family, the God of
Heaven who has already given you the blessings at his left hand, Honor,
Riches, and all endowments adorning your sex, may add length of days in the
practice of Religious duties, and charitable deeds, until he bring you to
the blissful vision of himself: so he prays who is

Your devoted Beads-man, To: WILLAN.

To the Reader.
Having by much importune labor received from Noble hands, a Copy of this
Sermon; out of a confidence that one passage therein, celebrating our first
Benefactor Viscount Sudbury, may do good to the Library of Syon College,
whereof I am a Keeper, I have adventured without consent of the Author to put
it upon thy censure, not doubting if I can procure his pardon, to promerit thy
thanks, and so Farewell:

From Syon College April 12. 1630. Thine John Spencer.

ELIAH'S WISH.
1 KINGS 19. 4, It is now enough O Lord, take my soul, for I am no better then
my Fathers.
THere are no thoughts more wholesome then those of death, not any less
frequently possessing the minds of men; we think of death as the Athenians
did treat of peace, never but when we are in blacks: As they which adventure
to the Indies take not so much into their considerations how many ships have
been swallowed in the waves, as what some few have gotten by the voyage: So it
is with us, we seldom meditate of the Millions dead before us, but of the
small Remainder suruiuing with us. They report that the birds of Norway fly
faster then the fowls of any other Country, not because nature has given
more nimblenesse or agility to their wings, but by an instinct they know the
days in that Climate to be very short, not above three hours long, and
therefore they make more haste unto their nests: Strange that birds should make
such use of their observation, and we practically knowing the shortness of
our lives, yet make no haste to our home, the house appointed for all living:
This Job 30. 23.
God complains of: The Storke knows Ier. 8. 7.
her appointed time, but my people know not the Judgment of the Lord: And by
another, he wishes their understandings were not so deordinate as to forget
their last end. Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
Our eyes behold all things, yet see they not themselves but by reflection in a
looking glass. Here are two looking glasses; one upon the Hearse, informing us
that neither Wisdom, nor Honor, nor Wealth, nor Strength, nor Friends, nor
Physic, nor Prayers, are sufficient Parapets to shelter us from the stroke of
death. Here is another looking glass in the Text, expressing the miserable
condition of our lives. If all the inventions of Hierogliphicall learning
(which St. Origin Origin. Hom. 7. in Exodus
compared to the Jews Manna, falling down in round and little Cakes, yet
affoording good nourishment) so they in small shadows conveyed excelcellent
wisdoms. If all of them had strained their wits for an Emblem, to decipher
the wretched estate of a living man, they could not come near the pattern in
the Text. Do but paint Elias sitting under the Juniper tree in a forlorn
posture with his face between his knees, The Motto, the words of the Text, It
is now enough, O Lord, take away my soul, for I am no better then my Fathers,
and you have life portrayed to life. Elias was the first man, unto whom God
resigned his key of life, and gave him power to raise the dead. Elias was the
sole man, whom God honored with a Chariot for his conueiance into the other
world. Elias was the second man elected to represent heavenly glory upon earth,
at the transfiguration of our Lord Jesus, and this man whilst he was in this
life, was weary of his life, and puts up a Supplication to almighty God to take
it from him.

The words contain a Prayer; Good is the proper object of prayer, we may
deprecate evil, but pray only for that which is good. This prayer is for
death, which in it self is neither good nor evil. That we may the better
conceive the true scope, it is fit that we should take into our considerations
these three particulars.

1 The motives preceding and producing the Prayer. 2 The Arguments enforcing
the Prayer. 3 The third and last, The Prayer it self.
A question will be asked in the Porch and entrance, is Elias in earnest? would
he live or dye? If he would live, why does he beg death? If dye, why did he
shun death by flying into the wilder nesse? One Executioner from Jesabell would
have given him his longing. The satisfaction is easy: It is some comfort when a
man is overcome, that he be conquered by a noble enemy Aeneae magni dextra
cadis -- David was unwilling to dye by the fury and malice of Saul, contented
to receive it by the hands of his friend Jonathan. If there be iniquity found
in me, kill me thy self, 1 Samuel 20. 8.
but bring me not to tby father. As Moses rod lying upon the Ground had the
shape, and poison of a serpent, but in his own hand it lost that affrighting
figure, and venomous quality: so death from Jezabell was an ugly serpent in
Elias apprehension, but from the hand of God a Caduceus a wand to waft him into
a better life: The hands of the spouse are fall of Rings beset with Iemmes, the
Berill, and the Hyacinth: God his hands are full of blessings, Cant. 5. 14.
full of all goodness, death it self which seems to be a privation of God,
from his hand, must needs be good from whom no evil can descend. This may
qualify his eschuing death by Jezabell, but being past danger, and out of his
Persecutors reach, what were the motives to desire it now? It is now enough.
The Expositors do vary, finding not only several but contrary motives: some
make it the euaporation of a discontented mind, the weakness of a frail man:
others attribute it to the devotion of an holy man, I will strike these
several flints, each of them may afford a spark to enlighten our text.

Chrysostom in his Rhetorical way demands: Chrysostom, ad Olimpiadem. Sermo de
Elia and Petro.
where is that spirit of Elias? where that terrible countenance that put Achab
to silence? where is that tongue the gouernesse of the Elements? why sits he
puling under a tree wooing death which will not come at his call? He answers
by a similitude: As a strong gale of wind filling the spread sails of a ship
hurries it from the intended port: so a violent gust of fear rushing upon the
Prophet drove him into this sad melancholy. Eucherius Vnde tam potens, vnde tam
infirmus? Eucherius super locum.
propounds it another way, Whence came his potency to work wonders? whence his
weakness to be weary ofhis life? his power was from God, weakness was his own:
God gave him a parcel of his power (mark I pray) his bare word brought a
drought upon Palestine, his prayer like a burning Fever entered into the
bowels of the earth, and scorcht up lakes, Rivers, Springs, fountains, and
left no moisture in them; but being left a small while to himself all his
courage is dried up to nothing. From hence 2. lessons:

First, that no prerogative of greatness, no profession of holiness exempt men
from common infirmities: where is that Heretic Pelagius belching out this
contagious poison, that a man may attain such perfection as to be free from
all weakness, and when he prays for forgiveness of sin, it is rather
humiliter then veraciter? Let him look upon Elias and be confounded. As the
Curtezan Lais said, Philosophers knocked at her gate as well as others: so the
best of men are overtaken: To go no further then our pattern. The seer is
fallen blind, the guide has lost his way, the charmer is stung by the
serpent, the man of God becomes a man of passion, failing in the common Rules
of ordinary goodness and wisdom, for good and wise men may pray for better
times then those they live in; but bear with patience all sinister and sad
events; whereas our great Prophet whines and repines, denoyd of hope that any
alteration should better his condition, and because the would will not be
guided by the Polestarre of his direction, he will stay no longer in it: Oh
let the weakness of a Saint be our warning; green wood will warpe and
shrink, if seasoned timber hold not out, and slender tressells must give way
when strong pillars bend under the burden: Especially it behooves us, which is
the next point of instruction, never to be so dejected at the view of our
fraylety as to forbear our resorting to God in prayer. St. James to encourage
Christians to that holy duty brings in this very example, Elias was a man
subject to the like passions as we are: Elias body was a clod of earth as ours
is, his mind obnoxious to the same perturbations, yet he prayed, so let us:
for God is not the God of Elias only, but a God rich in mercy to all that call
upon him. So I pass to the second motive as the prayer proceeds from a
Zealous devotion.

Caietan his Gloss is that he was more Plus timuit honori Dei quavi vita sua.
Caietan. super locum.
affrayd of Gods honor, then of his own life, and this is grownded upon the
reiterated Apology he makes unto the Angel being in the wilderness, The
children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown ^. 10. ^^.
down thy Altar, slain thy Prophets, I, even I am left alone, and they seek
to take away my life. By which it is probable his fear and care was cheefely
for the honor of God, least in the overthrow of his Person after so signal a
victory and noble Conquest and triumph over Idolatry, the Orthodoxe Religion
might suffer some reproach or diminution. Elias was the lively pattern of
Heroike Zeal; Chrysostomes opinion is that soon after God took away Elias,
lest his Zeal should destroy this inferior Globe: he was so severe against
sin that he took no compassion of the sinners; so the God of mercy least
fire and stubble should dwell together, he removed him to the Company of
blessed and holy spirits where he might see all good and no evil. St. Paul
seems to tax Elias and he does it with a Notandum, ye not what the Scripture
says of Elias, that he Romans 11. 2.
made intercession to God against Israel? Good men pray for sinners not against
them: Abraham prayed for the wicked Sodomites, and does Elias pray against the
Idolatrous Jsraelits? Jeremy prayed assiduously for his nation till he was
forbidden to pray any more; and did Elias pray for the vexation of his country?
The Husbandman in the Parable entreats his Master to spare the unfruitful
tree, does Elias wish the destruction of men? undoubtedly holy men have
merciful not cruel bowels, when they call for punishments, they are
medicines, not execrations, but predictions either by outward afflictions to
procure their conversion, or by death to intercept the progress of sin, or by
some wholesome example to terrify others from the like offense.

So Elias did, and so he might pray against Jsrael. And it is no marvel he
prayed against them, for he bends his Zeal against himself: rather then he
would live to see his God dishonored, he is willing to resign his precious
life: This should be the affection of all Gods Servants, to hold nothing so
dear as the honor of their Master. Let me parallel this story with another
like it, of St. Chrysostom. Elias was persecuted by Iezabell a Queen,
Chrysostom by Eudoxia an Empress, Chrysostomi Epist. ad Ciriacum.
both threatened with death: The holy Father taking it into his meditations
writing to his friend, thus he Resolves, What if the angry Empress banish me
my native soil and sweet country? all the earth is the Lords, and I shall be
as near to heaven any where, as at Constantinople: what if I be thrown into
the sea? Jonah prayed in the whales belly: say I shall be sawne asunder, the
noble Prophett Esaias underwent that condition. What if my head be taken from my
shoulders? Herodias heels trip't off John Baptists head: what if I be stoned
to death? Stephen the Proto-martyr passed to heaven through a shower of stones:
Suppose my Bishoppricke be taken away, I will remember Job: Naked came I out of
my Mothers womb, and naked I will return. Memorable is that in Josephus, when
Titus had taken and Josephus lib. 6. de bello Iudaie.
sacked Jerusalem, the Priests came and beged their lives of him: that merciful
Prince and Darling of mankind caused them to be slain as degenerate wretches,
that would ouerliue their Temple and their Religion; he is not worthy of life
who will not adventure it for the author of life.

To conclude this second motive, let us always have that preparation of mind
in the phrase of Tertullian to retaliate blood Crurorem cruore reponere.
with blood: our Savior in great plenty shed his most precious blood for us,
be we ready to spend our lives for him, and with Paul and Barnabas to ieopard
them for his Gospel: although our lives in respect of his are but stubble to
Pearl; yet being the greatest oblation we can offer, it will be most
acceptable, most rewardable: The loss of life for his cause is the saving of
it. Elias suit for death was never granted, he never died at all, but was
conveyed not into Earthly Paradise, the Deluge made that pleasure desolation;
nor stayed he in the Aeriall Heavens, too unquiet and disconsolate a place
amongst Storms and Thunders, Lightnings and Tempests. St. Chrysostom says,
it affrighted the Prince of the Air to see him ride so gloriously through his
quarter. Nor did he rest among the Spheres to be rapt and whirled about by
their diurnall motion; not to the highest heavens, that Prerogative was
reserved for the Worlds Savior: no Soldier triumphs before his General, but
God translated his enflamed Zelot and earthly Seraphin, into a happy and
blessed estate, in the bosom of Abraham, with this Privilege, others were
there before in soul; he both in soul and body.

Now proceed we from the Motives forerunning the Prayer, to the Reasons
attending upon it.

You have heard of some, as of St. Paul, eloquently pleading without any
Advocate to save his life, before Felix, Fesius, and Agrippa, and by an Appeal
taking truce with death: But here is one in the Text pleading for death, and
finding Reasons why he should live no longer. His Arguments are in number two.

The first is drawn from the satiety of life: It is now enough, as if he
should say thus in effect:

I have lived long enough to my self, long enough to my Country. First, to my
self, it pleased thy divine goodness, by making me an instrument of thy
glory to advance my own, so as I shall leave an high reputation and a
venerable name to all posterity: and for my Country, such thy mercy, by my
means they enjoyed much good; spiritual good, I reclaimed them, (although
they be now relapsed) from Idolatry to the Service of thee their true and
only God: I was the Reformer of their corrupted manners; my rugged Robes and
hairy Habit condemned their proud attire; my austere and strict life, taught
them to amend their loose and licentious conuersations: As a retired Heremite I
sequestered my self from humane society, to let them see 'twas less dangerous
to dwell among brutes then beastiall men. And for good temporal, I turned
their drought into Rain, and their famine into Plenty, having in my whole
course equalled, nay, transcended the period of Mortality, It is now enough O
Lord.

His second Argument is drawn from the common law of nature: I am no better
then my Fathers, my Ancesters in time, my Predecessors in profession are all
arrived at their wished Port; why should thou prolong my days by miracle,
sometimes appointing the Ravens (those unclean birds by thy law) and
unnatural in their kind, to be my Caters, as at the brook Carith? Sometimes
by multiplication of the old store, or by creation of new provision, turn
meal barrels into Granaries, and cruets of oil into Fountains, as at the
Widows of Sareptah. I desire not the producing of my misery, the preservation
of my life by extraordinary ways, let me pass O Lord the common way of all my
Fathers, For J am no better then my Fathers.

Observe in Elias Arguments, his method, and modesty, how orderly he ranks
his Reasons: There goes a sufficit before toll animam: He does not ask death
of God until he has performed great service unto the Lord in his life; for
it is a preposterous course to demand wages before the work be done: Rest
comes after labor, no Soldier looks for a donatiue until the war be
ouerpast; no Mariner calls for a fair wind until his vessel be full
fraught: It is no matter how long or how short our lives be, but how good. The
Moral man saw this; Life is long enough if full of good: St. Austins
similitude expresses this well, Augustine. Epist 28.
As a Musician tarrying long upon one string, little upon another, his lightest
touch makes not perhaps so loud a sound, but as sweet an harmony: So in God
his Consort, (who, as the Prophet speaks, keeps true time,) they make as good
music, that is, glorify God in their calling, unto whom he vouchsafes a
short life, it being both ornatus and ordinatus cursus, as they who enjoy the
longest.

The Sun and Moon those Fountains of light, and guides of time, fulfill
their courses in a short season. The dimmer Plannets are a longer while
wheeling about. The Scripture compares our life to Herbs and Flowers, A
Flower is Res Spectaculi, Spiraculi:
Delighting our eyes with various colors, pleasing our sense with sweet
savors, but withal of a fading substance: Say they escape the browsing mouth
of the beast, the pruning knife, the plucking hand, the nipping air, the
violent wind; they will wither of themselves. Of such metal are we made:
Imagine we could be free from Asaes Gowt, Naamans Leprosy, Jorams Iliaca
passio, Jobs unsavory breath, Hezekiabs botch, Lazarus biles, the woman of
Syrophenissa's dysentery, Publius Fever, and all diseases whereof the body of
man is a Lazaretto, and Receptacle; Galen found in one little part of the eye
an hundred several infirmities: could all these be avoided, yet our bodies of
their own accord would moulder into earth from whence they came. Since they
are Flowers, use we them like Flowers, which last long if they be distilled
into sweet waters: distill we our lives into holy and virtuous Actions;
distill them into the works of Piety; distill them into the works of Charity,
this is the way to make a short life last long; no Babylonian Tower, no
Egyptian Pyramid, no Rhodian Colossus, no Mausolian Tomb, no Triumphall
Arche, no life-counterfeiting Statua, can give such life of memory, as a life
it self transacted in worthy designs, for, Glorious (says the Wiseman) is
the fruit of Wisd. 3. 15.
good labors, perpetual is the memory of the Righteous, one generation
proclaiming their virtues unto another. So then have we in our allotted
stations served God in uprightness, and sincerity of heart, have we
endeavored in the utmost extent of our ability to do good, to our Religion,
our King, our Country, our Brethren? is there a sufficit in our lives? We
must hold our life in patience, but we may put death in our prayers: when Paul
may say he has fought a good fight, kept the faith, finished his course, then
he may come to his Cupio dissolui: When Hilarion can allege his 70. years
employment in the service of Hieronim. in vita Hilarion.
God, then he may say, Egredere anima mea, go out my soul, why should thou
fear approaching unto him whom thou have O vita secura vbi mors expectatur
absque formidine, excipitur cum dulcedine, imo exoptatur cum devotione. Bern.
served so long? when Elias can plead a sufficit, then toll animam may come
after it. O the secure life of good men, when death is expected without fear,
entertained with cheerful welcome; nay prayed and wished for with sweet
devotion.

In the second Argument take notice of his modesty, he esteems himself
(though wonderfully qualified) no better then his Fathers: If some small
portion of Elias modesty were left in the world, any blush of virtuous
bashfulnesse, the vile would not, in the Prophets phrase, presume above the
Honorable, nor the vpstart so highly disdain their Ancesters, preferring the
false and fading beauty of recent opinions, before the amiable wrinkles in the
face of aged truth. St. Paul says he served God from his elders and
progenitors; 2. Tim. 1. 3.
from whom he received his being and existencie, from them he took his piety
and religion; and he commends the deriuatiue faith of Timothy, descending from
his grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunice; And here Elias making honorable
mention of his Predecessors, tells us we owe unto them a double memory; First,
of their lives, as Adamants to draw us to the imitating of their virtues:
Secondly, of their deaths, as monitors to put us in mind of our own mortality.

All virtues Moral and Divine have been by our Ancestors most fully
exemplified: when a Poet would encourage a young Spark to noble undertakings,
he does it by this very way:

Te Pater Aeneas, and auunculus excitet Hector. Virgil.
Let thy father Aeneas and thy uncle Hector be thy Guides. Would you learn
faith and confidence in God? think upon your Predecessor Abraham the Father of
the faithful; Desire you to lead a pure, chaste life? think upon your
Predecessor Joseph; Would you meekly sustain afflictions of mind, and
tormenting diseases of body? think upon your Predecessor Job; would you be
zealous in the cause of God, and his Orthodox truth? think upon your
Predecessor Elias. The Wisemen of the East had but one Star to guide them
unto our Saviors cradle, but we so many of our Predecessors, as have led holy
and Regular lives; so many Stars enlightening our way, so many Loadstones to
draw us unto goodness; our Ancestors having run their Race, resigned the
torches of their life, and Sicut cursores vitai lampada tradunt. Lucret.
withal left us the lamps and lights of their example.

2. It is very good and wholesome for them also, who spend their days in sin
and vanity to reflect their eye upon their Predecessors: Let the covetous
aiming at wealth, and doing no good with it, think upon his Predecessor Nabal,
who ten days together lay as a block without sense, motion, or show of life.
Let the Ambitious aspirer think upon his Predecessor Absolon meeting with a
tree in the forest, which heard not his fathers Caveat for his life, but
became the Revenger of his ingratitude, and the fatal instrument of his
destruction. Let the Lascivious wanton wallowing in sensual delights, think
of his Predecessor Zimri dying in the act of his sin: Let the Capacious
Funnell, able to do as much alone, as Zerxes multitudinous Army, dry up an
Hellespont, think upon his Predecessor Balthazar perishing in his carowsing
Bowls: Let the vayne-glorious boaster, proud of what is not his own, think of
his predecessor worm-eaten Herod cut off in the midst of his glorious
Harangue. And let all true Repentant sinners think on their Predecessor David,
whose bed swamme in tears, and of the three sillables reconciling his angry
God unto him; of his Predecessor Peter, recovering more grace by weeping, then
he lost by sinning; of his Predecessor Mary Magdalen, who became a Lebete
Phiala, of a Cauldron seething and boiling in lust, a Crystal vial of pure
Chastity. And let all disconsolate souls flying with Elias for shelten to the
Iunipertree, think of their Predecessor Jesus, who dyed on the tree: under his
Cross is the true shade; Oh good, and desirable is the shadow Bona and
desiderabilis vmbra sub alis tuis, Jesus vbi tutum fugtentibus refugium, gratum
fessis refrigersum. Bern. Hom. 2. super Missus est.

Quantum libet $otis anxietatum pate res vita praesentis.

Propinet afflictio, parua toleramus, si recordamur quid biberit ad patibulum
qui inuitat ad celum. Sid. Apollinar. lib. 9. Epist. 4.


under thy wings Lord Jesus; there is the safe Sanctuary to fly unto, the most
comfortable refreshing of all sin and sorrow; whatsoever cups of affliction
this life propines unto us is nothing to the bitter draughts he drank upon
the Cross who inuites to heaven: Let us all think of our Predecessor treading
the Paths of death before us; we have erred with our Fathers, we are
Pilgrims and strangers upon earth as all our Fathers were, we must dye as our
Fathers did; For we are no better then our Fathers.

The third and last part is, the prayer it self, Toll animam; out of it there
do naturally flow these two Corallaries.

The first, that life is no such Jewel, but a good man may find time and
cause to be weary of it, or else Elias had never been at toll animam. The
second, that there is a more blessed life after this life, or else Elias could
not have been so mad as prodigally to cast away his life present. To the first

Life may be considered two ways: First, as God at first gave it: Secondly, as
we now enjoy it. The life which God gave had five prerogatives; two without
man; three within him; without him God and his blessed Angels to protect him;
besides, Paradise the pleasing seat of his Habitation: Within him, Knowledge,
Righteousness, and Immortality; his knowledge exceeding ours in three
particulars. First, in amplitude and extent, reaching to God, the creatures,
and himself. Secondly, in the excellent manner, not as we by coniecturall
probability derived from effects, but by evident demonstration out of the
causes. Thirdly, for duration or continuance; ours is gotten with difficulty
and easily lost, either by discontinued intermission and cessation, or the
brain and fancy may be distempered, as in a Phrensy, or the memory dulled as
in a Lethargy. Secondly, man was created Righteous, that Righteousness was the
rectitude and integrity of the whole man, whereby his soul was obedient unto
God, his body to the soul. This was the Crown and Diadem of man's life. Thou
have Crowned him with glory and worship, adorned him with grace and
holiness: An happy life was that, wherein Methusalem living almost a thousand
years should not have offended once; whereas now the most righteous man falls
seven times, that is, oftentimes a day. Lastly, that was a kind of Immortal
life; a thing is said to be incorruptible three ways: First, in respect of the
matter, either which it has not, as the Angels are immortal, those pure and
immateriall substances; or in respect of the matter which it has, as the
Heavens, the matter whereof they are made, being insusceptible of any form but
one. Secondly, in regard of the form; so the body of Adam was immortal as the
widows oil lasted in the cruse without diminution, so might his body have
endured without corruption, and that by the third the efficient cause, not by
any inherent quality, or disposition in the body, but by a supernatural dowry
of the soul. God endewed the first soul with such a powerful virtue, as
enabled it to preserve the body whereto it was united, from corruption, as a
Candle enlightens the lantern wherein it is contained: So the blessedness of
the soul reflecting upon the body should have kept it in perpetual vigor and
health. That was a free, noble, innocent, lively life; But man being in Honor,
forgot his God, and lost this life. What is the life we now enjoy? take a short
view, of the several ages, of the several estates, of the inseparable
adjuncts of our life, and you will find merely to live is no great happiness.

First, an Infant, that is a life of pity, In the Ages.
ten months close prisoner in the dungeon of the womb, not beholding the
light, which when he comes into, how sadly he salutes it, presaging his hard
welcome, shaming that he is naked, lamenting that he is borne, repining that
he is borne to misery: then if his cradle proves not his coffin, he lives a
child, that is a life of folly, in his speech, thoughts and actions; youth
succeedes, that is a life of sin, reason is weak, passion strong,
concupiscence itcheth, lust rages, sin reigns: Manhood the flower of all,
is a life of vanity, Man in his best estate is altogether vanity. Lastly, an
old man, that is a life of death: The Apostles word is of Abraham and Sarah,
when they were old, they were as dead; the head is gray, the face withered, the
skin wrinkled, the limbs stiff, the stomach weak, the memory frail, the
body crooked, the vital powers decayed, the spirits spent; this is the life in
ages; what is it in callings?

Man lives either single, and that is a free life but uncomfortable, or he
takes a In the calling,
wife, wedlock is the school of Patience; demure Sarah chid with Abrabam,
bleareeyed Leah wrangled with Jacob, scornful Micol scoffed at David,
stubborn Vashtai will not come at Ahasshuerus call, and it is no better in the
men. Discreet Abigail lights upon a churlish Nabal, Pilat was as unkind a
husband as an unrighteous Judge, denying his wife the life of our blessed
Savior. This life is either private or public, the private is simply the
best; Joseph saw it when he advised his brethren rather to continue
Shepherds, then to stay with him in Pharoahs Court: Old Barzillay found it
refusing David his courteous offer, and would not exchange his private Roguel
for tumultuary Jerusalem. The Oracle accounted him the most hapy man of his
time, who living until he was purely old; never did see any house but his
own. Whether we eat the bread of careful industry, or the sweet vnswet-for
bread of an vnacquired patrimony in the most retired, quiet, plentiful
condition, something still falls out verifying that of our Savior, Sufficient
to the day is the sorrow of it.

The public life is either in Church or Common wealth: The Churchman whether
in Chair or cure leads a laborious, an envious, a dangerous life, his labor
never at an end. David tunes his Harp to drive away Saul's Melancholy, and he
darts his Iauelin at him; a lively Emblem of the Pastor and most people. When
Elias prayers have procured a blessing from heaven, his best reward is a Cave
in the wilderness. St Augustine wept when he took holy Orders, and they were
Prognosticating tears forerunning his infinite pains in washing Blackmores,
whose sowles were more tawny then their hides; His perpetual bickerings and
encounters with Heretics, for such was God his especial providence, that he
and Pelagius should come into the world much about one year, that the Antidote
might be contemporall to the poison; His wearisome employment in determining
secular causes, for then very good Christians believed their suites, could not
be happily ended, unless they came through the clear and sinceare hands of
upright Churchmen. It Was a grave witty conceyt of one of the Pope Vrbans, who
putting his Rochet on, wondered that being made of so light stuff it was so
ponderous and weighty: Above all, affrighting is that speech of Chrysostom: Of
all men (says he) I could wish, there were no day of judgment, Deus donorum
promptus auctor, sed importunus exactor. Bern.
why so? Others shall answer for themselves alone, but I for my people, as
Judah was pledge for Benjamin; so many Talents as God gives, so many torments
if they be not well employed. There is but one comfort in that calling, they
do cooperate with God in reducing souls unto himself. In the Commonwealth,
great places are like Pictures, fairest, furthest off, look upon them at a
near distance, and there lies under the thin skin Nazianzen, in Laudem
Cipriani.
of Honor and dignity, a vaste corpse of trouble and vexation. Let all
Histories Inspice and disces sub ista tenui membranae dignitatis quantum mali
latet. Sen. Epist. 115.
be searched, divine, humane. Moses the first Governor of Gods people, so tired
with the cumber of his place, as he desires to be rid of his life: Kill me
Lord, and I will account it for a favor. Augustus had relinquished his
Sovereignty, as soon as he obtained it, but for the pride of his wife Liuia.
Dioclesian did surrender it, and turning Gardener, found his Plants more
pliable then his people: and Charles the fifth, enjoyed more sweet repose in a
Monastery then in a Monarchy. As in Supreme, so in subordinate Governors, He
that with care and conscience does execute the duties of his place, although
he live upon drowsy Poppies, and stupifying Mandragora's, shall hardly get
time for secure rest, but be like the Liui. Drusus.
Roman who in all his life had never leisure to keep Holiday. You Nehem 11. 24.
Pethahiahs who are at the Kings hand in matters concerning the People, did it
become modesty to rifle your secret thoughts, you have your share in Elias his
prayer, when just commands are more questioned then obeyed, and sincere Actions
meet with sinister interpretations; when common and easy burdens are not
borne with dutiful cheerfulness, nor public cares sweetened with benign
acceptance; nay when all possible endeavor that people may lead godly, quiet,
and peaceable lives, is performed, and requited with murmuring instead of
blessing, is not this enough to produce Elias Wish? Even the poor beasts when
they are weary make haste Quamadmodum pecoribus fatigatis, velocior domum
gradus est. Sen. de Clem.
home. Thus passes Man's life in the callings.

The Adjuncts of life are two In the adjuncts of life.
Sin, Misery.
In my private meditations upon this Point, I purposed to describe unto you the
Actions wherewith the sinful life of man is distained, but when I surueyed the
lives of wicked men, so many sins presented themselves, that I knew not where
to rank them, so ugly in shape as I durst not look upon them; and when I
considered the lives of the best, and the Aug veh laudabili. etc.
woe denounced unto the most laudable life of men, that the whole life of a
devout bSaint was but sin and barrenness; I stood amazed until I remembered
there Tota me terret aut peccatum aut sterilitas.
was a veyle to cover them, the Integument of Christ his Righteousness, and a
Sponge to blot them out, God his mere Mercy, and man's true Repentance. What a
Torment is it to a good Soul to be perpetually struggling with his natural
corruptions, never to have truce with Satan's Temptations, and to see and
suffer, nay sometimes to be infected with the sins of others? And this is
our in euitable condition till with Elias we have cast off the mantle of
mortality. As for Misery, as a Center in a Circle meets with every line in the
Circumference: So Man receives punishment from God, from Angels, Devils, and
every single creature, the very Gnat having a sting to torment him. Oh blessed
Lord, are all our lives in the several Ages so variable, in the Callings so
troublesome, in the Companions so intolerable? what remains but with Elias to
think of another life, and with Nazianzen to bury the Miseries Narianz, in
Funerepatris.
of this life in the hope of future Felicity; which is the second Corollary,
and last point.

It must be so that there is another life, for here they live many times the
longest lives who were not worthy to live at all, Here the Israelites make the
brickes, and the Egyptians dwell in the howses; David is in want, and Nabal
abounds; Sion is Babylons captive. Has God nothing in store for Joseph but the
stocks? for Esaias but a saw? will not Elias adorn the chariot better then the
Juniper tree? will not John Baptists head become a Crown as well as a Platter?
Surely there is great Retribution for the Just, there is fruit for the Maiora
illic accipimus qu^m hi^ aut operamur aut patimur. Ciprian. lib. 4.
Righteous: God has Palms for their hands, Coronets for their heads, white
Robes for their bodies, he will wipe all tears from their eyes, and show them
his goodness in the land of the living. Of the infinite happiness in that
celestial life, how should I speak? Earthly Jerusalem was portrayed by
Ezechiel upon a Tile, so Ezechi. 4. 1.
cannot the Heavenly be St Austin wrote two and twenty books of the City of
God, how can I bring into the last gasp of an hour, the unity, the plenty, the
Beauty, the holiness, the felicity thereof? when he himself confessed after
all his endeavor, all that can be said is but Stilla de Mari, scintilla do
foco,
a drop to the Sea, and a spark to a fire. This for your comfort: St. John
found Revel. 21.
twelve gates in it, open day and night to entertain departing souls,
repairing thither in the true faith, accompanied with an holy conversation: The
blessed Angels standing Sentinels for their guard and conduct. A Corcida
Grecian at his death thus cheered up himself, I shall go among Philosophers,
to Pythagoras; among Musicians, to Olympus; among Historians, to Hecateus;
among Poets, to Homer: a poor Heathenish and Pagan comfort, like Polyphemus
whistle hanging about his neck when his eyes were boared out: Mere moral
virtue may find great reward on earth, and less torment in hell, but Nihil
bonum sine summo tono. Ansel.
true good is from Christ; His precious blood opened Heaven for them only
which believe in his saving name; And they are sure to go among the Patriarks,
to Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob; among the Prophets, to Moses and Elias; among
the Kings, to David, Hezekiah, and Josias; among the Apostles, to S. Peter, and
S. Paul; amongst the Martyrs, to S. Stephen, and to the innumerable society of
Saints, and Angels, whither, as we ought piously to believe, he is
transported to whom we perform these sad Obsequies.

I hope there is no Auditor in this high Assembly so unequal as to suppose
this Text chosen as a just parallel to the Honorable party deceased; for
alas, they agree only in the (...), that as Elias, so he was a man subject
to many infirmities; of which if any curious ear desire to hear, he will be
deceived. I do not remember when David made Saul's Epitaph proclaiming his
virtues, that he touched any of his errors, those he washed away with his
tears, and the God of mercy has pardoned; what God has put out of his
memory, ought not to remain in ours: Yet I say confidently because truly,
malice it self could fasten no funereous crime upon his life. As when a tree
is sallen, you may conjecture what breadth it bare, and how far it spread, by
the vacuity and emptiness of the place where it stood: So if we consider him
hewn down by death, as a Christian, as a Subject, and as the Father of a
Family, he will appear a Cedar and no Shrub. The light of Stars and
glittering of Diamonds is borrowed from the Sun, all humane titles are
nothing, which receive not their luster from Piety and Religion. For his
Religion he was neither superstitious nor factious, but he served God in that
Way which Papists call Heresy, and Nouellists formality, a true member of the
English Church; he thought of our Church as David of the Tabernacle, that it
was very amiable; he embraced her holy doctrine, reverenced her comely Orders,
loved her painful Preachers. If due observation of Gods Sabath; if
frequentation of Gods house, attention in hearing, devotion in prayer; if an
ear open to Reproof, and a mind willing to Reform what he did amiss; if
strong pains in sickness meekely borne, be outward signs to know a good
Christian, such was he: I add, if works of Charity and Almesdeedes which
Daniel held a means to redeem sin, and St. Paul accounted an acceptable
Sacrifice, these wanted not. He has to the bullding of an Hospital in the
place of his birth, given competent maintenance for the relief of ten poor
people to the worlds end. That Noble Act of his I remember with joy.

He was the first Benefactor to the Library of Syon College, Samuel his
Ramath, where by the pious care and zealous industry of that grave and Reverend
Divine, M. John Symson (who, as Camillus was called a second Romulus, merits
the title of a second Founder (maugre the opposition of an envious Sanballat) a
most Stately room is erected for the benefit of the worthy Preachers of this
Honorable City of London, but wants the Furniture of books. Books are the
Rivers of Paradise watering the earth: The deaw of Vide Sixtum Senens in proem.
Bibliothec.
Hermon making the valleys fertile; The Arc preserving the Manna pot, and
Moses Tables; the Monuments of ancient labors; the Baskets keeping the
d^posited Relics of time so as nothing ^s lost: The Magazine of Piety and
Arts. A Soldier without Arms may be valiant, but not victorious; an Artisan
without his instruments may be skillful, but not famous; Archimedes is known
by his Sphere and Cylinder. A Preacher without books may have some zeal, but
little knowledge to guide it. S. Paul himself although so inspired, found as
much want of his books as of his cloak in winter. To aim at Learning without
books is with the Danaides to draw water in a sieve. Haurit aquam cribris
clericus absque libris.
What were it for this wealthy City to rear up a Library equal to that of
Pisistratus Asidue repetunt quae perdunt Belides vndas, Ovid.
at Athens, of Eumenes at Pergamus; of Ptolomey, at Alexandria? Were the means
of your industrious Preachers answerable to their minds, this good and great
work needed no other supply, for they like Plato would give 3000. Grecian
pence for three small volumes of Pythagoras, and with Hieronime empty their
purses by Nostrum marsupium charia Al^xandrina euacuarunt. Hieronim.
purchasing Alexandrian Papers; and with Thomas Aquinas, rather have
Chrysostom upon St. Matthew, then the huge City of Paris. O that you knew the
sly and cruel Arts of our Adversaries in corrupting books, so as if the
ancient Fathers were now alive, they could not know their own elaborate
works: you would at any rate purchase true and ancient Coppies for your
Preachers, that from them you might receive true and ancient doctrine. Remember
the loss at Heidelbergh, and seek to repair it by following his Noble
example, who in this particular showed what affection he bare to Religion and
Learning.

As a subject he was exemplary, in this age wherein liberty is made an Idol,
and obedience an exile; infinite occasions of State, ineuitably requiring
private supplies, he was never wanting to his duty: His clear judgment
informing him that he must not be a silly Passenger in a storm at sea, who
regards more his own trifling fardles, then the preservation of the ship
wherein he goes. He knew well that just Princes have power to tame the unruly,
and means to guerdon obedient subjects, and he found it. For modestly and
humbly carrying his inferior condition, he heard the Governors voice, Friend
sit up higher, and the Honor conferred upon him in his life accompanyes him
to his hearse: for see a private funeral, but a Priuatum funus, fletus
publicus. Ambro. in funere Saliri.
public mourning; the great Officers of state, and many noble Peers
solemnising his farewell.

As a father of a family God gave him many felicities, a noble wife, equalling
her Parentage by her virtues (for Generosa semina in ortus exurgunt suos. Sen:
Trag:
generous seeds rise according to their planting) hopeful children, the
pillars of his house, a fair Patrimony increased by his industry (for I will
give you no false copy of him.) He was no prodicall Otho knowing how to waste
not how to bestow; but a Cato, of whom Plutarch says, he held this Perdere
scit donare nescit. Tacit.
for a Maxim, 'Twas only for widows and Orphans to suffer any diminution in
their estates. He knew that frugality is the pursebearer to bounty, and
providence a surer sanctuary against want and debt, then the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus, and as sure a way to preserve possessions in ancient names, as the
Leuiticall law against alienations. St Bernard preaching Bernard in obltu
Gerardi
the funeral Sermon for Gerardus the Steward of his Abbey at Clare vallis,
among many commendations gives him this, that he was great even in little
matters, Magnus in minimos
his care and circumspection extending to the smallest atome of affairs: The
deceased Lord was a Gerardus in his family, and it is no mean or petty praise,
it being an argument both of an accurate judgment, and a strict conscience,
unwilling to suffer; much more to offer any wrong: Happy is he that deserves
the title to be fidelis in minimo faithful in a little, he shall be made a
Rules over many Cities. Thus he lived, perhaps not wishing death with Elyas
before it came, but entertaining it as a Messenger from Heaven to call him to
the Supper of the Lamb, whither he is now gone from the valley of tears to
the mount of happiness, from the labors of the servant into his Masters Joy.
Unto that Blessed place where no Satan shall tempt us, no sin defile us, no
sickness annoy us, no death destroy us, God Almighty for his mercyes sake in
Jesus Christ bring us: To whom be ascribed etc.

FJNJS.

