A COPY OF THE DECREE: WHEREIN TWO BOOKS OF ROGER WIDDRINGTON an English
Cathotholick are condemned, and the Author commanded to purge himself: AND A
Copy of the Purgation which the same ROGER WIDDRINGTON sent to his Holiness
Pope Paul the fifth.

Translated out of Latin into English by the Author, whereunto he has also
adioined an Admonition to the Reader concerning the Reply of T. F. etc. and the
condemnation of Fa: Suarez book by a Decree of the Parliament of Paris.

He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, both are
abominable before God. Prou. 17. IHS


Permissu Superiorum. 1614.

To the Reader.
THere came forth some few months since (Christian Reader) out of the supreme
tribunal of the holy Inquisition, a Decree printed at Rome by the Printer of
the Apostolical Chamber, and to be published throughout the whole Christian
world, wherein two Books which I wrote with a simple, and sincere intention,
are condemned, and the Author commanded to purge himself forthwith. I have
obeyed their command, and made forthwith my purgatition, and have done as much
as lies in me, to send it forthwith to his Holiness. But because that Decree
is printed, and published in every place, and the purgation which I have sent
is only in written hand, lest Catholics should perchance imagine, that I have
not been careful to fulfill his Holiness command for purging my self, I
thought it necessary to Print also, and publish that manuscript purgation
which I have sent, which otherwise without doubt would come into few men's
hands, that so the whole world may sincerely judge as well of my purgation, as
of that condemnation of my books, and whether I am to be accounted a Catholic
and a child of the Church, or an Heretic, and an enemy thereof, as some men
very irreligiously, yet under pretext forsooth of religion, are not afraid. ( I
pray God forgive them) to give forth speeches of me.

Thy brother and servant in Jesus Christ, ROGER WIDDRINGTON.

A Copy of the Decree. A DECREE To be published every where, made by the
Sacred Congregation of the most Honorable Cardinals of the holy Roman Church,
specially deputed by our most Holy Lord Pope Paul the fifth, and the holy
Apostolic Sea, for the examination of books, and their permission,
prohibition, purgation, and impression throughout the universal commonwealth.
THe Sacred Congregation of the most Honorable Cardinals of the holy Roman
Church, deputed for the examination of Books, having seen a Book falsely
entitled, An Apology of Cardinal Bellarmine for the right of Princes,
against his own reasons for the Popes authority to depose Secular Princes, in
order to spiritual good, written by Roger Widdrington, an English Catholic,
in the year of our Lord 1611. And another Book of the same Author, entitled,
A Theological Disputation concerning the Oath of Allegiance, dedicated to the
most Holy Father Pope Paul the fifth, printed at Albionopolis, in the year of
our Lord 1613. has judged both the Books worthy to be condemned, and
prohibited, and by the commandment of our most Holy Lord Pope Paul the
fifth, does by this present Decree, utterly condemn, and prohibit them in
what language soever they are printed, or to be printed: and except the Author
of them, who professes himself to be a Catholic, do purge (or clear)
himself forthwith, he is to understand, that he shall be thoroughly punished
with Censures, and other Ecclesiastical punishments. Furthermore, it
commands under the penalties contained in the holy Council of Trent, and in
the Index of forbidden Books, that none, of what degree, or condition soever,
be so bold from henceforth to print the foresaid books, or cause them to be
printed, or keep them with him in any sort, or read them. Also it commands
under the same penalties that whosoever have them now, or shall have them
hereafter, he shall presently upon the knowledge of this present Decree,
exhibit them to the Ordinaries of the places (where he is) or the
Inquisitours. In testimony whereof this present Decree was signed, and sealed
with the hand, and seal of the most Honorable, and most Reverend Lord, the
Lord Cardinal of S. Caecilia Bishop of Alba, the 10. of March 1614.

P. Bishop of Alba, Card. of S. Caecilia. The place for the Seal.
Regist. fol. 50. Fr. Thomas Pallauicinus of the Order of Preachers, Secretary.
Printed in Rome by the Printer of the Apostolical Chamber. 1614.



An Admonition to the Reader, concerning the Reply of T. F. etc.
1 THis Decree of the Sacred Congregation, as it is thus translated into
English, I have (Courteous Reader) taken out of M. T. F. lately published,
whose unsound, and insufficient handling this Controversy, but yet somewhat
cunning, and colorable, and therefore easy to blind the eyes of the simple,
I will, God willing, ere it be long most clearly, but modestly discover. In
the mean time, thou may very plainly perceive the weakness of his
Discourse (to omit his intemperate and uncharitable bitterness) if thou do
but consider the true state of the Controversy, which is betwixt us, and that
all his Replies must be either evident demonstrations, or invincible
authorities, to which no probable answer can be given, otherwise he only
beats about the bush, and will never prove that which he pretended to
convince; and wilt also be pleased but slightly to read over the Appendix to
my Theological Disputation, wherein I fully answered all the arguments, which
Fa: Suarez brings to demonstrate the doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes to be a point of faith; which Doctrine as this Author confesses, is
the maine question between him and me: and therefore for the better
confirmation of his Reply, he nakedly urges all Fa: Suarez arguments (but
concealing his name) which I in that Appendix have already fully satisfied.

2 For first, I plainly declared the reason of that distinction, which I
alleged betwixt the Popes power to command temporals, and to punish temporally
by way of coertion, which distinction seems greatly to trouble this Author,
because he perceives, that it satisfies the chiefest Arguments, which are
usually brought from the authority of many Canons, and from the nature and
effects of Excommunication, to prove, that the Pope has power, not only by
the privileges of Princes, but also by Christ his institution, and by
consequence of his Pastoral office, to dispose of temporals, and to inflict
temporal punishments by way of coercion.

3 Secondly, I showed, that Marsilius of Padua, whom with other enemies of the
Church, Suarez affirms to have first impugned this Doctrine of deposing
temporal Princes by the Popes spiritual authority, was not by Catholic
writers of former times accounted an heretic, for that he did impugn this
Doctrine, neither do those Authors, who relate Marsilius his errors, as
Castro, Prateolus, D. Sanders, and others, note this for one, that the Pope
has not power to depose Princes; which is an evident sign, that before this
our miserable age, that Doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, was not
accounted by Catholics to be a point of faith.

4 Thirdly, that from the time of Gregory the seventh, who was the first
Author, that clearly taught this Doctrine, (but after he had first put it in
practice) and was the first Pope, that, contrary to the custom of his
Ancestors (says Onuphrius) deposed the Roman Emperor (for which cause he had
much ado to clear himself even with his own friends, as appears by the
Letter, which Hermannus Bishop of Mentz, his dear friend, and follower in all
such his proceedings, wrote unto him, desiring to be satisfied herein, and was
by Sigebert, who in those days was greatly esteemed by the wisest for his
singular virtue, and learning, although Cardinal Baronius, and Cardinal
Bellarmine do without sufficient ground call him a Scismatick, at that time
impeached of novelty, not to say, of heresy, for so be Sigeberts words) it
has been continually even to these our days contradicted by Catholic
Authors, as appears by Ioannes Trithemius, Jn Chronico Monasterii Her. saug.
ad annum 1106.
and Iacobus Almainus In lib. a^ dominio naturali etc. inprobatione conclus 2
ae.
there related, but especially by the Kingdom of France, as witnesses Petrus
Pithaeus, In codice libertatum Eccles. Galli canae.
a man greatly commended by Fa: Posseuine the Jesuit, for his singular learning
and knowledge in Antiquities, In Apparatu verbo Petrus Pithaeus.
and it is sufficiently confirmed by the late proceeding at Paris against the
books of Card: Bellarmine, Becanus Schulckenius, and now lastly of Suarez,
whose book was for this Doctrine by a solemn Decree of the Parliament of
Paris, and Printed by the Kings Printer, and with the Kings privilege
condemned, and reprochfully burned the 27. of June past by the hangman, before
the great Stairs of the Palace, and four of the chiefest Jesuits of France
therein named, were enjoined under pain of treason in their Sermons to exhort
the people to the contrary Doctrine: And doubtless this Author, who in all
points follows these former men's steps, if his book had been printed in
Latin, would have quickly perceived by the fruits of his own labors, whether
in France there be any Catholics, who do impugn this Doctrine of deposing
Princes by the Popes authority, or no: And yet this Author would cunningly
persuade the simpler sort of Catholics, thereby to perplexe their consciences,
that I only am the man, who do impugn this temporal authority of the Pope
to depose Princes; whereas he cannot be ignorant, that besides me, many
others of our nation, as both the Barclaies, Mr Blackwell, Mr Warmington, Mr.
Barret, those thirteen Reverend Priests, all by public writings, and many
others of the best learned of our Nation, both Priests, and laymen I could
name, who are of my opinion; and if it were not for the clamors, threatenings,
and violent proceedings of our Adversaries, (I mean not Protestants) they
would publicly profess as much as I have done: and as for the State of
France, what opinion they be of, it is manifest. And therefore that Doctrine of
Vasquez concerning probable opinions may be very well applied to this my
doctrine, howsoever this Author falsely supposing the Doctrine for the Popes
power to depose Princes to be defined, would gladly persuade our English
Catholics to the contrary.

5 Fourthly, I showed in that book, that seeing the Pope is not the Church,
but only a principal member thereof, their is to be made a great distinction
between the facts, and practices of Popes, and between the facts and practice
of the Church: neither is the practice of many Popes, to be accounted the
practice of the Church, unless by the whole Church it be allowed, as that
opinion and practice for the Popes power to depose Princes, and to inflict
temporal punishments by way of coertion never was: and therefore although it
be, and has been, the more common opinion of Catholics for some ages past,
that the Pope has authority to depose, yet that it is certain, and not to be
contradicted, but to be believed as a point of faith, and the contrary not to
be accounted an opinion, but rather an heresy, is altogether false. To the
Council of Lateran, which but of late years has been urged, and that only
by some few, because Suarez did only barely relate it, and not urge the words
thereof, I did remit him to the Preface of my Apologelicall Answer, wherein I
largely discoursed of the Decree of that Council. But because this Author
seems to stand much thereon, as the chief pillar and ground of his pretended
definition, I will at large in my Answer to his Reply treat of that Council,
and satisfy all the cauils (which nevertheless should be clear
demonstrations, if this Author did intend to prove his purpose) which he has
taken out of D. Singletons, or rather Fa: Lessius his Discussion of the Decree
of that Council, and I will show, that it cannot be sufficiently proved,
first, that the Council by those words, temporal Lord, did intend to include
Soueraign Princes; secondly, that although it did by those words understand
Sovereign Princes, yet that it did not suppose, that the Pope had authority
to depose Sovereign Princes; and thirdly, that although it did suppose it, yet
it did not suppose it as a point of faith, and an undoubted doctrine, but at
the most as probable opinion, so that from the authority of this Council it
can not be convinced, that it is a point of faith or an undoubted doctrine,
that the Pope has authority to depose Soueraign Princes.

6 Lastly, thou may perceive (Good Reader) what strange paradoxes this Author
dare adventure to maintain by this, that he blusheth not to affirm, and would
cunningly persuade our State, that my manner of handling this controversy
probably, concerning the Popes authority to depose Princes etc. is dangerous
and pernicious to his Majesty, and therefore, that my books deserve to be
prohibited, no less in England then Rome, and that wise men in the parts where
he is, do greatly marvel, how it can stand with the wisdom of his
Majesty's Council to permit them to be printed and published in England.

7 But if this Author had either sincerely or entirely related my opinion, or
else had put in mind the Reader against what kind of Adversaries I do
oppose, he would presently have perceived, that it is too apparently, and
shamefully untrue, that my manner of handling this question probably is
dangerous and pernicious to his Majesty, as this Author does endeavor to
persuade his Majesty, not for any love that he is known to bear unto the
State, but to the end, by all likelihood, that he and such like violent
spirits, may write more freely, and without being controuled or contradicted
by Catholics, who, as he is persuaded do little regard the writings, and
opinions of Protestants concerning this or any other Doctrine. For it may be
dangerous to his Majesty to handle a question probably against one Adversary,
which will be nothing dangerous to handle it probably against an other. As for
example, if it were agreed upon by all Catholics, that the Pope has no power
to depose his Majesty, then it were dangerous to his Majesty, that any
Catholic should call this in question, and dispute it probably: but if on the
contrary side, all Catholics should agree in this, that it were certain,
unquestionable, and a point of faith, that the Pope has power to depose his
Majesty, and to absolve his Subjects of their allegiance, to command them to
take arms against him, etc. then if a Catholic should call this in question,
or, which is all one, dispute it probably, and maintain that it is not
certain that the Pope has such an authority, but it is questionable, and
probable, that he has it not, no man of any sense, or understanding can
affirm, that such a manner of disputing this question probably against those
Adversaries, who hold it for certain, can be any way dangerous, or pernicious
to his Majesty.

8 Now behold the manner that I have taken in handling this Controversy. Card.
Bellarmin, Gretzer, Lessius, Becanus, Suarez, and other Divines, especially of
the Society of Jesus, whom this Author does in every step, as though he were
their Creature, follow, have laid this for a sure and undoubted ground, that it
is a point of faith, and to be believed as certain, and under pain of
eternal damnation by all Catholics, that the Pope has power to depose
Princes, to absolve Subjects from their Allegiance, and thereupon to command
them to bear Arms, and raise tumults against their Prince so deposed. So that
you see, that they already have laid the danger, and undoubted overthrow to his
Majesty's person and Crown, if the Pope should perchance depose him, in that
they affirm, that all Catholics are bound in conscience to forsake him, and
to fulfill the Popes command, to the destruction of His Majesty's person and
State. This Doctrine, to wit; that it is a point of Faith, and undoubted
principle of Catholic Religion, that the Pope has power to depose Princes,
and to inflict all temporal punishments by way of coercion, and that all
Catholics are bound in conscience to forsake his Majesty, and to bear Arms
against him, in case the Pope should depose him, I have taken upon me, for two
principal reasons, to impugn, and do not doubt clearly to maintain the same
against the clamours of this Author, or any other whatsoever. My first reason
was, for that it is against the truth and purity of the Catholic Church, She
being the pillar and ground of truth, that doubtful opinions, and which among
Catholics are only in Controversy, and by the Parliament of Paris, have
been condemned as scandalous, seditious, damnable, and Pernicious, should be
enforced upon English Catholics, as an undoubted doctrine of the Catholic
Faith, to the utter overthrow of themselves, and their whole posterity, by me^
who are in no danger to loose, but rather to gain temporal advancement
thereby.

9 My second reason was, to assure His Majesty, that all English Catholics
may, according to the grounds of Catholic Religion, be true, and constant
Subjects, and that notwithstanding any sentence of excommunication, or
deprivation denounced, or to be denounced against his Majesty by the Pope,
they may with a safe conscience (mark well what I say) and also in practice
they are bound, to adhere to his Majesty, and obey him in temporals, as still
remaining their true and lawful Sovereign, and to resist any such sentence of
Excommunication, or deprivation. The reason wherefore I affirmed, that
Catholics might with a safe conscience adhere to his Majesty, and resist the
Popes sentence of deprivation, was, for that it is a probable opinion, and
which with a safe conscience, and without danger of Heresy, error, or
temerity, may be embraced by Catholics, that the Pope has no authority to
depose Princes, nor to inflict temporal punishments by way of coercion, but
that the last punishment, to which the Ecclesiastical power is extended, are
only Ecclesiastical and spiritual censures. Wherefore, that which this Author
affirms, that I confess, that it is probable, that the Pope can depose
Princes is untrue, unless he mean that I confess it for disputation sake, or
as we usually say, Dato non concesso, it being given, not granted, for that it
makes nothing for, or against the question which is in hand. Therefore
positiuely I neither affirm it, nor deny it, neither with that part of the
contradiction, Whether it be probable, that the Pope can depose, and whether
it be probable, that the Oath may not be taken, do I intermeddle: but whereas
our Adversaries do with so great violence mayntaine, that it is certain, and
an undoubted doctrine of Faith, that the Pope can depose, and that the Oath
cannot be taken, I at this present do affirm the contrary, That it is
probable, that the Pope cannot depose, and that the Oath may lawfully be taken.
Neither do I, as this Author imposes upon me, take probable in that sense,
as Cicero in his Paradoxes did take it, when he affirmed, That nothing is so
incredible, which by arguing may not be made probable, taking probable, for
that which has some show or color of probability, or do I take probable for
that which I hold for probable, howsoever absurd it be, (as this Author
absurdly affirms, that without doubt I do) but I do take probable in that
sense, as Divines do take a probable opinion and which may be followed with a
safe conscience, as I declared out of Vasquez, and hereafter against this
Author, and his confused description of probable, which serves only to
entangle the consciences of the simple, I will more at large declare, in which
sense no Heresy or erroneous doctrine can be made probable, the contrary
being decided by the Church, as this doctrine for the Popes power to depose
never was, but has ever been impugned by Catholic Writers upon sufficient
grounds, and now lately condemned by the State of France, as pernicious and
damnable doctrine.

10 But the second and principal reason, which I brought for the securing of
his Majesty, and which this Author T. F. fraudulently concealeth, wherefore
English Catholics not only may in speculation, for the reason aforesaid, but
also in practice are bound, to adhere to his Majesty, and to resist the Popes
sentence of deprivation, was, for that, supposing speculatiuely it be
uncertain, whether the Pope has any such power to depose a King, or no, it is
an undoubted rule among Lawyers, and grounded upon the light of nature, and
principles of Divinity, that in causa dubia, sieve incerta, melior est conditio
possidentis. In a doubtful and disputable case the state of him that is in
possession is the better: And again, Cum sunt iura partium obscura fauendum
est reo potius, quam actori, When it is unknown, which of the parties that
are in suite has right, the defendant is to be preferred before the
plaintiff. Seeing therefore that from the very first beginning of this
Controversy, concerning the authority of Popes, and immunity of Kings; that
is, from the time of Gregory the seventh, who was the first Pope that
challenged unto him this temporal power over Kings, this authority of the
Pope to depose Kings (call it temporal or spiritual, as you please) has
been uncertain, disputable, and ever contradicted by Catholics, both Kings
and Subjects, and therefore it cannot be said that the Pope was ever in
possession of this authority, (although we should grant, that power, right, or
authority may be said to be possessed in that sense as possession is taken in
Law, whereof in my Answer to this Authors Reply, I will more at large
discourse) it consequently follows, that what opinion soever any Catholic
follow speculatiuely, concerning the Popes power to depose, yet in practice,
until this Controversy, concerning the Popes authority to depose Kings, and
the immunity of Kings not to be deposed, shall be decided, as yet it is not, he
cannot with a good conscience endeavor to thrust out a King so deposed from the
Kingdom, or Dominions which he lawfully possesses. Wherefore in the end of my
Apology I wrote these express words, of which also in my Epistle Dedicatory
to his Holiness I made mention And therefore if either Pope, Prince, or any
other forainer, should attempt to thrust an heretical Prince out of the
Kingdom which he possesses; this Controversy concerning the deposition of
Princes being undecided, he should contrary to the rules of Justice do himself
most manifest wrong. And much more a Subject cannot be excused from manifest
treason, what opinion so uer he does speculatiuely maintain concerning the
Popes temporal power, who practically under color perchance of devotion to
the Sea Apostolic, not duly also considering the bond of his Allegiance
toward his Sovereign, should endeavor to thrust his lawful Prince out of his
Kingdom which he possesses, notwithstanding any Excommunication, or sentence
of deprivation denounced by the Pope against him. Wherefore it is apparent,
that in practice I taught it to be absolutely false, that the Pope has
authority to depose Princes.

11 Consider now (good Reader) first the insincere dealing of this Author, who
concealeth the cheifest part of my opinion in securing his Majesty of the
constant loyalty and allegiance, wherein all his Catholic Subjects are in
conscience bound unto him, that thereby he may cause his Majesty to be
jealous of my fidelity, and to account me no good Subject, as this Author
falsely affirms, that I am neither a good Subject, nor a good Catholic, or
Child of the Church. But I trust in God, that it will appear to all men, that
Insurrexerunt in me testes iniqui, and mentita est iniquitas sibi, That false
witnesses are risen up against me, and wickedness has belyed her self; ^al.
26.
and that I will ever prove my self to be both a good Subject to his
Majesty, and also a dutiful child of the Catholic Church.

12 Secondly, consider the reason, why this Author is so greatly offended,
that I at this present do only take in hand (by answering probably all the
arguments which on the contrary side are to be objected) to show, that it is at
leastwise probable, that the Pope has no authority to depose Princes; and
consequently, that any man may with a probable and safe conscience take the
Oath; (for that the doctrine concerning the Popes authority to depose, is by
this Authors own confession, the maine question betwixt him and me, and the
chief ground wherefore the Oath is judged to be unlawful.) His reason
therefore is, for that he saw right well, what great advantage I had against
him, and what little advantage he had against me, in arguing or rather
answering in this sort, and therefore he calls it in heat of his zeal, The
most deuolish device that any man could invent. And truly if I should at this
first beginning have treated of this Controversy in any other manner, then by
handling it probably, in that sense as I have declared, I might worthily have
been censured of great imprudency, in giving my Adversary more advantage
against me then was needful. For this is the State of the question, whether
it can be clearly convinced by the authority of the holy Scriptures, Ancient
Fathers, General Councels, or by necessary inferences from any of them, as our
Adversaries pretend to convince, that it is an undoubted doctrine of Faith, and
the contrary not be defended by any Catholic, that the Pope has power to
depose Princes; and consequently that the oath cannot lawfully be taken. This
is the question: Mark now the advantage I have: for first I am not to prove
but only to answer: to defend, not to oppose: Secondly, it is sufficient for
me, that my answers be only probable; but there Replies must not be only
probable, but also conuincing, and which with any probability cannot be
answered. So that if I should go about at the first to prove my opinion to be
most true, which my adversary affirms not to be questionable, I should, as it
is evident, greatly disadvantage my self. For in such Controversies, as are so
violently maintained by the Adversary, that he will not grant the contrary part
to be questionable, it is necessary to proceed by degrees; first to make the
thing questionable and disputable, which the adverse part will not have to be
called in question: and after this is once agreed upon, then to examine whether
opinion be the truest. For perchance it may fall out, that as the opinion for
the immaculate Conception of our B. Lady, before Scotus did oppose himself
therein against S. Thomas and his followers, was scarce accounted probable, yet
afterward it was daily more and more followed, so that now it is esteemed to
be the far more true opinion: and as Alphonsus Salmeron, In cap. 5. ^ Rem.
disp. 51. Sect. D^ inde.
and Fa. Suarez Tom. ^. disp. 3. sec.
do affirm, Agreed upon by the consent almost of the Universal Church, and
of the Ecclesiastical writers, Bishops, Religious Orders, and Universities;
and as that opinion, which holds that the Pope has not power to dispense in
the solemn vow of religious chastity, neither in any lawful marriage before
it be consummate, is accounted by very many learned men to be the far truer
opinion, notwithstanding the practice of many Popes to the contrary: So it may
fall out, that in process of time this opinion that denies the Popes
authority to depose Princes, may be embraced by almost all Ecclesiastical
Writers, Bishops, Religious Orders, and Universities, notwithstanding the
practice of many Popes, and the vehement opposition of the Jesuits at this
present time to the contrary.

13 Thirdly, consider how little beholding are English Catholics to this
Author T. F. who will needs enforce them even with the temporal overthrow of
themselves, and of their whole posterity to defend that doctrine to be of
faith, which the State of France has condemned for scandalous, seditious,
damnable, and pernicious, and also endeavors to persuade his Majesty, that no
Catholic can, according to the grounds of Catholic religion, be a true, and
loyal Subject to his Majesty, but at the Popes pleasure, or which is all one,
so long only as the Pope shall not depose him, which he may do at his
pleasure. But we have great affiance in his Majesty's singular wisdom, and
clement disposition, whereof we have had both by his Majesty's gracious
Proclamation, Published after the discovery of the Gunpowder treason.
public books, and effectual deeds sufficient trial, that he will not be
drawn by the false suggestion of this Author, (who would have all Catholics
to be of the same violent spirit as he is) to have all his Catholic Subjects,
in the same degree of jealousy, but that he will ever make a distinction
betwixt them, who are his true hearted Subjects, and most loyal in all
temporal affairs, and will adventure all, that they have, and are, in defense
of his Majesty's Royal person, and dignity, against any sentence of
deprivation whatsoever, which shall be denounced against him by the Pope, For
so much did those 13. Reverend Priests Mr D. Bishop, Mr Colleto and the rest by
a publik Act bear in date the la^ of January 1602. promise to Queen Elizabeth:
the copy where of thou may see my Appendix, page 346.
(assuring themselves, that it is conformable to the grounds of Catholic
Religion which they profess, and not repugnant to that spiritual obedience
wherein they stand bound to the supreme Pastor of the Catholic Church) and
those other Catholics, who thinking it to be a point of faith, that the Pope
has authority to dethrone Sovereign Princes, will only defend his Majesty,
and yield him temporal obedience, until the Pope, after his sentence of
deprivation shall command them the contrary. And therefore let this Author T.
F. assure himself, that all his clamorous words, and threatening speeches shall
nothing discourage me from defending the truth, neither am I pressed on, to
write against him or any other, to show my wit, as he falsely affirms, or
for hope of any temporal lucre, or preferment, but merely and sincerely for
the love I bear to God, Religion, the Catholic truth, my Prince, and
Country: for which causes I neither am, nor ever will be ashamed to be pressed
on, to write against this T. F. or any other such like Author, who living in
other countries, and out of danger to loose any thing, but rather in hope to
obtain advancement by their writings, will press English Catholics to
defend, with danger of loosing all that they have, and of incurring their
Sovereign his high displeasure, that Doctrine to be of faith, which the State
of France accounts damnable, and enioyneth the Jesuits under pain of
treason to preach the contrary, as thou shall perceive by the Decree, which
follows, which is truly translated out of the French copy, printed at
Paris, which I have conferred with this English.

A DECREE Of the Court of Parliament made the 26. and executed the 27. of June
1614. AGAINST A Book printed at Cologne this present year, entitled,
Francisci Suarez Granatensis Societatis Jesus Doctoris Theologi Defensio fidei
Catholicae, et Apostolicae aduersus Anglicanae sectae errores, containing
diverse maxims, and propositions repugnant to the Sovereign power of Kings,
ordained and established by God, the safety of their persons, and the peace
and tranquillity of their States.
The place where are set the Kings arms.
At Paris. By F. Morel, and Peter Mettayer, the Kings Printers and Stationers
in Ordinary. 1614. With his Majesty's privilege. Extracted out of the
Registers of the Parliament.
THE Court of the great Chamber, Tournelle, and of the Edict assembled, having
viewed the Book printed at Cologne this present year, entitled, Francisci
Suarez Granatensis, e Societate Jesus, Doctoris Theologi, Defensio Fidei
Catholicae et Apostolicae, aduersus Anglicanae sectae errores, containing in
the third book Chapter 23. pages 376. 79. 80. 82. Chapter 29. pages 310, 11.
12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Chapter 6. page 834. Chap. 8. page 844. and
in other places many propositions against the Sovereign power of Kings
ordained and established by God, the peace and tranquillity of their States,
and that it is lawful for their Subjects and strangers to attempt against
their Persons. Conclusions of the Kings Attorney General.

All this being considered,

The said Court has declared, and does declare the Propositions, and Maxims
contained in the said book, to be scandalous, and seditious, tending to the
subversion of States, and to induce the Subjects of Kings, and Sovereign
Princes, and others to attempt against their Sacred Persons, and the speeches
mentioning King Chlowis, and Philip the fair to be false and slanderous, and
has also ordained and does ordain, that the said Book of Suarez be burned in
the Court of the Palace by the Executioner of high Justice. And it has, and
does inhibite, and forbid all sellers of Books, and Printers, to print, fell,
or disperse any of the said books, and also all other persons of whatsoever
calling or condition they be, to have, to write out, to retain, or to teach
in Schools, or elsewhere, or to Dispute the said Maxims, or propositions. It
also ordains according to the Decree of the 8 of June 1610. that the Decree
of the Faculty of Divinity made upon the 4. of June the same year,
concerning the renewing of the Doctrinall Censure of the said Faculty bearing
date the year 1408. confirmed by the Council of Constance, together with this
present Decree, as also those of the year 1578 and 95. shall yearly be read
the fourth day of June, as well in the said Faculty, as in the College of
the Priests, and Scholars of the College of Clermont, and of the four Orders
of begging Friars: And that at the request of the Kings Attorney General
informations shall be taken of the contrauentions against the said Decrees,
and Prohibitions made against writing, having, or keeping the like books.
Given in Parliament the 26. day of June 1614.

Signed. Voisin.

Furthermore it is Decreed, that the Fathers, Ignace Armand, Rector in this
City, Cotton, Frorton, and Sirmund, shall be summoned the first day to the
Court, and to them shall be showed, that contrary to their declaration, and
Decree of their General of the year 1610. the Book of Suarez has been
printed, and brought into this City, impugning the authority of the King, and
against the safety of his Person, and State: and they shall be enioined to
cause their General to renew the said Decree, and to publish it, and to bring
in an Act thereof within these six months: and to provide, that no Books
containing such damnable, and pernicious propositions be made, or published by
any of their company: and also they shall be enjoined in their Sermons to
exhort the people to the Doctrine contrary to the said propositions. Otherwise
the Court will proceed against the transgressors as men guilty of Treason,
and disturbers of the public quietness.

This above said Decree, and the Decreed were pronounced in the presence of the
Fathers, Ignace Armand, Charles de la Toure in the absence of Peter Cotton,
Fronton da Duc, and James Sirmund. And the Decree was put in execution before
the great Stayres of the Palace the 27. of June. 1614.

A Copy of a Letter, which is said to be written by the most Reverend, and
right Honorable Lord, the Popes Nuncio at Brussels, to Mr George Birket
Arch-presbyter then living.
Very Reverend Sir, and as a brother most beloved in Christ.
THere came into the City of Rome a Theological Disputation concerning the
Oath of Allegiance, the third work published under the name of Widdrington.
After it was there diligently examined, our most Holy Lord declared, that he
in no wise accepted of the Dedication of that book, and that he thought the
Author of it was neither a child of the church, nor a Catholic; and further,
that all Catholics should abstain from the reading thereof. Of these things I
was certified some few days since by letters of the congregation of the
universal Roman Inquisition by the commandment of his Holiness, to the end
that I should write thereof especially to your Reverence, that you may signify
the same to the Catholics there, and according to your wisdom make it known
unto them. God defend your Reverence with his heavenly custody. From Bruxells
the 26. Nouemb. 1613.

Of your Reverence most loving and respective
To the Letters, which are spread abroad among us no name is subscribed.



A COPY OF ROGER WIDDRINGTONS Purgation. To the most Holy and most Blessed
Father Pope PAVL the fifth, ROGER WIDDRINGTON an English Catholic wishes
everlasting happiness.
1 THere came unto my hands some few days since (most blessed Father) a
certain Decree of the Sacred Congregation of the right Honorable Cardinals of
the Holy Roman Church, who are deputed for the examining of books, dated the
16. day of March of this present year 1614, and printed in Rome by the printer
of the Apostolical Chamber, wherein two books written by me in sincerity,
and simplicity of heart, are by name, but yet only in general words without
naming any crime either in particular or in general, at which many do
marvel, altogether condemned and forbidden by the commandment of your
Holiness. And the Author of them unless he shall forthwith purge himself, is
threatened to be punished with Censures, and other Ecclesiastical punishments,

2 But what manner of purging your Holiness does expect at my hands, who am
the Author of those Books, and of what crime I ought to purge my self
(seeing that in this Decree there is no crime either in particular, or in
general objected against me of which I should purge my self, neither is my
conscience privy to any crime for the making, or publishing of those books) I
can not verily in any wise perceive. I know that certain Doctors
misinterpreting my words, have in their public writings falsely, and very
injuriously, not to speak a more heinous word (I pray God to forgive them)
impeached me of certain crimes (by whose instigation I know not whether your
Holiness has been moved to condemn those books) but considering that both
they are my Adversaries in this controversy, and that they are moved, as I
think, rather by affection, then by solid reason, and also that they do
foulely corrupt my words, and wrest them to a most bad sense, and never
intended by me (as I could most clearly demonstrate to your Holiness, if it
were now a convenient time) I do not think, that so great authority is to
be given, either to their sayings or writings, of what learning, or dignity
so ever otherwise they be, that they are of force to bind me, either to
embrace their opinions, especially being grounded upon so weak foundations, or
not to defend my innocence from their false accusations in such an exceeding
great crime, as heresy is.

3 And that your Holiness may clearly perceive, that I have already in these
books, which are forbidden by your commandment, purged my self as much, as
is sufficient for a child of the Catholic Church, I think it necessary to
repeat again with as much brevity as may be in what manner I have in those
books made profession of the Catholic faith (which in my opinion abundantly
suffices for the purging of my self from all imputation of heresy, error,
or any other crime, which does depend on these) and for what thing I made
Supplication to your Holiness in that Disputation of the oath of Allegiance,
that thereby your Holiness may manifestly perceive, that some persons, not of
the meanest degree, although perchance with the ignorant sort of people they
do greatly impair my credit, yet they do also bring your Holiness into no
small obloquy both among prudent Catholics, and especially among those, who
are Adversaries to the Catholic faith, whiles they are not afraid to diuulge,
not so circumspectly in my judgment as is fitting, that your Holiness did in
good earnest avouch, that you thought the Author of that Disputation to be
neither a Catholic, nor a child of the Church (whereas the Author does
profess himself both to be a Catholic, and a child of the Catholic Roman
Church, and submits most humbly that Disputation and all his other writings
to the judgment of the Holy Catholic Roman Church) neither that you would
accept of the Dedication of that book, whereas that Dedication, as it is
manifest by the Epistle of the Author written to your Holiness, was only a
most humble Supplication of the Author, and of other Catholics unto your
Holiness, that your Holiness, as being the supreme Pastor of the Catholic
Church, and whose office is to instruct, and confirm the sheep of Christ in
the Catholic faith, would be pleased to instruct them in the Catholic faith,
and in those things, which your Holiness had declared by your Breues to be
clearly repugnant to faith, and salvation. And that your Holiness did speak
the aforesaid words, both of the Author, and also of the Dedication, some here
give forth, that your Holiness his Nuncius then residing at Brussels did
signify as much to Mr George Birk^t the Archpriest, who was then living, and
that the same Nuncius did withal affirm, that he was certified some few days
since of those things (for so be the express words of the Nuncius his
Letters, These Letters were dated at Brussels 26 Nouemb. 1613.
which are spread abroad among us) by Letters of the Congregation of the holy
Roman universal Inquisition by the commandment of your Holiness, to the
end, that he should write thereof especially to his Reverence, that he
according to his wisdom should signify as much, and make it known here to
Catholics.

4 First therefore I the Author of those Books did protest, That I composed
them being moved thereunto for the zeal of God, of Religion, and of my
Country, and for other more particular reasons, which I related in the
beginning of those Books, without any respect of worldly favor, or fear,
neither with any obstinate mind, but only to find out the Catholic truth in
this most weighty Controversy, which belongs to the yielding of obedience
due by the Law of Christ to God, and Caesar, to your Holiness, who is the
supreme Pastor in Earth of our souls, and to our King, his most excellent
Majesty, who in temporals is only inferior to GOD, and I did submit most
humbly In Apolog. Lect^^ in fine.
whatsoever was contained in them to the judgment and censure of the Catholic
Roman Church, whose Child I professed my self to be, and if perchance any
thing through ignorance had escaped me, which should not be approved by her,
I did disprooue it, damn it, and would have it for not written In Disp. in ^e.
.

5 Besides, I did profess, In Dispu^. Cap. 6. ^. 3. Number. ^. and seq.
that with all due honor and respect I did reverence all the Canons of the
Catholic Church, although I did freely confess, that betwixt the Catholic
Church and the Pope, who is only the first and principal member thereof,
betwixt some Chapters or Decrees of the Cannon Law, and betwixt others, a great
distinction was to be made, and nevertheless I sincerely affirmed, that to
every one, in his degree and place, I gave dutiful, but not equal credit. For
in the vast Corpse of the Canon Law, and in the Volumes of the Councels are
contained, either sayings, or assertions of the Ancient Fathers, or Decrees, or
sentences of Popes and Councels: and these are either doctrinall, and which are
propounded as things to be believed by the faithful, or else moral, and which
in the external discipline of the Church, are commanded to be observed.

6 And first, I did acknowledge, that the doctrine which the Ancient Fathers
either in expounding the Holy Scriptures, or in Questions belonging to Faith,
have with uniform consent delivered: I did also undoubtedly believe, as being
certainly persuaded, that it was inspired by the Holy Ghost.

7 Secondly, I also with Melchior Canus, and other Divines affirmed, that the
doctrine also of all the holy Fathers in things, which do not appertain to
Faith, may piously and probably be believed by Catholics, yet that it ought
not of necessity to be followed as certain, and infallible.

8 Thirdly, I did profess, that the definitions of General Councels, lawfully
assembled, and confirmed by the Pope, wherein any doctrine is propounded to the
whole Church, to be believed of al men as of Faith, are to be received by
Catholics as infallible rules of Faith. Nevertheless, I did freely affirm
with the aforesaid Melchior Canus, and Card. Bellarmine, that those opini ns,
which in the said Councels are defined, or else supposed only as probable, and
those assertions which either incidently, and by the way are inserted, or for
better declaration, or proof of their decisions be produced, are sometimes
subject to error, and may be Catholics without any wrong to the Catholic
Faith be rejected. This withal observing, of which also in other places I
have admonished the Reader that although I, professing my self to be a child
of the Catholic Roman Church, do most willingly embrace whatsoever General
Council confirmed by the Pope, which do represent the Catholic Church, do
propound to the faithful as necessarily to be believed of faith, and which
certainly, and evidently is known to be the true sense and meaning of the
Councels: nevertheless, I do not undoubtedly believe every doctrine which
either Card. Bellarmine (speaking with due reverence) or any other Doctor,
seeing they are not appointed by God to be an undoubted rule of the Catholic
Faith, do cry out to be Catholic doctrine, to be the voice of the Catholic
Church, to be the meaning of the Scriptures and Councels, if especially some
Catholic Doctors do hold the contrary. Then truly, as it is meet, I do
reverence with all dutiful respect, and I do much attribute to their
authority, but that all those collections, which they in their judgments do
imagine to be evidently concluded out of holy Scriptures or Councels
(considering that oftentimes they are deceived, and do deceive, and what they
have written when they were younger, they may recall when they grow elder For
Car^ Bell. himself in his old age ha^ recalled many things which he wrote
wh^^ he was younger, and p^^ chance h^ now being elder, will recall mo^^
) are to be accounted for undoubted assertions of faith, and the contrary
opinion of other Catholics to be rather esteemed an heresy then an opinion,
this truly I cannot take in good part.

9 Fourthly, concerning the Canons, or Decrees of General Councels belonging
to manners, and to the external government of the Church, I promised to be
most ready to receive willingly all those Decrees, which in places where I
shall live, shall be generally received; for these are properly called the
Decrees, or Canons of the Catholic or Universal Church which are by common
consent admitted by the Universal Church. Neither doubtless is any man bound
to admit those Laws and precepts, which in the Country where he lives, are
not observed by the people, as according to the received opinion of Deuines,
and Lawyers; I there affirmed. And the same I there avouched, was to be
understood proportionally of the decrees of Popes, and Provincial Councels.
For as concerning the Popes definitions belonging to faith, if he define
without a General Council, I confess, that I have oftentimes auerred, that
very many, especially Ancient Divines of the University of Paris, whose names I
there related, Cap. 10. sec. ^. number. 27.
are of opinion, that such Definitions, unless they be received by the
Catholic Church, a^ definitions of the Catholic Faith, are subject to error,
whose opinion, both for the authority of so famous men, and also for the
reasons, and grounds, whereon that opinion is founded, I with later Deuines (to
whose opinion also Card. Bellarmine himself does plainly enough incline Lib.
2. de ^oncil. cap. ^.
, howsoever he would seem to auerre the contrary Lib. 4. de ^om. Pont. ^p. 2
and lib. de council. ^p. 17.
) have also oftentimes affirmed, is not to be condemned of heresy, error, or
temerity, which also now again (speaking with all dutiful submission) I fear
not to confirm.

10 Lastly, concerning my Disputation of the Oath, and the Dedication thereof,
which seems to be that stone of offense, and rock of scandal to some
Deuines, especially of the Society of Jesus, and to those Catholics who adhere
to them, I cannot, to speak unfeignedly, in any wise, understand what can
justly be objected against it, or what fault I have committed, either in
making it, or else in dedicating it to your Holiness, of which I should purge
my self. For first of all, I the Author of that Disputation and Dedication,
have therein professed; That I did not write it with any obstinate mind, but
in manner of an humble petition, sincerely, and for many reasons which I there
rehearsed, to inform your Holiness more fully, who as here we think, has
not been rightly informed of the reasons, for which English Catholics are
of opinion, that the Oath may lawfully be taken; and for this cause I did
dedicate it to your Holiness, that after you had carefully examined all the
reasons, for which English Catholics do think the Oath may lawfully be taken,
your Holiness might provide both for their spiritual and temporal safety, as
according to your fatherly wisdom, and charity should be thought most
convenient. And therefore, as in the end of that Disputation I affirmed, I did
faithfully set down all the cheifest arguments, which are usually alleged as
well against the taking of the oath, as in favor thereof, neither did I intend
to affirm any thing of my own opinion, but only as representing the persons
of them, who of set purpose do publicly maintain, that the Oath either may,
or may not lawfully be taken, leaving it to the fatherly care of your Holiness,
that when you have been fully informed of the whole progress of the matter,
and have diligently examined all the reasons, for which English Catholics,
obeying the Kings command, have taken the Oath, you will be pleased
particularly to approve them, or to condemn them, that Catholics in this so
most weighty a matter, which does so nearly concern the prerogative of your
spiritual Authority, and of his Majesty's Royalty, being fearful to resist
your Holiness precept declared in your Breues, and also being desirous to
obey, as much as with a safe conscience they may, his Majesty's command, may
clearly perceive, which particular clauses of the Oath they are bound to
admit, and which they are bound to reject, and may in plain and express
terms without any ambiguitie of words be instructed by your Holiness, in
what manner they may satisfy their own conscience, your Holiness will, and
also his Majesty's desire concerning all the particular parts of the Oath. For
as they are very ready to hazard their whole temporal estate, and also to
loose their lives for the Catholic faith, which by the Church (to whom this
office belongs to define matters of Faith, and not to private Doctors, who
may deceive, and be deceived) is declared to be truly the Catholic faith, so
doubtless they are unwilling to expose themselves, and their whole Family and
Posterity, which this our age does so much labor to advance, to eminent danger
of their temporal utter ruin, only for opinions, although they be maintained
by the greater, and better part of Deuines, so that others, although far
fewer in number, do defend the contrary. But as they are desirous with all
their hearts to obey your Holiness in spiritual matters, and in those things,
which cannot be omitted without sin: so also they might justly think
themselves to be more hardly used, then children are wont by their Parents, if,
especially in these times, wherein by reason of the Catholic Faith, which they
profess, they have grievously incurred his Majesty's high displeasure, who is
of a contrary Religion, they should without sufficient reason be forbidden to
give that temporal Allegiance to his Majesty, which they think by the Law of
Christ to be due unto him, having always before their eyes that command of
Christ our Savior, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God
the things that are Gods.

11 And that your Holiness may yet more clearly perceive, that this my
Disputation of the Oath (which is rather to be called a most humble
Supplication to your Holiness) was written in manner of an humble Petition, I
think it not amiss to repeat also word by word these very last words of my
Epistle to your Holiness.

12 This therefore (most Holy Father) is our most humble Supplication to your
Holiness, First, that your Holiness will be pleased to examine diligently
the reasons, for which our English Catholics do think the Oath may lawfully
be taken, and whereof they are persuaded your Holiness is not yet rightly
informed: Secondly that after you have thoroughly examined them, you will
vouchsafe in regard of your Pastoral carfulness to instruct them, which
parts of the Oath are, (I do not say only according to a probable opinion of
some Doctors, but according to Catholic Doctrine, necessarily to be believed
by all Christians) repugnant to faith and salvation, and therefore can not be
taken by any Catholic with a safe, and probable conscience: Thirdly, that if
your Holiness shall find, that you have not been rightly informed of those
reasons, for which our English Catholics do think, that the Oath may lawfully
be taken, and that therefore they have not in a matter of so great weight
proceeded rashly, and unadvisedly, you will be pleased to receive them, and
their Priests into your ancient favor, and that if they, or any of them have,
not through their own fault but through the indiscreete zeal of others suffered
any loss, or detriment in their good names, or other ways, it may be restored
again to them in that best manner, as shall seem convenient to the charity,
justice, and wisdom of your Holiness.

13. Now what there is contained in this our humble Petition, against which
your Holiness has just cause to take so high displeasure, that you will not
accept thereof, I remit to the judgment of indiferent men, but especially of
your Holiness. For by that, which we have said, it does manifestly appear,
that this disputation of the Oath was for that end composed by me, to inform
your Holiness (who is the Supreme Pastor of the Catholic Church, and to whom
Christ our Lord has given charge to feed his sheep, not only with precepts
and Censures, but also with the word of Doctrine, and to instruct them in the
Catholic faith) truly of our state, and to propound unto your Holiness
sincerely and with all duetifull submission those doubts, and difficulties,
which both to my self, and other Catholics do occur about this new Oath,
which is commanded by his Majesty, forbidden by your Holiness, and daily
taken by almost all Catholics of the better sort, to whom it is tendered, yea
even by those, who have the Jesuits for their directours, howsoever these
Fathers do in outward show seem to condemn the same; that after your
Holiness had duly examined the reasons, and arguments, which are usually
alleged on both sides, against, and for the taking of the Oath, you would be
pleased to satisfy our consciences, and to make known unto us, what parts of
the Oath may according to the principles of the Catholic faith be lawfully,
and what parts may not lawfully be taken, and lastly to declare unto us, which
be those many things, which your Holiness, being not rightly informed by
some, as we imagine, has affirmed in your Breeues to be clearly repugnant
to faith and salvation, for no man, be he never so great an enemy to the Oath,
dare avouch, that all things contained in the Oath are repugnant to faith and
salvation.

14. Now I beseech your Holiness to judge, first, whether I the author of
those books, who have professed my self to be a Catholic, and a child of
the Catholic Roman Church, and have subjected all my writtings to her
judgment, and Censure, with that submission, that whatsoever should not be
approved by her I would disprooue, condemn, and have it for not written,
ought be adjudged by the Supreme Pastor, and Father of the Catholic Church
to be no Catholic, nor a child of the Catholic Church. If I be no
Catholic, doubtless I must be an heretic, and defend obstinately (seeing
that heresy cannot be without obstinacy) some Doctrine contrary to the
Catholic faith. But I (to say nothing at this time of the Doctrine, which I
mainetained in those books, which if it were clearly heretical, why did not
that sacred Congregation condemn those books as heretical?) protested to
write nothing obstinately, but with an humble and submissiue mind, and ready to
recall my error, as soon as I should perceive that I had erred in any thing.
I confess indeed that I may err, but by God his assistance I will never be an
heretik. And if perchance in any thing I have erred, it is no error of malice,
or obstinacy, but of ignorance and infirmity: For I will never by God his
protection, wittingly and willingly defend any thing at all, which I shall know
to be contrary to sound Doctrine, or to the Catholic faith.

15. Secondly, concerning that, which some men, to no small scandal to
Catholic Religion, and to the great disgrace of the Sea Apostolic, especially
among those who be Adversaries to the Catholic Religion, do give out, that
your Holiness should say, that you would not accept the Dedication of my
disputation concerning the Oath, or rather the most humble Supplication of me,
and of other Catholics, as I have showed before, this only at this present I
will say, that we English Catholics are doubtless most miserable, who daily
enduring so many discommodities of this life for the Catholic faith, which we
profess, and having provoked his Majesty, a Prince otherwise most merciful,
who professes the contrary Religion, to take displeasure against us, which of
all the rest we account most grievous, and having therefore for a long time
been, and are daily made a pitiful spectacle to this whole Kingdom; now by
humble petition craving to be instructed by your Holiness in those things,
which you by your Apostolical Breues have to our most great temporal prejudice
declared to be clearly repugnant to the Catholic faith, do not only not
deserve so much at your hands, as to be heard herein, but your Holiness also
does forbid and condemn our petition, and does threaten the Author to be
punished with Censures, and other Ecclesiastical punishments, unless he purge
himself very speedily, and yet after an unusual manner impeacheth him of no
crime, whereof he should purge himself.

16. For behold (most blessed Father) how miserable, and to be pitied is our
case. Our Kings most excellent Majesty, to whom by the law of Christ we owe
temporal obedience, does demand of us, under pain of incurring most grievous
penalties, an Oath which he affirms to be only a temporal Oath, and of
Alleagiance: your Holiness, to whom by the law also of Christ we are bound to
obey in spirituals has by your Breues altogether condemned the same, as
containing in it many things flat contrary to faith and salvation, and has
withal declared, that all those Priests, who either do take the said Oath, or
do teach, or shall teach that it may lawfully be taken, shall be deprived of
their faculties: We English Catholics being between these two narrow
streights, and fearing least that by avoiding the gulf of Charybdis, we should
fall upon the rock of Scylla, that is least that we should not render to God
or Caesar, that which is their due, do most instantly request your Holiness,
who is our Supreme Pastor in spiritualls, and whose proper office is to
instruct and confirm the sheep of Christ in the Christian faith, that you will
be pleased to show unto us those many things, or at leastwise one among those
many, which in this Oath are so repugnant to faith and salvation, to the end
that we may both satisfy our own consciences, and also fulfill your
Holiness and his Majesty's command, as much as in us lies, and Catholic
Religion will permit: And nevertheless your Holiness does not only not
admit our petition, wherein with all dutiful submission we do propound the
reasons and arguments, which are usually objected, against, and for the taking
of the Oath, to be examined by your Holiness, and affirming nothing of our
own opinion; but you do also by the evil information of others, as we
think, wholely condemn the same, without alleging any crime either in
particular, or in general against it, and do declare, that the Author
thereof, or your humble petitioner, except he purge himself forthwith, shall
be grievously punished, and nevertheless you make no mention of any crime at
all, whereof he should purge himself.

17 Is it perchance a crime for those that are in ignorance, error, and doubt,
to have recourse to the Supreme Pastor, and Doctor of the Church to be
instructed by him in faith, and to propound with due submission the doubts, and
difficulties, which trouble both their own, and other men's consciences, to be
answered and satisfied by him, and that not in things of small moment, but in
such as, under pain of incurring great penalties, do belong to they eelding of
due obedience to God and Caesar? Is it a crime for children that are hungry, to
crave bread of their Father, for sheep that want Pasture, to require food of
their Shepherd, for Disciples that are ignorant, to beseech humbly instruction
of their Master and Teacher? We English Catholics do acknowledge your
Holiness to be our spiritual Father, Pastor, and Master, and do most
humbly request to be instructed by your Holiness in the Catholic faith, and
in those many things, which your Holiness by your Breues has declared to be
clearly repugnant to faith and salvation: and your Holiness does damn and
forbid our petition, and does ordain, after a manner altogether unusual, that
I the Author thereof, who in the name of the rest have written, and composed
the same, except I purge my self very speedily, shall be punished most
severely: For, as I think in no tribunal on the earth, this custom is to be
found, that any man is compelled by sentence of the judge to purge himself
under pain of incurring most grievous punishments, unless the Judge do make
known unto him the crime, for which if he do not purge himself, he is to
be condemned: Besides that it is impossible for one to purge himself of that
crime, whereof he is ignorant.

18 And to speak freely the truth (for now I, being summoned before the
highest tribunal on earth to purge my self, am by the law it self permitted
to speak somewhat more freely, so that I speak truly and modestly) this new
kind of condemning the books of Catholic Authors, and of commanding the
Author to purge himself, being made by such a public Decree, and under pain
of incurring the penalties contained in the Council of Trent, and in the Index
of forbidden books, without naming any crime either in particular, or in
general, for which they are condemned, and of which the Author should purge
himself (considering that the same punishment is not appointed in the Index
for reading, without distinction, all sorts of forbidden books, neither do
all crimes require the same purgation) does make both the Sea Apostolic odious
to the Adversaries of Catholic Religion, who will easily from hence take
occasion to persuade themselves, that the Bishops of Rome are wont to reject at
their pleasure, and to suppress violently by threatenings, and not by arguments
those opinions which they do not like, and to promote by favors, not by
reasons, those opinions, which are pleasing unto them; and also does little
satisfy prudent Catholics, who can hardly persuade themselves, that the
sacred Congregation of the right Honorable Cardinals, who are deputed for the
examination of books, (to whose informations your Holiness giving credit, as
we undoubtedly do imagine, has condemned those books, and ordained that the
Author shall be severely punished, unless he forthwith purge himself) if they
could have found in them any proposition, which is certainly known to be
heretical, erroneous, or repugnant to sound doctrine, they would have passed
it over with so great silence, and (contrary to to the usual manner of the Sea Apostolic in condemning the books of Catholic Authors, but of such
especially, who are commanded to purge themselves, as by innumerable examples,
which are extant in the tomes of the Councels, and in the Bulls of Popes I could
demonstrate) command the Author to purge himself only in general words,
without showing him any crime either in particular, or in general, of which
he should purge himself.

19 I therefore the Author of those books, whom the Sacred Congregation by
the commandment of your Holiness has enjoined to purge my self, but as yet
I know not of what crime, a most dutiful child of the Catholic Roman Church,
and of your Holiness in spirituals, and withal a most faithful Subject of
the Kingdom of England, and of our Sovereign Lord King JAMES in temporals,
being summoned before your Holiness his supreme tribunal to purge my self,
prostrate at your Holiness feet, do humbly request you by the dreadful
Majesty of God, the Supreme Judge of all: First, that your Holiness will
judge that which is right, and do me justice, and not give credit only to
the informations of them, who are my Adversaries in this controversy, and have
foulely corrupted my words, contrary to my meaning, but that you will examine
my cause by your own certain knowledge, and that you will make known unto
me all those things, or at the least wise some of them, which in those books
condemned by your Holiness commandment are clearly known to be repugnant to
faith, or good manners. For I protest, that I am most ready to correct those
things, which are to be corrected, to purge what is to be purged, to make more
plain what is to be explained, and to recall what is to be recalled.

20 Secondly, that if your Holiness, after due examination of my writings
shall find, that you have been misinformed by some persons, and that nothing
is to be found in those books, which is repugnant to Catholic Doctrine, as
some perchance have suggested to your Holiness, you will be pleased to recall
that sentence of the Sacred Congregation published against me and my books,
through evil information, or vehement importunity of some men, or through
misunderstanding the true meaning of my words, and that you will have a care of
my good name, in that good sort, as shall seem fitting to your wisdom,
charity, and justice, and that you will account me to be a Catholic and a
Child of the Catholic Roman Church. For that which I did write in another
place, (...) Disput. (...) Admonit. (...) 8.
I do here repeat again. I am a Catholic and a child of the Catholic
Roman Church, and if any man, of what degree so ever he be, shall wrongfully
accuse me of heresy, let him know assuredly, that by the assistance of
Almighty God, I will by all those means, which God and nature has granted to
innocent men to defend themselves, to the uttermost of my power defend my self
from their false accusations, until the Church, being fully informed of my
opinion, shall in plain, and particular words (for no man can recall errors,
until he know particularly what they be) condemn the same.

21 Thirdly, that your Holiness, will command, that this my purgation, and
most humble petition may for future memory be registered among the Acts of the
holy Office of the Inquisition, as the condemnation of my books is recorded,
as appears by the Decree it self, that those, who hereafter shall succeed
in that Office, may give their sentence and judgment as well of this my
purgation, as of that condemnation of my books, and whether I am to be
accounted a Catholic, and a child of the Church, or an heretic.

22 But if your Holiness will not be pleased to admit this my Purgation, and
most humble Supplication, and to recall the sentence denounced upon evil
information against my Books, and to have a care of my good name, which has
wrongfully been taken away, although I know right well, that the same
merciful and great God, who in times past preserved the credit of Robert
Grosseteste Bishop of Lincoln, with whom Pope Innocent the fourth being
wonderfully offended, Matthew Paris ad annum 1253.. diebus sub eisdem and ad
annum 1254.. Hoc etiam anno Dominus Papa.
determined to cast his dead bones out of the Church, and to bring him into so
great obloquie, that he should be proclaimed throughout the whole world for an
Heathen, Rebel, and disobedient, for that he had written to the said Pope
Innocent in the spirit of humility and love, that he would correct his
frequent or accustomed Crebros ^os errores ^orrigeret.
errors, although I know, I say, that the same God, who is not an accepter of
persons, is able also to deliver me from the unjust attempts, and false
informations of any whatsoever, and to make known my innocence to your
Holiness, and to the whole Christian World: nevertheless prayers, tears, and
patience, joined with the testimony of a good conscience, shall be my cheifest
refuge, and this shall be my daily comfort, that it is no whit less, but
rather more happy and grateful to God, to suffer persecution for Justice sake
at the hands of Kinsmen, and of the same Household, who in friendship and
society ought to be more streightlie linked, then of Strangers.

23 Finally, if in this my purgation, which the Sacred Congregation by
commandment of your Holiness has enjoined me, I have offended any man, as I
hope I have not, by speaking any thing not with that circumspection as is
fitting, (for wittingly and willingly I would give no man any just cause of
offense) I do most humbly crave pardon both of your Holiness, for whose
temporal and perpetual felicity, I will continually pray unto our most
merciful God, and also of the whole Christian world. From my Study in the
Feast of S. John Baptist. 1614.

A most humble Child, and Servant of your Holiness, and of the Holy See
Apostolic,
The Author of the Books as aforesaid, etc.



Errata.
Page 23. line 24. put out self. Page 45. line 7. them. Page 54. l. 2.
writings. page 59. l. 1. yielding. page 59. l. 18. manner.


