THE STRIPPING OF JOSEPH, OR The cruelty of BRETHREN to a BROTHER.

Jn a Sermon before his MAJESTY at White Hall, by ROBERT WILKINSON, Doctor in
Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his MAJESTY, and late Pastor of Saint
OLAVES in Southwarke.

With a Consolatorie Epistle, to the English-East-India Company, for their
insufferable wrongs sustained in AMBOYNA, by the DVTCH there.

Published and presented unto them, by Tho. Myriell Pastor of Saint STEPHENS in
WALBROOKE.

LONDON Printed by W. S. for Hen. Holland and Geo. Gibbs, and are to be sold at
the golden Flower de luce in Pope's Head Alley. 1625.

DEVS ^ INDICA


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Mr. Maurice Abbot, Governor of the EAST INDIA
Company; and to all the rest of the Right Worshipful ASSISTANTS and
ADVENTVRERS in that Honorable and Worthy SOCIETY.
Right Worshipful,
SVch and so great has been and is the exorbitancie of Man's lusts and
affections, since the woeful fall of our seduced Parents, that like
ouer-growing and ouer-crowing Affectus quasi vbertas animorum est naturalis.
Nam sicut in sentes ager qui est natura foecundus exuberat, sic animus
incultus, etc. Lactant. diui. Inst. lib. 6. cap. 1.
weeds, they have miserably pestered the soil of Man's soul. And as to other
lewd enormities and heinous irregularities they drive wretched man: so
especially to Discord, and Contention, even till it break out into fell murder
and bloodshed. This Saint James plainly tells us. Iam. 4.1.
From whence are wars, and contentions among you? Are they not from your
lusts that fight in your members? There are three of these lusts, which
principally serve this way; which Tres sunt affectus qui homines in omnia
facinora praecipites agunt, etc. propterea poetae tres furias esse dixerunt,
Lact. Jnst. lib. 6. c. 19.
Lactantius says, gave occasion to the Poets to feign three Furies, that is,
Pride, Covetousness, and Lust; all pestilent weeds in the garden of Man's
heart, and miserably choking the tender plants of Peace, and Love. Pride is
like the Bramble: Judge. 9.15.
For as that would needs tyrannise over all the Trees; So Superbia, will
superbire, that is, super alios ire, be above all: and as the Bramble is good
for nothing but to scratch, so Pride willing to do nothing but contend, for,
Pro. 13.10.
Only by pride man makes contention, as Solomon says. Covetousness or
inordinate love of riches is as Thorns (that is a fighting and pricking plant
too) which hinders the Seed of the Matt. 13.22.
Word, that it cannot grow up to the procuring of peaee and charity: and
therefore we are commanded to cut them up, by the Prophet, Jer. 4.4.
Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns. Lust is like a
Nettle (another wrangling weed) which is called vrtica quia vrit tactu, it
burns in touching: So Concupiscence first fires the body with the flame of
lewd desires, and afterward the world with combustions of discord. Which being
so noisome, must by Christians be rooted up, according to the prophecy, Isa.
55.13.
For Thistles shall grow Firre-trees, and for Nettles the Myrtle tree. Not that
we can wholly destroy these desires, Nos affectus and perturbationes, quam diu
in tabernaculo corporis huius habitamus, and fragili carne circundamur,
moderari and regere possumus, amputare non possumus. Hieron. ad Demetrian. Apud
nos ciues sanctae ciuitatis secundum Deum viuentes metuunt cupiuntque dolent,
gaudentque, August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 9.
that is neither possible to Man, nor required of God, but that we should
curb, and restrain them, and turn their violence another way, be ambitious
of heaven, covetous of spiritual graces, and lust after Gods presence in grace
and glory.

But alas, in stead of tilling the ground of our hearts, we let it lie like the
sluggards field, Pro. 24.30.
all ouer-growne with Briars and Thorns of contentious lusts, even to such an
harvest, that it may seem, some men endeavor by cruelty and covetousness,
not only to kill humanity and kindness in their hearts, but even to
depopulate, and root out mankind it self from the earth. This is evident and
plain by all stories from the beginning of the world. I will let pass Cain,
Nimrod, Nebuchadnezzar, Pharaoh, Antiochus, Herod, Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian,
Decius, Maximus, Licinius, Phalaris, Dionysius, Sylla, and others, both because
they are innumerable, and would take up a large volume to touch but a little of
each, and also because they being heathens are no better then dogs in account,
and every dog will do his kind. Neither will I trouble you with the
relation of the strange persecution used against the Christians in the
primitive Church, which were done with as much wit, and malice, as Hell and the
Devil could devise, as may appear by that which Saint Cyprian objects to
Demetrian. Deus solus in terris aut non colitur, aut non est impune quod
colitur. Innoxios iustos, Deo charos, domo priuas, patrimonio spolias, catenis
premis, carcere includis, bestijs, gladio, ignibus punis. Nec saltem contentus
es dolorum nostrorum compendio, and simplici ac veloci breuitate poenarum,
admoues laniandis corporibus longa tormenta, multiplicas lacerandis visceribus,
numerosa supplicia, nec feritas atque immanitas tua vsitatis potest contenta
esse tormentis, excogitat nouas paenas ingeniosa crudelitas. Cyprian. ad
Demetrian.
The only true God, says he, is either not worshipped at all, or else not
freely without punishment. Innocent, just, and men dear in Gods sight, do
thou drive out of their houses, spoil them of their patrimony, bind in
chains, shut up in prison, and tormentest with wild beasts, fire and sword.
Neither art thou contented with compendious and short pains, or torments which
would quickly dispatch us, but sundry engines are multiplied to tear out our
very bowels leisurely, and thy savage disposition is not satisfied with usual
tortures, but thy subtle cruelty has found out new punishments to destroy
us. But these wretches learned in short time to stake their hands, whilst they
found, Vigelius Saturninus quiprimus hic gladium in nos egit, lumina amisit.
Claudius Herminianus in Cappadocia indigne ferens etc. Cum viuus vermibus
ebullisset, Nemo sciat aiebat, ne gaudeant Christiani, Tertull. ad Scap. cap. 5.
partly vengeance falling on their own heads for hating Gods Saints, and
(...). Arist. Eth. 1.13. Nec tamen deficiet haec secta quam tunc magis
aedificariscias, cum caedividetur. Tertul. ad Scap. cap. 5. Dum opprimitur
crescit. Hilar. l 7. de Trin. Haud secus quam si quis vitem secatione pronocet
ad vbertatem. Just. Martyr. Colloq cum Tryphon. etc.
partly the Church to increase, by that which they thought would destroy it.

The more marvel it is that Christians Crudelitas vestra, gloria nostra est.
Tertull. ad Scapul.
whose glory it was to endure cruelty from the hands of others, should in time
through pride and covetousness come to loose their glory by executing cruelty
on others. For that it is so, I would Writers had never had just occasion to
affirm, nor Readers just reason to lament. Strange it is that Christians I
say, Romans 15.33.
whose God is the God of peace, Jsa. 9.6.
whose Savior the Prince of peace, Ephesians. 6.15.
whose calling is to the Gospel of peace, should through savage cruelty give
as much offense to Heathens, as ever heretofore Heathens gave to them. For what
true religious heart will not grieve to hear, that which is written by a
Christian, concerning the Peruians a people of the West Indies, Postquam
ingressis Perusium Hispanis mores eorum, facta and atrocia saeuitiae exempla
quae passim ab ijs edebantur, inspexere, nunquam ex eo non modo fateri
voluerunt, nos esse Christianos filios Dei (sicuti ab Hispanis audiebant) sed
nec ita quidem in lucem editos, vt vulgo nasci homines solent. Quippe fieri non
posse vt tam ferox and truculentum animal ab vllo homine genitum, and faeminae
partu editum sit. Itaque eorum animis penitus insedit haec opinio, nos mari
esse ortos, ac proinde nos vira Cochie vocant, quippe Cochie apud eos valet
Mare, and vira spumam significat. Ergo nos e mari concretos, and coalitos,
spumaque nutritos, vulgo ferunt, ac venisse in terras ad vastandum, and
perdendum mundum. Benzo. hist. non. orb. lib. 3. cap. 21.
who perceiving the direful and irefull carriage of the Spaniard toward them,
did not only refuse to acknowledge Christians to be Gods sons, but also
denied them to be bred and borne into the World after the common fashion of
men, thinking it could never be, that so savage and bloud-thirstie Creatures
could either be begotten of Man or brought forth of Woman. And therefore they
were verily of this opinion, that these men were bred of the Sea, and nursed up
of the froath of it, and afterward sent to Land to waste and destroy Mankind
out of the world. And so ill did these pretended Conuerters carry themselves
in that work of planting Christianity among the Heathens, that the poor
Indians openly professed unto them, Postquam Hathney cogitabundus aliquandiu
haefisset, a monacho petijt vtrum etiam Hispanis caelorum janua pateret, Cui
respondenti bonis Hispanis patere, Cacicus, fine longiore deliberatione coelum
se nolle petere, dixit, sed potius inferos, ne eadem illi cum hac crudeli
gente, manfio communis esset. Et his laudibus, honori busue Deus and sancta
fides ab Hispanis in America afficiuntur. Barthol. Casaus. Narrat. crudel.
Hispan. page 23.
That they had rather go to Hell by themselves, then to Heaven with the
Spaniards.

But these things were done far from home, a great way abroad, it may be
there is better behavior among our selves. It should be I am sure. God has
ingrafted in every man's heart shame and fear, and these Omne malum aut timore
aut pudore natura Perfudit. Tertull. Apolog. cap. 1.
says Tertullian, are the bridles to restrain the neck of cruel tyranny
and greedy avarice. But Auaritia est hydria Samaritanae, de qua qui biberit
sitiet iterum. Petr. Blesens. Epist. 141.
devouring Covetousness, which like the Samaritans Joh. 4.28.
water-pot, is never filled, but still thirsts, and like a man sick of the
Dropsy (who the more he drinks, the more he may) is never Haec sitis
diuitiarum miseris pectoribus assidet, and ambitionis salsugo, bibulam animam
occupat, vt per fas and nefas ad loca superiora, etc. Cypr. de not. Christ. in
Prolog. Auaritia nullis expletur opibus, and quanto amplius habuerit, plus
requirit, and neque copia neque inopia minuitur. Hieron. Epita. Paulae.
contented neither full nor fasting, breaks through these brazen gates of
shame and fear, and with her iron hands of Woluish rapacitie, seeks to
satisfy her lust upon every object, though thousands and ten thousands must
perish for it. Which I could make plain by infinite particulars, if it were a
thing that needed any great proof.

But I will give you but one instance only, which will abundantly suffice in
this case, and that is the infinite cruelty and oppression which has been
used by the Bishop of Rome, against the whole Christian world, for the
satisfying of his Vulturean avarice and Luciferian pride. What deposing of
Kings, exposing of their Crowns, transferring their Kingdoms, slaughtering
their Subjects, demolishing Temples, sacking and ransacking of Cities,
exhausting treasures, emunging men's purses, there have been by this means,
the whole West can witness, and our Ancestors in this Kingdom as well as any.
Videsis lector Matthew. Paris. de hac re misere conquerentem.
I insist not on particulars, for it were an infinite work. This one shall
serve for all of Hildebrand, or Helbrand, called Gregory the seventh, ruining
and cruelly overthrowing Henry that famous but unfortunate Emperor; and all
for that he would have maintained against him that which by God and by man's
Law is but the Princes right.

Good God! Quanta autem mala, quot bella bellorumque discrimina, inde subsecuta
sint, quoties misera Roma obsessa, capta, vastata, quod papa super papam sicut
rex super regem positus fuerit, taedet me morare. Denique tot mala, tot
scismata, tot tam animarum quam corporum pericula, hujus tempestaris turbo
inuoluit vt solus ex persecutionis immanitate ac temporis diuturnitate ad
humanae miseriae infaelicitatem sufficeret comprobandam. Otho. Frising. Chron.
lib. 6.36.
What thundering of Excommunications to curse him, what exciting of other
Princes to destroy him, what arming of his Subjects, yea his own Son to
rebel against him, what overthrowing of Cities, wasting of Countries,
ouerturning Churches, spilling man's blood, weakening of whole Christendom, was
there at that time! Even enough by the judgment of a grave Historian, to prove
the common calamity of Mankind. But if you should add to this their other
Cruelties, as their manifold intrusions into that See by poisoning their
Predecessors, their schisms by Antipopes, Erant eo tempore tres qui Pontifices
haberi voleba^t Gregorius 12. Benedictus 13. and Johannes 23. nec potorat
facile iudicari quis eorum verus ac legitimus esset Pontifex, cum non deessent
singulis doctissimi patroni. Bell. de Pont. Romans lib. 4. cap. 14.
three at a time, no man knowing which was the true Pope, their mutual cursing
and damning each other, their violence against the lives and goods of holy men,
as the Dulcinists, Wickleuists, Waldenses, Prelatos and Clerum penitus
aspernando, etc. Chron. Chron. fol. 227. Habitus est Ioha^nes Hus lingua potens
and mundiore vita clarus- Ibid. fol. 267.
Hussits, and others, merely for finding fault with their intolerable Pride,
you may justly conclude, that the scarlet Whore, has justified Nero and
Domitian, as Jerusalem did justify Sodom and Gomorrha.

But it is no marvel to see the members of a false Church offer violence to
each other, or to the Professors of the Truth. For it has ever been seen,
Semper and boni omnia mala passi sunt, and fecerunt mali. Saluian. de gubern.
Dei, l. 1.
that good men have suffered ill, and evil men inflicted it, says Saluian. As
for righteous men they offer no violence to any. None hurts, nor destroys in
all my holy Mountain, Isa. 11.9.
says God. Isa. 2.4.
There, Swords are turned into Sythes, and Spears into Mattocks. Whilst quite
contrary, Among false Christians Tools of good husbandry, are made
instruments of cruelty, Virg. Georg. lib. 1. Sarcula cessabant, versique in
pila ligones, Factaque de rastri pondere cassis erat. Ovid. Fast. 1.
Et curvae rigidos falces conflantur in enses. And crooked Sythes are turned
into sharpe-biting Swords. Religion is as jealous as Love, it can endure no
Riualitie. And therefore the greatest hate that ever Has been, says Nihil
germanos Dei cultores aeque se conciliat, atque consentientes de Deo
sententiae; quemadmodum co^tra, nulla re facilius dissoluuntur amicitiae quam
diuersa in huiusmodi tebus animoru^ sententia. Nazianzen. Orat. 1. de Pace.
Nazianzen, has arisen from contrary Religions; as on the other side, the
greatest Love that is to be found on earth, is among them that agree together
in the Truth.

But, O then, what shall we say to them who being of the same Religion, and
upon terms of peace, have practiced most exquisite torments upon the innocent
bodies of their Friends and Confederates? I say of the same Religion, if there
be any Religion indeed in those men, who by ferine cruelty maintain their
insatiable avarice. For Saint James tells us, Iam. 3.17.
The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without judging, and without
hypocrisy. Which plainly shows, that where there is not Lorin. com. in Jacob.
3.17.
verbum (...), but (...), the words and works of peace, but of contention and
violence, there is no Religion indeed. The World knows what I mean, and your
Worthy Society have understood it, Bernard.
non verbis sed verberibus, as one speaks, by that most inhumane and woluish
butchering up of your faithful Servants, and Agents, at Amboyna in the East
Indies, by the most unheard torments of the perfidious Dutch there. Of which I
may say as S. Augustine said of the civil wars of Marius and Sylla, Quae
rabies exteraru^ gentium, quae faeuitia Barbarorum huic de ciuibus victoriae
ciuium comparari potest? Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 3. c. 29.
What rage of foreign Nations, what bloodshead of Barbarians, is to be
compared to this treacherous tyranny of Confederates to their Friends? Pax cum
bello de crudelitate certauit, and vicit. Illud enim prostrauir armatos, ista
nudatos. August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 28.
Peace has contended with War for cruelty, and gone beyond it, for War
overthrows armed men, but this colored Peace has prostrated naked men.
Naked, save only of innocence, that, their souls being thoroughly clothed
withal, has kept them safe from the scandal of treason laid on them, or the
torments of hell threatened to them.

But, O unkind, unnatural! You this to us? We this from you? Whilst the Blood
of our valiant Countrymen lies reeking on the ground, to keep you in your own
Land, do you wastefully spill the blood of our faithful Countrymen in a
strange Land? O more then Scythian barbarism. Do you so requite us? What will
you gain by this, but in time to stink before other Nations, as Genesis 34.30.
Simeon and Leui did before the Shechemites? And therefore if your savage
hearts have any place for patience, or if you be not utterly forsaken of all
humane ingenuitie, hear the advice of him that wishes you well.

First, fall down on your knees, and with bleeding hearts Primus foelicitatis
gradus est non delinquere, secundus delicta agnoscere; Illic currit innocentia
integra quae seruet, hic succedit medela quae sanet. Cyp. Ep. 55.
confess this execrable Villainy, and pray to God, Act. 8.22.
that if it be possible, this lewdness may be forgiven you. For I perceive
you are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Secondly, as
one advised a less malefactor, Et siquidem patratum est seclus, precator,
supplicato, obsecrato, te ad Iudicum pedes prouoluere ne desinas, donec
impetraueris vt tradaris, ex sententia calculoque Iudicis carnifici vt
suppliciu^ des. Honori tibi vertetur apud inferos, ante purgatum hinc ire.
Synes. ep. 44
Beg and entreat some temporal Judge to censure you, and deliver you into
the hands of some Executioner, to be put to death. It will be an honor unto
you, at your future trial, to part out of this world purged by judicial
censure. If it had been only an outward injury in the business of Trade and
Traffike, yet were you bound in conscience to make Si enim res aliena propter
quam peccatu^ est, cum reddi possit non redditur, non agitur poenitentia sed
singitur. Si autem veraciter agitur, Non remittetur peccatum nisi restituatur
ablatum. August. ad Maced. Epist. 54.
restitution by pecuniarie compensation. For that which is unjustly taken and
peruersly detayned, will be at last as unpleasing to the conscience, Postea
implebitur os eius glacea, Pro. 20.17.
as is gravel in the teeth. But for murder what recompense can be made,
seeing all the world is not able to restore life again to the poorest creature
deprived of it? And therefore Gods appointment is, Genesis 9.^.
that whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Making it
just, that each man shall suffer in himself, what he has first done to
another. Yea, in injuries of a less nature then Murder, Lex talionis takes
place, Matthew. 5.38. Exodus 21.24. Leuit. 24.20. Sciendum est quod Deus (...)
lebat istam (...) nam insligi, (...) quilibet pateretur malum quod fecerat.
Tossed. Abulens. Tom. 2. in Mat. quaest. 322.
An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; for God would have every man endure
what he has done. And the very Heathens thought this a most just Law, as
Aristot. Ethic. lib. 5. Dicunt Rhadamanthum dicere, rectam fieri vindic^am si
quis patiatur ea quae fecit. Erat autem Rhadamanthus Iudex justissimus, and
propter hoc apud Gentiles Poetica fictio posuit eum esse vnu^n de tribus
iudicibus animarum apud inferos and sic tanquam famosum allegat eum
Aristoteles. Tossed. Abulens. in Mat. Tom. 2. quaest. 322.
Aristotle reports of the Pythagoreans; who further tells that even Rhadamanthus
himself could not but judge this Law to be just. Wherefore it is no marvel
that the Si membrum rupit meum ex pacto talio esto. Ludou. Charond. leg.
Antiquar. Leg. 78.
Romans put it into their twelve Tables. And howsoever some ancient Jews say,
that in wrongs of a less nature then Murder, this law was not exactly
observed, but sometime for an eye or a finger, money was taken either according
to common estimation, as V^i Tostat. loc. Citat.
Rabbi Solomon has it, or after the will of him that endured the injury, as
Josephus sets down; Yet for Murder there was no agreement to be made for
money, nothing could satisfy but the Death of the murderer, according to Gods
own edict. Number. 35.31. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
Murderer which is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to Death.

If you will do none of these, then know that none Scito quod nulla ciuitas
impunelatura sit sanguinis nostri effusionem. Tertull. ad Scapul.
of your Cities or Territories shall drink in our blood without just Revenge.
The Heathens could say and confess of Murderers, Act. 28.4.
that vengeance would not suffer them to live, and that Victima haud vlla
amplior potest magisque opima mactari Ioui, quam Rex iniq^^^. Senec. Herc. tur.
Jupiter accounts the murdering of Tyrants, as the fattest sacrifice. And if
you feel no outward Judgment fall upon you, think not your selves free, or
innocent, nor yet void of punishment, for it is (...). Synes. Epist. 32.
torment enough to be wicked and to be let alone in the guilt of sin. Yea,
in the opinion of all Divines, z it is the most miserable thing in the world,
Qui per diu sceleratus impunitus manet, eum oportet existimare infaelicissimum
de quo neque Deus neque homo sollicitus est. Synes. Epist. 44. Dilatio
vindictae dat locum paenitentiae. Nec dici potest, nulla ibi est vltio vbi
nulla conuersio est, quia men's dura and ingrata jam fibi ipsa supplicium est.
Leo ser. 5. de Epiph. Hoc est terribile, hoc extremum, cum jam non corripimur
pro peccatis, cum jam non corrigimur delinquentes. Orig. hom. 8. in Exodus
to sin and thrive therein, for that brings the sinner to hardness of
heart, and stupiditie in his lewdness, which makes him fit fuel for the
everlasting fire of Hell. And how much better were it for a man to endure some
chasticement, yea to put himself to pain by Repentance in this world, then to
run on in the delights of sin, and so to be tormented with easelesse and
endless pains in Hell eternally.

But you are secure of that, for you have done nothing but Justice, you have
punished Traitors and malefactors, Such even by their own confession, etc. But
O vnpoliticke cruelty! Will you so far usurp upon the Devils right, that
you will first make men guilty; and then plague them for it. Can you be so
ignorant of the law of Nature and Nations, as not to know, that Confessio facta
in tormentis non valet. ff. de quaest. lib. 1. Diuus. Bart. Pum. Sum. in verbo
Confessio.
Confession forced from a man by torment, is of no value against him. The Law
says that no torment should be used, Tortura judicijs non praecede^tibus
inferenda non est. Panorm. in cap. Cum in contem. de reg. iur. Barthol. Fum.
Sum. in verb. Tortur.
without some probabilities before causing suspicion in the party tormented:
Confessio facta in tortura, si non perseueret non praejudicat, quare videtur
fecisse metu tormentorum. Panormit. in lib. 1. H. de quaest. cap. 1. and 31.
quest. 2. Lotarius.
and that if a man confess in torments and deny it afterward, such
confession is nothing, as proceeding from fear of torments. Now that this was
the case of our innocent Contrymen, viz. To be accused without proof, or
probability, yea to be forced by torments to accuse themselves, which they
afterward upon their Deaths stiffely denied, is so clear and plain, that no
mire and dirt of contrary aspersion and accusation can obscure it, or deface
it; and has been so sufficiently in two Treatises proved unto you, that all
the water between England and Amboyna, cannot wash you clean from the crimes
of treacherous Cruelty, and cruel Treachery.

But to leave these men, let me in few words speak to you, O worthy and noble
Adventurers. It cannot choose but be a great grief unto you, as it is to every
true English heart, Difficile est pressam malis innocentiam non dolere. Hieron.
ad Iulianum.
to see innocence and fidelity suffer what is due to fraud and villainy. Yet
this, God often permits, for reason best known to himself. In such cases, we
are with Leuit. 10.3.
Aaron to lay the hand on the mouth, and to be patient, which is the only
Sudatur enim ac laboratur quamdiu hic viuitur; Nec sud antibus and laborantibus
alia possunt quam patientiae subuenire solatia. Cypr. de bono patient.
comfort in all distresses. This is that virtue which keeps a man in Luc.
21.19.
possession of himself, even when he is unjustly dispossessed of his goods.
And let us not wonder that we must be patient in bearing wrongs from one
another, for God is so himself toward us, who wrong him continually; Quotidie
contumelia afficitur praesens, and audiens and videns, and neque fulmen
immisit, neque mare jussit terram inundare, etc. Chrysostom. hom. 3. ad Po^
Antioch.
And though he be able to revenge himself to the full, yet he forbeares it
with infinite long animitie. Consider again, that Christian warfare differs
from the In Olympicis illis certaminibus, coronem consequuntut qui decertant;
At in Christi palaestra contraria coronarum lex est. Sic enim lege sancitum
est, vt qui percutitur, non qui percutit, etc. Isid. Pelus. lib. 2. Epist. 196.
Olympian combatings, for there, he which struck the greatest blow went away
with the garland; but here, not he which strikes, but he which bears the
greatest stroke shall go away with the Crown. Add unto this, that God is the
Plus improbum illum caedis sustinendo: ab illo enim vapulabit, cuius gratia
sustines. Tert. de Patientia.

Patientes facit de secutura vltione securitas Cypr. ad Demet.


Revenger of the Innocent, and the severe Punisher of such as offer injuries to
their Brethren. For he who has said, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Romans 12.19.
Vindicta mihi, Vengeance is mine, has also said, Ego rependam, I will duly
render it. Neither fear you, but that this late inhumane Practice in Amboyna
is registered in Gods black Book to be repaid again unto the Actors, with
full measure in due time. In the mean season, let us not cease to wait upon
God, and commit our cause unto him, comforting our selves thus far, that yet
it is much more (...). Jsid. Pel^s. lib. 2. Epist. 257.
wretched a thing to do injury our selves, then to suffer it from others.

Which that You may the better do, I have presumed to offer unto your
Worshipful Acceptance, this excellent ensuing Cordial, prescribed, and
tempered by a most skillful Doctor. And if you please, let It be as 1. Sam.
16.23.
David's Harp to Saul, a piece of spiritual melody, to expel from you that
disturbance of mind, which the evil spirit of Injustice, and ambitious
Avarice in those false Friends, has offered to bring upon you. It has long
lain by me, waiting for some occasion to come abroad, and would God it had
wanted this at this time. But seeing it is as it is, I beseech you to accept
it, and read it, and J doubt not, but as you shall find in Joseph's brethren
envy and malice to be an old disease; so you shall also find in Joseph
himself, Patientia quae est inside ossa sunt interius, ipsa sunt quae frangi
no^ possunt. Psalm. 34.20. August. in Psalm. 33.
patience and dependence upon God an ancient Antidote. I must confess for my
self, J have been much pleased and delighted in reading of it, as once the
royal and noble Auditorie was affected in hearing of it, and therefore I am
the more willing to communicate to others, what I have found beneficial to my
self. The rather, for that I am much bound to your Worships for many
charitable favors received from you, for all which I have returned or can
return nothing but my poor Prayers to GOD for your prosperous and flourishing
estate, and happy success in your most Honorable though hazardous and
dangerous Enterprises. And these (my prayers I mean) which are the Aduersus
arma, milites, Gothos quoque lachrymae meae armasunt. Talia enim imunimenta
sunt sacerdotis. Ambros. in Auxent. Orat. 5. Tom. 3.
weapons of a Christian Minister, shall never be laid down whilst breath is
in my body, but I will Romans 15.30. Vim facimus Deo non compellendo sed flendo,
etc. Ambros.
strive thereby even with GOD himself, and against all your Enemies, that you
may still long prosper in your great and weighty Affairs of Trade, to the
glory of GOD, the honor of the English Nation, the enriching of our
Weale-publike, the comfort and contentment of your own hearts, and finally the
spiritual locupletation of the poor Heathens, with the treasury of the
knowledge of CHRIST, one dram whereof is more worth, then all the Wealth of the
world beside. And indeed, this is one principal end of Merchandising, if not
in Man's purpose, yet in the intention and appointment of GOD. For -- Virgil.
Non omnis fert omnia tellus. says the Poet, Every Land abounds not with
every Commodity, -- Nonne vides croceos vt Tmolus odores, India mittitebur
molles sua thura Sabei? At Calybes nudi ferrum. Virgil.
But one Country is excellent for one thing, and another for another. Seneca
could see no other end of this, but that Vt necessarium mortalibus esset inter
se ipsos commercium, si inuicem alius ab alio aliquis peteret. Senec. Epist.
GOD would necessitate men to a kind of familiarity with each other, whilst
one was constrained to supply his wants by another. But the maine reason is,
that the glorious merchandise of his Holy GOSPEL might also be communicated
to THEM that want it, and so whilst men adventure for Earth they might gain
Heaven. Which I fear me has been rather hindered then furthered by these
uncivil broils, and unconscionable proceedings of Those that would make the
world believe they are the only devout maintainers of RELIGION; concerning
whom I would have said much more, but that I am restrained by that speech of
the Orator, which (...). Jsid. Pelas-epist. lib. 2. Ep. 163.
one commends as a Pattern to be followed, I fear least if I should speak
that which befits them to hear, J should fall into that language which becomes
not me to utter. So leaving them to GODS censure, I humbly take my leave of
your Worships, beseeching the GOD of Heaven to look upon You with the
favorable eye of his all-sufficient Providence, that by his heavenly Blessing
upon your painful proceedings, You may all become profitable Members of his
CHVRCH in this world, and glorious SAINTS in his Kingdom in the world to come;
and this for CHRIST his sake, To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, one
GOD in substance, three Persons in subsistence, be all honor and glory, now
and for ever, AMEN.

From my Study. Feb. 1. 1625. Your Worships: in all the Services of Love and
Duty: THO: MYRIELL.

THE STRIPPING OF JOSEPH.
GENESIS 37.23. Now when JOSEPH was come unto his brethren, they stripped JOSEPH out
of his Coat, even the party-colored Coat which was upon him.


THis Scripture which I have read, is part of a tragical history made famous
to the Church, by execution of an infamous and horrible fact, wherein we have
ten against one, men against a child, all brethren against a natural brother,
making a most wicked and barbarous assault; a sin in all circumstances
(Christ's death excepted) not in the world to be matched again. The report of
it stands briefly thus; Jacob the father of these disagreeing children, had
(as all men know) twelve sons, concerning whom it befell him (as in his
flock to have some white, some spotted sheep) so in his family to have some
good, some wicked children. In this variety we find that he loved Joseph
more then all the rest of his children, which was partly for the love he bare
to Rachel his dead mother (a part of a kind husband sure, to love his wife
even when she was dead) and partly, for that Joseph by her death was
motherlesse; and it is a virtue doubtless heroical and princely, to defend
and cherish the fatherless and motherlesse, widows and orphans. But it is
expressed in the Text, that he loved Joseph, because he begat him in his old
age; for that children so begotten, make the fathers flourish, and as it were
to seem young again. But howsoever his father loved him entirely, sure it is,
his brethren hated him deadly. For to be beloved of all men, or to please all,
is a gift yet never granted to any, no God himself cannot obtain it. The
causes of their hatred may be coniectured many: either for that he and they
were borne of diverse mothers, and most commonly, most mortal is the hate when
the mothers breed the quarrel, and bloody are the battles where women fight
the field; Or whether they hated him, for complaining of them, as it is Ver. 2.
Or whether for the love which his father bare him, as it is Verse. 4. Or whether
for his dreams, as it it Verse. 5. Whether for any, or for all these causes,
sure it is they hated him, and so hated him, as they sought for nothing but
opportunity to hurt him. In the end (as the Devil would have it) an
opportunity is offered. For they being in the field, Jacob sends Joseph
amongst them, so that now they have it as they would, for their father whom
they feared is out of sight, their brother whom they hated is in their hands. A
short tale to make poor Joseph coming toward them; first they spy him, then
they conspire against him, and upon the meeting lay hands on him. Now when
Joseph etc. and so we come to the Text; Of which that I may speak to Gods
glory, and the good of this great and royal assembly, I beseech you to assist
me with your prayers, etc.

I am not altogether ignorant how allegorically the Fathers have directed the
application of this story to Christ and his Passion, which in no part, or
person in Scripture is more eminently figured then in Joseph. For Christ was
beloved of God his Father in Joseph, he was hated of the Jews his brethren in
Joseph, he was mocked in Joseph, he was stripped in Joseph, he was sold in
Joseph; and in the end he was exalted in Joseph, and made great Lord of an
everlasting Kingdom. Yet forasmuch as it is not possible in the period and
capacity of one hour, to say whatsoever might be said, I will therefore
pass over all this, and follow only the historical sense, and make
application as best may befit the moral use of life. To which purpose I
observe in the Text two things, first, The kindness of Joseph unto his
brethren. Secondly, The unkindness of his brethren to him. Joseph's kindness
appears in his coming to them and visiting them. Their unkindness appears
in their stripping of him and spoiling him. Two worthy considerations, I
beseech you take notice of them, for by doing good and suffering evil, both
Prince and People must go to heaven.

But because Joseph's kindness is not here principally mentioned, but only to
extend by circumstance the offense of his brethren, I do make therefore that
their offense, the subject of my discourse, and observe therein two things:
first, The circumstances of the fact. Secondly, The fact it self. The
circumstances are in number two one, of the time When, Now when Joseph was come
unto his brethren. The other of the Persons, actors in the tragedy, which are
all brethren. A new Thyestes and Atreus on the stage.

For the time When, we must consider that Jacobs sons were now in the field
keeping sheep; For Jacob was already rich, and knew that his sons after him
should be inheritors of a great land, even the land of Canaan, yet he sent
them not to Pharaohs Court to learn Complements, and to join civility to
their other abilities, and so to make them (as many be). Gentlemen before their
time; but Jacob was a plain man, and trusted in the promises of God, and
therefore brought up his sons to keep sheep; whereas now, he that is worth
but a flock of sheep, yet holds it high disparagement to make his son a
shepherd, but makes him either a Lawyer or a Courtier straight. Again, we
must consider, that as it is Verse. 12. Jacobs sons were now keeping sheep in
Shechem, even there where not long before they had committed horrible murder,
and therefore Jacob happily fearing (as fathers are ever fearful of their
children) lest for that murder, somewhat might be for revenge intended, sends
one to see them. And whom does he send? Surely, no servant, but even his
beloved Joseph, to try (as it is thought) if by his kindness his brethren
would be reconciled unto him. But they as soon as they saw him, in stead of
embracing him offer violence unto him, and therefore if it be true which is
said, Foul circumstances make foul sins, this was surely a time of all
times peruersly picked, then to execute their malice, when so much love was
deserved. It is a kindness sure, but to inquire de aliorum salute, how other
men do; For who cares not how ill it goes with other, so it go well with our
selves? But Joseph did more then inquire: for he went out to see how his
brethren did, a step beyond common friendship, for, Hail Master, and How do
you, to speak friendly are every man's money, but he is a friend indeed that
goes out at doors to do his brother good. But whether went Joseph to seek
his brethren? He went into the wilderness. The merit is yet more. To seek
men is subject to error and wandering. Joseph lost himself whilst he sought
his brethren, Verse. 15. To seek men in the wilderness is often dangerous and
ill betiding, Jacob thought a wild beast had devoured Joseph; and so it was
indeed, but a wilder beast then Jacob thought of. Generally it is an evil
occupation to seek men, Princes and Magistrates know it who seek men for
civil obedience, and conformity; Prelates and true Churchmen know it, who
seek men to Religion and piety; and were it not for respect to God, who had
not rather be a Plough-man then a Priest to the people. And generally
whatsoever good, in whatsoever kind we do, we must neither look for reward
nor thanks at men's hands, no not when we feed the hungry, cloathe the
naked, relieve the sick, and visit (as Joseph did) them that have need of
visiting. And yet we must take this withal, though we do good, and for good
receive evil again, yet we must not so give over, but for evil do good
again, and that not as Saint Peter said to Christ, till seven times; but as
Christ said to Saint Peter, till seventy times seven times; referring evermore
the success to God, who shall punish unthankfulness as he punishes the
Devil. For there be, they say, four ways of restoring: first, Good for good.
Secondly, Evil for evil. Thirdly, Good for evil. Fourthly, Evil for good.
He that returns good for good is a man, for that is humanity to return one
kindness for another. He that returns evil for evil is a beast, for that is
horse play to strike at him that strikes at us. He that restores good for
evil is an Angel, for that exceeds the patience of man. He that returns
evil for good is the Devil himself, and as Solomon says, Pro. 17.13. Evil
shall not depart from that man's house.

The second circumstance is of the Persons, which are Joseph and his brethren;
Now when Joseph was come to his brethren, they stripped Joseph. Where we have the
first Joseph an Agent, and his brethren Patients; but the second Joseph a
Patient, and his brethren Agents. For Joseph (though it seems somewhat harsh)
is here twice called Joseph, Joseph came unto his brethren, and, They stripped
Joseph; so as Joseph when he came unto his brethren was Joseph, and now in the
hands of his brethren was Joseph still; Joseph in action, and in passion
Joseph; that is Joseph when he did well, and Joseph when he suffered ill, to
show that no affliction or chance, can charge or pervert the Saints of God. But
Joseph's brethren are not as Joseph twice called Brethren, but first, Joseph
came unto his brethren and then not as brethren, but as mere strangers only,
They, They stripped him of his coat. So that as Ruben by incest lost his
birthright, Genesis 49.4. Thy dignity is gone, says Jacob. So these men by
their cruelty lost their fraternity; Their brotherhood is gone: and therefore
he which found Joseph wandering in the Wilderness told him, that his Brethren
were gone away Verse. 17. The Jews make it mystical and bring him in saying,
Thy brethren are gone home, that is, Thy brethren have forsaken brotherhood.
And indeed Joseph had it by Inheritance to be forsaken, and hated of his own
Brethren, for so was Jacob of his Brother Esau, and so was Isaac his
Grandfather of Ismael, 2. Tim. 4.3.
and the days are come whereof the Apostle spoke, that Men shall be proud,
covetous, without natural affection. And the days are come, whereof CHRIST
spoke, Math. 10.21.
The brother shall betray the brother to Death. So as CHRIST said in that
Chapter, Cauete ab hominibus, Beware of men, we may step further, and say,
Cauete a fratribus, Beware and take heed of your own Brethren. For there is
not in the world so immortal and implacable hate, as the hate of Brethren. O
what shall Pater noster say, when he comes to reckon for this!

But whither shall a man go in peace if not to his own Brethren. Let there
be no strife between thee and me (says Abraham to Lot) Genesis 13.8. for we
are brethren. Which what a weight it had Moses shows, Verse. 7. where he says
that the Canaanites dwelt at that time in the Land. For will not Canaanites
clap their hands at this, to see such a rent or schism in Abraham's house?
Indeed when Ninevites oppose, and Canaanites kill one another, these go for
Dogs, and every Dog will do his kind. But when Jacobs sons, the seed of
the Church, the light of the World, shall rob and spoil one another, when we
of the refined Religion, the quintessence of Christianity, shall do that
oppression, which they scorn to do whom we scorn to be like; to speak
plain English, when Protestants fall out among themselves, and endeavor to
undo the good works which Papists have done, we are at a stand like Iosuah at
the siege of Ai, Ios. 7.8. What shall we say when Israel turn their backs
upon their enemies? For as an ill man is the worst of all Creatures, so an ill
Christian is the worst of all men, and an ill Protestant is the worst of all
Christians, and there is no sin like the sin of Joseph's brethren. But as
blind Isaac took Jacob for Esau, so Joseph took them to be his Brethren,
who upon trial proved his Executioners, and his Hangmen, like the Ox who
thinks he goes in a green pasture, and then falls into the slaughter.
Therefore as in Luke 10.29. a Lawyer asked of Christ, Who is my neighbor? So
we had need of a Lawyer to make a new motion, and to ask of the same Judge,
Who is my brother. For as Saint Paul says, He is not a Jew which is one
outward, but he is a Jew which is one within. Romans 2.28. So, he is not a
Brother who has it by name, but he is a Brother who shows it in nature. And
as Saint James says of Faith, Show me thy Faith by thy works. Iam. 2.18. So
Brotherhood must be showed by brotherly works. In truth the brotherhood that
is now adays, is but Vox artis, Wits instrument, a word of Art, and therefore
in no predicament. The brotherhood that is now, has these marks, a smiling
face, a courtly courtesy, a populer voice, words fair and glorious, with a
salutation more then superstitious, Mary, Aurum and algentum non est mihi. Act.
3.6. The brotherhood that is now, has these flashes or lightnings, I am right
sorry for you, and I would it were better with you, I wait but opportunity, I
wish no longer life then to express my love to you. But when you come to the
matter, you must have it as it is Prou. 3.28. with a Cras redi, I am at your
Service in any other matter then this, at another time; but for this my word is
past, you must come again to Morrow, and our devilish tongues are typt with
Italianisme. This is Fratrizare, but here is no Fraternity.

But now for Joseph, the Patient in this cruelty, Talia cur talis! That one so
harmless, should suffer so much harm! and that innocent men are every where
marked out to misery! At this, the Saints of God have often times not maruailed,
but stood amazed. But marvel not at it. The doors of the Israelites were all
besprinckled with blood. Affliction and sorrow are the works of the best men:
and as Saint Gregory says, Licet occultum sit, cum bonis male euenit, and
malis been, etc. Though it be a secret work of GOD, when good men suffer
Affliction and ill men Prosper, yet it is more secret and GOD works more
against course and kind, when ill men are afflicted and good men prosper. And
Eusebius says well to comfort in such a case, O qui Sanctorum labores
respicis, cur non and remunerationes? O thou that see the present sorrow of
the Saints, why do thou not look up to see the future joys of the Saints.
Multi vident punctiones, sed non vident vnctiones, Many see their Crosses, but
they feel not their Comforts. Ye stumble to behold the innocent Joseph in
affliction, why behold ye not in Egypt his glory and exaltation? Indeed the
world broacheth her best Wine first, but of CHRIST it is said, Tu serua sit
bonum vinum vsque nunc. Ioh. 2.10. And Solomon says of the virtuous Woman,
that in her latter end she shall rejoice. Prou. 31.25.

But let us leave the persons and come to the fact it self. Wherein is to be
considered, First, the manner of it, Stripping, Secondly, the prey or booty
which they took from him, His coat, even the partie-coloured Coat that was
upon him. For the first, Stripping is a kind of shrift, not ghostly from
sin, but a bodily absoluing of men from their encombrances, as Dionysius
stripped off the Golden coat from Jupiter, because it was too heavy and cold;
and the Infidels in the Old time spoiled the Christians of their Goods,
affirming it was good for them to be poor, that so they might go to Heaven
without hinderance. But surely, it had been more suitable, if Joseph coming as
a messenger from their Father, these men had with reverence saluted him, for
Ambassadors are entertained Princely for their Princes sake, and a good Son
beholds with reverence even the dead Picture of his Father. But here is no
one of them regards him as coming from their Father, nay here is no one of
them who once opens his mouth, to ask or inquire of the health and welfare
of their Father, but envy to their Brother makes them clean forget they had a
Father, and like ravening Beasts, they run at once upon him. Wherein besides
their lack of Humanity, they are likewise touched with lack of wit, to carry
their mischief cleanely. They might have spiced their Brother a Drink and
sent him home, I mean to his long home; but Poisoning it should seem was not
then in use. And therefore they fall to play the Lions, not a shamed to hurt
their Brother forceably. And indeed it is a principle in Machiauels Divinity,
that when the Foxes skin will not serve, we may piece it out with the Lions.
But he that hurts his Brother secretly, is either afraid of something, or
ashamed of something; but he that wrongeth his Brother forceably, as the
Prophet Micha speaks, Mich. 2.1. Because his hand has power, he does it
freely, because he can do it easily; It seems God has taken from him both
shame and fear, that he has cast the raynes in his neck, that he might
run to the Devil without resistance. And in truth these men were of a
scandalous occupation, for when Pharaoh asked of them their Trade or
Occupation, they said they were Shepherds. Thy Servants are Shepherds. Genesis
47.3. Ungentle Heardsmen of so gentle a Beast. They were Shepherds indeed, but
not as CHRIST said of himself, Ego sum Pastor ille bonus. Ioh. 10.11. They
were far from good Shepherds. They had somewhat of Abel, for they kept
Sheep well; but they had somewhat of Cain too, for they made little conscience
to kill their Brother. And though Stripping or Sheering were a part of their
occupation, being Shepherds, yet I will not say, it was long of their
occupation. But in truth Shepherds and Sheepmaisters are grown cruel men of
late, for they throw down Towns and Townships, Houses and Churches, they
strip men out of their Houses, yea out of their Coats, and put out Men (Gods
own image) to bring in Sheep. Nero, Dioclesian, destroyed but men, but these
men destroy Humanum genus, Mankind it self. Now surely if such be let alone,
Shepherds will shortly be more abominable to English Christians, then ever
they were to the Egyptians.

But to come to the matter. Joseph sustained in this conflict four kinds of
afflictions. For, first, they mock him: secondly, they strip him: thirdly,
they hazard his life: fourthly, in the end they sold him: in all which he was
a famous figure of Christ. Now he that kills a man does him less harm, then
he that strips him or spoils him, for he that kills him makes an end of his
misery at once, but he that robs and spoileth and makes him pine, he
gives him his life in patience, which is worse then death. And he says in
effect, as Saul to David, Go and serve other gods, that is, as much as in him
lies, he drives him to make shipwreck of Conscience, Religion, Salvation, and
All. And there is no cruelty like that, to practice to be rich, by wringing
small matters from the Poor. And therefore whereas in the Law theft was not
death, it should seem to be meant of poor hungry Thieves, such as Solomon
speaks of, Proverb. 6.30. Which steal through strong necessity: for when
David heard of a rich Thief that had stolen a poor man's sheep, there was no
way with him, but, Hic vir mortis filius. 2. Sam. 12.5. This man shall die the
death. And great reason; for one rich Thief makes a great many poor Thieves;
as in the Gospel, one foul Spirit, one Devil brought in seven other. And
therefore great reason the rich should be punished for the poor, as they that
have given occasion of sin to other. O therefore take heed of stripping,
take heed of oppression, He that gathers riches wrongfully, shall leave
them, says Ierem. 17.11. in the midst of his days. A memorable lesson for
great and wealthy men. It oftimes comes to pass that great and honorable
Houses are strangely and suddenly made desolate, by a cause not considered of
in the World, but secret in God, and that is, for some oppression, either in
the Father, in the Son, or in the Grand father: for, Nullum tempus occurrit
Deo; It is all one to God. But when they build, as Genes. 11.3. with bricks in
stead of stone, and slime in stead of mortar, that is, by indirect and
unmerciful means, God himself will give that House a name, and call it
Babel, a Castle of confusion. Therefore be sure ye get your wealth by
warrantable means, for if ye strip poor Joseph, Joseph will cry, and that
cry shall enter in at the ears of the Almighty, and then look what ye have
gotten, a secret Worm shall fire and consume it. Either your selves shall live
to see it pulled out of your teeth by an higher, or mightier tyranny, or your
sons (...) waste it with riot and prodigality, or some (...) posterity
shall forfeit it by some treason (...), but ye shall find it true which is
(...) ^gaudet tertius haeres; Three whole Gene^ (...) never enjoy it.

(...) which they took from Joseph was (...) considered first, barely as a
garment, (...) (...) him of his Coat; and then secondly, (...) ^^nament: Even
the party-colored Coat that (...) upon him. They stripped him of his Coat,
they took not from him gold or silver, as Exodus 12. the Jews did from the
Egyptians, for gold and silver were not then desired, nor yet adored as they
be now, but they took away his garment. Neither did they take from him a
cloak or a loose garment, as in the next Chapter, Thamar ran away with
Iudahs cloak. Much in our attire hangs loose about us; much in our attire is
merely accidental; for, Potest adesse and abesse. It may be allowed, and in
truth it might as well be spared. But they came yet nearer him; and stripped him
of his Coat; neither did they take from him a part of his Coat, 2. Sam. 10.
as Hanun took David's Ambassadors, and cut off their coats at the waste. He
that takes some and leaves some is counted now an honest Thief: but they
stripped him of his Coat, even of his whole Coat, yea the Jews think they
stripped him stark naked, and so made him at unawares a figure of Christ upon
the Cross. But the first Coats that ever our first Parents used, were made of
the skins of dead beasts, Genesis 3.
Genesis 3. as it were a new skin put on; that covetous and cruel men might
think that when they drive men to such poverty, as either to sell their
coat, or not to be able to buy themselves coats, they are as butcherly, as
he that takes a knife, and flayeth off the skin.

Deuteronomy. 22.
Therefore in the Law, it was not lawful to take every man's coat, no not to
pledge, Deuteronomy. 22. They might not take the widows garment. And, Exodus 22.
Exodus 22. when they took any man's coat to pledge, they had it for a very
short Iubile, for it was to come home again at night. And as Dorcas was
commended for the coats which she gave, Act. 9. see Matthew. 25. Act. 9.
many shall be condemned for not clothing the naked. Now as Saint Augustine
says, If he shall go to hell which gives not his own, whether think you
shall he go that takes away another man's? But alas, what meant these men to
do with Joseph's coat? Joseph's coat was a small booty among them all: yea
Joseph being the youngest of them all, his coat was too little for the least
of them all. Yet if Joseph had pilfered away old Reubens coat, every man can
tell how to cut short and to make a large thing less; but unless it be in
lying, we have little power to make things greater, Yet when Reuben gets
his brother Leuies coat, it is as when a great rich man gets the spoil of
a Bishopric, which prankes up his wife, paints out his children, multiplies
his train, magnifies his estate, and serves him to many good purposes. But
when Reuben takes away little Joseph's coat, it is as when a great man beggeth
a little office, or he who has hundreds and thousands of his own, yet
seeks to impropriate or strip a poor Parsonage, which when he has, it will
hardly serve him in with sauce to his meat. And let us here in a shadow
learn, never to lay hands on the coat which cannot profit us. It is a point
of high importance to hate all sin like a Serpent, yea though it promise,
Math. 4.
as the Devil did to Christ, Omnia regna mundi. But there be some sins,
which yield no man present profit, yea nothing but repentance and shame, Romans 6.
that a man may say of them as Saint Paul, What profit have we of those
things whereof we are now ashamed. Such a sin as Saint Augustine reports of
himself in his youth, Perreximus nocte intempesta nequissimi adolescentuli,
etc. A sort of wild and wanton Youths, were agreed to go out and to rob a
certain Apple Tree, and in such a night, as a man would not have turned a Dog
out of doors, and for such an Apple as when they had it, they threw it out of
doors. Now says he; What meant I vt essem gratis malus, to be so wicked for
nothing. A good lesson for Gallants, and young Gentlemen, who do many things
in their lives, of a wantonness and bravery, which sin, and sin, and reap
by their sin no profit but sin. 1. Reg. 21.
Such men are worse then Ahab, for Ahab yet sold himself to work wickedness.
Now he that sells himself has somewhat for himself; but he that sins
wantonly, gives himself to the Devil for nothing, and he is so much the more
accomptable to GOD, by how much he was content, for no provocation to forsake
GOD.

But though Joseph's coat did not serve his Brethren to wear, yet they had a
use for it, that showing it to Jacob dipped in blood, they might hide their
sin by it, so that as Erasmus said sometime of a Friars Cowle, that it was
like Charity, Quia operit multitudinem peccatorum, Because it hid a world of
wickedness: so we may say of Joseph's coat, that the outside of an honest
man, does oft-times hide a multitude of sin; for all the care is now to sin
with a cover, and then to seem honest, and, Si non cast, tamen caute, The
rule of Romish chastity, is dispersed into every vein, and part of life, and
so Jacob see it not, we care not what we do.

But Joseph's coat is here marked with a difference, They stripped him out of his
Coat. Which Coat? For it may be Joseph had two coats upon one body, as we
many times have two faces under one hood. Therefore it is answered, His
party-colored Coat. Now that which we call a party-colored, some call a
side-coate, or a coat with sleeves, some a painted, some an embroidered, some
a silken coat: some call it a coat of many threads, some a coat of many
pieces, but the most (and so let it go) a coat of many colors. If any man
will conjecture what Jacob should mean to make his son such a coat, first,
I answer, that Jacob was much beholden to the party-colored. For when upon
the composition betwixt Him and Laban, Genes. 30.
the party-colored fell to his share, it was his enriching, and yet I yield
not this for a reason. Neither would I have our masters of the Law to think,
that Joseph's pyed coat was a servants Liuerie, for he that could frame to
dwell in a Tent, to keep sheep, and to put up wrongs for Religions sake, he
little needed to bring up any of his sons to the Law. The Law came not in
till men grew more contentious, and unruly minded. Neither did Jacob make this
gay coat of a fond and wanton love, as the manner of many is, to paint out
their children like Puppits, and their daughters like Idols, as if they meant
to worship them; first to adorn, and then to adore them. Genesis 25.
For Jacob is defined to be a plain man, one that asked no more but for his
necessity, meat and clothing. Therefore some think that this coat was a
Priestly garment, wherewith Jacob meant to invest Joseph by reason of his
birthright. For in those days till the Priesthood was otherwise disposed of,
the elder son was still a Priest to the family, though in these days, the
elder son of a right bad Squire would think it foul scorn to be a Priest,
yea a Prelate to a whole Country. And though Joseph were the youngest but one,
yet the birthright was his, as it is said, 1. Chron. 5. For Jacob had three
Heirs, one a natural Heir, which was Reuben, who lost it by default; another
an Heir spiritual, which was Judah, of whom came Christ; and a third, an
Heir actual, which was Joseph. Some again think, that Jacob made to Joseph
this coat of many colors, for the abundance and variety of Grace and Virtue
in him. For whereas it is said, Verse. 3. that Jacob loved Joseph best, because
he begat him in his old age, yet for so much as he begat a later son, whom
he yet loved less, some therefore carry that saying after the Hebrew phrase
thus, that Jacob loved Joseph best, because he was to him the son of old
age, that though younger in years, yet grauer and ancienter in virtue. And why
might not Joseph for his virtue be called the eldest, though in years a child,
as Rehoboam for his folly is called a child, even when he was forty years
old, 2. Chron. 13. 2. Chron. 13.
And indeed the best ground of the Parents love, is the fear of God, and the
seed of virtue in their children; which of Joseph's virtue began even then to
sprowt, and after did so flourish, as the earth never bare so excellent a
flower. He was wise, Pharaoh said, there was none in the Kingdom like him.
Genesis 41. He was so faithful, as being in prison himself, yet was made Keeper
of the prison, and kept that which kept him, Genes. 39. He was chaste, even in
the assault of a strong temptation, as he lost his coat to keep his
honesty, whereas many now fell their coats to loose their honesty. How
gentle, kind, and loving to his father he was, look Genesis 45. and there you
shall see by the Corn which he sent in the famine to feed him, and by the
Chariots which afterward he sent to fetch him. And that which of all is a
virtue rare in these days, he was able to say, Remitte, sicut remittimus. For
the offense which his brethren here made him, he freely forgave it, and wept
when they spoke of it, Genesis 50. So that Joseph's coat of many colors was
nothing but the sign of his many virtues, to show how Jacob honored virtue in
his children.

Therefore, here I think began Heraldrie and the honor of Arms. For when the
people, at the first being equal in degree, grew in admiration of them whom
they saw to excel in virtue, they practiced by Ceremonies and sensible Honor
to adorn them. The holy Ghost in Scripture oftentimes applying the same kinds
of ornament and honor. For in Scripture Gold signifies holiness or zeal to
GOD, the excellency of virtue. And Silver signifies the pureness of Charity,
and Love to one another, Cant. 1.10.
which GOD intended when he promised his Church to make her borders of Gold
with waves of Silver. Cant. 1.10. In the Scripture, Exodus 26.14.
the Jewish Tabernacle, was covered or mantled with red. Exodus 26.14. Which
reports unto the hearer boldness and defense unto death, to signify that they
would protect the Sanctuary, Religion, and the Law, even to the effusion of
their last blood. In the Scripture, Green sometimes signifies Fruitfulness
in good works, for which cause Christ is called, a green Tree. Luke 23.31.
and sometime it signifies Flourishing in the protection of GOD, Jerem. 15.8.
for, he that trusts in God, his leaf it said to be ever Green. Ierem.
15.8. In the Scripture, Black signifies Constant, and immutable, and
therefore among the praises of CHRIST, Cant. 5.11.
his head is said to be curled and black as a Raven. Cant. 5.11. In the
Scripture, the Saints are said to be clothed in White. Revel. 19.4.
Revel. 19.4. which Verse. 8. is expounded to be, the righteousness of the
Saints: yet not righteousness inherent, but by imputation in Christ. Revel.
7.14.
For, Reu. 7.14. They washed their long Roabes and made them white in the blood
of the Lamb. Revel. 19.16.
And therefore, as Revel. 19.16. Christ had his name written upon his Coat, so
these virtues were doubtless written in the many colors of Joseph's Coat.

Therefore Gentle-women, Good-women, and Sisters in CHRIST, here is no warrant
for Wantonness and Superfluity. A little Scripture God wot serves to enlarge
your liberty, and she who can scarce put on her Coat, yet can readily
conclude from Joseph's Coat, If he then, why not we? If Men may be so fine,
much more may Women. And indeed, it holds oftentimes too strongly, for many
plain men are oftentimes brought to hang all their own pride, and their
wealth, and their wits too, on their Wives backs. But what if Joseph ware a
Coat of many colors, therefore, ye may do so too. It is true, if it stands
with your estates, perhaps you may. For David's Daughter ware a Coat of many
colors, 2. Sam. 13.
which is warranted by Custom of the time and respect of her place. And CHRIST
spoke it without reproach, when he said, They that wear soft raiment are in
Kings houses. Math. 11. Math. 11.
So as ye may do any thing, yet be proud of nothing. Ye may by Joseph's
example paint out your Coats, but take heed of painting your Faces; ye may by
Joseph's example wear many Colors, not too many Fancies, not every Moon to
mint a new fashion. Women sure were made in Gods image as well as Men, now of
GOD it is said, That there is with him no variableness nor shadow of Change.
Iam. 1.17. Finally, mistake not the matter, Joseph's Coat, was a coat of
Arms, the outward ensign of his inward Virtues, and if ye show more colors
without then virtues within, then are ye like the Fox, your Skin, your
Coat is worth more then your Bodies.

Again, here is a lesson for men, especially for Courtiers, a lesson worth
the learning. For what was the ground of all this grief, but that the painted
Coat must be put on Joseph, on Joseph I say, and of none of the Elder
brethren. For, Luke 15 The Elder brother will not look into the house, if but
a Calfe be killed for the Younger, and men have no patience to endure it, if
but an Office be translated, or any Honor bestowed where they like not. O but
give Jacob leave to give the party colored Coat, bind not the hands of a
Prince, for when Subjects assume to limit the Prince, then they presume to be
above the Prince. And look what sins are managed in Presumption, they end
for the most part in confusion.

Again, here is for You (most Excellent) here is for You, a mirror of your
self, and this Imperial Kingdom. Your Majesty is to us as Jacob, who has
wrestled with GOD, and obtained a Kingly Blessing: and we are to your Majesty
as Joseph and his Brethren, a multitude of Sons, begotten of diverse Mothers,
some distinguished by Religion, some by Condition, some by Profession, some by
Country ornation. Some of us are distinguished by Religion, for the Sons of
Leah come in from Rome, and tell your Majesty they are of the Elder house, and
therefore no reason our Sheafe should stand and theirs should fall. But Leah
their Mother was bleare-eyed, and they in truth are blind, in a false
admiration of their own Antiquity. For what though Leah crept first into
Jacobs bed, yet Joseph's Mother was first betroathed, and therefore as it is in
the Emblem, Tandem suum iustitia obtinuit. And Joseph had the Birthright,
therefore to your Majesty comes Joseph for pre-eminence, that our CHVRCH may
stand and theirs may fall. Sometime again, we are distinguished by State or
Condition, for some of us be rich, and some of us be poor, and as the Poor
for the most part malign and defame the rich, so the Rich oppress and devour
the poor, Therefore to your Majesty comes the Rich, that they may keep their
Colors, and to your Majesty comes the Poor, that they may keep their Coats
upon their backs. Sometime again, we are distinguished by Profession, some
holding of the Laietie, and some of Leui, that is, the Church or Clergy.
Joseph's Brethren took from him a party colored Coat, but many of our
Brethren would give to us a party colored Coat, that we should wear as much
Blew as Black, and live like Micha's Leuite, by Livery service, and attending.
Therefore to your Majesty comes the Laietie, that Leui may do his Duty, and
to your Majesty comes Leui that he may have his Duty. Sometime again, we
are divided by Country or Nation, for he is in English, and he is in
Scottish, and I know not what, and GOD knows a little thing serves to make a
rupture, and to disturb this turbulent brain of ours. Therefore as your
Majesty is Lord of all, so come we to your Majesty to unite us all, and as
you Crowned us with one Name, so procure unto us one heart and mind, preserve
us from strife, and if it may be from secret Emulation, for Hate seeks blood,
and Blood seeks blood again. It is no marvel though these men sought to
kill their Brother, for their hands were lately embrewed in the Sichemites
blood, and as the Tragedian says, Crescit dum non punitur scelus. He that is
pardoned for killing of a Stranger, will assay at the next blow to kill his
Brother, the next thought will be to kill his own Father. And to whom does
Blood now cry for Protection? Indeed, when there was no King the blood of Abel
cried immediately unto GOD, but your Majesty being King, it cries now to you,
because you are in stead of God.

Lastly, here is for all men, to see in Joseph an Image of this vain and
inconstant World. He that was the day before between his Fathers knees, is
now in his bloody Brothers hands, and he who even now was in a painted Coat,
is now stark naked and without a Coat. It was wont to be said for a sure
Proverb, As sure as the Coat on your back; as sure indeed, for we are sure
of nothing. For what assurance have we, when our Father puts on, and our
Brethren pull off, when one man bestows it, and ten men are ready to take it
away. And thus it is with your Coat, your Riches, and your Treasures, yea thus
it is with your party colored Coat, your Titles and your Honors. The world
is like Nabuchadonozer his Image, Gold in the head, Silver in the breast, Brass
in the belly, Iron in the legs, but the feet, which should be strongest are
of Clay and Earth, and this Golden glory has no strength to stand upon.

Yet let no man be discouraged; for as our good often ends in evil, so our evil
often ends in good again. Joseph is here stripped, anon he is sold, after that
imprisoned, but after all that he is exalted, Genes. 30.
and made the great Commander of Egypt, that a man may truly say. His fortune
was of as many colors as his Coat. Yea, twice now has Joseph lost his Coat,
once here in the hands of his Brethren, and again by the hands of that Harlot
Potyphars wife. But afterward Pharaoh does inuest him with a Ring and a
Chain, and a royal Coat.

And thus by evil and good, by chance and change lies the way to Heaven,
whereas we murmur but at one affliction, and grudge if we have not Heaven for
nothing. But there be but two ways, if we be upon the broad way, that is, If
we have all things at will, and nothing to trouble us, we may suspect we are
not right, there is nothing so fearful as to be Fortunate. But if we be upon
the narrow way, if pinched and pricked with Thorns, if spoiled, oppressed,
defrauded, defamed, these things may import a better passage, that they will
land us at the end in the gates of Heaven. Unto which he bring us, that has
so dearly bought us, JESUS CHRIST the righteous, to whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be all Praise and Glory, Power and Dominion, now and for ever,
AMEN.

FINIS.
A Friend of the Publisher hereof to the Readers.
READERS, If any of you list to be so censorious (in this critical Age) as to
censure the late Publishing of this praecedent Sermon; Give me leave to answer
you, that It being the Posthume-manes of a Reverend Learned and Eloquent
Divine, deceased; was doubtless reserved not without some Divine Providence
till now: the Subject being so seasonable for the occasion: And the Publisher
hereof, (...) reverend friend, certes, his ingenuitie, in my judgment,
deserves grateful acceptance at the least, in conioyning his elaborate
Consolatorie Epistle or Preface to that Worthy Society, with the said Sermon:
there being so near affinity between JOSEPH'S unnatural Persecutions in
Egypt by his Brethren, and the inhumane Tortures of our Contrymen in
Amboyna, by the either Atheistical or Arminian Dutch There: The true Relation
whereof I profess I could nor can read but with tears, nor think on without
sorrow of heart. And as Joseph's Persecutions cried up to God till they were
avenged, so without doubt does the Blood of our miserably macerated and
massacred Contrymen cry at Heaven Gates for Vengeance: For GOD is Just, and
whose is Vengeance but His? What should I say more, in the Argument? there
being so much, so learnedly, so piously, so iudiciously said in the Premises:
which I trow no Reader that has either. Learning or Judgment will deny. So
farewell, and fruere.

H. D.


