A THEOLOGICAL DISPVTATION CONcerning the Oath of Allegiance, dedicated to the
most Holy Father Pope PAVL the fifth, WHEREIN ALL THE PRINCIPAL ARguments
which have hitherto been brought by Cardinal Bellarmine, Jacobus Gretzer,
Leonard Lessius, Martin Becanus, and diverse others, against the new Oath of
Allegiance, lately established in England by Act of Parliament, are sincerely,
perspicuously, and exactly examined

By Roger Widdrington, an English Catholic.

Translated out of Latin into English by the Author himself, whereunto he
has also added An Appendix, wherein all the arguments, which that most learned
Divine Franciscus Suarez, has lately brought for the Popes power to depose
Princes, and against the aforesaid Oath of Allegiance, are sincerely rehearsed,
and answered.

Thou shall swear the Lord lives, in truth, and in judgment, and in justice.

Ierem. cap. 4. seal of the Society of Jesus IHS


Permissu Superiorum. 1613.

TO THE MOST HOLY, AND MOST BLESSED FATHER POPE PAVL THE FIFTH, ROGER
WIDDRINGTON an English Catholic wishes everlasting happiness.
IT will doubtless seem strange unto your Holiness (most blessed father) how
I so boldly durst adventure to take in hand this disputation concerning the
Oath of Allegiance, which your Holiness has already by your Breues declared
to be clearly repugnant to the Catholic faith, and with all to dedicate the
same unto your Holiness. But if your Holiness will be pleased to consider
advisedly the true state of this controversy, both concerning the Papal
authority to depose Princes, and also concerning the lawful taking of this
oath of Allegiance, and carefully to observe the preposterous manner of
proceeding, which my adversaries have used in impugning my doctrine, and in
maintaining their own, and diligently to examine the reasons, which did move
me to write, I make no doubt, but that your Holiness will presently perceive,
that I am free from all temerarious presumption, and that I am very clear from
all those slanderous imputations, whereof some men have in public writings
falsely accused me, and that with far greater reason I could return their
calumnies against me, back upon them selves.

2 And first of all it was never my meaning, as heretofore In the Preface to my
Apologeticall Answer number. 8. and in the Answer it self nu. 111.
in the very same words I have declared, when I did set forth my Apology for
the rightful power of Princes against Cardinal Bellarmine, to impugn the
common opinion of Divines, which grants to the Pope authority to depose
Princes, as apparently false, and with invincible arguments to demonstrate the
contrary opinion to be true; but whereas some very few later Divines, and
especially Cardinal Bellarmine only in a later Edition of his works, yet
bringing no other reason to prove the same, then in his former Editions he had
brought, do so stiffly, and with such vehemency defend this authority of the
Popes Holiness to depose Princes, that they imagine to have most clearly
convinced the same, and fear not to charge with heresy all those Catholics,
who in this point do not run with them; this only was my intent, (to the end I
might learn the truth in a matter of so great importance, as is to know what
is heresy) to give at the least a probable answer to the arguments of
Cardinal Bellarmine (whom rather then any other writer I took upon me to
confute, both for that he had out of all the best writers gathered all the
chiefest arguments which to prove this authority were most forcible, and also
for that he being now alive knew best how to maintain his own opinion, and
being a question of such great moment, would also by all likelihood defend the
same) and consequently I did only intend to show probably out of his own
principles, and not inuincibly to convince, that his arguments for confirming
this authority were not so certain and insoluble that as they did evidently
demonstrate, that those Catholics, who do not approve the said authority,
are not to be numbered among the faithful, and true believers, or not to be
admitted to the participation of holy Sacraments. Therefore the present
controversy, which is at this time between me, and Cardinal Bellarmine is
not concerning this absolute question or proposition, which the Divines do
commonly defend, to wit, whether the Pope has authority to depose Princes for
heresy, but concerning this modall proposition, Whether it be so certain, and
without all controversy, that the Pope by Christ's institution has the said
authority to depose Princes, as that those, who defend the contrary opinion
to be probable, do expose themselves to manifest danger of heresy, error, or
any other mortal sin.

3 By which it is evident, that I have not taken upon me to demonstrate, but
only to answer probably; and therefore I can not justly be blamed, if I have
not brought altogether demonstratiue reasons, or answeares; for it is
sufficient for my purpose, if for the confirming of my opinion I have either
brought at the least wise probable reasons, or else have given only a probable
answer to the reasons of Cardinal Bellarmine, or of any other who has taken
upon him his defense: for probability of one thing, and certainty of the
contrary can not stand together, neither can there be alleged any probable
answer to a reason which is truly demonstratiue and invincible. But he that
imagines to overthrow my Apology for the right of Princes only with
plausible, and probable arguments, is both himself grossly deceived, and will
also very easily deceive his Reader; for he that will take upon him to
demonstrate his opinion to be certain, and to be believed as a point of faith,
and to convince the contrary to be heretical, and which can not probably be
defended by any true Catholic, must of necessity produce either unanswerable
authorities, or invincible reasons, and to which no probable answer can be
given. And this is the true state of the question concerning the Popes
Holiness power to depose Princes. Now what profit this manner of disputing
brings to Princes, I have showed in the end of my Apology See also beneath
cap. 3. sec. 2. nu. 4.
, and this benefit Subjects do reap thereby, that, besides the knowledge of
the truth in a matter of so great importance, as is to discern a probable
doctrine from heretical, they shall most clearly perceive, that for the
defending of opinions, which are only probable, they are not bound to cast
away there whole temporal estate, to incur the high displeasure of their
Prince, and to expose their whole posterity to danger of perpetual beggerie.

4. Neither is the state of this controversy concerning the Oath of
Allegiance, which does greatly depend upon the former question of deposing
Princes, unlike to the state of it. For they that are of opinion that the Oath
may lawfully be taken, are for this cause moved thereunto, for that they are
persuaded, that by the Law of God they are bound to obey the command of their
lawful Prince, so long as it does not apppeare, that he commands them any
unlawful thing, or which exceeds his authority to command. And therefore
these men think it to be sufficient for them, if they do but make a probable
answer to all the arguments which are drawn from the authority of holy
Scriptures, Counsels, Canons of holy Church, your Holiness Breues, and from
Theological reasons, or any other proofs, which do seem clearly to
demonstrate, that the whole Oath, or any part thereof is repugnant to faith or
salvation, or does exceed his Majesty's authority to command. But they that
will take upon them to convince that this Oath cannot be taken by any man with
a probable, and consequently safe conscience, it is not enough for them to
bring only either probable reasons, or probable authorities, but they must also
bring such demonstratiue, and invincible arguments, to which no probable
answer can be given. But this they will never be able to do, for it is an
easy matter to cite some texts of holy Scripture, whatsoever thou shall loose,
feed my sheep, If you have Secular judgments, etc. also some General
Counsels, that of Laterane, that of Lions; and that of Trent, some Canons of
Holy Church, Nos sanctorum, Iuratos, Absolutos, and three Breues of your
Holiness, for the confirming of their opinion; But that this is the true
meaning of the Scripture which they pretend, that this is necessarily concluded
from the Counsels, Canons, and your Holiness Breues, which they would have, I
do not say, only probably to persuade, but by a demonstratiue argument to
which no probable answer can be given evidently to convince this truly is a
thing of too too great difficulty. And this is the reason, most Holy Father,
which makes me to be so confident against such learned Adversaries. For I am
confident in the cause, which I am certainly persuaded to be most just, and not
in my own learning which I acknowledge to be but very little. For it is
sufficient for me to bring reasons, or answers, which at the least are
probable, which in a disputable matter is not very hard to do; but my
adversaries, unless they bring demonstratiue arguments, and which evidently
do convince, and do cleerelie confute my answers as altogether improbable,
they labor all in vain, and they will at length perceive, that they do not
fight against that doctrine, which I have taught, but against that, which they
themselves have feigned.

5 Secondly, the manner, which my adversaries have observed in confuting my
Doctrine, and confirming their own, is too too exorbitant. For to that which
hitherto I have written, two Doctors of Divinity have made an answer, to wit,
Edward Weston, and Adolphus Schulckenius; (if Schulckenius, and not Cardinal
Bellarmine himself, as D. Weston has constantly auerred to many, be the
principal Author of that book;) but both of them so unsoundly, guilefully,
bitterly, that they do plainly show, that they rather desire by imposing
upon me that which I never said, and by reproachful speeches to disgrace my
person, then by solid reasons, and arguments to confute my doctrine, and to
defend their own. For either they charge me with those things which I never
wrote, nor imagined; or those things which I have written, they do in such
manner deprave, that they do altogether misconceiue the true meaning of them,
and so they do not impugn, what I have affirmed, but what themselves have
invented, or else they do so couldly confirm their own opinion, that
although with their clamours they fill the ears of the unlearned, yet the
learned may plainly perceive, that they are clean overcome, and that they
prosecute their cause not so much by arguments, as by reproachful speeches;
and lastly they would willingly that their own uncertain inferences out of
the holy Scriptures and Counsels, which we have heretofore fully satisfied,
should be accounted infallible positio^s of faith; al which partly I have
beneath briefly insinuated, lest that I should be more troublesome to your
Holiness, then a supplicatorie letter does require, partly I will show
hereafter, God willing, more at large. Wherefore if your Holiness relying
upon the learning, and conscience of these men, or of others of greater place,
and dignity, and giving credit to their false informations, should condemn my
writings as heretical, or erroneous, as Doctor Weston, and Doctor
Schulckenius, or if D. Weston be to be believed, Cardinal Bellarmine
himself, have falsely and injuriously laid to my charge, what great wrong your
Holiness should do me, and what occasion of no small scandal you should give
to the adversaries of the Catholic Church, I remit to the judgment both of
your Holiness, and also of the whole Christian world: Neither is it unknown
to your Holiness how that certain books, which if need shall require, I will
hereafter name, where some few years since, by a particular decree of the Sea
Apostolic, and General Inquisition through the evil information, and
importunity of some certain men, condemned as erroneous, and if I do not
forget, as flat heretical, who nevertheless did afterward, the matter being
better examined, recall the former sentence by a new decree, which did not
contain so severe a censure.

6 Now what manner they have held in impugning this Oath of Allegiance from the
beginning hitherto, I will with as much breuity, as may be, sincerely declare
unto your Holiness. It is well known, and public to the whole Christian
world, and which I cannot but with grief rehearse, how that horrible, and
infamous conspiracy of the Powder Treason, plotted by certain Catholics
upon a preposterous zeal to advance the Catholic religion, intending to blow
up with Gunpowder the whole house of Parliament, together with the Kings and
Queens most excellent Majesty's, their Royal issue, and the three States of
the Realm, and innumerable other persons of every state, and condition, was
the principal occasion of devising and enacting this Oath of Allegiance. For
in the next Session of Parliament after this detestable conspiracy was but
newly discovered, it was thought convenient by all the States of this kingdom
to frame the aforesaid Oath of Allegiance, and to ordain, that it should be
tendered to all sorts of Catholics under most grievous punishments to all them
who did refuse it, thinking this to be a most fit means for the better
discovering hereafter of such like traitors, and preserving of his Majesty
from such like future conspiracies. The Law being now enacted there was a
great, and long consultation among Priests what Catholics ought to do in this
case. At the last Master George Blackwell being then Arch-Presbyter of the
English Priests was resolved to be of this opinion (which the greater part of
Priests, who came then to London to know what was to be done in this so
difficult a matter, did also follow) that this Oath, according to the plain
and common understanding of the words, might with a safe conscience be taken by
any Catholic. But this resolution of Master Archpriest was nothing pleasing
to certain Jesuits, and some other very few Priests in comparison of the
rest. And from hence all this stir and controversy concerning the taking of
this Oath did first arise. For those Jesuits did vehemently oppose themselves
against Master Archpriest, and did constantly affirm that they would reuerse
whatsoever had been concluded by him, and that they would procure a Breue from
your Holiness to command all Catholics not to take the Oath. Which truly
with very great expedition according to their promise they did perform. For,
although a certain Priest not of the meaner sort did presently upon Master
Arch-Priests resolution with all the speed he might write to Master Nicholas
Fitzherbert being then at Rome, and did sincerely relate unto him how al
things had past, earnestly requesting him, that either by himself or by means
of some Cardinals he would effectually deal with your Holiness, that you
would not be persuaded to send hither at this time, and things standing as
they do, any Breues to forbid the taking of the Oath, lest that otherwise your
authority, as well temporal to depose Princes, as spiritual to define
infallibly without a General Council, were more strongly called in question
by Catholics, then ever heretofore: (For at that time Master Blackwell did
only intend to deny the lawful executing of your power to depose Princes,
things standing here as they do, and not the aforesaid either spiritual, or
temporal power it self) yet this answer he received from Master Fitzherbert,
that these letters, although they came to his hands in a very short time, yet
they came too late, for that it was determined at Rome, that your Breues should
presently be sent hither to forbid the Oath. Whereupon Father Parsons fearing
least our English Catholics would be drawn away by the authority of Master
Archpriest, and of the other Priests, who followed his opinion, sent instantly
hither his letters (the true copy whereof I will beneath c set down) which
were certain forewarnings of your future Breues, wherein he gave English
Catholics to understand, that there was at Rome a consultation of seven, or
eight of the learned Divines that could be chosen, and all were of opinion,
that this Oath under this form of words could not be taken by any man without
denying the Catholic faith, for that the Popes authority in chastizing Princes
upon a just cause is de fide, and moreover that your Holiness gave the like
answer to the same Father Parsons in the presence of Master Thomas Fitzherbert.
But because very many Catholics with us (as will appear by this disputation)
do not well perceive from whence any good inference can be made, that your
authority to chastise Princes in general is in this Oath denied, they would
gladly concerning this point be more fully instructed by your Holiness.

7 Not long after this letter of Father Parsons, your Holiness sent hither
your first Breue, wherein you expressly declared, that this Oath, cannot
lawfully be taken by any man, for that it contains many things which are
clearly repugnant to faith, and salvation. Some few months after it happened
that Master Blackwel the Archpriest was apprehended, and being brought before
the Magistrate he took the Oath being tendered him; whom Cardinal Bellarmine
by private letters (about which time also your second Breue came hither) did
sharply reprehend, as though he had abiuted your Holiness spiritual primacie:
But Master Blackwell by other letters (which by chance came into the hands of
his Majesty's privy Counsel, and which were an occasion that he did more
clearly explane his opinion concerning For he was very unwilling for fear of
incurring your holiness displeasure, to declare sincerely his opinion
concerning the Popes power to depose Princes.
all the particular clauses of the Oath) did return an answer to Cardinal
Bellarmine. Against your Holiness his Breues, and Cardinal Bellarmines
letters, the Kings Majesty, co^cealing at the first his name, did write an
Apogie in defense of the Oath of Allegiance. To which Apology Father Parsons
in English, and Cardinal Bellarmine, Iacobus Gretzer, Leonard Coquaeus,
Antonius Capellus, Martinus Becanus and diverse others did answer in Latin:
But all of them did so slenderly handle the question of the Oath, which was the
principal controversy, that the English Catholics, who did before think
the Oath to be lawful, were thereby more confirmed in their opinion, and the
rest, who favored the Jesuits, did not a little blush to see a matter of so
great importance so weakly handled. For these Divines, otherwise doubtless
most learned, do labor to prove, that in this Oath is plainly denied the
Popes Holiness spiritual primacie, his power to excommunicate, and to bind and
loose, which nevertheless the defenders of the Oath, as will appear beneath,
does think to show sufficiently to be false. Neither is there scarce any
(learned) Priest with us, the Jesuits only excepted, and those not all, who is
of opinion, that there is any thing contained in this Oath, which is clearly
repugnant to faith, as your Holiness in your Breues has declared, and
therefore neither dare they publicly defend the same, but least that they
should seem to be wholly discomfited, some of them fly to certain other
arguments of lesser moment, which in their due places I will rehearse.
Whereupon betwixt a certain Jesuit, who was then prisoner in the Gatehouse,
and some other Priests, who at the same time were prisoners in Newgate, (yet
all of them very vehement against the Oath) there was by intercourse of letters
a great contention concerning this matter; But at the last these Priests, who
affirmed that the oath neither contained in it any heresy, or error, compelled
the Jesuit by force of disputation partly to silence, and partly to interpret
his opinion in a milder sort.

8 And this is the reason (most holy Father) why very few Lay-Catholikes of any
name, or worth with us do refuse to take the oath, being tendered them by the
Magistrate. For while they advisedly call to remembrance, that this oath,
before it was by your Holiness declared to be clearly repugnant to faith, and
salvation, might with a probable, and consequently with a safe conscience be
taken by any Catholic, by reason of the authority of so many learned, and
virtuous Priests; and with all they do now not only consider, that your
Holiness prohibition, being a mere declaratiue precept See what is a
declaratiue precept beneath cap. 1. sec 4. nu. 1. and 2. in the end.
, can have no greater force to bind, then the reason wherein it is founded, and
whereon it wholly depends, as beneath Cap. 10. sec. 2. nu. 41. and the rest.
out of the doctrine of Franciscus SuareZ shall be made manifest, but also they
are probably persuaded, that your Holiness was by Cardinal Bellarmine, and
Father Parsons wrongfully informed of the reason, for which you forbade them to
take the oath, to wit, for that it contains many things, which are clearly
repugnant to faith, and salvation; seeing that neither your authority to
chastise Princes, to excommunicate them, to inflict censures, or any spiritual
authority which is certainly known to be granted by Christ to Saint Peter,
and his Successors is in this oath denied, as Cardinal Bellarmine, whom
Father Parsons, and diverse others Divines of the Society of Jesus do imitate,
does by fallacious inferences labor to deduce; they can not as yet
sufficiently perceive, by what forcible argument they are bound with the
perpetual temporal overthrow of themselves, and there whole posterity to obey
your Holiness declaratiue command, which at the most is grounded upon a
probable reason. Neither do they imagine that they ought therefore to be
accounted rebellious to the Sea Apostolic, for that they, reserving otherwise
all dutiful reverence to your Holiness, do not in a matter which is so
prejudicial unto them, obey your Holiness Apostolical letters, which either
are written upon false information, or grounded only upon a probable opinion.
For although they be most willing to loose all temporal goods, yea, and life
it self for the Catholic faith, nevertheless for defending of opinions,
although they be received almost by the Universal Church not as points of
faith, but only as probable opinions (for they are not ignorant, that betwixt
the Church firmly believing, and only probably thinking a great difference is
to be made) to be deprived of al their goods, to be accounted Traitors to
their Prince, and Country, and moreover to suffer their children, nephews,
kinsmen, and their whole posterity which this our age does so much labor to
advance, to be brought to perpetual beggerie without incurring any danger of
denying the Catholic faith, or committing any mortal sin, they think it to
be neither wisdom, nor charity. And therefore they both think themselves to
be more hardly dealt with all, that having so long time endured so great
calamities, there should be now so heavy a burden laid upon them by him, from
whom they rather expected to have received some comfort, as that they should be
enforced, to the utter ruin of their whole posterity, besides the perpetual
loss of their own goods and liberty, and also, which is most grievous to
them, with manifest danger to incur the high displeasure of their Prince,
being otherwise very merciful, to defend opinions which only are probable, and
may without danger of damnation be rejected by Catholics; and also they think
themselves to be greatly wronged by some few of their countrymen, and those for
the most part unlearned persons, as Tailours, Shoomakers, and especially
ignorant women, who although they can scarsely read the Oath, yet they do so
bitterly inueigh against it, and the defenders thereof, that they are not
afraid publicly to avouch, that it is far worse to take the oath, then to go
to the Protestants Churches, and to communicate with them in Religious service,
and Sacraments. And doubtless if your Holiness were but rightly informed, how
scandalously, and vnsincerely some of those persons here with us, who would
gladly in outward show be accounted vehement impugners of the Oath, carry
themselves in hugger mugger, of whom, if it shall be necessary, I will
hereafter inform your Holiness, truly I cannot tell, whether the tender
bowels of your fatherly charity would rather be moved to take compassion of
those Catholics, who without dissimulation do defend the Oath for causes which
they think to be reasonable, or to take displeasure against their Adversaries.

9 I partly pitying the miserable state of these my Catholic Countrymen,
partly moved at their earnest request, and partly allured with a fervent desire
to learn certainly the truth in this so important a matter, as is the denying
of the Catholic faith, and the dutiful reuerencing of both the spiritual and
temporal authority, have composed this Disputation of the Oath, faithfully
putting down all the reasons, and and answers on both sides, and for that
cause I have dedicated it unto your Holiness, that after you have carefully
examined all the reasons, for which the English Catholics do think the Oath
may lawfully be taken, your Holiness may provide both for their spiritual and
temporal safety, as to your fatherly wisdom, and charity shall be thought
most convenient. For as it is not fit that heretical opinions, which overthrow
the Church of Christ, should be maintained by Christians for Catholic
doctrine, so neither is it meet, that doubtful opinions, and which are only
probable, and therefore not to be believed with supernatural, and Catholic
belief, should be preached for undoubted assertions of the Catholic faith,
and by some private Doctors be forced by violence upon Christian people to
their exceeding great temporal prejudice, and to the notorious scandal of the
Catholic Religion; but as the Catholic truth, which is necessary to
Salvation, ought by all Christians to be found out, and maintained, so that
doctrine, which is not Catholic, ought to be distinguished and severed from
that which is Catholic.

10 And verily if this controversy had been of such a nature, that the
treating thereof might without danger of doing other men wrong have been
pretermitted, I would not doubtless by examining it have endangered my self to
incur your Holiness high displeasure. But considering that it tends to the
public good of our Country, to the just defending of my own innocence For
some do chiefly for that cause among the unlearned people tax my Apology,
for that it seems to confirm the principal poins, for which your Holiness
has declared the oath to be unlawful.
, and of diverse others, and to the declaring of that obedience, which by the
law of Christ we owe both to the spiritual command of your Holiness, and
also to the temporal precepts of our Kings most excellent Majesty, I have
great hope, and confidence, that your Holiness will not take in evil part,
that I not with any obstinate mind, but to inform more fully your Holiness
of the whole matter, whereof, as we think, you have not as yet been rightly
informed, and to learn the truth in this so weighty a business, I have
sincerely taken upon me this disputation, whereby we may at length be
instructed, what authority we are bound to grant both to your Holiness, and
also to his Majesty according to the principles of the Catholic faith. For
both the spiritual and the temporal power we do reverence with all dutiful
respect; to both of them we desire to render those things, which are theirs,
as well to Caesar, which are Caesar's, as which are Gods to God, what belongs
to either authority according to the grounds of Catholic faith, we intend to
declare sincerely, uprightly, and without any flattery at all; being most
certainly persuaded, that your Holiness will not take in good part, that any
man, upon overmuch affection toward the Sea Apostolic, should attribute to
the Popes Holiness more ample authority, as a thing to be certainly believed
as a point of faith, then which by necessary, and evident consequence can be
proved out of holy Scriptures, or some definition of the church to be granted
him by Christ our Lord: For these me^, as very well says most learned Canus
Lib. 5. de loc. cap. 5. prope fine.
, do weaken not strengthen, do overthrow not establish the authority of the Sea Apostolic. For what will he in the end gain by disputing against
heretics, when they perceive that he takes upon him to defend the Popes
authority not by judgment but by affection, neither that he endeavors to
find out the truth by force of his disputation, but to apply himself to
another man's will and pleasure? Peter has no need of our lying, he has no
need of our flattering.

11 This therefore (most Holy Father) is our most humble supplication to your
Holiness, First, that your Holiness will be pleased to examine diligently the
reasons, for which our English Catholics do think the Oath may lawfully be
taken, and whereof they are persuaded your Holiness is not as yet rightly
informed: Secondly, that after you have thoroughly examined them, you will
vouchsafe in regard of your Pastoral carfulness to instruct them, which
parts of the Oath are, (I do not say only according to a probable opinion of
some Doctors, but according to Catholic doctrine, necessarily to be believed
by all Christians) repugnant to faith and salvation, and therefore cannot be
taken by any Catholic with a safe, and probable conscience: Thirdly, that if
your Holiness shall find, that you have not been rightly informed of those
reasons, for which our English Catholics do think, that the oath may
lawfully be taken, and that therefore they have not in a matter of so great
weight proceeded rashly, and unadvisedly, you will be pleased to receive them
and their Priests into your ancient favor, and that if they, or any of them
have, not through their own fault, but through the indiscreete zeal of others
suffered any loss or detriment in their good name, or other ways, it may be
restored again unto them in that best manner, as shall seem convenient to the
charity, justice, and wisdom of your Holiness. And in the mean time they
will not neglect to pray continually to almighty God that he will grant you a
long, and happy life to the good of the Catholic Church, to the salvation of
your own soul, and to the comfort of them who are wrongfully oppressed.

From my Study the first of June 1613.
THE AVTHORS ADMONITION TO THE READER.
THere be four things, Christian Reader, which I thought good to admonish thee
of. The first is, that if perchance thou art resolved to make an answer to
this Disputation, which I have composed, thou must call to thy remembrance what
is the true state of this present controversy. For it is not sufficient for
thee, as I have before declared, to produce only probable arguments either
against the whole oath, or any part thereof, or else against the Answers,
which I, in the name of them who defend the oath, have alleged, but thou must
bring arguments, which are plainly demonstratiue, and to which no probable
answer can be made; otherwise thou will never sufficiently demonstrate, that
this oath cannot be taken by any man with a probable, and consequently with a
safe conscience.

2 The second, is; that whereas not long since two Doctors of Divinity,
Adolphus Schulckenius, (if he be the only Author of that book which is
published in his name) and Edward Weston have seemed in some sort to answer my
Apology for the Soueraignety of Princes, to whom at this time I being detained
with other occasions, cannot commodiously return a full answer, which
nevertheless thou shall, God willing, ere it be long receive, I thought it
convenient to propound unto thee at this present some things, which thou may
observe in them. And first of all both of them have so guilefully dissembled
the true state of the controversy, as though they would persuade the Reader,
that I intended to bring evident, and demonstratiue reasons against that
doctrine, which defends the Popes authority to depose Princes, and to
dispose of their temporalls, and to prove inuinciblie, that the reasons, and
authorities, which Cardinal Bellarmine brings to confirm the said
authority, to be altogether improbable; whereas contrariwise Cardinal
Bellarmine pretends to demonstrate, and therefore is not afraid to charge
those Catholics with heresy, who deny the aforesaid authority, and I, as
both in my Apology, Nu. 3. and nu. 463.
and in my Apologeticall Answer In the places above cited in the epistle to
his Holiness nu. 2.
, I did purposely observe, intended only probably to show, that Cardinal
Bellarmine has not hitherto sufficiently demonstrated, either by the
testimony of holy Scriptures, or tradition of the Apostles, or any definition
of the Church, or by any Theological arguments, that the Pope has by Christ
his institution any authority at all, either directly, or indirectly, either
absolutely, or respectively to the spiritual good to deprive Sovereign
Princes of their temporal Dominions By which it is manifest that I have not any
way altered the state of the question from that I proposed in my Apology, as
some do apprehend, but that they did not diligently observe the words, which
both in the beginning of my Apology, nu. 3. and in the end, nu. 463 I did
purposely and in express words set down.
: and consequently, that those Catholics, who deny that authority, are not
to be branded with any mark of heresy, or error, as Cardinal Bellarmine
over rashly affirms, or also to be charged with any crime of temeritie.
Which observation if thou carefully wilt consider, thou shall very easily
perceive, that neither Doctor Schulckenius, nor Doctor Weston do in there
Apologies set forth in defense of Cardinal Bellarmine, impugn that doctrine
which I have taught, but which they themselves have invented. For neither do
they demonstrate, that the reasons, or authorities, which Cardinal Bellarmine
has brought, are such, that no probable answer can be made unto them, neither
that the Solutions which I have made unto them are void of all probability.
For if this doctrine concerning the Popes power to depose Princes be
necessarily to be held as a point of faith, as these Doctors following
Cardinal Bellarmine will needs have it to be, it must of necessity follow,
that either Christ, or the Apostles have delivered it to the Church by word, or
writing, or else it must be gathered, I do not say, only by probable, but by
evident, and necessary consequence from those things, which we have received
from Christ, or the Apostles. But let them produce but one only authority out
of holy Scriptures, but one only Apostolical tradition, but one only
definition, but one only Theological demonstration, let them insist thereon,
let them urge it as much as they are able, if I do not give thereunto a
probable answer, I will instantly acknowledge my self to be vanquished: if
they refuse to do this, it is manifest, that they seek euasions, and that
they not for desire to find out the truth, but least they should seem to be
overcome, will rather with clamours, then with reasons yet contend: and
moreover that they do great injury both to the faith of Christ, and the
faithful, whiles they do not desist to thrust upon the faithful people, to
their notable temporal prejudice, their own uncertain opinions for
infallible assertions of the Catholic faith.

3. And verily if for desire to find out, and teach the truth, Doctor
Schulckenius had bin sincerely moved to write, he would doubtless have bin
greatly ashamed both to delude his Reader so grossly, and also to charge me
falsely with such manifest untruths. And first of all to make me odious to
Secular Princes thus he writes in his Dedicatorie Epistle: Not far from the
end.
An other thing there is that the same my Adversary (meaning Widdrington) who
for his own advantage cries out with open mouth, that the power of Princes is
divine, that it is most holily ordained by God through the law of Nature, that
Subjects by the law of God owe obedience to Princes; the same my Adversary, I
say, when so it fitteth his purpose, cries out, that Subjects have power
inherent in themselves, and due unto them by the law of God and nature, which
they can never loose or transfer from them selves, over Kings, to judge them,
to depose them, to choose others, to transfer Kingdoms, to change the manner
of government: Thus writes my Adversary. number. 439. and 460.

4. But truly I cannot but wonder that Doctor Schulckenius is not abashed to
impose upon me so manifest an untruth. For I never affirmed, that Subjects have
power over Kings, to judge them, to depose the^, to choose others, etc. But
this only I affirmed in that place, Nu. 438. and seq.
that whenever Emperors do utterly forsake the Empire, neither will protect
it any longer, but do leave the Kingdom to be spoiled by the enemies, and
consequently will no longer reign over the people, nor be their Emperors, or
Protectors (as, according to the opinion of Lupoldus Babenbergius, and Michael
Coccinius, it happened when the people of Rome transferred the Empire to the
Germans) in that case the Pope, Senate, and people of Rome by the vertuall, at
leastwise consent of all the other people of the West-parts, who were subject
to the Empire, had full right, and authority (which by no custom, or
translation of the Imperial Seat they could loose, it being connaturall and
due unto them by the law of nature To wit, in that case when they had no
Emperor, for then they were absolute of themselves, and subject to none.
) even according to the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine but now related, to
appoint over themselves a new Emperor, and consequently to transfer the
Empire, which the Grecians did only in name hold in the Western parts to
Charles the great, and his Successors, or to any other, the Imperial See
being in those parts at that time as it were vacant, or without any Emperor.

5. Secondly, Page 561. ad nu. 567.
the same Schulckenius toward the end of his book does foully belie me as
affirming an other thing, which is far more dangerous, and does with more
spiteful words aggrauate the same. For, whereas I answering to the authority,
which Cardinal Bellarmine had brought from the example of Queen Athalia, who
by the commandment of Ioiada the high Priest was slain, did write, that
Ioiada the high Priest in killing Athalia did no other thing, then which every
faithful Subject in the like case ought to have done; which for that cause I
did affirm, as in the same place I did declare, for that Ioiada not of his
own authority, but in the name of the King, and of the Common wealth did
command that Athalia being an Usurper, and intending to raise a Conspiracy
against the true and lawful King, and who by the Common wealth was
acknowledged and received for such a one, crying out, in the temple to the
people as the Scripture relates The fourth of the Kings chap. 11. and 2.
Paralip. chap. 23.
, Treachery, Treachery, Conspiracy, Conspiracy; Doctor Schulckenius does so
misconstrue my words, as though I should auerre, that every faithful Subject,
if he only think, that one has by a bad title usurped the Kingdom, may, and
not only may, but also ought to kill such a Prince. And at last he exclaimeth
in this manner: Behold O Kings, and Princes, you have one who is careful of
your security; So obseruant are they of your Princely Majesty, who do
violate and calumniate the Pontificiall authority. Every Subject, says
Widdrington, not only may, but also ought in such a case to do that, which
Ioiada did. O miserable state of Princes, whose Kingdom, and life is subject
to the judgment of every private man? If Cardinal Bellarmine had written such
a thing, what tumults would not Widdrington make! what clamours would he not
raise?

6. But where is your conscience O Schulckenius? where is your sincere and
upright dealing? what has so greatly blinded your mind, that you should not be
ashamed to impose upon me so manifest a slander? Did Ioiada only think, and
not also certainly know, that Athalia had by an unjust title usurped the
Kingdom? Did he not also certainly know that King Ioas a child of seven
years age, the true Heir to the King. dome, whom he himself had delivered
from being murdered, was with him alive and safe in the house of God? Did not
he, before he put Ioas in possession of his Kingdom, and caused Athalia to be
slain, enter into league with the Centurions, who as the Scripture says, went
round about Judah, and gathered together the Levites of all the cities of Judah,
and the chief men of the families of Israel, and they came into Jerusalem:
and all the multitude made a covenant in the house of God with the King: to
wit, to put Ioas their lawful King, who was wrongfully detained from his
Kingdom in possession thereof: and in the Kings name, and by his authority to
cause Athalia the usurper to be slain, especially if he should raise any
conspiracy against the King: For Ioiada did not by his own authority, but in
the Kings name, and by the Kings authority command Athalia to be slain.
Ioiada, says Abulensis, 4. Reg. q. 20. nu. cap. 11.
represented the Kings person, it was lawful for the King to command Athalia
to be slain; Therefore also it was lawful for Ioiada, who represented the
Kings person in all things. Tell me now, I beseech you, O Schulckenius, may not
every faithful Subject lawfully, and ought not he also in the like case, that
is, not by his own private authority, as you faigne, but by the public
authority of the true King, and who is certainly known to be true King, the
Common wealth also consenting there unto, kill an usurper, not who is only
reputed, but also certainly known to be such a one, and who plotteth treason
against the true King? Neither does this doctrine open the way to rebellions,
and conspiracies, or expose the lives of Princes to the judgment of private
men. But you in this very place do lay open a wide gapp to rebellions, and
reuoltings, whiles too too unadvisedly you do affirm, that the consent of the
people is sufficient to give away to an other, the rightful title to a
kingdom from the lawful Heir, and who also has no way offended. Athalia,
say you, Page 558.
without doubt did tyrannically usurp the Kingdom, but having reigned
peaceably six years, it is credible, that, the people by little and little
giving their consent, she obtained a lawful right to the Kingdom. And
nevertheless you knew right well, O Schulckenius, that Ioas, who by
inheritance was the true and rightful King, was at that time safe and alive in
the house of God. And this your seditious doctrine was perchance one cause
among others, wherefore your book was publicly burnt in Paris. And therefore
prudently Becanus, Page 120.
who in the first edition of his Controuersia Anglicana did teach this very
same doctrine, perceiving his error, did in his later corrected Edition cause
that very same sentence to be clean blotted out.

7. Thirdly, the same Doctor Schulckenius, to disgrace me also with the Sea
Apostolic, as though I taught flat heretical doctrine, thus he writes in
the sixth Chapter of his Apology. The second Conclusion Page 256.
: It is heretical to affirm, that the Pope as Pope, and by the law of God
has not any power in temporals. This is against Widdrington, the Lutherans,
and the Caluinists. The third Conclusion Page 258.
. It is heretical, that the Pope as Pope, and by the law of God has not any
power to command Secular Princes in temporal matters, at leastwise in order to
spirituals. This is against Widdrington, the Lutherans, Caluinists, etc. And
nevertheless all my writings do most manifestly teach the flat contrary. For I
do not only by the way, but of set purpose, neither once or twice, but very
oftentimes in express words teach, repeat, and inculcate, that the Pope has
power in temporals not indeed to dispose of them, but to command Secular
Princes in temporals in order to spiritual good. With what face therefore dare
Schulckenius avouch, that I deny that very thing, which in the very same
express words not once or twice, but most frequently I do affirm? I omit now
diverse other slanders, which this Doctor does very falsely lay to my charge, of
which I will ere it be long, if God permit, most clearly purge my self. In
the mean time let the prudent Reader judge, how little credit is to be given
to these kind of men, and whether our English Catholics may safely repose
their faith, there consciences, and all the temporal estate of themselves, and
of their whole posterity, upon the writings of such men, who, to disgrace
their Adversary, do of set purpose corrupt his sayings and sentences, in such
an important matter as is the teaching of heresy.

8. Concerning Doctor Weston I will say little at this present, being also
hereafter, God willing, to expostulate with him more at large (but modestly)
concerning his dangerous doctrine, the bitterness of his style and diverse
slanders wherewith he falsely does charge me. He says, Page 463.
that his months work Disputation is not a reuengement of an angry mind
against me, (and of that he calls God to witness) but a courteous admonition
rather of a friend, and brother; and that patience, Page 156.
and contempt of wrong does moderate the sharpnes of his style; and that he is
not willing to provoke me to anger, and to requite me with railing speeches.
And nevertheless his book, or rather infamous libell is so stuffed with railing
speeches, that his very friends are ashamed of the spiteful bitterness of this
man. For behold the admirable patience of this writer, behold the courteous
admonition of a friend, and brother. Impiety, pride, flattery, and also
heresy almost in every other page he lays to my charge. Thou lie O
Widdrington, thy lies O Widdrington are familiar to him, he often calls me
enemy of mankind, a wicked man, a blasphemer, a profane Idolater of the
Civil state, impious Apologist, impious flatterer, full of Calvin, and Luther,
the vicar of Hell, and impious heretic is frequent in his mouth, and diverse
other reproachful speeches he is often times pleased to bestow upon me. But if
this Doctor, when he is patient, not angry, a contemner of injury, my friend
and also loving brother could belch up such soul, and spiteful nicknames,
what bitter, and venomous speeches, I pray you, if he had bin angry, would he
have cast out against me from his raging stomach? But I pity the weak
judgment of this man, of what a weak judgment he is this his book does
plainly show, whereof also certain Doctors of Doway have given sufficient
testimony, who for that cause would not permit, that his book should be
printed at Doway with public approbation. His spiteful speeches do nothing
hurt me, nor profit his cause; doubtless they do great harm to his own
conscience. But in this he does me exceeding great wrong, (and thereof I call
God to be a witness, and revenger against him) in shameful affirming, that I
conspired to take away his life. First of all, says he, thou beginnest a
tragedy against me which should have gloriously ended with my blood, if it had
succeeded according to thy desire. God is my witness, that this is most false,
which he charge me withal. For I never, I call the same God to witness, did
even in thought plot any thing against the person of this man, neither did I
ever wish to him any thing worse then to my self. That also which he says,
that I upon spleen against the Jesuits, wrote my Apology for the rightful
power of Princes, and that he by private letters did admonish me of my
impiety, and heresy, is most untrue; For neither upon any spleen against the
Jesuits, whose Order I do reverence with all dutiful respect, whom this
Doctor having now with the air changed also his mind, does in his book
egregiously flatter, I was moved to write my apology; This only did very much
dislike me, and which at the first caused me to write, that some of these
Religious men did so stiffly cleave to their own opinions, that they would
needs have them to be followed by all Catholics to the exceeding scandal of
the Church, and to the great temporal prejudice of our English Catholics.
Neither did this Doctor send his letters to me, or imagined that they should
come to my hands, but by chance by means of a friend of mine I came to a sight
of them. And verily, if both in the Western, and Northern parts of this Land
it had not been reported by many, that a Doctor of Divinity had excellently
confuted my Apology, and showed most clearly, that many heretical
propositions were, forsooth, therein contained, I would never have answered
such an idle Pamphlet. But seeing that he secretly, and treacherously accusing
me of heresy, and Paganism did first assault me, the most just law of nature
gives me leave to have care of my credit and good name, in a matter of such
moment as is the falling into heresy, and to free my self by lawful means
from such a foul imputation. And if he in assaulting me has by the blameless
defending of my innocence received any scarre, let him not attribute the same
to my just defense, but to his wrongful setting upon me, who has prepared for
himself a pitfall, wherein be might be caught. I am a Catholic, and a child
of the Catholic Roman Church; and if any man of what degree soever he be,
shall wrongfully accuse me of heresy, let him know assuredly, that by the
assistance of almighty God, I will by all those means, which God, and nature
has granted to innocent men to defend themselves, to the uttermost of my power
clear my self of those slanders, until the Church being perfectly informed
of my opinion, shall in plain, and particular words, (for no man can recall
errors, unless he know particularly what they be) condemn the same.

9. The third thing, which I would admonish thee of (courteous Reader) is, that
when this present Disputation was in the Press, I had a sight of the
Apologeticall Disputation of Leonard Lessius, wherein I found an objection
alleged by him to impugn the Oath, which his English Recapitulator (fearing
perchance that it would not be pleasing to our English Catholics) did make no
mention thereof, whereas of the rest of Lessius his arguments against the said
Oath, he does not so much make an Abridgement, or Recapitulation, but rather
relate them word by word. This Lessius therefore affirms, that the Kings of
England are Feudaries to the Pope, and hold their Kingdom of the Pope as it
were in free-farme, and consequently that no man can lawfully swear, that the
Pope in no case whatsoever has power to depose the King. And this objection,
says Lessius, he never saw well answered. The same exception also, although
not in express words, yet in very deed is taken by Martin Becanus, who
although in his English Controversy set forth by him this last year, he does
expressly affirm, Page 102.
that it is certain to him, that all the parts of the Oath are not false, if
they be well declared: For these be true, 1. That King James is lawful King of
England, Scotland, Ireland. 2. That in the same Kingdoms he is Sovereign, or
supreme Lord in temporals; yet in the same his English Controversy corrected,
and set forth by him again this present year, For his former Edition was
censured at Rome by a special command of his Holiness, as in the Censure it is
expressed.
he affirms with Cardinal Bellarmine, that the Kings of England are
Feudaries to the Pope. And therefore whereas before he did write, that it is
certain to him, that King James is Sovereign Lord in temporals, now in his
corrected Edition he leaves out this word (Sovereign) or supreme, and only
says, that King James is Lord in temporals.

10. But to this objection Sir Thomas More once Lord Chancelour of England,
whose authority both for his singular learning, and particular devotion to the Sea Apostolic is greatly to be regarded, does very well answer In the
Supplication of souls, page, 296
in these words. If he (the Author of the Beggars Supplication) say, as indeed
some writers say, that King John made England, and Ireland tributarie to the
Pope, and the Sea Apostolic by the grant of a thousand marks: we dare
surely say again, that it is untrue; and that all Rome neither can show such a
grant, nor never could, and if they could, it were nothing worth: For never
could any King of England give away the Realm to the Pope, or make the land
tributarie, though he would. Seeing therefore that no King has power to give
his Kingdom to an other man without the consent of the Kingdom, which
comprehends not only the Barons, but also the communaltie, neither does
Cardinal Bellarmine, or Becanus allege any one writer, who affirms that the
communaltie consented to this gift, or donation of King John, or of any other
King whatsoever, if that may be called a gift, which was not freely given, but
rather extorted through fear (for Pope Innocent, as Matthew Paris In the life
of King John: the year of our Lord, 1212. and 1213.
relates, would not absolve, or make peace with King John, who was
excommunicated, and forsaken almost by the whole Kingdom, and was by the King
of France brought into great distress, unless he would resign his Kingdom
into the Popes hands: wherefore King John (as Matthew Paris says The year
1213.
) being brought into despair, did condescend to the persuasions of Pandulfus
the Popes Legate, and did grant not without grief the underwritten form of
peace) I do not perceive, how the aforesaid objection does sufficiently prove,
either the kingdom of England to be tributarie to the Pope, and the King to be
his Feudarie, although we should also admit, that the King did give the
Kingdom to the Pope by the consent of his Barons, or that the English
Catholics may not probably persuade themselves, and this their persuasion
confirm by Oath, that King James, and not the Pope is their Sovereign Lord in
temporals, and that the Pope has not by reason of this Sovereignty or supreme
dominion in temporals any power to depose the King.

11. To conclude, I would gladly, that Becanus would sincerely declare unto us,
for what cause he in his new corrected English Controversy, was moved to put
out that word (lawful King) whereof in his former Edition he made no scruple,
but was certain thereof. This very last year Becanus was certain, that King
James is lawful King of England, and that he is Sovereign or supreme Lord of
this Kingdom in temporals. This year it is lawful for us English men,
according to Becanus opinion, to acknowledge King James to be King of England,
but not lawful King, to be our Lord in temporals, but now our Sovereign Lord.
What manner of Allegiance we may according to his opinion make the next year,
seeing that certainties do so easily become to him uncertainties, we cannot
know as yet. In very truth I am sorry, that such and so learned men do in a
matter of so great importance upon slight reasons so easily change their
opinions, and do by their inconstancy, and mutabilitie seek to bring us
English Catholics into so great calamities. And whether necessity compels
us to oppose our selves with all our might against this kind of doctrine, which
especially here in England is both very scandalous to the Catholic Religion,
and greatly prejudicial to the temporal estate of us English Catholics, I
remit to the judgment of any indifferent man, who is both well affected to the Sea Apostolic, and also to the Kings Majesty.

12. The fourth and last thing, whereof I would admonish thee, is, that when
the printing of this Disputation was almost fully finished, there was sent unto
me an English book printed but lately, and entitled, A Supplement to the
discourse of Master Doctor Barlowes Answer, etc. composed by F. T. Wherein
this Author in the two first chapters makes a long discourse to prove, that
this Oath of Allegiance is altogether unlawful, and cannot with a safe
conscience be taken by any Catholic. And this is the sum and substance of
his whole Discourse. First of all he supposes that in this Oath is denied the
Popes power not only to depose, but also to excommunicate Princes, if they
shall deserve it, and the safety of souls shall necessarily require it. From
whence he afterward Page 66. nu. 117.
concludes, that although the Oath does not expressly affirm, the Kings
Majesty to be the supreme head of the English Church, nor in plain words
deny the Pope so to be; yet it supposes, and implies both the one, and the
other; and thereupon denies the Popes authority to excommunicate, and depose
a temporal Prince. And howsoever the matter be otherwise colored, it is
evident enough, that the true reason, for which the said authority of the Pope
is impugned in the Oath, is no other, but because the Kings Majesty is held to
be no way subject to the Pope, yea and to be himself supreme head of the
Church of God in England. This being supposed, this Author endeavors to prove
the Oath to be repugnant to the law of God, of nature, of Nations, to the
Civil, and Canonical law.

13. Out of the old Testament he produces that saying of Deuteron. 17. Si
difficile and ambiguum, etc. If thou forsee the judgment to be hard and
ambiguous etc. rise and go up to the place which the Lord thy God shall
choose, and thou shall come to the Priests of the Levites stock, and to the
Judge that shall be for the time, etc. And if any shall be so proud as not to
obey the commandment of the Priest, that shall for that time minister unto the
Lord thy God, by the sentence of the Judge let that man die, etc. So that it
belonged to the High Priest absolutely, to command the Judge to give sentence
of death against the transgressions of his commandment. Therefore the same
authority have also the High Priests in the new Testament. He brings also out
of the old Testament, certain other particular facts of Priests, and Kings to
prove the same. Out of the new Testament he alleges that saying of our
Savior to Saint Peter, whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. Feed my sheep, the
killing of Ananias, and Saphira, and some other such like examples. Out of the
law of nature he shows, Nu. 69.
that in all Societies an inferior is subject to the Superior, the less
perfect to the more perfect, as the wife to the husband, the servant to his
Lord, the scholar to his Master, the subject to his Prince, policy to
Religion, temporals to spirituals, and he that has care of temporals to him
who is Superior in spirituals, and so the Common wealth must be subject to the
Church. Out of the law of Nations he shows, Nu. 77.
that in all Common wealths, even among the Panyms, the Religious Society had
the pre-eminence above the Common wealtb in all things that any way appertained
to Religion. Out of the civil law he brings many Constitutions of Emperors,
and the Statute laws also of this Kingdom to prove the Popes Primacie in
spirituals. And finally in the second chapter he only alleges that decree of
the Council of Lateran, which has bin so often urged, and answered. This is
the substance and summarie of his discourse.

14. But first of all, who knows not, but that one inconvenience being
granted, many absurdities do presently follow, The Supposition of this Author
for so much as concerns the Popes power to excommunicate Princes and his
Primacie in spirituals, to wit, that they are denied in this Oath, as this
Author supposes as manifest, but proves it with no reason at all, is very
untrue, as in this Disputation we have abundantly showed. And verily it is
exceeding strange, that learned men should not blush to affirm, with such
confidence, that to be his Majesty's intention and meaning which he himself
in public writings does expressly profess not to be his meaning, and so often
to inculcate without any solid proof that very argument, which both his
Majesty himself, and many others have oftentimes very sufficiently confuted.

15. Secondly, how vain that consequence is, which this Author does infer
Page 67.
from that maxim of the Lawyers, Accessorium sequitur principale, The
accessorie follows the principal, therefore the Church having power over the
soul, has consequently power over our bodies, and goods, unless it be
understood of power to command corporal things, as they are referred to
spirituals, every man of learning may easily perceive. For out of this
principle we might also argue in this manner: The accessorie follows the
principal, therefore he that is Lord of all horses, must be Lord of all
bridles: The Pope has power over the souls of Kings, therefore also over
their lives. Let this Author explain unto us, what the Lawyers do understand
by this word (accessorie,) and what by this word (principal) in this their
vulgar maxim, which has many limitations, and by diverse learned men, is
diversely understood; in the mean time we deny his consequence. The like
argument Lessius In his Apologeticall Disputation page 201.
does make: The Pope, says he, has power to excommunicate Kings, therefore he
has power to depose them; because he that can punish with a greater
punishment, can also punish with a less. But if we may rightly argue from one
thing to another which is of a diverse nature, condition, and degree, we may
also conclude thus: The Pope has power to excommunicate Kings, therefore he
has also power to kill them; because he that has power to do the greater,
has power to do the less And that excommunication is a greater punishment,
then corporal death, Cardinal Bellarmine expressly affirms lib. 3. de
Ecclesia. cap. 6. and lib. 3. de Laicis cap. 21. and cites for it Saint
Augustine lib. 1. contra Aduersarium legis, and prophet cap. 17. as I observed
in my Apology nu. 183.
. A man has power to understand, therefore also to fly. A Priest, who is no
Bishop, has power to absolute from sins, therefore also from debts. The same
Priest has by the means of the Sacraments power, to give the Kingdom of
heaven, therefore also earthly Kingdoms. Be not these I beseech you, very
fair arguments to persuade English Catholics to cast away all their goods,
and to deny their dutiful allegiance to their Prince?

16. Thirdly, it is untrue which this Author affirms, that the doctrine
concerning the Popes power to depose Princes is in this Oath plainly abiured as
impious and heretical: For only this doctrine is in this Oath abiured as
impious, and heretical, that Princes which be excommunicated, or deprived by
the Pope may be deposed, or murdered by their Subjects or any other
whatsoever. Which position, as we will declare beneath, is according to the
common sense of the words so to be understood, that it is in the free power of
the Subjects, or any other whatsoever to depose, or if they will, to murder
Princes, which he excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, and therefore it may
worthily be abiured as heretical.

17. Fourthly, whosoever will attentively read the discourse of this Author,
will most clearly perceive, that he does not forcibly prove any other thing
from the law of God, or nature, then that the temporal power is in spirituals,
and in temporals, as they become spirituals subject to the spiritual power of
the Church to command, but not to punish by way of coercion I said by way of
coercion for the Church as I have often repeated in my Apology, and
Apologeticall Answer has power to impose a temporal punishment by way of
command if it be necessary for our souls health, but not by way of coercion.
So that if we will not obey the command of the Church imposing such a temporal
punishment, she can only for our disobedience punish us finally with spiritual
punishments, as by inflicting spiritual Censures, but not by depriving us of
our lands, or lives.
with temporal punishments, but only with spiritual. And so the light of
reason does teach us, that every Superior may chastise him who in subjection
is his inferior with some punishments, to wit, which are proportionable to his
Superiority, As a Master may punish his scholar with whipping him, or
expelling him his school, a father the son in like manner and by disheriting
him, and thrusting him out of his family, a husband his wife almost in like
manner, and so the spiritual Common wealth with spiritual, and the temporal
with temporal punishments.
that is, by depriving him of those goods, and privileges, which are proper to
that community, whereof he is Superior; But that any Superior besides the
supreme Governor of the Civil Commonwealth has power to punish his
inferiors, with punishment of death, depriving of any corporal member or of
all temporal goods, cannot necessarily be deduced from the light of natural
reason.

18. Fifthly, he that will diligently consider the under written sentences of
Saint Augustine, and Cardinal Bellarmine will presently comprehend of what
force is that text of Deuteronomie 17. If this text had bin a forcible argument
to prove the Popes power to dispose of temporals, doubtless it would not have
bin omitted by Cardinal Bellarmine in his Controversies, where he brings
other places of the old Testament to the same purpose, which I have in my
Apology answered.
and other such like places of the old Testament, which is a figure of the new,
to prove that the Pope has power to depose, or kill Princes, because the High
Priest of the old law had that power, although we should admit, which cannot be
sufficiently proved, (as hereafter, God willing, we will show more at large)
that the High Priest had that authority. Excommunication, says Cardinal
Bellarmine, Lib. 2. de Ecclesia. cap 6.
is now in the Church in steed of corporal death, which was in the old
Testament, and which a common wealth has in temporals. And Saint Augustine, q.
39. in Deuteron.
Excommunication does now this in the Church, which killing did in the old
Testament. In which place he compares that saying of Deuteronomie cap. 24.
He shall be slain, and thou shall take away evil from among you, with that
saying of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 5. Take away evil from among your selves. And
in his book de fide and operibus cap. 2. he says, that the material sword,
which Moses, and Phinees did use, was a figure of the degradations, and
excommunications, which are to be used in the new law, seeing that in the
Church discipline, says Saint Augustine, the visible sword was to cease.

19. Sixthly, those places of the new Testament, Whatsoever thou shall loose,
etc. Feed my sheep, also the reason which this Author alleges out of Father
Parsons, to wit, that otherwise the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth should be
imperfect, and not sufficiently provided for, I have heretofore in my Apology
Nu. 35. and seq. and nu. 203. and seq.
satisfied. That corporal killing of Ananias, and Saphira, and the visible
delivering of the fornicatour into the hands of Satan, are to be referred to
the grace of miracles. Neither do I think this Author will affirm to be in
the Popes power to kill wicked men with his only word.

20. Seventhly, from the law of Nations this Author proves no other thing,
then that all Nations had ever Religion in most great estimation, and that they
preferred Religion before policy, but that the Priests of the Gentiles, as
Priests, had power to punish any man with pain of death, or loss of all
goods, this did not proceed from the law of nature granting to Priests such an
authority, but from the private, and peculiar positive laws of every Nation.
Which Cicero Pro domo sua.
cited by this Author does most clearly confirm, saying, that it was most
notably, and divinely ordained by the ancient Romans, that the Bishops should
have the chief command in matters that appertained as well to the
Commonwealth, as to the Religion of the Gods. Out of the Civil law, this
Author does only prove that the Pope is supreme head of the Church in
spirituals.

21. Lastly, to that decree of the Council of Lateran, which is by our
Adversaries so often inculcated, I have given diverse Answers in the Preface of
my Apologeticall Answer, Nu. 43.
which this Author does dissemble. One only of them he does briefly insinuate,
and most slenderly confute, to wit, that by those men, who there are said, not
to have principal Lords over them, are not understood Emperors, Kings, and
absolute Princes, but other petty Lords, who are subject to Kings, and
absolute Princes: for that Fridericke the Emperor in the fifth year after this
Council of Laterane, did make the same law in the self same words, changing
only spiritual punishments into temporal, who could not by the name of them,
who have not principal Lords over them, understand himself, and other
absolute Princes. From whence I probably collected, that those words (who has
not a principal Lord) could not of themselves comprehend Kings, and absolute
Princes, who unless they are expressly named, are not to be understood in
penal laws. And to say, as this Author barely, and without proof affirms,
that the Emperor did not indeed by those words comprehend Kings, but the Pope
did comprehend them, is to say, not to demonstrate: considering that if that
Council would in that decree have comprehended absolute Princes, it might as
easily have specified them by the proper and peculiar names of Kings, and
absolute Princes, as by those general words of Principal Lords, or who have
not principal Lords over them, especially seeing that the same Council in
other Decrees did expressly use the peculiar names of Princes.

22. Therefore until any one shall clearly demonstrate, I do not say probably
only show, that the Answers, which I have given to that Lateran Council, are
altogether improbable, there can no forcible argument be drawn from that
Council to prove evidently and inuincibly, that the opinion which holds the
Pope to have power to depose Princes, is so certain that the contrary cannot
be defended by Catholics without note of heresy, error, or temeritie. And
let this suffice for this present to show the weakness of this Authors more long
then solid discourse, for that it may be, that we will hereafter more exactly
examine all his arguments in particular, and show the weakness of every one of
them.

23. Lastly, this Author urges greatly certain words of Saint Chrysostom,
which I thought expedient in this English Edition to examine, for that I
understand some of our Countrymen have of late made great reckoning of those
words, as though they were clear for the Popes authority to depose Princes.
This Author therefore endeavoring to prove out of the law of Moses, that the
spiritual power was then the supreme power on earth and commanded all
temporal authority, and consequently might chastise temporal Princes, (he
means with temporal punishments) when it was necessary for the glory of
God, and the good of the Church, he brings Cap. 1. nu. 31.34.
the example of King Ozias, 2. Paralip 26.
(to which nevertheless I have fully answered in my Apology Nu. 354. and seq.
) whom AZarias the high Priest Azarias was not the high Priest as this Author
imagines, but only a weekly Priest with 80. others. Genebrard in his
Chronology the year of the world 3408.
with the assistance of 80. Priests, most valiant men (says the Scripture)
because he presumed to offer incense, and would not obey his admonition but
threatened him and the Priests, and was therefore stricken by almighty God with
leprosy, did not only command him to depart out of the temple, saying Egredere
de Sanctuario, etc. Go out of the Sanctuary, etc. but also thrust him out of
the same, festinato expulerunt eum, they thrust him out in haste, and was
forced by the sentence of the Priests (according to the prescript of the law,
Leuit. 13.
) to live in a house a part so long as he lived. And I cannot omit, says this
Author, Nu. 34. etc.
to touch here by the way, what Saint Chrysostom Hom. 4 de verbis. Isaiae Vidi
dominum.
observes further in this example, to wit, that whereas OZias being leprous
did not only dwell in the City (though in a house a part) but also reign still
for some years even until he died, he ought to have been cast both out of
the City, and also out of his Kingdom, and that Almighty God was so highly
offended, because the same was not performed, that he withdrew the spirit of
prophecy from Esaias, and other Prophets during the life and reign of OZias.

24. Exiuit, says Saint Chrysostom, cum lepra, etc. The King went out of the
temple with a leprosy, and yet they did not cast him out of the City, for the
respect they bare to the Kingly diadem, but he still sat in his throne
breaking again the law of God: what then? God being angry with the Jews
interrupted the prophecy. So Saint Chrysostom: And again a little after,
speaking in the person of God. Ego, (says he) quod mei numeris feci, etc. I
have done my part (that is to say, I have stricken Ozias with a leprosy) and
you are afraid to cast him being unclean out of the City: you bear reverence
to his Kingly dignity violating the law of God, etc. I do therefore speak no
longer to the Prophets, neither do I any more give the grace of spirit, etc.
Silet spiritus, etc. The grace of prophetical spirit was silent or ceased, and
God did not show himself, because under that unclean man there was no grace.
Thus says Saint Chrysostom upon occasion of these words of the Prophet Esaias,
Isai. 6.
Et factum est anno quo mortuus est Ozias Rex, vidi Dominum, etc. For where as
all the Prophets used to declare the time and year of the Kings reign when
they prophesied, Saint Chrysostom notes, that Esaias here omitted that custom,
and did not speak of the life and reign of Ioathan, in whose time he had his
vision, but of the death of King OZias, during whose reign the spirit of
prophecy had ceased for the causes before declared.

25. Well then hereby it appears that God was offended, not only because
Ozias was not cast out of the City, but also because he was suffered still to
reign. Consedit in solio, says the holy Father, legem Dei rursum
transgrediens, he sat still in his throne transgressing again the law of
God, that is to say, This (that is to say) of this Author as against that which
Saint Chrysostom says in this place.
as he had broken the law of God before, in presuming to sacrifice, and
threatening the Priests; so also did he again transgress, and violate the same
in retaining his Kingdom being Leprous: and because the same was permitted,
and more respect borne to his Kingly dignity, then to the execution of Gods
law, therefore says Saint Chrysostom, God punished the whole state not
permitting his Prophets to prophecy, as they were wont.

26. Whereupon I infer, that seeing the express law of God ordained, that the
cause of Leprosy should be judged and determined wholly by the Priests, and
that Ozias was subject to this law, it follows that as he was expelled out of
the temple by the Priests and forced by their sentence to live in a house
apart, (though within the City) so ought he also to have bin by their
sentence cast out both of the City, and of his Kingdom. And if we consider
but only that which was done by the Priests in this case of OZias, it cannot be
denied but that they had a judicial power over his person, seeing that they
both commanded him to go out of the temple before he was leprous, and
afterward thrust him out, yea and confinde him to live in a house apart. For
though the Scripture does not express, that his confining and separation was
ordained by them, yet it could not be otherwise: seeing that the law ordained
Leuit. 13.
expressly, that every leprous man should be brought unto the Priest, and that
ad arbitrium eius separabitur, he should be separated at his judgment, or
arbitrament, which our Savior himself Matthew. 8. Marc. 1. Luc. 17.
acknowledged, when he remitted the leprous (whom he cured) to the Priests.
Thus writes the Author of this Supplement.

27. But I wonder that this Author would urge so vehemently for him self the
authority of S. Chrysostom, who in this very place is so plain against his
doctrine. First therefore this Author affirms, that Azarias and the other
Priests did not only command King Ozias to depart out of the temple, but they
did also thrust him out of the same, meaning as it seems, as we say, by head
and shoulders, and by laying violent hands upon him, whereas Saint Chrysostom
in that very place seems to affirm, that they did not thrust him out by
violence, but only by their words, and commandment, and crying out against him
as an unclean person, Et egressus est Rex, says Saint Chrysostom, omnibus
exemplum factus, purgatumque est templum and erectus est nemine propellente,
quique sacerdotium sibi vellet sumere, and hoc quod habebat perdidit: Et exiuit
e templo. And the King went forth being made an example to all, and the temple
was purged, and he was cast forth no man driving him forth, and whereas he
would arrogate to himself the Priesthood, he lost that which he had: And he
departed out of the temple. And the reason why the Priests ought not to lay
violent hands on the Kings person, Saint Chrysostom did a little before give
in these words. But the King did not abide the admonition of the Priest, but
being puffed up with arrogance opened the Temple, and entered into the
Sanctuary to offer incense. But what did God? After the Priest was contemned,
and the Priestly dignity trodden under foot, nec quicquam praeterea potuit
Sacerdos (Nam sacerdotis tantum est arguere, etc. Neither could the Priest do
any thing more (For it is the office of a Priest only to reprove, and to give a
free admonition, not to raise arms, not to use targetts, not to shake a lance,
nor to shoot arrows, nor to cast darts, but only to reprove and to give a
free admonition.) After therefore the Priest had reproved, and yet the King did
not yield, but took weapons, sheilds, and spears, and used his power, then
the Priest said to God, I have done that which belonged to my office, I can do
no more, help thou the Priesthood, which is trodden under foot, etc. Thus
Saint Chrysostom. By which you may perceive, how far was the apprehension of
Saint Chrysostom from those violent and bloody courses, which some vehement
defenders of the Popes power to depose and kill Princes Suarez especially, as
shall appears beneath in my Appendix against him in the last Sec. of the first
part. See also beneath cap. 5. sec. 3. nu 4. etc.
do affirm, may belong by the law of God to Priestly function.

28. Neither can this Author sufficiently prove, that it belonged to the
Priests of the old law to thrust out by violence a leper out of the City, but
only by command, and by declaring that he was a leper, which declaration did
appertain only to the Priests by the express appointment of almighty God,
but that the Priests, after they had declared one to be infected with leprosy,
and had charged him to depart, and the people to put their command in execution
according as the law did prescribe, had any further authority (as they were
Priests) to cast him out by violence, cannot be convinced out of the old law.
Even as in the new law it belongs only to the Clergy to declare whether one
be infected with heresy, which was figured in the old law by leprosy, but
after they have declared one to be infected with heresy, and have used
against him Ecclesiastical Censures, and have delivered him to the Secular
Magistrate, commanding or requesting him to proceed according to the equity of
the law, they have no further power, (as they are Clergy men) to use any
corporal violence against him, and if it shall please the temporal Prince to
pardon his life, the Clergy cannot take it away, as out of Dominicus Bannes Cap
7. sec. 2. nu. 17. in the end.
I will show beneath.

29. Secondly, that other saying of this Author, to wit, that according to
Saint Chrysostom God was offended not only because Ozias was not cast out of
the City, but also because he was suffered still to reign, is also contrary to
Saint Chrysostomes words, which have bin related by this Author. And in the
very next homile Saint Chrysostom declares the whole matter more particularly
in these words: I will only add one thing, says he, Hom. 5. de verbis Isaiae.
which we demanded in the beginning, what is the cause, that seeing in
prophecies all are wont to set down the time, wherein the Kings did reign,
this Prophet Esaias omitting that names the time, wherein OZias died, speaking
in this manner, And it came to pass in the year wherein King Ozias dyed. And
yet he might have expressed the time of the King, as all prophets usually did.
But he did not so: For what cause did he not so? It was an ancient custom to
cast a leprous out of the City, to the end that those who lived in the City
might be the better, and that the leprous himself should not present to men,
prone to give reproachful speeches an occasion of scoffing and derision: but
that he abiding out of the city might have solitarines to be in steed of a
veil, or cover, against the reproach of calamity. And this ought this King to
have suffered after his leprosy, but he did not suffer it, those that were in
the City reuerencing him for his Sovereignty: but he remained at his house
privately. This provoked God to wrath, this hindered the prophecy, and which
came to pass in the time of Hely the word of God was precious, neither was
there any commanding vision. Thus Saint Chrysostom, whereby it is manifest,
that Saint Chrysostom does not affirm, that God was offended, that Ozias was
thrust out of his Kingdom, but only that he was not thrust out of the City,
according as the law in Leuiticus did ordain.

30. Wherefore the meaning of those former words of Saint Chrysostom, he sat
in his throne breaking again the law of God, is clear by these later which I
did now relate. For as before he being no Priest transgressed by presuming to
offer incense, so now again he being leprous transgresses by presuming to
remain in the City, which the law did forbid. Also this Author may perchance
use some cunning in translating those words of Saint Chrysostom, Consedit in
solio legem Dei rursum transgrediens, He sat still in this throne breaking
again the law of God, as though Ozias had offended again by remaining still
in his throne, or continuing to be King; wherefore this word still may be
equivocal, and of purpose put by this Author to signify the sense aforesaid,
whereas the words of Saint Chrysostom are only, He sat in this throne
breaking again the law of God; not for that he sat in his throne, or which is
all one, kept still his Royal dignity, although his son Ioa^han did
administer it in his name, but for that he departed not out of the City, as
Saint Chrysostom expressly declares.

31. Now concerning the example it self of King Ozias, who for his leprosy
was cast out of the temple, and perchance also out of the City, which Cardinal
Bellarmine brought to prove that the Pope has authority to depose Princes, I
have in my Apology answered at large, neither has Doctor Schulckenius, as
hereafter, God willing, I will plainly show, convinced those answers to be
improbable. The argument which Cardinal Bellarmine brought was in substance
this: The Priests of the old law had authority to thrust a leper, who does in
the new law signify an heretic, out of the temple and out of the City, yea
and if he were a King to deprive him of his Kingdom, or at leastwise of the
administration thereof, as appears by this example of King Ozias, therefore
the Priests of the new Testament have authority to deprive heretical Kings of
their Kingdoms, or at least wise to suspend them from the administration
thereof.

32. Among other sufficient answers, which I gave to this argument, I denied
the consequence; to wit, that although the Priests of the old Testament had
authority to deprive a King, being infected with leprosy, of the
administration of his Kingdom, so long as he remained a leper, (for that I do
not think it to be scarce probable that they had authority to deprive him
wholly of his Regal authority,) nevertheless it does not therefore follow,
that the Priests of the new law have the like authority. My reason was, for
that the Priests of the old Testament had by the special law of God authority
granted to judge and determine when any man was infected with leprosy, and
withal there was a peculiar punishment appointed by the law against those who
were infected with leprosy, to wit, that they should live extra castra out of
the camp, that is, a part from the rest, (for then the Isralites were as an
army of men marching forwards day by day, in the desert For if it should be
so, that a King living out of the City, could not possibly govern his
Kingdom, and in the old Testament Kings being infected with leprosy were by
the law of God compelled to live out of the City, it follows necessarily,
that God gave leave to the Priests or to the people to deprive a leprous King,
or to declare him deprived of the government of his Kingdom, so long as he
remained a leper: But the Priests in the new Testament have doubtless
authority given them by Christ to judge, determine and decide, what is heresy,
and who is infected therewith, and also to punish with Excommunication and
other Ecclesiastical punishments any one who is infected with heresy, which
punishment of Excommunication (which as Suarez Tom. 5. disp. 1. sec. 4.
defines it, is an Ecclesiastical Censure, whereby one is deprived of the
Ecclesiastical communion of the faithful) was figured by that separation of
the leper from the company of those who were in the camp: yet because the
depriving a King of the administration of his Kingdom does not by the law of
God follow the sentence of Excommunication, which by the law of God only
depriueth of Ecclesiastical communion, as in the old Testament it did follow
the living of a King out of the City, and a part from the rest of the people,
as our Adversaries do suppose, this example of King Ozias is of little worth
to prove the Popes power to depose heretical Princes.

33. Finally I cannot but observe, how well forsooth this Author, who is so
vehement against the Oath, and for the Popes power to depose Princes, does
agree with Cardinal Bellarmine in urging this argument, which is taken from
the example of King Ozias; For Cardinal Bellarmine affirms, that King Ozias
was thrust out both of the City, and also deprived of his Kingdom, this Author
auerreth, that he was neither thrust out of the City nor out of his Kingdom:
Others, as Abulensis, Nu 4. Reg. cap. 15. q. 4.
do affirm that he lived indeed out of the City, wherein Josephus also does
agree, Lib. 9. Antiquitat. cap. 11. A great Historiographer of the Jews, and
living before Jerusalem was destroyed by the Romans, and therefore it is
likely that he know all the particular facts of those Kings. So writes
Abulens. q. 9. in 15. cap. lib. 10. Regum.
but not deprived of his Kingdom, but that he remained still true King not
only in name but also by right, although by reason of his infirmity his son
Ioathan did in his fathers name and by his authority govern it: and reason
does confirm the same, for the depriving of dominion, as well observes
Suarez, when it is done, does always continue, but King Ozias was only to live
out of the City for the time of his leprosy, so that if he had bin cured, he
might have returned again to his palace within the City, and consequently to
the government of his Kingdom, and therefore he could not be deprived of his
Regal authority, but at the most as it were suspended, for the time of his
leprosy, Disp. 15. de Excommun. sec. 6. nu. 3.
from executing thereof, neither is it strange, that a man may have right or
dominion of a Kingdom, which he cannot govern as appears in children, who
may be true Kings, although they cannot govern it.

A Summarie of this whole Disputation.
Chapter 1. Wherein certain general rules are prescribed out of the doctrine
of Franciscus Suarez to understand how we are to interpret the words of any
law. Chap 2. Wherein two arguments of Iacobus Gretzer, and Leonardus Lessius,
against the first branch of the Oath from the beginning to those words, And
that the Pope etc. are examined. Chap. 3. Wherein five objections of Cardinal
Bellarmine, Gretzer, Lessius, Becanus, Suarez, and of others against the second
branch of the Oath, And that the Pope etc. to those words, And also I do
swear from my heart etc. are at large discussed. Chap. 4 Wherein three
arguments of Cardinal Bell. Gretzer, Lessius, Capellus, and of others against
the third branch of the Oath, Also I do swear from my heart etc. to those
words, And I do further swear etc. are propounded and solued. Chap. 5.
Wherein three objections of Lessius, Capellus, and of others against the fourth
branch of the Oath, And I do further swear etc. to those words. And I do
believe etc. are answered. Chap. 6. Wherein five arguments of Cardinal Bell.
Gretzer, Capellus, and of others against the fifth branch of the Oath, And I do
believe etc. unto those words: which I acknowledge by good etc. are satisfied.
Chap. 7. Wherein five objections of Gretzer, Lessius and of others against the
sixth bra^ch of the Oath, which I acknowledge by good, unto those words, And al
these things I do plainly etc. are thoroughly debated Chap. 8. Wherein two
arguments of Lessius, and of others against the seventh branch of the Oath, And
all these things I do plainly etc. unto those words, And I do make this
recognition etc. are discussed. Chap 9. Wherein one objection of Father Parsons
against the last branch of the Oath, And I do make this recognition etc. unto
the end, is most clearly answered. Chap. 10. Wherein five arguments of
Cardinal Bell. Lessius, and of others taken from the title of the Act, from
the Popes Breues and the authority of the Divines of these times, from the
scandal, from the bad success of those Priests who have maintained the Oath,
and from a certain Revelation to impugn in general the Oath, are at large
examined Then follows an Appendix wherein all the arguments, which Franciscus
Suarez has of late brought to prove the Popes power to depose Princes, and to
impugn the Oath of allegiance are sincerely related and answered. Lastly,
there is adjoined the Preface to Widdringtons Apologeticall answer, wherein he
clears himself from four heinous crimes, heresy, error, scandal, and
temeritie, wherewith some have wrongfully charged his Apology which he wrote
against Cardinal Bell. his reasons to prove the Popes power to depose Princes.
THE FORM OF THE OATH DIVIDED INTO EIGHT branches in that manner as it is
treated of in this Disputation.
1. I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare
in my conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord King James
is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries page 13.

2. And that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church
or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any power or
authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or
Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy him, or his
Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and
obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise tumult, or to offer any violence, or hurt to his Majesty's Royal
person, State, or government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his
Majesty's Dominions. page 19.

3. Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration or
sentence of Excommunication or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or
pretended to be derived from him or his Sea against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience: I
will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power against
all Conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or
their Persons, their Crown and dignity, by reason or color of any such
sentence or declaration or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be
against him or any of them. page 52.

4. And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine and position, That
Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. page 68.

5. And I do believe and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor
any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof. page ^8.

6. Which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully ministered
unto me, and do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary, page
128.

7. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear,
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation, or
mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. page 154.

8. And I do make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly,
and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God. page 160.

A THEOLOGICAL DISPVTATION concerning the Oath of Allegiance.
THis whole disputation we will for more perspicuitie divide into ten
several Chapters. In the first, we will set down certain general rules,
which shall be very profitable for the better understanding of any law, and
consequently of this Oath, which his Majesty by Act of Parliament has
enacted. In the next eight chapters, we will sincerely examine all the
objections, which are commonly alleged by the impugners of the Oath against
any particular clause thereof, which oath we will divide into 8. branches. In
the tenth, and last Chapter, we will faithfully discuss, and weigh all the
arguments, which are usually objected against the oath in general.

CHAP. I.
Sect. I.
1 FIrst therefore Franciscus Suarez a most famous Divine of the Society of
Jesus, (whom in this we have rather chosen to follow then others, for that his
authority, both in regard of his singular learning, and also of the religious
course of life, which he professes, will not be so easily rejected by the
chief impugners of the oath) does distinguish Lib. 6 de Leg. cap. 1. nu. 1.
three sorts of interpreting laws: to wit, an Authentical, Usual, and
Doctrinall interpretation. Authentical he calls that, which is done by the
authority of him, who has power to make the law, and who consequently has
also full power to interpret the same, and to declare the true meaning of
every word therein contained, according to that Decree of Justinian the
Emperor, Leg vlt. Cod. de Leg Diffinimus.
Diffinimus autem, etc. We define, that all interpretation of laws, which the
Emperors make, is to be accounted firm, and certain. For if it be only at
this present granted to the Emperor to enact laws, it is also only meet for
the Imperial crown to interpret laws. The second interpretation, which is
called usual, depends only upon common use, and custom, which, according to
that vulgar axiom of the Lawyers, Cap. cum dilectus de consuetud. and leg. si
de interpretat. ff. de leg.
is the best interpreter of laws. For as custom has the force of a law, and
therefore is commonly called a law not written, so also it has power to
interpret the true and proper meaning of the law.

2 The third kind of interpretation by way of doctrine is only grounded upon
the judgment of men skillful in the laws. For seeing that such is the
condition of man, that he can scarcely declare his mind with such perspicuous
words, but that ambiguities, and doubts may oftentimes arise, especially in
humane laws, which are delivered briefly, and in general terms, therefore in
the applying of them to diverse cases in particular, many doubts do usually
arise, for the deciding whereof (since the Lawmakers is not always at hand to
declare his meaning) the judgment of learned, and prudent men, and a
doctrinall interpretation is necessarily required. From which necessity
proceeded the science of the Civil law; whose true end is to deliver the true
sense, and understanding of humane laws; and which without all doubt is
greatly to be regarded, for that in every art the judgment of men skillful
therein is of great moment, and causes at the least no small probability; I
said, at the least, for if it should so fall out, that all Interpreters should
agree in the expounding of any law, it would cause then a moral certainty, and
(speaking regularly) it would also induce an obligation to understand the law
according to their interpretation. But to find out by a doctrinall
interpretation, in what sense the words of any law are to be taken, the same
Suarez, Cap. 1. cit. nu. 7.
following herein the common doctrine of Divines, and Lawyers, does assign
many general rules, wherein three principal heads, upon which the true
interpretation of every law does chiefly depend, are to be observed; to wit,
the words of the law, the meaning of the Lawmakers, and the reason or end, for
which the law is made.

Sect. II.
1. AS concerning the words, we say, that in every humane law the property of
the words, that is, the proper signification of them is first of all to be
regarded, for from it the true interpretation of the law is chiefly to be
gathered, and which, if there be no other impediment, is always to be
preferred, as may be deduced by many texts of the Canon Extra de translat.
Episcopi cap. 2. and in cap. ad audientiam de decimis.
, and Civil law Leg. Non aliter ff. de legate. 3. leg 1.. si is qui nauem ff.
de Exercitoria action: and in leg prospexit ff. qui, and a quibus.
. And the reason is manifest, because in common speech words are to be taken in
their proper, and usual meaning, unless by some circumstance the contrary
may be gathered, therefore much more this is to be observed in laws, which
ought to be clear, and not exposed to circumuentions, and false
interpretations: for otherwise nothing could be certain in laws, neither
could men's actions be ruled, and directed by them, for that every one might
according to his pleasure wrest them to improper senses. And in regard of this
rule the ancient Fathers, and Divines do teach, that the words of holy
Scripture, and which do deliver any doctrine of faith, or precepts of manners,
are to be taken in their proper sense, unless by circumstances, or otherwise
the contrary may necessarily be gathered.

2. But if it chance, that any word of the law has together many proper, and
usual significations, then we must use that rule, which in all ambiguous, or
equivocal speeches is wont prudently to be observed: to wit, that the matter
of the law, with other circumstances, be diligently considered, for by them the
meaning of the words will easily be determined. And especially we must
consider the beginning of the law, and with it to join the rest which
follows, for to the beginning, if there be no obstacle all which follows,
is to be applied. For in the beginning of every constitution the final cause,
and which does chiefly move the Lawmakers, is usually contained, and therefore,
according to the common doctrine of the Lawyers, that most of all is to be
regarded to understand the meaning of the law. Wherefore it is necessary, that
every man, before he deliver his judgment, how any equivocal word of the law
is to be understood, to peruse diligently the whole law from the beginning to
the end, according to that principle of the Civil law, Inciuile est, Leg.
Inciuile ff. de leg.
etc. It is an uncivil part to give his judgment, or answer concerning any
one particular clause of the law, unless the whole law be first perused.
Therefore by the antecedents, and consequents, together with the matter, and
other circumstances, the equivocal signification of any word is to be
determined. But if the words of the law should be so equivocal, that neither
by the antecedents, nor consequents, nor by the matter, or reason of the law,
the determinate sense of the law could be known, then it were no law, because
not only it were not clear, but also it should not sufficiently express the
meaning of the Lawmakers. Nevertheless it can hardly fall out, but that one
sense be more agreeable to the matter, which is handled, and that is to be
preferred according to that rule of the law: Leg. Quoties ff de Regulis Iutis.
Whenever the same speech has two senses, let that especially be taken,
which is more agreeable to the matter, which is in hand.

Sect. III.
1. SEcondly, Suarez cap. 1. cit. nu. 12.
concerning the intention, or will of the Lawmakers, it is to be considered,
that as well the substance, as the force of the law does chiefly depend
thereon, because the will of the Lawmakers is the soul of the law; whereupon
as in a living creature, both the substance, and operation of life does
principally depend on the soul, so in a law on the will of the Lawmakers. And
therefore although the Lawmakers does pronounce words, Suarez lib. 3. de leg.
cap. 20.
which of themselves are sufficient to command, and with all other things
externally requisite to the making of a law, if he have no intention to
command, and to enact a law, he does not enact it, neither is it a true law.
And in this manner are rightly understood those assertions of the Civil law,
Quod Principi placuit, Instit de Iure nature. gent and Civilly. Sedet.
etc. That which pleases the Prince has the force of a law: because the whole
law depends upon his will, and pleasure. And, Non dubium est, Leg. Non dubium
Cod. de leg and leg. contra legem ff. de leg.
etc. Without doubt he offends against the law, who following the words of
the law does against the will thereof; verily for that the will, or intention
is the soul, and as it were, the substance of the law. Therefore that is the
true interpretation of a law, by which we follow the intention, and will of
the Lawmakers, whereupon if by any means the will of the Lawmakers can be
known, according to it especially the law is to be interpreted.

2. Nevertheless, that which we have said, is not so to be understood, as
though the only internal will of the Lawmakers considered by it self without
words, can be a sufficient rule to interpret any law, both for that no man can
understand another man's mind but by his words, and therefore the meaning of
the law, which consists in words cannot be taken from the will of the
Lawmakers, seeing that the will it self cannot be made manifest unto us but by
words; as also for that a law is not enacted by the Princes will, unless by
the words of the law it be sufficiently expressed, seeing that the will alone
is not of it self sufficient to bind; neither also is it sufficient, that it
be privately known by some other way, but it is necessary, that it be
sufficiently contained in the law it self; See Suarez lib. 3. de Leg. cap. 15.
and therefore the Divines define a law, to be a sensible sign, whereby the
commanding will of a Superior is made manifest. But what we have said, is so
to be understood, that whereas the words of the law, being taken barely by
themselves, be oftentimes ambiguous, and may proceed from diverse intentions,
and wills, therefore by the things to it annexed, to wit, by the matter, and
circumstances it must prudently be gathered, from what will, and intention
they did proceed, and then the signification, and interpretation of the words
must be accommodated to the intention of the Lawmakers, whereupon the
substance, and force of the law does chiefly depend. Wherefore it is true, that
men do judge of the mind of the speaker by his words, and that a law is not
made by the internal will, unless it be in the law it self sufficiently
expressed; for that a law, being a rule of humane actions, having force to
bind, (wherein it differs from a council, or any other admonition, which
has not force to bind,) it must by words sufficiently expressed in the law
be propounded to them, whom it intends to bind. Nevertheless, that words
may sufficiently express the intention of the speaker, and the will of the
Lawmakers, they are not to be taken severally, and barely by themselves, but
they must, and ought by all circumstances annexed be determined rather to this,
then to that signification.

3. But to understand, what means, and conjectures, besides the naked force of
the words, are to be used Suar. cap. 10. cit nu. 17.
to find out the will of the Lawmakers, the Lawyers do assign many rules.
And among the rest, (for, to set down all at this present were over tedious)
the matter of the law is chiefly to be regarded, for the words must especially
be agreeable to the matter, according to that saying of S Gregory, Lib 1.
epist. 28 ad Aristobulum, and habetur in cap. propterea, extra de verborum
significat.
Plerunque dum proprietas, etc. Oftentimes when one attends to the property
of the words, he loses the force of their meaning, or, as in the Decretals we
read, he loses the true meaning of them. Wherefore if at any time the words
taken in their proper signification should argue any injustice, or like
absurdity to be in the mind of the Lawmakers, they must be drawn to a sense
although improper, wherein the law may be just, and reasonable; because this
is presumed to be the will of the Lawmakers, as has been declared by many
laws in ff. tit. de legibus. Nam in ambigua voce legis ait lex, Leg. in
ambigua ff. de legibus.
etc. For in a doubtful word of the law, says the law, that sense is rather
to be chosen, which is void of all default, especially seeing that, the will
also of the law may be gathered by this. Because it ought not to be presumed,
that the Lawmakers did intend to command any absurd, or inconvenient thing,
unless the contrary do evidently appear. And this rule the ancient Fathers
do observe in expounding the holy Scriptures, and the Divines in declaring the
precepts of nature: for which cause those words of our Savior, I am a door, I
am a vine, I am a shepherd, are by them transferred to improper, and
metaphorical senses; so also that precept, thou shall not kill, is to be
understood of unjust killing; and, thou shall restore to every one his own,
ought not to be extended to restore to a mad man his sword.

4. In like manner, a benign, and favorable interpretation, if there be no
other let, is always to be preferred, according to that approved rule of the
law, Leg. Benignius ff. de legibus.
Benignius leges, etc Laws are to be interpreted in the more favorable sense,
that thereby their will, or meaning, may be conserved. And if any word of the
law has two senses equally proper; or if the things be any way equally
doubtful, in punishments, Salas disp. 21 de leg. sect. 3. Octaua regula.
as also in all odious matters we must follow the milder part. But in
benefits, and favorable causes, which are usually contained in last Wills, and
Testaments, the larger interpretation ought to be made, so that thereby no man
be prejudiced, according to that saying of the Canon law, De regulis Juris in
Sexto.
Odia restringi, fauores conuenit ampliari. It is meet, that odious things be
restrained, and favors to be enlarged. In judgments, if the matter be
doubtful, the person accused is rather to be favored, then the plaintiff;
the possessour, rather then the suitor, and doubtful speeches are to be taken
in the better sense, and which is more profitable to the speaker. Sa verbo
interpretatio. nu. 1.
In a general speech the person, who speaks, is understood to be excepted,
Salas regula 22. and Sa nu. 14.
and to conclude, In laws the diversity of words, does argue diversity of
things, for otherwise the law should superfluously use variety of words. Salas
regula 7. ex Azorio, and Panormit. leg. si ^d^m codicilli. Cod. de codicillis.
Many other observations are set down by Divines, and Lawyers, which may be
seen in Joan. Azor. Tom. 1. lib. 5. cap 16. q. 9. and seq.
Joan. de Salas, Disp. 21. de leg. sect. 3.
Franciscus Suarez. Cap. 1. cit. and seq.
and the Summists, verbo, Interpretatio, where Syluester, Angelus, Tabiena, Sa,
and others, who treat of laws.

Sect. IIII.
1. LAstly, concerning the reason, and end of the law, which was the third of
those three heads before rehearsed, which ought to be observed to find out the
true meaning of the law by a doctrinall interpretation, it is first of all to
be supposed, Suarez lib. 3. de leg. cap. 14.
that there be two sorts of humane laws to be distinguished: the one is called
a constitutiue law; the other a declaratiue; the diversity of which laws is
sufficiently known by the words themselves. For a declaratiue law, as it is
declaratiue, does impose no new command, but does only declare, what is
commanded, or forbidden to be done by some former ancient law: but a
constitutiue law does of it self impose a new command, and obligation: so that
betwixt these laws there is this difference, that a constitutiue law is a rule
to guide, and direct humane actions by, and therefore it is extended only to
future actions, and not to such as are already past, which, for that they are
already past, can have no rule to guide them by: but a declaratiue law of it
self is no such rule, but it does suppose, and declare a former rule, neither
does it make a new obligation, but it supposes an obligation already made;
and therefore it comprehends not only future actions, but such also as are
already past: for whiles it declares a former law, it also vertually
declares, that all those actions, which have, are, or shall be committed
against that law, were, are, or shall be evil. But some laws there are, which
in part are declaratiue, and in part constitutiue, for that partly they declare
a former obligation, and partly they impose a new; of which kind are all
humane laws, which under pain of death do forbid thefts, murders, and such
like villainies, which are already forbid by the law of God, and nature; which
in respect of the punishment newly imposed, are constitutiue laws, but in
regard of the offense, which was before against justice, they are only
declaratiue. Wherefore according to the common opinion of Divines, he that
commits theft, does not commit two sins, one against the law of God, and
nature; and another against the Princes law, unless the Prince should forbid
that unjust action upon a motive of some other virtue, for then it were two
sins and not one only sin. And so the Church, or civil common wealth in
honor and reverence of Religion forbidding to shed blood in consecrated
Churches; or to steal Church goods, and which are dedicated to Gods service,
causes those actions, which otherwise would be only repugnant to the virtue of
justice, to be now sacrilegious, and opposed to the virtue of religion; in
regard whereof they are rightly accounted constitutiue laws: and so he that
robs Churches consecrated to divine service, or does in the same give any
man a bloody wound, does commit not only injustice, but also sacrilege.

2. This supposed, Suarez Lib 3. de leg. cap. 20.
affirms, that the end, or reason of the law is far different from the
will, or intention thereof: for without all doubt in the mind of the Lawmakers
these two are distinguished, to wit, his will, or intention, whereby he
intends to command, or bind his subjects; and the reason, which moves him
to make that command. For the will, or intention of the Lawmakers, whereby he
intends to command, does give force to the law, and it is the intrinsecal
form, and soul of the law, as before has been said, but the reason is only
the end, which moves the Lawmakers to enact the law, and is as it were the
personal reason of the Lawmakers himself; neither does it substantially
compound a constitutiue law: As for example, in the precept of fasting, the
macerating of the body, or mortification, or satisfaction for ones sins, and
such like, which may move the Lawmakers, are not of the substance of the law,
neither of themselves are necessary to the constitution of such a law,
whereupon the same law may be enacted without these motives, and by one
Lawmakers it may be enacted for one motive, and by another Lawmakers for
another motive, whereas the law is the very same. Yea sometimes the Lawmakers
may be moved for some private, or unreasonable By the Printers fault it is in
Suarez reasonable.
motive, and yet the law shall be of force, if in regard of the matter, and
object it be reasonable. I said according to Suarez, that the reason of the law
does not substantially compound a constitutiue law; because, as Suarez in the
same place Nu. 10.
does well observe, if the law does only declare a former law of God, or
nature, then it only depends upon the reason, or, which is all one, upon the
precedent law, for from it all the obligation thereof does proceed.

3. Wherefore the end, or reason Suarez lib. 6. cap. 1. nu. 19.
of a constitutiue law does not sufficiently contain the mind, or will of the
Lawmakers, both for that the reason of the law is not the text of the law, as
also for that many things are decreed by humane laws, rather because so it
pleases the Lawmakers, then for any certain reason; and therefore, as we
read in the Digests, Leg. Non omnium, ff. de leg.
Non omnium, etc. There cannot be yielded a reason of all things, which have
been decreed by our Ancestors. For although a law must always be agreeable to
reason, nevertheless the choosing, or electing of those things, which are
reasonable, is oftentimes without reason; for one may choose that thing, which
is in very deed reasonable, not moved thereunto for a reasonable cause, but
for some dishonest end; and therefore the reason, which moves the Lawmakers,
cannot always be known, according to that saying of the Civil law, Leg. Et
ideo, ff. de leg.
Et ideo rations eorum, etc. And therefore the reasons of those things, which
are decreed, ought not to be examined, otherwise many things, which are
certain, would be overthrown. Wherefore the sole reason of the law does not
contain the will of the Lawmakers, because he might according to his pleasure
not conform himself to it in all things, but only so far forth as he
would, and has declared himself by his words. Nevertheless, if the reason of
the law be known, as commonly it is expressed in the forefront of the law, it
much avails to find out the intention, and will of the Lawmakers, especially
that reason, which is expressed in the law: for after the words themselves it
seems to have the second place of certainty, for then the reason of the law
is in some manner a part thereof; for it is contained, and supposed therein.
Whereupon it is necessary, that the precept, and will of the Lawmakers be
agreeable to his reason, and consequently that the words, which signify the
act commanded, if they be ambiguous, be determined by the reason therein
expressed.

4. And therefore that reason which is expressed in the law, is morally a sure
means to find out the will of the Lawmakers, yet it is not so infallible, but
that also other circumstances are to be regarded; for the sense, and meaning of
the reason it self may sometimes be ambiguous, and by other circumstances be
made more perspicuous, and certain. And it may also fall out, that for the
same reason the will may be moved diverse ways, and to diverse things, and
therefore to know fully the will, which is the proper mind of the Lawmakers,
the sole reason expressed even in the law it self, does not suffice, but all
circumstances are to be weighed, and diligently to be considered. But that
reason; which is not expressed in the law, but invented by Expositors, although
it may somewhat avail to find out the will of the Lawmakers, yet it is not a
certain token, but only a probable conjecture; both because the reason is not
always certain, but controuerted among Doctors, and also because it is much
more uncertain, whether that was the reason, which moved the Lawmakers, seeing
that there may be other reasons, for which he might be moved, and consequently
it is uncertain, to what reason the true meaning of the law is more agreeable.
Many other observations, which now to rehearse would be over tedious, are set
down by Doctors, to know how by a doctrinall interpretation laws may
sometimes be extended, sometimes restrained, but these, which we have taken out
of Suarez almost word for word, will give no small light to the better
understanding of the true meaning of the oath, whereof we now do treat.

CHAP. II. The first branch of the Oath.
I A. B. do truly, and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and
declare in my conscience before God, and the world; That our Sovereign Lord
King JAMES is lawful, and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his
Majesty's Dominions, and Countries.

Sect. I.
1. AGainst this branch two objections especially are usually made. And first
Iacobus Gretzer, In Comment. Exeget. cap. 6. page 103.
a famous Divine of the Society of Jesus, does against this clause [our
Sovereign Lord] object in this manner.

Whosoever affirms that King James, and not the Pope is supreme head of the
Christians in great Britannie even in Ecclesiastical, and spiritual matters;
denies the Catholic faith; But he, that takes the oath prescribed by King
James, affirms that King James and not the Pope is supreme head of great
Britannie even in spirituals, therefore he denies the Catholic faith. The
Minor I prove: because in the beginning of the oath he professes, testifies,
and declares swearing in his conscience before God, and the world, that King
James is his Sovereign Lord, but according to the commmon use, and practice of
England, this Sovereign Lordship, or Supreme dominion is referred not only to
the Supreme civil, but also to the spiritual, and Ecclesiastical; for it is
treason to deny or not to grant to the King this spiritual Supremacy.

2. To this objection it is answered by denying the Minor proposition. For
first of all, although his Majesty's Subjects, according to the present laws
of this kingdom, are sometimes under grievous punishments compelled to swear,
that our most Noble Prince King James is Supreme Governor of this Kingdom as
well in causes Ecclesiastical, as in temporal, nevertheless they are not
compelled to acknowledge the aforesaid Kings Supremacy, by virtue of his oath
of Allegiance, whereof now we treat, but by virtue of another oath, commonly
called, the oath of Supremacy. And therefore although this word Lord, or
Dominus, may signify in general as well a spiritual, as a temporal Lord, yet
when it is spoken of a temporal Lord, and its an oath of temporal Allegiance,
it ought in common speech, and understanding, to which in this oath we are
tied, to be limited by the matter, which is handled, and other circumstances
annexed, according to the rules before Cap. 1. sect. 2.
related, to signify only a temporal Lord, or a Lord in temporal affairs.

3. Besides, if we must needs scan so strictly every word of the oath, first,
in the oath it self of Supremacy, whereon Gretzer groundeth his objection,
these words [ Sovereign Lord are not so much as named, but only [Supreme
Gouernour] that hereby it may appear, what a severe Censour Gretzer is, to
condemn so rashly, and upon so weak a ground, for these words forsooth [our
Sovereign Lord] this oath of Allegiance, as containing a manifest denial of
the Catholic faith.

4. Secondly, since that Gretzer will be so rigorous a Censour, that
proposition, which he supposes to prove his Minor, is also false. For I do
not in this branch of the oath profess, testify, and declare swearing, that
King James is our Sovereign Lord, as Gretzer does falsely affirm, for so
Sovereign Lord should be the predicate, and not the subject of the
proposition, whereas true, and lawful King is the predicate, or, which is all
one, is affirmed of our Sovereign Lord King James.

5. True indeed it is, that in this branch of the oath, we call King James our
Sovereign Lord, by which name all Kings, what Religion soever they profess,
are usually called by their Subjects, yet, if we will speak strictly, and in
rigor, we do not in this branch properly affirm, or swear, as Gretzer
faineth, that King James is our Sovereign Lord (although we might truly, and
lawfully swear the same:) but we do only here affirm, and swear, that our
Sovereign Lord King James is lawful, and rightful King of this Kingdom. Now
who sees not, that betwixt bare calling, and swearing there is a great
distinction? For Jews, Infidels, or Heretics, who especially are subject to
the Pope in temporals, will not be much afraid, if cause require, to call him
their most holy Lord, because this name, or title is given him by all men; but
to profess, affirm, and swear, that he is a most holy Lord, or, which is all
one, that he is truly so called, they will perchance stand in some fear. As
also those, who so vehemently impugn this oath, will not stick perchance to
call it the oath of Allegiance, seeing that commonly it is so called, yet to
profess, testify, and by oath affirm, that it is truly, and in very deed an
oath of allegiance, as it is usually called, without doubt they will not
adventure. Neither is this, which we now have said, for that cause affirmed by
us, as though we do think it lawful, to call King James our Sovereign
Lord, but not to acknowledge by oath, that he is our Sovereign Lord; but only
to show how idly Gretzer from those words, our Sovereign Lord, does take
occasion to impugn this oath, as repugnant to Catholic faith.

6. If perhaps Gretzer had dedicated this his Exegiticall Commentary to King
James, who now reigns in great Britannie, (as he has consecrated the same
to his most holy mother, who now reigns with Christ in heaven) he would
greatly have feared to have called him most potent Lord, as he calls him
sometimes most potent King, lest that he should have seemed to acknowledge him
to be a Lord in spirituals, seeing that this Lordship, or Dominion of the K.
of England, if we may give credit to Gretzer, is according to the common use,
and practice of England, to be referred not only to the civil, and temporal,
but also to the spiritual, and Ecclesiastical Lordship, or Dominion. And we
also do not a little marvel, how Gretzer durst adventure to call the Kings
Majesty so often in his book King of great Britannie, since that betwixt a
King, and a supreme Lord, or Governor, Gretzer can allege no great
distinction; and, according to Gretzer, this supreme government, or
Sovereignty, is referred not only to the civil, and temporal, but also to
the Ecclesiastical, and spiritual Sovereignty.

7. But of a far different opinion are Martinus Becanus, and Father Parsons,
both eminent Jesuits, who, concerning these words, our Sovereign Lord, are
not so scrupulous. For Becanus In Controuers. Anglic. cap. 3. page 102. printed
at Mentz an. 1612.
writes in this manner: And truly to me it is certain, that all the parts,
and propositions of this oath are not false, if they be well declared. For
these be true; 1. That King James is lawful King of England, Scotland, and
Ireland. 2. That in the same Kingdoms he is Supreme Lord in temporals: And Fa.
Parsons In his book entitled, The judgment of a Catholic English man
living in banishment, etc. part. 1. nu. 22. page 13. and 16.
does confidently affirm, that there is no man, who sticks, or makes
difficulty to acknowledge our Sovereign to be true King, and rightful Lord
over all his Dominions; for that every English Catholic will swear, and
acknowledge most willingly all those parts, and clauses of the Oath, that do
any way appertain to the Civil, and Temporal obedience due to his Majesty,
whom he acknowledges for his true, and lawful King, and Sovereign over all
his Dominions. Whereby it is apparent, that this violent exposition, which
Gretzer wresteth from those words, our Sovereign Lord, is neither approved by
Becanus, nor Fa. Parsons, nor by any other, that I have either read, or heard
of, either of our own, or of any other nation. See also beneath Cap. 4. sect.
3.
somewhat appertaining to this objection.

Sect. II.
1. SEcondly, Leonard Lessius, In his Apologet. Disputation page 396, and in
the English Recapitulation of his book, entitled, A brief and clear
Declaration, etc. page 51
a most learned Divine of the Society of Jesus, against these words [true, and
lawful King] argues in this manner:

No man can lawfully affirm with an oath that thing to be true, whereof he
has no certain knowledge, for otherwise he should expose himself to danger at
the least of perjury: but no man can have any certain knowledge of the true,
and lawful titles of Kings, since that to them some things are required, which
are hidden, and cannot clearly be known, therefore no man can lawfully
swear, that such a one is a true, and lawful King. The like argument with
far greater show of probability may be urged against Popes, and especially
inferior Bishops; to whose true, and lawful Ordination some things are
necessary, which by natural means cannot be certainly known; and especially
the true intention, and inward mind of him, who ministers the Sacrament,
without which neither Baptism, which of necessity is supposed to the true
Ordination of a Bishop, neither the Consecration it self of a Bishop, is of
any force at all.

2. To this objection, which Becanus, and Fa. Parsons according to their
principles but now related, must confess, to be but a mere Sophisme, (seeing
that, according to them, it is certain, that every man may by oath
acknowledge, King James to be true, and lawful King of England, etc.) it may
be answered two ways: First, that, according to the common opinion of
Divines, every man may lawfully, and without any danger of perjury, swear
that thing to be true, which he persuades himself to be morally certain,
neither has he any probable doubt of the contrary; although the thing, which
he confirms by oath, be perchance in very deed not true: but of the true,
and lawful title of our most noble Prince King James to this kingdom, we are
morally certain, neither can we have any probable reason, to move us to any
never so small a doubt to the contrary, especially seeing that his true, and
rightful title to this kingdom has been declared, and confirmed by the
universal consent of the whole kingdom.

3. The second answer is, that the immediate object of this oath, or, which is
all one, the thing immediately sworn, is not this proposition, King James is
true, and lawful King of this kingdom, etc. but this, I do truly, and
sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my conscience, that
King James is true, and lawful King of this kingdom, etc. but of this my
unfeigned, and sincere acknowlegement, profession, testification, and
declaration I am not only morally, but also Physically certain, and therefore
no man can incur any danger at all of perjury by taking this branch of the
oath. So that Lessius untruly, and against the express words of the oath does
affirm, that this branch of the oath is of the thing it self, and not of my
acknowledgement, profession, testification, and declaration: seeing that the
words themselves do most clearly show the contrary, and Father Parsons, and
Becanus (but now cited) do in express words suppose the same as certain. And
this second answer is diligently to be observed for the better understanding
of the next ensuing branch of the oath.

CHAP. III. The second branch of the Oath.
ANd that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church, or
Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other has any power, or
authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms and
Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade, or annoy him, or his
Countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of their Allegiance, or to give
license, or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise tumults, or to offer any
violence, or hurt to his Majesty's Royal person, State or government, or to
any of his Majesty's subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Sect. I.
1. THis second branch of the oath is that rock of scandal, and stone of
offense, whereat so many of this age, as well learned, as unlearned do usually
stumble. For certain eminent writers of this age, to wit, Card. Bellarmine,
Iacobus Gretzer, Leonard Lessius, Martin Becanus, all Divines of the Society
of Jesus, and some others moved especially with the authority of these men,
who, to defend his Holiness Breues, directed to the English Catholics, have
taken upon them to impugn this oath of Allegiance, do chiefly rely upon the
Popes power to depose Princes, as a most sure and firm foundation to prove
evidently the said oath to be unlawful, and to contain many things, which
are flat contrary to faith and the health of souls, as his Holiness has
publicly, and in express words by his Breues declared.

2. The first therefore, and most principal objection, which is commonly made
against this second branch, is framed by Martin Becanus In Controuersia
Anglicana, cap. 3. q. 4 page 138.
in this manner.

No man can with a good conscience take that oath, wherein is contained any
proposition, which he judges to be clearly false. But in the oath of
Allegiance, which his Majesty has propounded, there is contained a
proposition, which Catholics judge to be clearly false, therefore Catholics
cannot with a good conscience take this oath. The Mayor proposition is evident,
because no man can with a good conscience affirm any thing without an oath,
which he judges to be false, therefore much less with an oath; for if a
simple lie be not lawful, much less perjury.

The whole difficulty therefore is to prove the Minor proposition, which if it
be once sufficiently confirmed, it will forthwith be evidently convinced, that
this oath cannot with a good conscience be taken by any Catholic.

3. And first of all Card. Bellarmine, and Lessius, and which also Becanus does
insinuate, do openly profess, that it is not only false, but also clearly
repugnant to Catholic faith, to affirm, that the Popes Holiness has not
authority to depose Princes; and this they imagine to have demonstrated by the
testimony of Scriptures, holy Fathers, Councels, holy Canons, and by most
evident reasons. But that Card. Bellarmines arguments are not conuincing, and
demonstratiue, I have in another place In my Apology for the power of Princes,
and in the Preface to my Apologet. Answer, nu. 33. and seq.
abundantly proved, and therefore I think it needless to repeat them now
again.

4. But Lessius (besides the authorities, and reasons, brought by Card.
Bellarmine, to prove this doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes, to be
embraced as a received principle of says, which I have, as I said before,
already answered, and besides certain other his reasons omitted by Card.
Bellarmine, which I also have elsewhere In the aforesaid Preface, nu. 52. and
seq.
alleged, and satisfied) produces this argument, as a chief ground, to
confirm the aforesaid doctrine to be certainly believed as a point of faith.
Thus therefore he writes: In his Apologeticall Disputation for the Popes
power, part. 2. sect. 3. page 396.
But it is certainly to be held, that this doctrine [of deposing] is not
ambiguous, that one may lawfully hold either opinion, but altogether certain,
so that without injury to faith it cannot be denied. Which first I prove, for
that these propositions are in express terms defined in a Roman Council
under Gregory the seventh, That the Pope may lawfully depose the Emperor,
That he may absolve the subjects of wicked men from their allegiance. This
Council is to be seen in Onuphrius in the life of Gregory the seventh, and
in Baronius in the year of our Lord 1076. But a definition made by the Pope
with a Council appertains to faith. Therefore, etc.

5. I cannot in truth but greatly marvel, that so singularly learned a man
should bring so weak, and unlearned an argument to prove a matter of so great
importance, as is the dethroaning of Sovereign Princes; as though it were
lawful for any man to play with the Crowns of Kings, and Emperors, First
therefore we deny, that the aforesaid two propositions were defined in a
Roman Council under Gregory the 7. although we will not deny, but that they
were indeed openly maintained by Pope Gregory the 7. who was the first of all
the Popes, as Historiographers do write, See beneath cap. 6. sect 3. nu. 16.
that deposed the Roman Emperor. But that the Reader may fully perceive the
truth of the whole matter, he must observe, that in the third tome of the
Councels betwixt the 55, and 56 epistle of the second book of the Epistles of
Pope Gregory the seventh, are inserted twenty seven brief sentences, which
are there called Dictatus Papa^ among which the aforesaid two propositions
related by Lessius are also contained. These brief sentences of Pope Gregory,
Cardinal Baronius (belike to make them to carry more credit) affirms to
belong to the Roman Council, held under Gregory the seventh the year 1076:
but to prove the same he brings neither reason, nor authority, but we must,
forsooth, give credit to his bare word, that these sentences are known to
belong to the Roman Council.

6. If they be known to appertain to the Roman Council, Baronius should
have showed, to whom this is known, and for what reason, authority, or
conjecture they are known to appertain to the aforesaid Council. But Lessius
proceeds further, and very boldly affirms, that they were defined in that
Council. But we beseech you, most learned Lessius, that you will also make
known to us, how this, which you do so confidently auerre, is known to you.
In the Decrees of the Councels these definitions are not to be found, and from
Baronius you only have, that these sentences are known to appertain to the
Roman Council. May not many things appertain to a Council, which
nevertheless are not defined therein? Will you auerre that all those things,
which are known to appertain to the Council of Nice, of Laterane, of Vienna,
of Constance, of Florence, and lastly of Trent, are defined in those Councels?
I think verily that you will scarcely admit this much. Besides, if those
sentences were defined in the Roman Synod, how is it known to you, that they
were defined, as propositions belonging to faith, or only as probable
assertions.

7. But what kind of definitions those were, you might have gathered by the
eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and eighteenth sentence. For the eighth
sentence is, that only the Pope can use the Imperial arms: The ninth, That
all Princes do kiss only the Popes feet: The tenth, That the Popes name only
is to be rehearsed in Churches: The eleventh, That there is but one only name
in the world, to wit, the Popes: The eighteenth, That the Pope, if he be
canonically ordained, is by the merits of S. Peter undoubtedly made a Saint, as
witnesses Ennodius Bishop of Pauia, to whom many holy Fathers do agree as is
contained in the Decrees of blessed Pope Symmachus. Will you now auerre, that
also these sentences were defined in that Council? Truly I do not think you
will. And if it most clearly appear even in your own judgment, that these
sentences were not defined in that Synod, how can it be known to you, that
the former two sentences, rather then the rest, were therein defined? Be
careful therefore, most learned Lessius, not to object against us such kind
of definitions, invented first by your self, which in these times it had been
far better to have omitted, then to have urged, for that they call either
your learning, or sincerity in question, and also do rather weaken, then
confirm the Popes power to define without a General Council, which you do
so vehemently maintain, that you will scarcely have them to be accounted
Catholics, who are not herein of your opinion. Neither would I, for reverence
to the Sea Apostolic, have made any mention of them at all, if you through
inconsiderate zeal, and being moved thereunto by no sound and sufficient
reason, had not adventured, to enforce timorous consciences, and to thrust by
violence upon the Christian world doubtful positions for certain, and to
coin new articles of faith, to the great obloquie of so famous Divines, who
are not of your opinion, and also to the exceeding great temporal prejudice of
all us English Catholics.

8. But be it so, let us grant you for disputation sake, which you cannot
prove, that these brief sentences were defined in that Roman Council not only
as probable assertions, but also as most certain positions of faith, yet we
may, without injury to the Catholic faith, with the Doctors of Paris, and
many others, whom we will beneath Cap. 10. nu. 27
relate, deny your Minor proposition, to wit, that the Popes definition only
with a Provincial Council, as that Roman Synod was, does of necessity make
the doctrine, which it defines, to be believed of all men as a point of faith,
seeing that there are many Catholics both of singular doctrine, and piety, as
I said before, who do constantly auerre, that the Pope defining without a
General Council may err, and be deceived. And I would willingly behold the
shameless forehead of that man, who would not blush to traduce so great, and
so worthy men of such eminent authority, learning, and piety, as being half
Catholics, and enemies to the Sea Apostolic, or to distaine their honor with
the reproachful infamy of heresy, error, or temeritie.

9. Secondly, Becanus In Controuers. Anglican. cap. 3. in fine.
for confirming the Minor proposition, only relieth upon the authority of the
Council of Laterane, and the universal consent of the whole Christian world,
so that he thinks it to be most certain, that the Pope, if not by divine
law, and the institution of Christ, yet at the least by humane law, and by the
permission of the whole Christian world decreed, received, and approved in the
Council of Laterane, has power to depose disobedient Kings, and Princes. And
at the last he concludes, that it is all one to swear, that the Pope has no
authority to depose the King, and to swear, that the great Council of
Laterane, and that all the Popes, Divines, and Lawyers, and all others, who do
teach, that the Pope has power to depose the King, have erred in this point.
What Catholic man dare presume to swear this? Truly, it were all one, as if
he should say, I swear in my conscience before God, that concerning this
point I know more then all others: No man, as I think, is so arrogant.

10. To this objection of Becanus we answer in like manner, that we also do
no less marvel, that a man so excellently learned (to impugn the oath of
Allegiance) should so nakedly, and rawly produce the sole authority of the
Council of Laterane, which I have already in the Preface of my Apologeticall
Answer fully satisfied, and abundantly showed, first, that the aforesaid
Council has neither defined, nor supposed as certain this doctrine of the
Popes authority to depose Princes. And secondly, that although it had supposed
this doctrine as true, yet unless it had supposed it as certainly, and
undoubtedly true, and not only as probably true, the contrary opinion may be
maintained without any danger of faith, or any temeritie at all.

11. But that you may perceive the weakness of your argument, tell us, I pray
you, most learned Becanus, whether all those Divines, who with might and maine
do defend, that the blessed Mother of God was conceived without original
sin, among whom are Alphonsus Salmeron, and Franciscus Suarez, both famous
Jesuits, who, to confirm this doctrine, do allege the consent almost of the
Universal Church, and the uniform assent of all Universities, must forthwith
auerre, that all other Catholics, who are not of their opinion, have erred in
this point, or that they in this point know more, then all others, who embrace
not their opinion? What Catholic dare presume to auerre this much? No man, as
I think, is so arrogant. May not in the Church of God many opinions be
probably defended on both sides without impeaching, either of error,
temeritie, or any other crime?

12. Does not Joan. Maldonate, an excellent Divine of your Order, boldly
affirm, In Summula q. 12. ar. 7. vide etiam qu. 15. ar. 21. and 22.
that neither the Pope, nor the whole Church has power to dispense in the
solemn vow of chastity, and that those Ecclesiastical persons, and
Interpreters of the Canon law, who have taught the contrary, do seem to him
to have had more regard of some examples of certain Popes, then of the holy
scripture: For what Divinity would auerre, that the Church can dispense in the
law of God, and nature? But who, unless an heretic, will deny, that the vow
of chastity does bind by the law of God, and nature? And nevertheless I
think you will scarcely affirm, that Maldonate therefore intended to condemn
of error, or any other crime, so many Popes dispensations, and all those
Catholics, who be not of his opinion herein. Truly I am ashamed, that men of
so great learning, and who above others profess religious perfection, should
be so stiff in their own opinions, that they fear not upon slight grounds
both against the rule of Christian charity, and in reproach of Catholic
Religion, to slander most learned, and virtuous Catholics, who cleave not to
their opinions, with heresy, error, temeritie, or any other grievous crime.
And this may suffice for the satisfying of Becanus his argument, until he do
demonstrate, that those answers, which I have made to the Council of
Laterane, be altogether improbable.

13. Thirdly, Franciscus Suarez also a most learned Jesuit, and one of the
chief Professors of Divinity in this age, in his Treatise of laws, lately
printed at Antwerpe, has alleged Lib. 4. de Legibus cap. 9.
certain arguments, whereby the aforesaid Minor proposition may be confirmed;
to wit, that the temporal power is subject, and subordinate to the spiritual,
and consequently that the Pope, for the spiritual good, has power to depose
Princes, and to dispose of all their temporals: for the indirect dominion, or
authority, which the Pope has over the universal world, from which the
Divines do derive his power to depose Princes, is only grounded, says Suarez,
in the subordination of these two powers. And although the reasons, which
Suarez brings, be triuiall, and have long since been produced by Card.
Bellarmine, and diverse others, yet I thought it necessary to put them down in
this place, for that his authority is of great moment with the best learned
Priests of our nation, who with great expectation have long desired to see,
what arguments he could produce to confirm this doctrine of deposing Princes
by the Popes authority, assuring themselves, that a Divine of so profound
erudition now at the last, after so exact debating of this controversy, would
bring the very best, and choicest reasons, which could be invented, to
demonstrate the aforesaid authority.

14. Two therefore only arguments Suarez does bring to prove the subordination
of the Ecclesiastical, and Civil power, wherein (says he) the indirect
dominion in temporals, which the Pope has over the universal world, is only
grounded.

The first and principal ground (as he says) of this subordination is taken
from the unity of the Church sufficiently signified in the Gospel, and
declared by S. Paul, 1. Cor. 12. who says, that we all are baptized into one
body, etc. and, Romans 12. we being many are one body in Christ, etc. and
Ephesians. 4. and many other places: which reason Suarez dilateth in this manner.

15. Seeing that Christ our Lord has instituted his Church as one spiritual
kingdom, wherein there should be also one King, and one spiritual Prince, it
is necessary, that the temporal power should be subject to the spiritual, as
the body is subject to the soul. For by this example does Gregory Nazianzene
Orat. 17. ad populum timore perculsum.
very well declare the subordination of these two powers: for as a man were not
well compounded, unless the body were subordinate to the soul, so neither
the Church should be conveniently instituted, unless the temporal power were
subject to the spiritual, as Pope Boniface the 8, out of S. Bernard, has well
concluded, affirming, that the sword must be under the sword, and the temporal
power must be subject to the spiritual. For where there is one body, it is
necessary that there be one head, whereunto all the members must in some sort
have recourse; otherwise neither peace, nor perfect unity could be in the
body: But the Church of Christ is one body, therefore, although there be in it
many powers, or Magistrates, it is necessary, that they have among themselves
a subordination. For as much therefore as it were a perverse order, if
spirituals were subject to temporals, it must of necessity be granted, that
the temporal power is subordinate to the spiritual. Which subordination may
also be confirmed by Pope Gelasius, Did 96 can. Duo sunt.
who out of those words, Pasce oues meas, does insinuate, that Kings and
Emperors are subject to S. Peter.

16. But if thou answer, that Kings and Emperors are subject to S. Peter in
his spiritual government: Against this answer Suarez replieth in this manner:
For to make (says he) the temporal government right, and honest, it must of
necessity have a spiritual rule, therefore it is necessary, that the
temporal power it self of governing be directed by the spiritual: and this
is to be subject, and subordinate to it. And for this cause Popes are to render
an account for Kings, and Emperors, because it belongs to them to correct,
and amend in whatsoever they, not only as men, but also as Kings, shall in
exercising their power offend.

17. The second argument, which Suarez brings to confirm this subordination,
is this: because Christ our Savior had not otherwise sufficiently provided for
his Church, if he had not given her power, to keep Kings and Princes in due
order at the least, by using the spiritual sword.

18. To these arguments of Suarez I answer, that, to speak the truth, I am by
them rather much confirmed in my ancient opinion, to wit, that the doctrine
concerning the Popes power to depose Princes is not certain, then any way
withdrawn from the same. For he affirms nothing else, then what I will most
willingly grant him, and which in my Apology for the rightful power of
Princes, and my Apologeticall answer, I have more at large declared. First
therefore I admit, that the Church of Christ is one mystical body, and one
spiritual kingdom, and that all Christians as well Kings, as Subjects, are
members of this body. But we utterly deny, that this spiritual kingdom of
Christ is compounded of the Ecclesiastical, and politic power; neither will
Suarez, as I think, affirm the same, but the only politic, or temporal
power does compound earthly kingdoms, and of the sole spiritual power is
compounded the kingdom of Christ, as I elsewhere In Apolog. nu. 137. and seq.
out of Card. Bellarmines grounds have more plainly showed, and also Becanus
Aduersus Torturam Torti part. 2. cap. 3. arg. 3.
in express words does acknowledge the same.

19. Moreover, we grant with Pope Boniface the 8, that the temporal sword is
under the spiritual, and that the temporal power is subject to the
Ecclesiastical, not only in nobility, nor yet of it own nature, as Cardinal
Bellarmine Lib. 5. de Roman. pont c. 6.
, and Becanus De Primatu Regis Angliae cap. 1. nu. 4.
do well affirm, but only accidentally, in that manner, which I have
heretofore In the place before cited.
more fully declared, to wit, in regard of the sin, which Princes, when they
abuse their temporal power, do commit: which in very deed is nothing else,
then that a temporal Prince in spiritual matters is subject to the spiritual
power of the Church. And this is the only meaning of S. Gregory Nazianzene,
when he compares the spiritual, and temporal power, to the soul, and
body. Which similitude, as I have elsewhere In the place but now cited, and in
my Apologet. answer nu. 19. and seq.
showed, does rather weaken, then confirm the Popes power to depose Princes,
and to dispose of their temporals. For as the soul has power to command the
body to exercise all corporal actions, which are subject to the command of our
free will, yet she has not power of her self to exercise those actions, which
are proper to the body, without the help and assistance of a corporal organe;
so also the spiritual power of the Church has authority to command the
temporal power, or rather a temporal Prince, in whom the supreme temporal
power does reside, to do all those temporal actions, which are necessary to
the preserving of the spiritual good, yet the spiritual power has not
authority of her self to dispose of temporal things, or which is all one,
cannot of her self exercise those functions, which are proper to the civil
power, without the aid and concurrance of the Secular Magistrate. But all this
is nothing else, then that temporal Kings, and Princes in spirituals, or in
temporals, as in regard of the sin annexed, which is spiritual, they are made
spiritual, be subject to the spiritual direction, command, chastising, and
government of the Ecclesiastical power. Neither does Suarez in his Reply, when
he affirms, that the very power of governing temporally, to make it
virtuous, and honest, must be directed by a spiritual rule, prove any thing
more then what we have said, unless he will contradict both himself, and most
evident reason.

20. Nevertheless, I cannot deny, but that the aforesaid assertion of Suarez
is very equivocal. For if by a spiritual rule he understand a supernatural,
and Ecclesiastical rule, and by rectitude, and virtue he mean supernatural
rectitude, and virtue, his assertion is most true: for, to make temporal
governing to be good and virtuous supernaturally, it must of necessity be
directed and guided by a supernatural rule. But if he speak only of moral
rectitude, and virtue, it is most false, that to make temporal governing good
and virtuous morally, it must of necessity be directed by a supernatural
rule, but it suffices, if it be directed by the rule of moral rectitude and
virtue: which moral rule, although in some sort it may be said to be
spiritual, as also all moral virtues are, which are inherent in the soul,
which is spiritual, yet it is not an Ecclesiastical, or supernatural rule.
And thus much Suarez himself in the same Treatise does suppose for certain.
For he admits, as undoubted, that Infidel Princes have true, and full
authority to enact just and honest laws, and yet it is manifest, that in
making such laws they are only guided, and directed by moral rectitude, and
honesty, and not by any Ecclesiastical, or supernatural rule. And by this
the Reader may easily perceive, how weak, and unsound is the chiefest
foundation for the Popes power to dispose of temporals, which, as Suarez
himself confesses, is only grounded in the unity of the Church, and in the
subordination of the temporal power to the spiritual. And thus much
concerning Suarez his first argument.

21. His second argument also we do freely grant him. For we do willingly
admit, that Christ has left in his Church sufficient power to keep Kings, and
Princes in good order, at the least by using the spiritual sword. But from
hence it cannot be certainly gathered, that the Church has power to depose
Princes, or to dispose of their temporals; for so he should have power to use
not only the spiritual, but also the temporal sword. And the very same
reasons, which our Adversaries can bring to prove, that the Church for the
spiritual health of souls must of necessity have sufficient power and
authority to depose Princes, will in like manner convince, that she must also
have sufficient force and means to execute this her authority, and actual to
thrust them out of their kingdom: for by the actually reigning of wicked
Princes, more then by their right, and title to reign, the health of souls is
chiefly endangered. By this therefore it is manifest, that Suarez is not in
very deed contrary to our opinion, but that rather he may be rightly alleged
for a favorer thereof; seeing that by his arguments no other thing can be
gathered, then that the temporal power in regard of sin, which is
spiritual, is subject to the spiritual direction, command, and chastising of
the Church: which both I, and both the Barclaies, with all other Catholics,
do freely acknowledge; and that Suarez does not in very deed dissent from our
opinion, his manner of handling the question does clearly show. For unless
he would in express words have auerred, what we affirm, what other thing
could he have said, then that, which he, handling this question of set purpose,
has taught, and last of all concluded, that the Church must have a power to
keep Kings and Princes in good order, at the leastwise by using the spiritual
sword.

22. Wherefore to the principal objection, which is put down in the beginning
of the Chapter against this second branch of the oath, it is easily answered by
denying the Minor proposition, if it be understood of all Catholics, as
without doubt it must be understood to make the argument to have any color of
probability. For many Catholics, whom heretofore In my Apology nu 4. and seq.
I have named, and some of them I will beneath Sect 3. nu. 5. and seq.
relate, do plainly hold, that the Pope has no authority to deprive Supreme
Princes of their kingdoms, and to dispose of temporal things. And therefore
this doctrine of deposing Princes by the Popes authority is not certain, and
without all doubt, and much less to be believed as a point of faith as Card.
Bellarmine, and Lessius, and before them Gregorius de Valentia do over rashly
affirm, since that the contrary opinion is probably defended by Catholics,
and consequently may be maintained without danger of mortal sin. But this at
this present we do suppose both out of that, which we have already
abundantly disputed, and will hereafter Against D. Schulckenius his Apology
for Card. Bellarmine.
dispute against the arguments which Card. Bellarmine has gathered out of holy
Scriptures, ancient Fathers, Councels, and Principles of Divinity, and also
out of John Barcklay, who has very learnedly defended his father, Master
Doctor Barcklay, against the Treatise of Card. Bellarmine for the Popes power
in temporals.

Sect. II.
THe second objection, somewhat different from the former, which is usually
made against this second branch of the oath, and insinuated by Lessius In
Disput. Apolog. nu. 216. 217.
, as his English Recapitulator Page 52. Fourthly.
does relate, may be framed in this manner.

1. No Catholic can without danger of perjury swear that to be true, whose
truth in the judgments of all Catholics is accounted at the least to be
doubtful, for so he should expose himself to danger of swearing an untruth,
but whether the Pope has power to depose Kings and Princes, is by all
Catholics accounted at the least to be a doubtful, and disputable question,
as does appear by the stream of Doctors, whereof some are of opinion, that
this doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes is undoubtedly true, and no
man does condemn it as undoubtedly false: therefore no Catholic can, without
danger at the least of perjury, swear, that the Pope has no authority to
depose Kings and Princes.

2. To this objection two answers are usually made, and both of them do out of
my Apology for the rightful power of Princes, and out of John Barcklay In
Vindicijs pro Regibus.
suppose, that without any danger of heresy, error, or any other crime, it
may by Catholics be probably defended, that the Pope has not authority to
depose Princes, or, which we now do take for all one, to deprive them of
their lawful right, and title to reign: and consequently, that this question
of depriving Princes by the Popes authority, is not a doubtful thing, to wit,
whereof no determinate assent can be had, but probable, and by Catholic
Doctors controuerted on both sides. For betwixt doubfull, and probable, or
disputable, which two are cunningly confounded in the objection, there is a
great distinction, as beneath Cap. 10. sect. 2 nu. 9. and 19.
out of the doctrine of Gabriel Vasquez we will show more at large.

3. This supposed, the first, and most principal answer is, that the thing,
which in this branch of the oath we do immediately, directly, and properly
swear, is not, that the Pope has not authority to depose the King, as the
objection does falsely suppose, but, that I do truly, and sincerely
acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my conscience, that the Pope
has not authority to depose the King, as the express words of the oath both
in the first, and the last branch thereof do most evidently declare, and also
Cap. 2. sect. 1. nu. 7.
Martinus Becanus, and Father Parsons, whose words we have before related, do
freely confess: which my sincere acknowledgement, and declaration of my
opinion, since that it is in no sort doubtful, but physically certain unto me,
I may lawfully, with a safe conscience, and without any danger of perjury
confirm by oath.

4. The second answer is, that betwixt depriving, and deposing a King, there
is a great distinction, if we will speak according to the express meaning of
this oath, which betwixt these two does make a manifest difference, as
appears by those words contained in the fourth branch of the oath, Princes
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed by their subjects, or any other
whatsoever. For to deprive Princes, is by a iuridicall, or lawful sentence to
take away their right, and just title to their kingdoms, which depriving is in
the fourth branch of the oath referred to the Pope; but to depose Princes, is
to execute this sentence, and to displace, or thrust them out of the possession
of their kingdoms, which deposing is attributed to the subjects, or any other
whatsoever. If therefore in this second branch of the oath it is only affirmed,
that the Pope has no authority to depose the King, that is, to thrust him out
of the possession of his kingdom, then that proposition, (if we once suppose,
yt this his authority to deprive Princes, is not decided by the Judge, nor
certainly agreed upon by Catholics) is in my opinion morally certain, neither
is it by any Divine, or Lawyer, whom I have read, called in question; seeing
that the Pope has no authority to depose the King, or to put him out of the
lawful possession of his kingdom, so long as it is uncertain, not decided,
and in controversy among virtuous and learned Catholics, whether he has any
such authority to deprive Princes, or no, as in the end of my Apology, out of
the approved rules of the Canon, and Civil law I have sufficiently deduced,
and also out of the known principles of Divinity, if need require, I will
further confirm.

Sect. III.
1. THirdly, against this second branch it may be objected, that although a
learned and skillful Divine, who is able to search into the depth of this
difficult controversy, and to examine exactly all the reasons and proofs,
which are usually made against, and for the Popes authority to deprive Princes
of their kingdoms, may perchance have some sufficient ground prudently to
persuade his conscience, that the Pope has no such authority; yet an
unlearned man, who for want either of natural capacity, or of sufficient
learning, is not able to examine these deep Theological questions, cannot
prudently, and without evident temeritie frame unto himself a right dictamen of
conscience, whereby he may lawfully persuade himself, that the Pope has not
this authority given him by Christ, which the greater part of Catholics, both
Divines and Lawyers do constantly affirm to be given him by Christ his
institution; therefore at the least an unlearned man cannot without great
temeritie take this second branch of the oath, although he should only swear
his opinion, persuasion, or declaration.

2. But this objection is easily satisfied: And first it may be answered, that
although one rashly conceiving this, or that opinion, or having any bad
intention to do evil, does offend in this, that he judges rashly, or
intends to do evil, yet the oath it self, wherein he truly auerreth, that
he has this rash opinion, or wicked intention, may be without any offense at
all. As if a Superior should command his subject to declare unto him sincerely
his opinion concerning such a matter, the subject may lawfully, and without any
temeritie tell his opinion, and if need require, confirm it by oath, although
perchance he conceived that opinion rashly, and unadvisedly. Wherefore from
this objection it can not well be gathered, that this second branch of the oath
cannot without temeritie be taken by unlearned men, but at the most it may be
inferred, that unlearned men cannot without some note of temeritie persuade
themselves, that the Pope has such authority granted him to deprive Princes,
albeit, if they have once, although rashly, conceived such an opinion, they may
without any temeritie swear this their temerarious opinion.

3. The second therefore, and principal Answer is, that also an unlearned man
may with a safe conscience, and without any danger of temeritie take this
second branch of the oath, for that he may prudently, and upon sufficient
grounds persuade his conscience, that the Pope has no authority to deprive
Princes granted him by Christ his institution. For as heretofore In the end of
my Apology.
I have briefly insinuated, and will beneath Cap. 10. sect. 2 nu. 10.
repeat the same again, there be two sorts of principles, or grounds,
whereby a man may be persuaded, that this, or that opinion is true, or false.
The first are called intrinsecall grounds, and do consist in the discussing,
and debating of all the reasons and arguments, which may be alleged for, and
against any opinion: And these kind of grounds do only appertain to learned
men, who are able to discern what force the reasons, and answers on both sides
have. The other grounds are called extrinsecall, and they are only founded upon
the bare authority of prudent, and learned men, upon whose authority in a
matter disputable, and controuerted among Doctors, any man may prudently, and
without any note of temeritie rely. And these grounds are common also to
unlearned men, who, although they are not able to weigh exactly the reasons, or
intrisecall grounds of this, or that opinion, yet they can easily learn, and
discern, what opinion learned men do follow. And this is a sufficient ground
for unlearned persons, to cleave unto the opinion of skillful, and prudent men,
whose judgments, since that they themselves be not able to discuss the
controversy, may safely, and securely follow, although the contrary opinion
be perchance the more probable, the more secure, and embraced by the greater
number of Divines, as beneath Cap. 10. sect. 2 nu. 11. and seq.
out of the doctrine of Gabriel Vasquez, a most learned Jesuit, I will show
more at large.

4. As for example, in this case of usury there is a great controversy among
Divines, whether in lending of money it be lawful to take interest ob lucrum
cessans, that is, in consideration of the profit, or gain, which the lender
might have made, if he had employed his money otherwise, some Divines
affirming, and some denying it to be usury. Now, if a virtuous, prudent, and
learned Divine do confidently tell an unlearned person, that the opinion,
which affirms it to be no usury, is probable, and in practice secure, and
which likes him best, although many others, and perchance the greater, and
better sort of Divines do follow the contrary opinion, which also without all
doubt is the more secure, yet the authority of this learned Divine is,
according to the truer, and more approved opinion of Divines, a sufficient
ground for the unlearned man, whereby he may securely, and without any note of
temeritie persuade his conscience, that he may lawfully take interest for that
respect, and reject in practice the more common, and the more secure opinion of
other Divines, albeit he, since that he is unlearned, be not able to examine the
nature, quality, and conditions of usury. And the like may be applied to this
present controversy of deposing Princes by the Popes authority, and others
such like disputable cases.

But that the vnlearneder sort of people may in part perceive, what sufficient
extrinsecall grounds, and authority of learned and prudent men they may have,
to persuade their conscience securely, that the Pope has not any power to
depose Princes, and to dispose of their temporals, I will only produce some few
authorities of so many, which I have heretofore In Apolog. and Resp. Apologet.
alleged.

5. The first authority is of John Trithemius an Abbot, of the Order of S.
Benedict, and a man of singular learning and piety, who writes, that in his
time, to wit, in this present age, wherein nothing has been newly defined
either by Councels, or Popes, concerning the Popes authority to deprive
Princes (for all the decrees of Popes, and Councels, which by Card. Bellarmine
are usually alleged to confirm the aforesaid authority, were long before
Trithemius his time) this opinion which denies the Pope to have any such
authority, was probably defended by Scholasticall Doctors. For so he writes,
In Chronico Monasterij Hirsaug the year 1106.
He indeed [Henry the 4.] was the first among all the Emperors, who was
deposed by the Pope. The Scholastickes are at strife, and as yet the
controversy is not decided by the Judge, whether the Pope has authority to
depose the Emperor, or no; which question, seeing that it belongs not to us,
we will leave indiscussed.

6. The second testimony is of Albericus Roxiatus, a most famous Professor,
as Trithemius De Scriptoribus Eccles. ad annu^ 1340.
writes, both of the Canon, and Civil law, and a man excellently learned, who
lived in the year 1340. For he calls in question the four most principal
Decretall letters of Popes, which favor their authority to dispose of
temporals, (whereof one is that famous, and so often inculcated by our
Adversaries, sentence of deposition, given against Frederick the Emperor by
Pope Innocent the fourth, in the presence of the Council of Lions) and
affirms, that they are not in his opinion, agreeable to law, but that they
were made by Popes against the liberty, and right of the Empire. The Pastors
of the Church (says he In Dictionario verbo, Electio.
) meddling with that, which belongs not unto them, have made four Decrees;
the one concerning the election of the Emperor, which begins, Venerabilem,
and of this it is there noted by all men. Another is about the deposing of
Frederick the Emperor, extra de sententia, and re iudicata, cap. ad
Apostolicae in Sexto, where also of this it is noted by all men. Another is
concerning the discord betwixt Henry the Emperor, and Robert King of Sicily,
and the sentence of treason published by the Emperor against him, which Decree
is in Clementina de sententia, and re iudicata, cap. Pastoralis. Another is in
Clementina prima de Iureiurando, that the Emperor is bound to swear
allegiance to the Pope, and concerning the Popes authority over the Emperor.
Which Decrees, whether they be just, or no, God knows. For I (under
correction) (and if it should be erroneous I recall it) do think that none of
them be agreeable to law. Yea my opinion is, that they were published against
the rights, and liberty of the Empire, and I think that by God they were
instituted distinct powers. Whereof I have noted sufficiently lege prima, Cod.
de Summa Trinitate, and fide Catholica.

7. The third authority is of Ioannes Parisiensis, a famous Divine of the
Order of S. Dominicke, and, as Trithemius affirms, De Scriptoribus Eccles ad
annum 1280.
most learned in the holy Scriptures, and who in the University of Paris was
for a long time together public Professor, and left behind him many
disciples; he flourished about the year 1280. This Doctor (therefore) although
he be of that opinion De potest. Regia, and Papali cap. 14. ad 20.
, that if a King should become an heretic, and incorrigible, and a contemner
of Ecclesiastical Censures, the Pope might do somewhat with the people,
whereby he might be deprived of his Secular dignity, and be deposed by the
people, to wit, he might excommunicate all those, to whom it belongs to
depose the King, who should obey him, as their Sovereign: Nevertheless he is
of this opinion, that it belongs not to the Pope to depose iuridically Kings,
or Emperors for any crime whatsoever, although it be spiritual, that is, by a
definitive sentence to deprive them of their kingdoms, in such sort, that
after the sentence be published, they should have no more power, and authority
Almainus de potest. Eccles. q. 2. cap. 8.
. For he affirms, that Excommunication, or such like spiritual punishment
is the last, which may be inflicted by a spiritual Judge. For although (says
he) it belongs to the Ecclesiastical Judge to recall men to God, and to
withdraw them from sin, yet he has not power to do this, but by using
those means, which be given him by God, which is by excluding them from the
Sacraments, and participation of the faithful. Wherefore, although Parisiensis
does think, that the temporal common wealth has in some cases of very great
moment, authority to depose their Prince, with which question I do not at
this present intermeddle, yet concerning the principal controversy, which is
now betwixt me, and Card. Bellarmine, to wit, whether it be heretical,
erroneous, or temerarious to affirm, that the Pope has no power to deprive
Princes of their Royal right, and authority, Ioannes Parisiensis does most
plainly, as we now have showed, contradict the opinion of Cardinal Bellarmine.

8. The fourth authority is of William Barcklay, a most learned man, and yet
no more learned, then religious (howsoever some falsely, and unchristianly do
calumniate him) who in times past was Counselor to the Duke of Lorraine, and
Master of Requests, and in the University of Mussepont Professor of the Canon,
and Civil law, and also Deane. Antonius Posseuinus verbo Gulielmus Barclaius.
This Doctor therefore in his book de Regno, printed at Paris in the year
1600, with privilege of the most Christian King of France, (which book
Posseuine in his Bibliotheca relates among other approved books, and takes
no exception against it) writes In lib. 4. de Regno cap. 4.
in this manner: First of all we acknowledge, that all Kings are by the most
straight bonds of nature, and religious oath obliged to keep Gods
commandments, to worship him religiously, and to use all care and diligence,
that their subjects do not revolt from true Religion, and fall into Idolatry,
Iudaisme; or heresy. But if they omit to do the same, or be negligent
therein, they are to be judged by God alone, because only to God they are
subject, I speak of temporal judgment, and subjection. For all Kings, as
they are children of the Church, as they are Christians, as they are sheep of
Christ his flock, ought to acknowledge the Pope S. Peter's successor, and
Christ his Vicar, to be as much their Superior, as they are to every one of
the people, that as they have authority to judge rebels, and traitors, and to
deliver them to the executioner to be punished, so the supreme Prince, and
universal Pastor of the Church, has power to condemn with spiritual
judgment Princes offending against God his law, and to deliver them to
invisible tormentors to be punished with the rod of the invisible spirit, and
with the two edged sword of Excommunication. And this his opinion he in his
book published after his death, has against Cardinal Bellarmines reasons very
learnedly, and elegantly maintained, whom his son John Barcklay has with
great learning, and elegancie defended against the most foul calumnies, which
Cardinal Bellarmine endeavored to lay to his fathers charge.

9. The fifth testimony may be grounded upon the authority of Master George
Blackwell In his Examination
, a virtuous and learned man, and not long since the Archipresbyter of the
English Priests, who even until death maintained this opinion, that the Pope
has not power to deprive Princes of their kingdoms: and also of Master
William Barret In his book de Iure Regis.
an English Catholic, and moreover of those thirteen English Priests, whose
authority to confirm this opinion, I did heretofore In the Preface to my
Apologeticall Answer nu. 26
allege in these words.

10. And the very same opinion are bound to follow, to make their fact to be
lawful, those thirteen D. William Bishop, John Colleton, John Mush, Robert
Charnock, D. John Bosseuile, Antony Hebborne, Roger Cadwalader, Robert Drury,
D. Antony Champney, John Iackson, Francis Barnebey, Oswald Needham, Richard
Button. Whereof three are Doctors of Sorbon, the rest are accounted by
Catholics to be grave, virtuous, and learned me^.
English Priests, and all of them, two only excepted, at this present time
alive (whose names, if before In the end of Master Blackwels Latin Examination.
they had not been published, I would in truth have concealed) who, to give
assurance of their loyalty to the late Queen Elizabeth, did by a public
instrument protest, and made it known to all the Christian world To wit, as
much as did lie in them; for that they made a public instrument of this their
protestation, to be published to the whole Christian world, when it should
please the Magistrate; So that I wonder under what color of probability any
learned, or prudent man can object against those words [to all the Christian
world] although they were not expressed in any part of the instrument, as in
very deed they are in express words contained.
, that she (being at that time excommunicated by name, and deprived by the
sentence of Pope Pius the 5. of her Regal authority) had nevertheless as
full authority, power, and Sovereignty over them, and over all the subjects
of this Realm, as any her Highness Predecessors ever had. And that
notwithstanding any authority, or any Excommunication whatsoever, either
denounced, or to be denounced against her Majesty, or any borne within her
Majesty's Dominions, which would not forsake the defense of her, and her
Dominions, they think themselves not only bound in conscience not to obey
this, or any such like Censure, but also do promise to yield unto her Majesty
all obedience in temporal causes.

11. Wherefore this their promise, and declaration does not only belong to a
matter of fact, but also to declare the lawful right, and authority of her
Majesty to reign. For these Priests do not only protest, that Queen
Elizabeth (being then by the Pope deprived of her Regal authority) did reign
de facto, whereof there could be made no doubt, and do not only promise, that
they will obey her Majesty de facto, but also they do acknowledge, and
profess, that she at that time had as full authority, power, and sovereignty
over them, and all the subjects of this Realm, as any her Highness
Predecessors ever had. Which their assertion truly is most false, if the Pope
had power to deprive her of her Regal authority. To these our English Priests
I could add many others both learned, and virtuous, who are of the selfsame
opinion, although to avoid his Holiness indignation against them, they are
fearful publicly to profess the same, and therefore I think it not
convenient to express their names.

12. Finally, the sixth authority, (which therefore, in the last place I have
produced, for that it, as also the former authority of Master Blackwell, and
those thirteen Priests, do confirm almost every clause of the oath) is
grounded in a very substantial testimony of the kingdom of France. And first
in a General assembly of the States of France, held at Paris in the year
1593, Cardinal Pelleue, and other Prelates, who then were present, would not
receive certain Decrees of the Council of Trent, among which that of the 25.
Session, chap. 19, wherein Kings are forbidden to permit single combat, was
one. In the Decrees of the Church of France, compiled by Laurence Bochellus,
tit. 20 page 917.
The Council of Trent (say they) does excommunicate, and deprive a King of the
city, or place, wherein he permits to fight single combat. This article is
against the authority of the King, who cannot be deprived of his temporal
dominion, in regard whereof he acknowledges no Superior at all.

13. Secondly, Petrus Pithaeus, a man, as Posseuine In Apparatu verbo, Petrus
Pithaeus.
affirms, truly learned, and a diligent searcher of antiquity, in his book
of the liberties of the Church of France, printed at Paris by the authority of
the Parliament in the year 1594, does out of a general maxim, which France To
wit, because the greater part of France, from which denomination is taken, did
approve it.
, as he says, has ever approved as certain, deduce this particular
position. The Pope cannot give as a pray the kingdom of France, or any thing
appertaining thereunto, neither has he power to deprive the King thereof, or
in any other manner to dispose thereof. And notwithstanding any admonitions,
Excommunications, or Interdicts, which by the Pope may be made, yet the
subjects are bound to yield obedience due to his Majesty for temporals,
neither therein can they be dispensed, or absolved by the Pope. Which words if
we diligently consider, as also that protestation of the thirteen Priests, we
shall find, that the principal branches of this oath, against which Cardinal
Bellarmine, Gretzer, Lessius, and Becanus do take so great exception, are in
them comprehended: to wit, that the Pope has not any power to depose the King,
or to dispose of his temporal dominions, and that notwithstanding any
Excommunication, or sentence of deprivation, I will bear faith, and true
allegiance to his Majesty, and will defend him to the uttermost of my power,
etc. and that from this the Pope has no authority to absolve me, and
therefore without all doubt I may renounce all pardons, and dispensations to
the contrary.

14. If therefore that be true, which Navarre an excellent Divine, and most
skillful in the Canon law, as Posseuine affirms Verbo Martinus ab Alpizcueta.
, does write, to wit, that although in the contentious, or external Court
regularly many things are to be observed, that one may follow an opinion, which
is in controversy among Doctors, yet in the Court of conscience to this effect
that we shall commit no sin, it is sufficient to choose his opinion for true,
whom for good cause we think to be a man sufficiently learned, and of a good
conscience, how much the more may an unlearned man, according also to the
doctrine of Gabriel Vasquez, which beneath we will set down, prudently
persuade his conscience, that this branch of the oath, to wit, that the Pope
has not power to depose our King, is true, which not one only learned, and
virtuous man, but very many do allow, and who also have diligently read,
examined, and abundantly satisfied all the arguments, which their Adversaries
have deduced out of holy Scriptures, ancient Fathers, Decrees of Popes, and
Councels, and other Theological reasons against the same?

15. And although very few, whose writings are now extant, in comparison of
others, who defend this temporal power of the Pope, are to be found, who deny
his authority to deprive Princes of their kingdoms, this nevertheless ought
not greatly to move any man, since that heretofore In my Apology nu. 449.
I have alleged many reasons for this purpose, which now to repeat again I
think it not to be altogether superfluous. Thus therefore I wrote in the place
before cited.

Neither ought any man to marvel, that this opinion, which defends the
Popes temporal authority, has taken so deep root in the minds even of the
most learned; partly for that from the very beginning of this controversy the
Pope wanted no flatterrs, (as neither at this day he does want) who either for
hope of gain, or desire of preferment, or for favor, or fear For to say that
so worthy men, among whom some also were Popes, did write against their
conscience in favor of Princes, or for fear of them, is to stretch forth his
mouth into heaven. For contrariwise it might be said more probably that those
Doctors, who do so vnmeasurably advance the Popes authority, do speak for
fear, or favor of him, seeing that they are Ecclesiastical persons, who may
by him get greater preferme^t. And especially, since that they say (although not
well) that the Pope does graciously embrace them, who do amplify his
authority, and depresseth them, who do speak against the same. Thus writes
Ioannes Parisiensis de potest. Regia, and Papali cap. 21. ad 41.
of him, would advance his authority more then is fitting: partly for that the
reasons, and arguments, whereon this temporal authority of the Pope, in
regard of spiritual good is grounded, do make a great show of probability to
them, who do not exactly consider the whole matter: partly for that, although
there ever have been, and also at this present are, very many virtuous and
learned men, who are of the contrary opinion, nevertheless, for fear of
incurring the Popes displeasure, or giving any occasion to wicked Princes to
afflict the Church more freely, or to live more licentiously, who seemed with
this temporal power of the Pope, as with a bridle, to be more easily kept in
good order, they thought it more expedient to pass over this present
controversy with silence, and lest they should give any scandal to the weak,
only to conceal, but not to deny the truth: partly, for that Popes are not
accustomed willingly to permit, that the facts, or opinions of their
Predecessors, which do favor the Papal authority, should either be
impugned, or called in question.

16. And therefore both the Pope himself, and other ordinary Bishops, and
Inquisitours against heretics are very careful, that no books, which do
seem to derogate any way from the Popes authority, be published; and if they
be already published, that either they be altogether suppressed, or be read by
no man without special license, (and that obtained in writing) until they be
corrected. And so it is a most hard matter especially in these days, either to
find in Catholic books any one sentence, or clause, which seems any whit
at all to call in question the Popes temporal authority, or else to know
certainly, what the Authors of books do think concerning the aforesaid
authority, but rather what opinion the Correctors, and Censours of books do
follow, seeing that the Authors are oftentimes against their wills compelled to
speak, and to deliver their opinion not with their own, but with these men's
words.

17. And to confirm what I have said, dai]y experience See in what manner
Aubertus Myraeus, a Canon of Antwerpe, has in Sigebert, an ancient writer,
lately set forth by him and printed at Antwerp, especially in the year 773.
and 1111. cut off, added, changed whole sentences concerning the electing of
Popes, and the inuesting of Bishops, granted to the Emperors. And if in ancient
writers these men dare presume to correct in this manner, how much the more may
we imagine that they will do the same in modern writers? Through the Printers
fault it is in my Latin copy by the Emperors.
can yield innumerable examples, among which it shall at this time suffice one
only to relate, concerning a very learned man, who sending to certain men an
excellent work of his to be printed by their means, wherein he plainly
signified, that he was of this opiinion, that the Pope by Christ's institution
had neither directly, nor indirectly any temporal dominion, and therefore no
authority to deprive Princes of their kingdoms: when his book, if it may be
called his, which was so much changed from his, was printed, and sent him back
again, he found it so chopped, and changed, as if now he should only affirm,
that the Pope had no direct dominion in temporals, nor any direct power to
dispose of Princes dominions. And therefore it is no marvel, that this
opinion, for the Popes power to depose Princes, has so many, and the contrary
so few Patrones, and Supporters. But if his Holiness would be pleased to give
leave to learned Divines and Lawyers, to speak plainly their minds, without
danger of incurring his displeasure, and would compel them, as Almaine De
Authoritate Ecclesiae cap. 3. in principio, who takes it out of Occam.
says, by oaths, and horrible threatenings to declare sincerely what belongs
to the fulness of the Ecclesiastical power, I do not doubt, but that a very
great number of learned Catholics would forthwith show themselves, and in
public writings would cleerelie teach, that this doctrine for the Popes power
to depose Princes is not certain, without all controversy, and to be held of
faith, as Cardinal Bellarmine and some few others do vehemently affirm, but
that the contrary opinion may without any danger of heresy, error, or any
other crime be probably maintained.

18. But because their is small hope, as I am persuaded, to find out the truth
by this way, I know no other remedy at this present, but humbly to request his
Holiness, and those, whom it does concern, that, until the Church has
clearly defined the matter, (for I do not think, that the uncertain
collections of Card. Bellarmine, or of any other Doctor, although he be most
learned, out of the holy Scriptures, Councels, or Decrees of Popes, are to be
accounted Ecclesiastical definitions) they will permit, that this most
difficult, and weighty controversy, the ignorance whereof may breed either
perpetual amity, or discord betwixt temporal Kings, and Clergy men, may
modestly, peaceably, and without contumelious speeches, by learned Divines be
with solid arguments disputed on both sides; and withal, that virtuous, and
skillful Divines, who both for their singular learning are able to find out
the truth, and being once found, will also for their true zeal, and love of
God, without any humane respect defend the same, will endeavor to have always
before their eyes this notable sentence of most learned and devout Gerson In
his treatise De examinatione doctrinarum. Secunda veritas.
: The second truth, says Gerson, is, that the Popes sentence binds all men
not to dogmatize the contrary, unless by them, or among them, who do
perceive a manifest error against faith, and do know, that, unless they
oppose themselves, there will by their silence arise a great scandal unto our
faith. And if there be any prosecuting of censures, and punishments against
them, let them know, that blessed are they, who suffer persecution for justice
sake.

19. Nevertheless, I do not by this intend to auerre, that this doctrine, for
the Popes power to depose Princes, is contrary to faith, or salvation; seeing
that it is, and has been defended by so many, and so worthy Divines; but this
only I do now affirm, and I do constantly think it to be most true, that the
opinion, which with such might and maine does maintain that the aforesaid
doctrine, for the Popes power to deprive Princes, is certain, without
controversy, to be believed as a point of faith, and that it cannot be
impugned by any Catholic, without denying the Catholic faith, (which is not
the common opinion of Catholic Divines, but proper and peculiar to Cardinal
Bellarmine, and some few others, and which with all their might, by right and
by wrong, by arguments, and reproachful speeches they endeavor to maintain)
is, I speak it alas with grief, a very great scandal to Catholic Religion,
and will by all likelihood breed a great dissension betwixt the Clergy, and the
Laity, and that therefore it ought by every man, who desires true peace, and
unity betwixt the holy Church of Christ, and the earthly kingdoms of this
world, with all diligence to be contradicted.

Sect. IIII.
1. FOurthly, it is objected by Lessius Nu. 213.
, as also we may perceive by his English Recapitulator Page 44.
, against those words [nor by any other means with any other] wherein all
power to depose Kings is absolutely denied, and consequently it is vertually
affirmed, that neither the Pope, nor the civil common wealth has in any case
whatsoever any authority to depose the King, which seems in many men's
judgments to be repugnant to natural reason, and to the principles of moral
philosophy. And therefore this question of deposing Princes by the authority
of the commonwealth, being at the least uncertain, and in controversy among
Catholics, the very same arguments, which have been before objected against
the former clause of this branch, concerning the Popes authority to depose
Princes, may in like manner be urged against this clause of the oath.

2. To this objection it is answered first, that concerning this question,
which is rather a moral, and politic, then a Theological controversy, many
learned Divines are of opinion, that the civil commonwealth has no
authority at all over their Sovereign Prince, and that a Supreme temporal
Prince cannot be judged, and punished with temporal punishments, but by God
alone, whose opinion to condemn as temerarious, and improbable, without doubt
were great temeritie. Seeing therefore that this question is probably disputed
on both sides by Catholic Doctors, the very same Answers, which before were
given to the former objections, concerning the Popes power to depose Princes,
may be also applied to this objection, concerning the power of the civil
commonwealth to depose their Sovereign: to wit, that also an unlearned man
may by extrinsecal grounds, that is to say, by reason of the authority of
prudent, and learned men, securely persuade himself, that the civil
commonwealth has no authority at all over their Sovereign and absolute
Prince, and also that this his persuasion, acknowledgement, and declaration, he
may with a safe conscience, if need require, confirm by oath: And so of the
rest.

3. Secondly, it is answered, yt in this second branch of the oath I do not
absolutely acknowledge, testify, and declare, that the civil commonwealth
has no authority to depose the King; but if in those words [nor by any other
means with any other] we must needs comprehend also the civil
commonwealth, at the farthest I do acknowledge, that the Pope neither by
means of the commonwealth, nor with the commonwealth, has authority to
depose the King; which proposition verily is most true, so that we suppose,
that no authority has been hitherto granted to the Pope to depose absolute
Kings, and Princes. For otherwise we should also by these words expressly
acknowledge, that the Pope has authority to depose the King, which
nevertheless we have before denied. As for example, this proposition, A stone
by means of a man, or with a man, has power to understand, is most false. For
although a man be endued with the power of understanding, yet a stone neither
without a man, neither with a man, neither by means of a man can understand.
For this preposition by, or by means, does signify a secondarie, or
isntrumental cause, which supposes a principal, as a man is said to see by
means of his corporal eye: but this preposition with, does import usually a
concourse, or cooperation of two causes, as Socrates with Plato does draw a
boat. In like manner, although it were granted, that the civil commonwealth
has power in some case to depose their Prince; yet it does not therefore
follow, that the Pope either with the common wealth, or by means of the
commonwealth, has also authority to depose their Prince: for so the Pope
himself, as a chief and principal cause, should also have power to depose a
Prince, which nevertheless has not been hitherto by any man sufficiently
proved. As also no man can deny, but that this proposition is most true, A
stone neither with the commonwealth, nor by means of the commonwealth, has
authority to depose a King. And although betwixt the Pope and a stone there is
great difference in this, that a stone is not capable of such a power, and
therefore neither has, nor can have any power to depose Princes, yet if we
speak only of the actual power to depose, it is manifest, that there is no
difference at all betwixt them, if so be that we suppose, that the Pope has
not as yet any such authority granted him. Those therefore, that think this
oath to be unlawful, by reason of the aforesaid words, do not seem, in my
judgment, with any sufficient reason to be moved thereunto, for that neither
the power of the commonwealth to depose the King is herein denied, neither can
that opinion, which denies such a power to be in the commonwealth, by reason
of the authority of such famous Doctors, who do approve it, and for the
reasons, which do move them to approve it, be for any sufficient ground drawn
from the principles either of Philosophy, or Divinity, without great
temeritie, be condemned as temerarious, and improbable.

Sect. V.
1. THe fifth, and last objection may be made against those words [or to
authorize any foreign Prince to invade, or annoy him, or his countries, or to
discharge any of his subjects of their allegiance,] For it is well known, that
the Pope is not only a spiritual, but also a temporal Prince, and that he
has other inferior Princes subject to him in temporals: Therefore he has as
ample authority temporal, as any other temporal Prince whatsoever; but if a
King does any notable wrong to an other Prince, or his subjects, for repairing,
or revenging of which wrong he may justly, and lawfully wage war against that
King, the Prince wronged has power to authorize other inferior Princes, who
be his subjects, to bear arms, and to invade the countries of that King:
Therefore the Pope, if he should receive any great loss and damage, by means
of our King, which cannot be avoided, or recovered but by war, may authorize,
and give leave to foreign Princes, who be his subjects, to annoy him, and to
invade his Countries; and therefore no Catholic can with a safe conscience
take this oath under this general form of words.

2. To this objection it is easily answered, to wit, that the aforesaid clause
of the oath, as also all the rest, which make mention of the Popes power to
depose the King, to discharge subjects of their allegiance, and to absolute
from this oath, are, according to the usual and proper meaning of the words,
and according to the express mind of the Lawmakers, to be understood of the
Pope, as he is Pope, and the spiritual Pastor of our souls, and not as he is
a temporal Prince. Neither does the King, and Parliament in this oath intend
to deny, that the same power to bear Arms, wage war, and invade Countries,
which belongs to all other secular Princes, is also granted to the Pope, as
he is a secular Prince.

3. Lastly, against that clause [or to discharge any of his subjects of their
allegiance, and obedience to his Maiestie] I cannot see what other thing can
be objected, then which before has been objected against the former clauses.
For it is most certain, as Cardinal Bellarmine Intr^ct de potest. Papae
contra Guliel. Barcla^um cap. 21. page 202.
himself in express words acknowledges, that Subjects are bound by the law
of God, wherein the Pope has not authority to dispense, to bear true faith
and allegiance to their lawful Prince; Neither is it necessary to add with
Cardinal Bellarmine that reduplication so long as he is Prince, for there is
no man so ignorant as to imagine, that obedience is by the law of God due to a
Prince, when he is no Prince.
And therefore if it be lawful to acknowledge, profess, and declare, and this
declaration to confirm by oath, that the Pope has no authority to deprive a
King, or which is al one, to make a King no King, it necessarily follows,
that the Pope has not authority to discharge subjects of their allegiance,
and obedience, which by the law of God and nature they owe to their lawful
King.

CHAP. IIII. The third branch of the Oath.
ALso I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration, or
sentence of Excommunication, or deprivation made, or granted, or to be made, or
granted by the Pope, or his successors, or by any authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him, or his Sea, against the said King, his
Heirs, or Successors, or any absolution of the said subjects from their
obedience, I will bear faith, and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs,
and Successors, and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all
Conspiracies, and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his, or
their persons, their Crown and dignity, by reason, or color of any such
sentence, or declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons, and traitorous conspiracies, which I shall know, or hear of, to be
against him, or any of them.

Sect. I.
1. AGainst this branch three objections are commonly made. And first Card.
Bellarmine In Respons. ad Apologiam pro Iutamento etc. printed at Collen 16 ^o.
page 9.
, Gretzer In Comme^t. Exeget. cap. 6. arg. 1. 2. 3. 4.
, and Lessius Nu. 218.
, as also his English Recapitulator Page 5^.
relates, do object, that in those words [notwithstanding any sentence of
Excommunication, I will bear faith, and true allegiance to his Majesty, etc.]
is plainly denied the Popes power to excommunicate even heretical Kings. For
how a Catholic (says Cardinal Bellarmine) swear lawfully, and justly not to
obey the Pope excommunicating an heretical King, unless he believe that an
heretical King cannot be excommunicated by the Pope? And Gretzer, without any
proof at all, supposes as manifest, that in the aforesaid words the Popes
power to excommunicate Kings is denied. But Lessius, foreseeing what may be
answered to the aforesaid argument of Cardinal Bellarmine, preuenteth the
answer in these words: You will say, says Lessius his Recapitulator, that the
power to excommunicate is not here denied, but only a certain effect of
excommunication, which is, that notwithstanding a Prince be excommunicated, yet
shall not his subjects be released from the bond of their allegiance. But this
effect does necessarily follow the sentence of Excommunication, as the practice
of the Church for the space of more then twelve hundred years does show, which
this Author [Lessius] has evidently proved in other places of his book.

2. To this obiecton we answer, that the Popes authority to excommunicate the
King is not in the aforesaid words denied, but rather granted, and supposed, as
also the Kings most excellent Majesty in his Premonition to all Christian
Monarchs does in express words auerre Page 9.
. For in this branch it is only vertually denied, that Excommunication, being a
spiritual censure, works this temporal effect to deprive Princes of their
temporal kingdoms, and dominions, or, which is all one, to make lawful Kings
no Kings, and consequently to absolve subjects from their temporal obedience,
which, according to the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, is by the law of God
due to all lawful Kings. The truth is, says his Majesty, In the place now
cited.
that the Lower house of Parliament, at the first framing of this oath, made it
to contain, that the Pope had no power to excommunicate me; which I forced
them to reform, only making it to conclude, that no excommunication of the
Popes can warrant my subjects to practice agianst my person, or State; denying
the deposition of Kings to be in the Popes lawful power, as indeed I take any
such temporal violence to be far without the limits of such a spiritual
censure, as excommunication is. So careful was I, that nothing should be
contained in this Oath, except the profession of natural allegiance, and
civil, and temporal obedience, with a promise to resist to all contrary
uncivil violence.

3. Now let us examine how sufficiently Cardinal Bellarmine replieth to this
answer of his Majesty. For whereas his Majesty In the Catalogue of the lies
of Tortus, nu. 1.
had charged Matthaeus Tortus, or Cardinal Bellarmine, whose book at that time
went under Tortus his name, with lying, for that he had affirmed, that in the
oath of Allegiance the Popes power to excommunicate even heretical Kings, is
expressly denied; Seeing that, says his Majesty, the point touching the
Popes power in excommunicating Kings is neither treated of, nor defined in the
oath of Allegiance, but was purposely declined: which his Majesty in his
Premonition had before more at large declared, Card. Bellarmine In his Apology
chap. 15. in the first lie.
to this answer replieth in this manner:

4. The Author of the book did not write, that in the oath of Allegiance the
question touching the Popes power in excommunicating Princes is treated of, or
properly defined; for he knew well enough, that in the tenor, or form of an
oath there is no place to dispute Theological questions. But he affirmed, that
in the aforesaid oath is denied the Popes power to excommunicate even
heretical Kings: And that this is true, it is evident by those words of the
oath; Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration, or
sentence of Excommunication, or deprivation made, or granted, or to be made,
or granted by the Pope, or his Successors, etc. I will bear faith, and true
allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors. But whosoever swears,
that he will obey an heretical King, notwithstanding the Popes
Excommunication, does not he together swear that he acknowledges not in the
Pope, power to excommunicate heretical Kings? for otherwise it were not an
oath, but sacrilege to swear, that he will not obey the sentence of
excommunication made by the Pope against an heretical King, if he should
believe, that the Pope had power to excommunicate heretical Kings.

5. But this answer of Cardinal Bellarmine, with reverence to so worthy a
man, is of no force at all. For, (besides that he too rigorously wresteth that
word, [treate of] as though his Majesty, affirming that the question
concerning the Popes power to excommunicate was not treated of in this oath,
should understand a Theological Treatise, or Disputation, whereas it is most
evident, that the true meaning, and intention of his Majesty, is, that nothing
at all concerning the Popes power to excommunicate, is either affirmed, or
denied in this oath, but all mention of the aforesaid power was purposely
declined) his answer is neither true, neither, if it were true, does he
thereby clear himself at all of that falsehood, wherewith his Majesty does
charge him. For why, I pray you? cannot one, either moved for hope of gain, or
terrified with fear, swear that he will not obey a just excommunication, and
by so swearing commit sacrilege, who nevertheless does not deny the power it
self to excommunicate? How therefore does Cardinal Bellarmine out of those
words, notwithstanding any Excommunication I will bear allegiance to his
Majesty, or, to speak more plainly, notwithstanding a just Excommunication, I
will not obey it, rightly deduce, that I therefore, so much as obscurely do
deny the power to excommunicate? But Card. Bellarmine answers, that
whoseouer swears in that manner, either denies the power to excommunicate,
or commits sacrilege. Be it so. But if his Majesty would freely grant him
this second, this nevertheless granted, I can in no wise perceive how he
excuses himself from falsitie, in that he before not with any disjunction,
but absolutely pronounced, In this branch the Popes power to excommunicate even
heretical Kings is expressly denied.

6. Secondly, neither is that true, which Cardinal Bellarmine, under the
aforesaid disjunction, does infer, to wit, that by swearing this branch,
either the Popes power to excommunicate is abiured, or sacrilege committed.
For he that swears, that notwithstanding any sentence of excommunication to
be made against the King, yet he will bear to his Majesty true faith, and
obedience in temporals, although he does swear, that he will obey the King
though he be excommunicated, because Excommunication has not power to deprive
Kings of their temporal dominions, and to take away the temporal obedience of
the subjects, as very learned Divine, whom heretofore In my Apology nu. 346.
I have cited, do affirm, yet he does not swear, that he will not obey a
just Excommunication, as Cardinal Bellarmine does ill conclude. For although
he believes, that the Pope has authority to excommunicate heretical Kings,
yet he does not believe, that Excommunication, being a spiritual censure,
works this te^porall effect, to deprive heretical Princes of their Regal
authority, to make kings to be no kings, or to take away from subjects their
natural and civil obedience, which by the law of God, according to Card.
Bellarmines Before cap. 3. sect. 5 nu. 3. where also we observed, that the
aforesaid reduplication added by Cardinal Bellarmine [so long as they remain
Kings] is superfluous.
opinion, they owe even to heretical Kings, so long as tney remain Kings, no
whit less then to Catholics.

7. Finally, that, which Lessius affirms, that the absoluing of subjects from
the bond of their allegiance is an effect, which is necessarily annexed to the
sentence of Excommunication, as the practice of the Church, for the space of
twelve hundred years, and upwards, does show, is altogether untrue. For by no
practice at al of the Church can it be showed, that the absoluing of subjects
from the bond of their allegiance, which by the law of God is due to absolute
Princes, is an effect of Excommunication, but at the most another punishment,
although sometimes imposed together with Excommunication, as Suarez, Becanus,
and many other Divines, whom herefore In my Apology nu. 346.
I have related, do in express words acknowledge; (concerning which
punishment, whether it may for any crime be imposed by the Popes authority
upon absolute Princes, or only upon inferior Princes by the consent of
absolute Princes, to whom they are subject in temporals it is now a
controversy among Divines;) And very lately Becanus writes In controuersia
Anglicana cap 3. q 2. page 108. and in the same corrected page 122.
in this manner: It is one thing to excommunicate a King and another thing to
depose him, or to deprive him of his kingdom, neither is the one necessarily
connected with the other. Many Kings and Emperors have been excommunicated,
and yet not therefore deposed; and contrariwise many deposed, and yet not
therefore excommunicated. Now that subjects cannot be absolved from their
allegiance, unless the Prince be also deprived of his Regal authority, we
have now but a little before clearly showed out of the doctrine of Cardinal
Bellarmine, who expressly affirms, that to deny obedience to a Prince, so
long as he remains Prince, is repugnant to the law of God, from which the
Pope has no authority to absolve. Behold therefore how well these most
learned Divines of the Society of Jesus do agree among themselves in
assigning the chiefest reason, for which this oath of Allegiance does contain
a flat denial of the Catholic faith. And whether we English Catholics for so
weak and slender arguments, and wherein our most learned Adversaries do not
agree among themselves, are bound to hazard our perpetual liberty, and whole
estate, with the utter ruin of our posterity, and withal to be accounted by
our Prince no faithful subjects, I remit to the judgment of the pious, and
prudent Reader.

8. Lastly, who does not perceive, that the very same objection, which the
aforesaid three Doctors have made against this third branch of the oath, to
prove thereby, that this oath cannot be taken by any Catholic, without
manifest abnegation of the Catholic faith, in the very selfsame manner may in
the same express words be alleged against those thirteen English Priests,
and also against the kingdom of France, who, as we have seen before, Cap. 3.
sect. 3. nu. 13.
do constantly defend, that the Pope has not power to deprive the King of
France of his kingdom, and that notwithstanding any Excommunications, which by
the Pope can be made against the aforesaid King, yet the subjects are bound to
yield obedience due to the King in temporals, neither can they in this be
dispensed or absolved by the Pope. See also how those thirteen English
Priests, whom also before Cap. 3. sect. 3. nu. 10.
we have cited, did protest, that they would yield all obedience in civil
causes to Queen Elizabeth, notwithstanding any authority, or sentence of
Excommunication denounced, or to be denounced against the said Queen. For in
the very same manner, and for the selfsame reason Cardinal Bellarmine might
denounce against these, Here is clearly denied the Popes authority to
excommunicate Kings and Princes.

Sect. II.
1. SEcondly, against that word [Sucessors] some object in this manner: It may
sometimes fall out, that a Successor is not a lawful Heir, but an usurper.
Seeing therefore that I am bound to take this oath according to the express
words thereof, and according to the plain and common sense of the same words
without any equivocation, as in the seventh branch is expressly signified: and
this word [Successor] signifies in general every Successor, either lawful,
or unlawful; by virtue of this clause I am bound to swear to bear faith, and
true allegiance to all his Majesty's Successors without limitation, and
consequently to every his Successor, although he should be an usurper,
therefore no Catholic can lawfully take this clause of the oath in these
express words, unless to the word [Successors] this word [lawfull] be added.

2. To this objection it is answered, that, although this word [Successor] does
in general, and being taken by it self signify every Seccessor either
lawful, or unlawful, yet particularly, and properly, especially when it is
placed in a law, it is commonly taken only for a lawful Successor, and who
rightfully succeeds. Wherefore according to that rule before Cap. 1. sect. 3.
nu. 3.
alleged out of Suarez, and confirmed by the Civil law, to wit, that the
words of a law must be taken in that sense, which is without default, this word
[Successors] must in this oath established by his Majesty's law be limited only
to lawful Successors, and who, according to the laws of the kingdom, do
succeed. For, as according to law, id tantum possumus, quod iure possumus: we
can only do that, which we can do by law: so according to law, he only is
accounted to succeed, who by lawful right does succeed. Whereupon the Civil
Lawyers do define Inheritance, Leg nihil ff. de verborum signify.
to be a succeeding to all the right of a party deceased, and an Heir, who
succeeds him in all his right; without adding lawful succeeding, or lawfully
succeeds, for that it is always so to be understood, and therefore being
necessarily supposed, it is not expressed, but altogether omitted in the
definitions of an Heir, and of Inheritance. And whenever in the common, or
Statute laws, or pragmaticall decrees of this kingdom any mention is made of
the King, and his Successors, this word [lawfull] is but few times added,
although always it ought to be understood: And therefore this word [Successors]
in this branch of the oath is, according to the proper, usual, and civil, or
legal signification of the word, to be taken only for lawful Successors. I
said civil, or legal, because it may fall out, that some word by extension,
restriction, parification, or fiction of the law, may have another even proper
signification, then it had at the first imposition thereof, as death, son,
and many like words, which in the law are also properly taken, for a civil
death, and an adoptiue son.

Sect. III.
1. THirdly, some object against those words [And him, and them I will defend
to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever,
which shall be made against his, or their persons, their Crown and dignity,
etc. and will do my best endeavor to disclose, and make known unto his
Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, all treasons and traitorous conspiracies,
which I shall know, or hear of to be against him, or any of them.]

For, say they, according to the present laws of this Realms, it is Treason,
and a Traitorous Conspiracy, and Attempt against his Majesty's Crown and
dignity, to reconcile any man to the Pope, or to be reconciled, to be made a
Priest beyond the Seas by the Popes authority, and afterward to return into
this kingdom, and moreover to deny, that the Kings Majesty of England is
supreme Governor in his kingdom even in causes Ecclesiastical: Therefore by
virtue of these words I am forced to swear to defend his Majesty against all
such reconcilings, and returnings of such Priests into this kingdom, and to
disclose all the aforesaid Treasons, and Traitors to his Majesty, which no
Catholic by reason of his temporal, and civil obedience is bound to
perform, and therefore this oath does not contain only temporal allegiance,
as his Majesty pretends, but many other things, which are flat contrary to
Catholic doctrine.

2. To this branch also of the oath may be reduced that objection before Cap.
2. sect. 1. nu. 1. and seq.
rehearsed, which Gretzer made against those words [our Sovereign Lord]
contained in the first branch: As also the principal ground, whereon Antonius
Capellus in his book entitled, Against the pretended Ecclesiastical primacie
of the King of England, does chiefly rely Controuers. 1. cap. 2. page 30. and
seq.
, to prove, that the obedience, which his Majesty requires of his subjects in
this oath, does to a Catholic exceed the bonds of civil obedience, invade
the spiritual power of the Church, and is flat contrary to the Catholic
faith, which by this argument he thinks to demonstrate.

Whosoever commits fellonie, and treason, falls from the allegiance, which
is due to the King by the oath of Allegiance.

But he, that will be reconciled to the Pope, he that will obey whatsoever
authority the Roman Sea does pretend, and to conclude, he that refuses the
oath of the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy, framed in times past by Queen
Elizabeth, is guilty of fellonie, and treason: He is not reputed guilty of
treason, who refuses the oath of Supremacy, unless after it ^ee three times
tendered him, he shall refuse to take it.


Therefore, he that will not be a perpetual enemy to the Pope, he that
acknowledges whatsoever his authority, he that refuses that impious oath of
Supremacy, falls from the allegiance due to the King by the oath of
allegiance.

3. The Mayor proposition cannot be denied. The King himself proves the Minor
by his laws made in this very same Session of Parliament, wherein this oath is
commanded. For first, the King ordains, that no subject of his shall depart
the Realm to serve in the wars, unless he become bound by Obligation with
two Suerties, not to be reconciled to the Pope, who does otherwise, is
accounted a Fellon. Moreover, he is guilty of high treason, that shall cause,
counsel, help, or be privy to, that any person be reconciled to the Pope, or
Sea of Rome, or shall procure that any one promise obedience to whatsoever
authority of the Bishop of Rome. Neither will he have these to have their
pardon, unless they shall first take two oaths, the one, of the Kings
Supremacy, the other this of Allegiance.

4. The King himself therefore has by his law proved the Minor proposition to
wit, that he commits fellonie, and treason, who does not swear perpetual
emnitie with the Pope, who will obey him in any sort whatsoever, who refuses
to take the oath of Supremacy. How therefore can Catholics with safety of
the Catholic faith, which they believe, take this oath? If in this oath all
friendship, all obedience, all power of the Pope be abiured, how can they take
it without hurt to their souls? Wherefore it is clearly false, as I think,
that only civil obedience is demanded of English men in this oath, and that
the spiritual power of the Pope, or the Catholic faith is no way touched
therein; and that it is truly said by Tortus, that therein is abiured the
Catholic faith, and all power of the pope no less then in the oath of
Supremacy.

5. Moreover, read the Kings Apology, and every man shall perceive, that he
brings the approving, confirming, and calling of Councels to prove, that
civil obedience is due to Kings. Wherefore, according to his Majesty, civil
obedience does comprehend these, which truly no Catholic does believe to be
civil things, or to belong to civil obedience. Wherefore his Majesty cannot
deny, but that under the name of civil obedience he requires of his
Catholic subjects many things, which to a Catholic do exceed civil
obedience. Thus far Capellus.

6. To this objection it is answered first, that, although this word, Treason,
or Traitorous Conspiracy, has of late years, according to the laws of this
Realm, been extended in some sort to certain spiritual causes; yet according
to the proper, formal, plain, and usual signification of this word [Treason]
it only comprehends civil, and not spiritual causes. And although some
spiritual causes be punished with the ordinary punishment of proper, and
natural treason, and in that respect may be called treasons, nevertheless
truly, really, and formally they are not natural treasons, neither can they in
any other manner be called treasons, then may whatsoever Secular crimes, as
thefts, murders, adulteries, if they be forbidden by the Prince under the
punishment of true and natural treason. For true, proper, and natural treason
is of the same nature in all places, in all countries, and among all nations,
and is forbid by the law of nature, and nations, although in diverse Countries,
according to the custom of every one it be punished diverse ways, with what
kind of punishment every outrageous crime, if the Prince shall so ordain, may
be punished, and in that respect, taking it name from the effect, may be called
Treason.

7. Secondly, and principally we answer, that, according to the rules before
Cap. 1. sect. 3. nu. 1.
alleged, no humane law can have greater force to bind, then the Lawmakers
intends it shall bind, and the words of a law are to be taken in that
sense, wherein the Lawmakers declares they are to be understood. But both the
King and Parliament do plainly declare, what treasons, and traitorous
conspiracies they intend shall be comprehended under those names, whiles in
express words they affirm, that in this oath they intend nothing else, then
the profession of natural allegiance, and civil obedience, which by the law
of God and nature is due to all lawful Princes, whatsoever Religion they
profess, with a promise to resist, and disclose all contrary uncivil
violence. So careful was I, says his Majesty In his Premonition p. 9.
, that nothing should be contained in this oath, except the profession of
natural allegiance, and civil, and temporal obedience, with a promise to
resist to all contrary uncivil violence. And again in his Apology Page 46.
, For as the oath of Supremacy (says he) was devised for putting a difference
between Papists, and them of our profession: so was this oath, which he would
seem to impugn, ordained for making a difference between the ciuilly
obedient Papists, and the perverse disciples of the powder Treason. And in the
second Session of Parliament Cap 4.
holden the third year of his Majesty's reign, wherein this oath was devised,
in the Preamble to the oath thus it is written: And for the better trial, how
his Majesty's subjects stand affected in point of their loyalty, and due
obedience, Be it also enacted, etc. Which loyalty, and due obedience in the
fourth Session of Parliament Cap. 6. in the beginning.
, holden the seventh year of his Maisties reign, is in these words more
clearly expressed: Whereas by a Statute made in the third year of your
Majesty's reign, entitled, An Act for the better discovering, and repressing
of Popish Recusants, the form of an oath to be ministered, and given to
certain persons in the same Act mentioned, is limited, and prescribed, tending
only to the declaration of such duty, as every true, and well affected
subject, not only by bond of Allegiance, but also by the commandment of
almighty God ought to bear to your Majesty, your Heirs, and Successors, etc.

9. Seeing therefore that his Majesty has publicly and plainly declared,
that he only requires of his subjects the profession of natural Allegiance,
and civil, and temporal obedience, with a promise to resist all contrary
uncivil violence, and purposely for that cause would not, that the denying of
the Popes power to excommunicate him should be contained in this oath; and the
Parliament in like manner does only demand in this oath that obedience, which
by the bond of allegiance, and the commandment of almighty God is due to his
Majesty, it is most evident, that those Treasons, and traitorous conspiracies,
which by virtue of this oath we are bound to disclose, and against which we
are bound to defend his Majesty, are not spiritual reconcilings to the Pope,
nor detecting of Priests, who do not plot any temporal conspiracy, or
uncivil violence against his Majesty's royal person, Crown, or dignity; but
only such civil, or rather uncivil treasons, and traitorous conspiracies are
forbidden in this oath, and commanded to be disclosed to his Majesty, which
the law of God and nature does oblige subjects, what Religion soever they
profess, not to attempt against their lawful Prince.

10. To comprehend therefore the whole matter in few words, two kind of
Treasons, or traitorous conspiracies may be distinguished; the one, true,
natural, and proper, which are forbidden by the law of nature, and nations,
and are of the same nature in all Countries, and which are opposite to natural
allegiance; the other metaphorical, positive, and improper, which are made
treasons only by the positive decree of the Prince, and only for that cause
are called Treasons, or Traitorous Conspiracies, for that they are punished
with the punishment of true, and natural treason. The former treasons, and
traitorous conspiracies his Majesty intended only to comprehend in this oath
of allegiance: Concerning the later treasons, and traitorous conspiracies,
which are forbidden by other laws, and oaths, his Majesty did not intend to
ordain any thing at all in this oath.

11. From hence it is easy to answer to the objection of Capellus. For if his
Mayor proposition be understood of true, proper, and natural treason, and of
that natural allegiance, and civil obedience, which by the law of God and
nature is due to every lawful Prince, what Religion soever he professes, and
which only, as has now been showed, his Majesty intends to demand of his
subjects in this oath, then we do willingly grant his Mayor; For whosoever
commits such treason, whosoever offers such uncivil, or unnatural
violence to his Majesty, whosoever attempteth such traitorous conspiracies,
falls from the allegiance due to his Majesty, by virtue of the oath of
natural Allegiance: But then his Minor proposition is false; for he that will
be reconciled to the Pope, he that refuses the oath of the Kings Supremacy in
causes Ecclesiastical, etc. does not commit natural, or rather unnatural
treason, does not offer unnatural violence to his Majesty, neither does he
attempt unnatural, or uncivil Conspiracies. For although the aforesaid
reconcilings are by the later laws of this Realm adjudged Treasons, and are
punishable as true, and natural Treasons, and therefore they may be called
positive Treasons, yet they are not true, proper, and natural Treasons, which
only by virtue of this oath we are bound to reveal, and against which only by
virtue of this oath we are bound to defend his Majesty; neither are they
contrary to that natural allegiance, which only the King and Parliament does
require of us in this oath. And so one may commit such treasons without falling
from that natural allegiance, which is due to his Majesty by virtue of this
oath of allegiance, wherein only natural allegiance is demanded of the
subjects.

12. But if Capellus by the name of Treason does in his Mayor proposition
understand all sorts of treasons as well improper, and positive, as true, and
natural treasons; then we deny his Mayor to be universally true. For one may
commit such treasons without falling from that allegiance, which is due to his
Majesty by virtue of this oath of allegiance, wherein only natural
allegiance is required of the subjects, with a promise to resist all contrary
unnatural violence, and to disclose all such unnatural treasons, and
traitorous conspiracies, and to defend his Majesty against them to the
uttermost of his power.

13. Therefore neither has the King proved the Minor proposition by his law,
as untruly affirms Capellus, neither has Capellus proved it by argument, but
as yet it remains to be proved: And therefore his Conclusion is evidently
false: to wit, that in this oath all friendship, all obedience, all power of
the Pope is abiured. For that only friendship, that only obedience, that only
power of the Pope is denied in this oath, which cannot stand with that
natural, and constant allegiance, which subjects by the law of God and nature
do owe to their Prince. And therefore neither is it truly said by Tortus, or
Capellus, that in this oath is abiured the Catholic faith, and all power of
the Pope, no less, then in the oath of Supremacy.

14. Wherefore, although we should grant to Capellus, that the Kings Majesty,
according to the principles of his Religion, which he embraces, is of opinion,
that many things do appertain to civil obedience, which according to
Catholic doctrine do not appertain, (wherewith, as being impertinent to
that, whereof now we treat, I will not intermeddle) yet we utterly deny, that
his Majesty in this oath of Allegiance (for of other oaths there is no
question at this present) does require of his Catholic subjects under the name
of civil obedience, anything, which to a Catholic does exceed civil
obedience: for that, as we have often said, he requires of his subjects in
this oath no other allegiance, then natural, and which by the law of God and
nature all subjects owe to their lawful Princes, whatsoever Religion they
shall profess.

15. And truly, if this manner of arguing, which Capellus uses, were to be
allowed for good and lawful, it might by the very like reason be proved, that
it were not lawful for any Catholic (the present laws of this Realm
standing in force) to take even that oath of Allegiance, which in times past,
when the Kings were Catholics, was required of the subjects. For although
Catholics should only swear in these general words, that they truly, and
sincerely profess, testify, and declare, that King James is true, and lawful
King of this kingdom, and of all other his Majesty's dominions, and that I
promise to bear unto him all true obedience and allegiance, which no man
doubts but that it is lawful to swear, as Fa. Parsons, and Becanus, before
Cap. 2. sect. 1. nu. 7.
related, do affirm, yet the selfsame argument of Capellus may in the very
same words be also urged against this oath, as any man, though but meanly
learned, may clearly perceive; which truly is a manifest sign, that the
aforesaid argument of Capellus is in very deed fallacious, captious, and
sophistical, as we also have sufficiently proved.

CHAP. V. The fourth branch of the Oath.
ANd I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure, as impious, and heretical, this damnable doctrine, and position, That
Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or
murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever. Cardinal Bellarmine In
editione Polita (...) and in Coloniensi anno 1610.
, and Capellus do read, may be deposed, and murdered.

Sect. I.
1. AGainst this fourth branch three objections are commonly made. And first
some object against that word [abiure;] For, say they, this word [abiure] does
import a recalling, or recanting of a former doctrine, which one before has
maintained, and therefore this branch cannot lawfully be taken by him, who
never maintained such a doctrine. Seeing therefore that all his Majesty's
subjects indifferently, and without exception may be compelled by the
Magistrate to take this oath, it is evident, that this branch cannot lawfully,
and without perjury be taken by those, who never maintained this doctrine
concerning the Popes power to depose, or murder Princes.

2. To this objection it is answered, that although this word [ abiurare, to
abiure] be sometimes taken for to periure Abiurare creditum, to forswear his
debt, apud Salust.
, or to forswear, yet though we turn over all the Dictionaries, we shall
never find, that to abjure a doctrine, does only signify, to recant a
doctrine, which one before has maintained; but to deny, condemn, or detest
by oath any doctrine, whether before he has maintained it, or not Simancas in
tit abiurare, nu 1 and 2.
. And although in rigor of speech this word [to abiure] should signify to
recant, or unsay by oath that doctrine, which before he has maintained, yet
according to the plain and common sense of this word, and according to the
usual practice which is observed in abiuring heresies, or errors, this word
[to abiure] does signify to damn, deny, or detest by oath not only a
doctrine, which before in very deed he has maintained, but also which either
he has indeed maintained, or it is suspected Simancas nu. 18.
, that he has maintained. And so the custom of the Inquisition is, that he
who is either accused, or denounced before that tribunal for defending any
heresy, must purge himself by abiuration, and he is compelled to abjure that
heresy, whereof he is denounced, or suspected, although perchance in very
deed he did never either by word teach it, or with heart believe it. Whereof
we may see some examples in the great Council of Chalcedon. For in the eighth
action Bishop Theodoret, who was suspected of heresy, was compelled publicly
to anathematize Nestorius, and all heretics. And in the ninth, and tenth
Action of the same Council, Bishop Iba, who being accused of certain errors,
and found innocent, yet by reason of the suspicion, he was compelled to say
Act. decima, in fine.
, I have anathematized Nestorius, and all his perverse Dogmata.
opinions, and I do now again anathematize him ten thousand times, and I do
anathematize every one, who does not hold, as this holy Synod does. Now that
the King and Parliament, by reason of that horrible Gunpowder-treason attempted
by some Catholics, under pretense to advance Catholic religion, had great
cause to suspect, that also other Catholics did maintain the same damnable
doctrine concerning the murdering of Kings, at leastwise by the Popes
authority, which these Gunpowder-Traitors did defend, is alas, with grief I
speak it, too too manifest.

Sect. II.
1. SEcondly, against those words [as hereticall] some Divines of this kingdom
do vehemently, and almost only object, in so much that they are of opinion,
that this only branch is sufficient to condemn the oath as altogether
unlawful. For they persuade themselves, that out of the most certain
principles of Logic it may evidently be convinced, that this branch of the
oath cannot be taken by any man without manifest perjury. And this objection
(which Leonard Lessius Nu. 219.
, as his English Recapitulator Page 54.
does relate, Antonius Capellus Controuers. 1 cap. 1. nu. 3. page 34.
, and another Englishman, in his answer to a certain Proclamation published
by his Majesty Page 84.
, do briefly insinuate) is more largely, and strongly urged by the Author of a
certain English Dialogue, [intituled, The judgment of Protestancie, and
Puritanisme, both highly displeased at this passage in the oath] wherein this
Author with great confidence, as it seems, persuades himself, to have
clearly demonstrated, that no Protestant, or Puritan, according to the
principles of their Religion, can, without manifest perjury, take this branch
of the oath. And this his pretended demonstration may in the very like manner
be urged against Catholics.

This therefore is the sum, and substance of his demonstration, and of his
whole Dialogue.

2. No man can without perjury abjure that position as heretical, which is
not heretical, but this position, That Princes, which be excommunicated, or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or any
other whatsoever, is not heretical: therefore no man can without perjury
abjure it as heretical.

The Mayor proposition he supposes as manifest. The Minor he proves. But
first he supposes two known grounds, and granted by all men. The first is,
Cap. 2. page 8.
That an oath consisting of diverse passages, parcels, or branches every one
affirming, or denying some thing, it is impossible the whole oath should be
true unless every one of the said passages, parcels, or branches be true, and
lawful. For if any one parcel be false, before a man has taken the whole,
he must needs have sworn the falsehood contained in that part. And this
undoubted truth is founded upon the common received principle, Bonum est ex
integra causa, malum ex quocunque defectu; That which is good proceeds of a
whole and entire cause, evil proceeds from the least defect.

3. The second supposition is, Page 13.
That Heresy being an error against faith obstinately maintained in the
understanding of him, that professes Christ, it must needs follow, that
nothing can be heretical, unless it contain some error against faith. So
that although a position be repugnant to natural reason, yet it is not enough
to make it heretical, unless it contain some falsehood against faith, and
consequently to the express word of God; which according to the Protestants
doctrine, is the sole and only rule of faith, and the only touchstone to try
faith from heresy. Many positions are false, as that London is but a mile
distant from York, but not heretical, because their falsehood is only
repugnant to natural reason, and is not contained in the express word of God.

These being supposed, he argues in this manner.

4. Whenever an affirmative proposition is heretical, of necessity it must
either be against faith, and consequently against the express word of God, or
else the contradictorie negative must be a position of faith, and contained in
the express word of God:

But neither this affirmative position, That Princes, which be excommunicated,
or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or any
other whatsoever, is against the express word of God, neither the
contradictorie negative, to wit, That Princes being excommunicated, or deprived
by the Pope, may not be deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or any other
whatsoever, is contained in the express word of God.

Therefore the former position, That Princes being excommunicated, or deprived
by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or any other
whatsoever, is not heretical.

5. And if perchance it should be answered, that, whereas it is written in the
20. chapter of Exodus, Thou shall not kill: and 1 Reg. 26. Destroy him not, for
who shall lay his hand on the Lord his anointed, and be guiltless? one part
of the aforesaid position, to wit, That Princes may be murdered, is
heretical, and against the express word of God, and therefore the whole
position, in regard of this one part, may be abiured as heretical; yet this
answer is not sufficient: For the position in hand to wit, That Princes being
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their
subjects, or any other whatsoever, does not absolutely affirm, that Princes,
after they be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be murdered by
their subjects, or any other whatsoever, but with a disjunction, to wit, my be
deposed, or murdered. And therefore, although the position were heretical, if
it did only affirm, they might be murdered, yet not affirming this, but only
that they may be deposed, or murdered, there is no show of heresy in it in
regard of being contrary to the aforesaid texts of Scripture, to which it is
nothing contrary at all.

6. For according to the most true and approved rule of the Logicians, to make
a disjunctive proposition, or any thing affirmed under a disjunction, to be
false and heretical, it is necessary, that both parts of the disjunction be
also false and heretical, neither is it sufficient, that one only part be
heretical. And therefore although the second part of the disjunction, to wit,
That Princes may be murdered, be heretical, and against the express word of
God, yet because the first part of the disjunction, to wit, That Princes, being
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed by their subjects, or
any other whatsoever, is not heretical, nor contrary to the express word of
God, the whole disjunction position cannot be in very deed heretical, and
therefore by no Protestant, or Puritan can it be abiured, as heretical. And
this is the sum and substance of the pretended demonstration of this Author,
and also of his whole Dialogue.

7. The very self same argument, which this Author makes against Protestants,
and Puritanes, may in the very like manner be alleged against Catholics, who
hold, that the infallible rule of faith is the holy word of God delivered by
Scripture, or Tradition, and the true sense, and right meaning thereof declared
so to be by the Catholic Church, unto whom the infallible assistance of the
holy Ghost, to declare the true sense and meaning of God his holy word, was
promised by Christ our Lord. For neither out of holy Scripture, or Tradition,
neither by any definition of the Church, or General Council, can it
sufficiently be proved, that the Pope has not authority to deprive Princes,
or that after they be deprived by the Pope, they may not be deposed by their
subjects, or any other whatsoever, but rather by the continual practice of
Popes the contrary seems to be supposed for certain, which also Cardinal
Bellarmine, both in his Controversies, and in his answer to Doctor Barcklay,
does endeavor (but in vain) to demonstrate.

8. Wherefore in this branch, says Lessius, as his English Recapitulator Page
54. 55.
relates, the doctrine of the Catholic Church is abiured as heretical, and
impious: For the plain sense of the oath condemns not only the opinion of
murdering, but also of deposing, and he that takes the oath, abiureth both
the one, and the other. And were the sense ambiguous, yet could it not be
taken, it being in a matter belonging to faith, wherein no equivocation, or
ambiguous speeches may be used. Whereby it is evident, that no man can from
his heart detest this Catholic doctrine as impious, and heretical, if he be
not himself already fallen deeply into heresy, and impiety.

9. To this objection two Answers are usually made. The first, and principal
answer is, that albeit the aforesaid proposition, Princes, which be
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their
Subjects, etc. does seem by reason of that later conjunction [or] to be a
disjunctive proposition, or rather a Categoricall proposition of such a
disiunct predicate, as the Logicians term it, which vertually does imply, or
may be resolved into a disjunctive proposition (to the verity of which
disjunctive proposition is only required, as it was said in the objection,
that one part of the disjunction be true, and to make the whole disjunction
false, and heretical, both parts of the disjunction must be false, and
heretical, neither does it suffice that one only part be false and
heretical) Nevertheless, according to the common sense, and meaning of the
words, it is in very deed, and according to our English phrase, equivalent to a
copulative proposition, or rather to a Categoricall proposition of such a
copulate predicate, which may be resolved into a copulative proposition, to
the verity whereof, according to the Logicians rule, it is contrariwise
required, that both parts of the copulation be true, and to make the whole
proposition false, and heretical, it is not required, that both parts of the
copulation be false, and heretical, but it suffices that one only part
thereof be false, and heretical. Neither is it unusual, that a conjunction
disjunctive be sometimes taken for a copulative, and contrariwise a copulative
for a disjunctive, as we may see in leg. sape. ff. de verborum significat.
Whereof read Felinus in cap. inter caeteras, extra, de rescriptis. Ioannes
Azorius, tom. 1. Instit. lib. 5. cap. 25. and Salas disp. 21. de Legibus sect.
3. regula 26.

10. But if any one will needs contend, that the aforesaid proposition,
Princes, which are excommunicated by the Pope, etc. by reason of that
disjunctive conjunction [or] is indeed a disjunctive proposition, this
notwithstanding being granted, the objection may easily be answered. For albeit
we admit it to be a disjunctive proposition, nevertheless we affirm, that it
is not an absolute disjunctive, whereof the aforesaid rule of the Logicians, to
wit, that both parts of the disjunction must be heretical to make the whole
disjunction to be heretical, is to be understood, but it is a conditional
disjunctive, which imports a free choice, or election of the will, or, which
is all one, a free power to choose whether part of the disjunction we please; to
the verity of which conditional disjunctive is required, that you may choose
whether part of the disjunction you please; and if it be heretical to affirm,
yt it is in the free power of the will to choose whether part of the disjunction
we please, the whole disjunction, or disjunctive proposition, implying such a
condition, or free election, without doubt is heretical.

11. Now that this disjunctive conjunction [or,] being placed in the aforesaid
proposition, does in common sense, according to our English phrase, import a
copulation, or such a disjunction, which leaves a free power in the Subjects
to choose whether part they will, that is, to depose the King, or if they
please, to murder him, will most evidently appear, if both in common speech,
and also in the laws of the Realm, we diligently consider the proper, and
usual signification of this word [may] when there follows the conjunction
disjunctive [or.] And this may be showed by almost innumerable examples,
whereof some of them we will here set down. As for example: You may stay here,
or depart. You may eat, or drink, You may buy in such a place wine, or oil.
You may have in the shambles beef, or mutton. You may go to such a place by
land, or by water. You may buy that land in fee-farme, or by lease. The King by
virtue of an Act of Parliament may take of convicted Popish Recusants twenty
pounds for every month, or the third part of all their lands. The Sheriff may
presently hang a thief condemned to die, or delay his death for some small
time. If any person hold any lands of any other Lord, then of the King, by
Knights service, he may give, dispose, or assure by his last will and testament
two parts of the said lands holden by Knights service, or of as much thereof as
shall amount to the full yearly value of two parts. If a man by his last will
and testament ordain, that his Executors may bestow twenty pounds upon the
poor, or repair such a bridge, it is in the free power of the Executors to
choose whether of those two they please. Finally, in clauses of reuocation,
where the words are, that one may by any deed in his life time, or by his last
will and testament revoke the said uses, and limit new, it is in his free power
and choice to do it by the one, or by the other, as he shall please. And in
infinite such like examples the verb [may] implies a free power to choose
either part of the disiunctio^ one pleases, neither can there scarcely be
alleged any one example, wherein the conjunction disjunctive [or] immediately
following the verb [may] is not so take.

12. Wherefore the plain and usual meaning of the aforesaid proposition,
[Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or
murdered by their subjects, etc.] or, which is all one, Subjects may depose,
or murder their Prince, being excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, (for in
this last the verb passive is only changed into the active) is, that it is in
the free choice of the Subjects to depose such a Prince, or, if they will, to
murder him. So that if it be heretical to affirm, as without doubt it is,
that it is in the free power of the Subjects to depose, or murder such a
Prince, because it is heretical, and against the express word of God to
affirm, that they may murder him, the aforesaid position consisting of that
disjunction is heretical, and therefore it may without any danger at all of
perjury be abiured as heretical.

13. From hence it may be gathered first, that, according to the common, and
usual understanding of our English phrase, there is a great distinction
betwixt these two verbs [may] and [can.] For [can] does usually signify a
power in general, whether it be natural, or moral; but [may] for the most
part imports a moral power; to wit, if it be used alone without any
conjunction following it, most commonly it signifies a lawfulnes to do the
thing proposed: As, I may do this, signifies, that it is lawful for me to
do this: but if there follow it a conjunction copulative, or disjunctive, it
implies a choice, or free power to choose whether part of the disjunction, or
copulation one will.

14. Seeing therefore that the Latin verb [possum] implies power in
general, whether it be natural, or moral, and according to the thing
affirmed, or denied, it is limited to a natural, or moral power, as in this
proposition, Ignis potest comburere: The fire has power to burn, it
signifies a natural, and necessary power in the fire to burn; and in this,
Potest homo eligere bonum, aut malum; A man has power to choose good, or evil,
it signifies a free, and moral power: from hence it follows, that this
proposition, Subjects may depose, or murder their Prince, being
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, is not so properly, and significantly
translated into Latin by the verb [possum] Subditi possunt deponere, aut
occidere suum principem excommunicatu^, etc.] as by the substantive of [possum]
or by the verb permittitur, to wit, in potestate est subditorum, or,
permittitur subditis principem suum excommunicatum, vel depriuatum per
pontificem deponere, aut occidere: It is in the power of subjects, or, it is
permitted to subjects to depose, or murder their Prince, being excommunicated,
or deprived by the Pope. And therefore the Latin translation of this oath,
does not by the verb [possum] sufficiently express the proper, and usual
signification of the verb [may] contained in the aforesaid position, unless
either the conjunction copulative [and] be put in place of [may] to wit,
Principes per Papam excommunicati, vel depriuati possunt per suos subditos
deponi and occidi, deposed, and murdered, as Cardinal Bellarmine, and
Antonius Capellus have it in their books translated: or else there be
understood a condition of the free will to choose whether part of the
disjunction one pleases, to wit, possunt deponi per suos subditos, aut, si
velint, occidi, be deposed, or if the subjects will, be murdered.

15. Secondly, from hence it is also gathered, that in a disjunctive
proposition, wherein is implied a condition of the will, to choose freely either
part of the disjunction, it makes all one sense, whether the conjunction
copulative [and] or the disjunctive [or] be used. For both of them do signify
a free power to choose which part one pleases: and so the conjunction
disjunctive has in sense the virtue, and force of a copulative, and the
copulative of a disjunctive. Wherefore the ancient Fathers, when they speak of
our free will, and do affirm, that it is in our power to choose good, or
evil, they use indifferently the conjunction disjunctive [or,] and the
copulative [and,] sometimes affirming, that it is in our power to choose good,
or evil: other times, that it is in our power to choose good, and evil. Yea
Cardinal Bellarmine himself propounding in his Controversies the question
concerning free will, does confound [or] with [and] and takes them for all
one. There is a controversy (says he) Tom. 4. lib. 5. cap. 13.
betwixt Catholics, and heretics, whether a man in the state of corrupt
nature has free will to choose moral good, [and] to avoid evil, or which is
all one, to observe, [or] break moral precepts.

16. Seeing therefore that in this proposition, Princes being excommunicated,
or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their subjects; or,
which is all one, Subjects may depose or murder their Prince, being
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, the verb [may] does import a free
power in the subjects to choose which part of the disjunction they please, that
is, to depose him, or if they please, to murder him, it makes all one sense,
whether it be said, Princes may be deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or,
Princes may be deposed, and murdered by their subjects; as Cardinal
Bellarmine In editione Politana, and Coloniensi, printed 1610.
and Antonius Capellus Page 12.
putting the coniunctio^ copulative [and,] do seem to have well observed, and
to be of opinion, that the aforesaid disjunctive proposition is in very deed
equivalent to a copulative, or such a conditional disjunctive, which vertually
does contain a copulative. And truly if this pretended demonstration of this
Author were so evident an argument, as he imagines it to be, to condemn this
oath as sacrilegious, without doubt it could not have escaped the most quick
understanding of Cardinal Bellarmine, who also would not have neglected to
produce any reason, which might clearly have convinced the oath to be
apparently unlawful.

17. Now from this which has been said, it is easy to answer in form to the
aforesaid objection, whose whole strength depends upon the nature, and
quality of a disjunctive proposition.

Wherefore to the Minor proposition it is answered, that it is heretical, and
against the express word of God contained in the aforesaid two texts of holy
Scripture, to affirm, that Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by
the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or any other
whatsoever: or which is all one, that Subjects, or any other whatsoever, may
depose, or murder Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope.
For the plain and common meaning of this proposition is, as we have showed
before, that it is in the free power of subjects, or of any other whatsoever,
to depose such Princes, or if they will, to murder them, which proposition is
flat heretical.

18. And whereas it is objected, that the aforesaid proposition, Princes, which
he excommunicated, etc. is a disjunctive, but to the verity of a disjunctive
proposition it is sufficient, that one part of the disjunction be true, and to
make the whole disjunctive proposition to be false, and heretical, it is
necessary, according to the most certain rule of the Logicians, that both
parts of the disjunction be false, and heretical.

It is answered first to the Mayor, that although in external sound the
aforesaid proposition, Princes which be excommunicated, etc. seem to be
disjunctive, yet in very deed, and according to the plain and common
understanding of our English phrase, it is, as we have already showed,
equivalent to a copulative, to the verity whereof it is necessary, that both
parts of the copulation be true, and to make the whole copulative proposition
to be false and heretical it suffices, that one only part of the copulation
be false and heretical. Now that one part of the aforesaid proposition, to
wit, that, Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be
murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever, is flat heretical, is too
too manifest.

19. But lest we should seem to contend about the bare words, we answer
secondly, and grant that the aforesaid proposition, Princes, which be
excommunicated, etc. is a disjunctive: but then the Minor proposition is to be
distinguished: For when the Logicians affirm, that to the verity of a
disjunctive proposition it is sufficient that one part of the disjunction be
true, and to make the whole disjunctive heretical, it is necessary that both
parts of the disjunction be heretical, that approved rule of the Logicians is
to be understood of an absolute disjunctive, to wit, which does not vertually
contain in it a condition, or free power in the will to choose whether part one
pleases: For to the verity of this conditional disjunctive it is necessary,
that both parts of the disjunction may be chosen, and if it be heretical to
affirm, that it is in the free choice of any man to choose whether part of the
disjunction he pleases, the whole disjunctive proposition is heretical. Now
that it is heretical to affirm, that it is in the free power of the subjects
to depose, or if they will, to murder their Prince, being excommunicated, or
deprived by the Pope, no man can call in question.

20. Nevertheless, the Author of this Dialogue does seem to deal somewhat
cunningly, and endeavors not so much to impugn directly the affirmative
proposition, which is expressly contained in the oath, and to prove directly,
that the aforesaid position, Princes being excommunicated, etc. may be deposed,
or murdered, not to be heretical, as the oath affirms; but he flies from
the affirmative to the negative, and endeavors to show, that the
contradictorie proposition, to wit, Princes being excommunicated, etc. cannot
be deposed, or murdered, etc. is not certain of faith, nor contained in the
express word of God; from whence he concludes, that the former affirmative
proposition, which is in express words contained in the oath, is not
heretical; because in what degree or falsehood any position is false, in the
opposite degree of truth the contradictorie must be true.

21. But this Author by his manner of arguing seems desirous to shun the
difficulty, and to impugn a proposition, which is more clear, and manifest,
by another more obscure, and equiuocal, which among Logicians is accounted a
great defect in arguing, whose nature is to prove one thing less manifest by
another more apparent. For the falsehood of this affirmative position, Princes,
which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered
by their subjects, etc. or which is all one, Subjects may depose, or murder
their Prince, being excommunicated, etc. is more clear and manifest in the
common understanding of our English phrase, then is the truth of this negative,
Subjects may not depose, or murder their Prince who is excommunicated, etc. by
reason of that negative aduerbe [not] which, as the Logicians say, is of a
malignant nature; for that it destroys, or denies whatsoever follows after
it, making an affirmative to be a negative, and a negative to be an
affirmative, an universal to be a particular, and a particular to be an
universal As this universal affirmative proposition, all men are sensible, is
by putting not in the beginning, Not all men are sensible, made a particular
negative.
. So that the meaning of the aforesaid negative proposition is by reason of
that negative aduerbe [not] made ambiguous, and may have this sense, that
Subjects may neither depose, nor murder their Prince, being excommunicated,
etc. which proposition so understood is not of faith, neither in very deed
contradictorie to the proper and usual meaning according to our English
phrase, of the former affirmative which is abiured in the oath. And therefore
no marvel, that this Author was desirous to fly from the affirmative
propsition to the negative.

22. Supposing therefore, that contradiction, according to the approved
doctrine of Aristotle Lib. 1. de Interpret. cap. 4.
is an affirming, and denying of the selfsame thing in the selfsame manner,
we answer, that this negative position, Princes, which be excommunicated etc.
may not be deposed, or murdered by their subjects, etc. is contradictorie to
that affirmative position, which is abiured in the oath, if the verb [may] be
taken in the same manner, or sense in the negative, as it is taken in the
affirmative: And then, that as the affirmative is heretical, so the negative is
of faith. For as the sense of the affirmative is, as we have showed before,
that it is in the free choice of the subjects either to depose their Prince
being excommunicated, etc. or, if they will, to murder him, which is false,
heretical, and against those express words of Scripture, Thou shall not kill;
Destroy him not, etc. So the sense of the negative contradictorie must be, that
it is not in the free choice of the subjects to depose such Princes, or if they
please, to murder them; which proposition is most true, and contained in the
express word of God, because it is not in their free power to murder them, as
is manifest by the former places of Scripture. And this, which has been said,
is sufficient for any man, but of mean learning, to perceive both the weakness
of this Authors pretended demonstration, or rather scarce probable
argumentation taken from the nature and quality of a disjunctive proposition,
and also how rashly, and without sufficient proof, Lessius, as his English
Recapitulator relates, so barely affirms, that in this branch the Catholic
doctrine is abiured as heretical, and impious, and that the plain sense of
the oath does not only condemn the opinion for murdering Princes, but also
for deposing them.

23 And thus much concerning the first and principal answer to this second
objection. The four next numbers 24. 25. 26. 27. which are in the Latin
Edition concerning the nature, and conditions of copulative, and disjunctive
propositions, because they cannot easily be understood by the vnlearneder sort;
and also for that they are not very necessary to the full understanding of
this first answer to the former objection, I have in this English Edition
purposely omitted.

28. The second principle answer, which some of our countrymen do make to the
aforesaid objection, is gathered from the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine Lib
2. de Council. cap. 12.
, who expounding that sentence of Pope Gregory the first Lib. 1. ep. 24.
, I confess, that I do receive the four first Councels, as the four books
of the Gospel, affirms, that the aduerbe [as] does import a similitude, and
not an equality, as that Matthew. 5. Be you perfect, as your heavenly father is
perfect. For in like manner these do answer, that those words, I do abhor,
detest, and abjure as heretical, etc. do not import an equality, but a
similitude; and so in common speech do only signify, that I do exceedingly
detest that doctrine. And so we usually say, I hate him as the Devil, I love
him as my brother, not intending thereby to affirm, that the one is in truth a
Devil, or the other my brother.

29. Now to omit that word [murthered] as though there were no mention at all
made in the oath concerning the murdering of Princes, and to speak only of
deposing them; these men affirm, that the aforesaid position, Princes, which
be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed by their subjects,
or any other whatsoever, supposing that this question concerning the Popes
power to depose Princes is not yet decided, is in their judgments a false, and
seditious proposition, and that it has some similitude with error, and
heresy; not for that they think it to be in very deed heretical, or
erroneous, but for that they do constantly hold it to be of such a nature,
that it may be condemned by the Church as an erroneous, and heretical
proposition, if deposing be taken in that sense, as it is in this branch of the
oath distinguished from depriving. For to deprive a Prince, is to take away by
a lawful sentence his Regal authority, and in this branch is referred to the
Pope, but to depose a Prince, is to thrust him out of the possession of his
kingdom, and in this branch is referred to subjects, or any other whatsoever.
The falsehood therefore of the aforesaid position may be gathered partly from
holy Scripture, Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's; which precept is
plainly understood not only of rendering to Caesar which is Caesar's, but also
of not taking away from him that which is his, and which he lawfully
possesses: as also contrariwise the plain meaning of that precept of the
Decalogue, Thou shall not steal, is not only to take away unjustly that thing
which is our neighbors, but also not to render to him that which is his; and
partly it may be gathered from the most true principles of the Divines, and
Lawyers, to wit, that no man is to be put out of his lawful possession, until
the right of the adverse part be sufficiently decided. Seeing therefore that
this question concerning the Popes power to deprive Princes, is not as yet
sufficiently decided, for that as yet the Judge has not determined the
controversy, as Trithemius Cited before cap. 3. sect. 3. nu. 5.
well affirmed, and we also heretofore have showed, so long as it is in
question among Catholics, and probably disputed on both sides, whether the
Pope has such authority to deprive Princes, or no, they can not by virtue of
any Excommunication, or sentence of deprivation made by the Pope against them,
be deposed by their subjects, or any other whatsoever, or which is all one, be
violently by their subjects, or any other thrust out from their kingdom, which
they do rightfully possess. By this therefore which has been said it is
manifest enough, that according to both these answers, although many do like
better the former, that the aforesaid position, Princes, which be
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their
subjects, or any other whatsoever, may truly, lawfully, and without any danger
of perjury be abiured as impious, and heretical doctrine.

Sect. III.
1. THirdly, some object against those words [this damnable doctrine:] for say
they, no man can truly detest, abhor, and abjure, that which is not, but
there is no such doctrine, which affirms, that Princes which be
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope may be murdered by their Subjects, or
any other whatsoever (in which sense the aforesaid position, according to the
first, and principal answer to the former objection, is understood) therefore
according to that former answer no man can truly, and with a safe conscience
take the aforesaid clause of the oath.

2. To this objection it is answered by denying both the Mayor, and the Minor
proposition. For to detest and abhor a doctrine (which is all one with to
abjure, if this detestation be confirmed by oath) being an act of the will, and
not of the understanding, wherein truth, and falsehood do only reside, is not
to affirm, that the doctrine, which I detest, is at that time defended by any,
but it does only signify, that I have a great dislike, and hatred (of which
my dislike I call God to witness) to that doctrine, whether heretofore it has
been maintained, or hereafter may be maintained, or that time, when I abjure
it, it is maintained, or else suspected to be maintained by any. Now, that it
may justly be suspected, that this doctrine, to wit, that Princes, which be
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be murdered by their Subjects, is
maintained by Catholics, the late most wicked murders of the two Kings of
France, together with that execrable Powder Treason intended by certain
Catholics do yield sufficient testimony. For if before any public
Excommunication, or sentence of deprivation denounced by the Pope against the
aforesaid three Kings, those Traitors thought it lawful to murder them, how
much more would they approve this doctrine to murder Princes as lawful, if
they should by the Pope be Excommunicated, deprived, and declared to be public
enemies of the Church?

3. Besides, a Prince deprived by the Pope, according to the opinion of those,
who defend the Popes authority to deprive Princes, is not a true, and a
lawful Prince, but a Tyrant, not only such a one, who governs the Kingdom
wickedly, and Tyrannically, but also who has no authority to reign; but
whether the doctrine of lawfully killing such a Tyrant, is at this time
maintained by any Catholic, let the writings of Ioannes Mariana, Emanuel Sa,
Gregorious Valentia, and other Divines, who treat of this question, give
judgment.

4. Moreover, does not Gregorius de Valentia, a most learned Jesuit, most
manifestly teach this doctrine, of killing Kings by the Popes authority? For
thus he writes. By 2.2. Disp. 1. q. 12. punct. 2. assertio. 2.
the authority of the Church, and so also of the Pope, any man for the sin
of apostacy, and forsaking of his faith, may be altogether deprived of his
dominion, and superiority over his Subjects, etc. This assertion is proved
first, and inuincibly by all those arguments, whereby in the precedent question
punct. 3. we have convinced, that Heretics, and Apostatates from the faith may
by the authority of the Church be deprived even of their life. For if they may
be deprived of their life, much more of all their goods, and therefore also of
the Superiority over others, seeing that life does ouerway all such kind of
temporal goods, and it heing taken away, all other things are with it taken
away. The like also has Martinus Becanus Both in his English controversy,
which was censured at Rome, cap. 3. q. 3. page 115. and in his corrected page
130.
a Divine of the same Society of Jesus, who from the authority, which the
high Priests had in the old Testament to depose Princes, endeavors to
prove, that the same authority was also given to the Pope in the new
Testament; and withal in the same place he affirms, that the high Priest in
the old Testament had authority to command that Kings should be killed, if
they were rebellious, and would not obey his sentence, from whence he
infers, that he might also deprive them of their Kingdom. The high Priest,
says he, might in the old Testament deprive Kings of their life, therefore
also of their Kingdom. Of this no man doubts. And who perceives not, that
this argument was by Becanus produced for this end, to show, that as much
authority was granted to the Priests of the new Testament over Kings, and
Princes, as was given to the Priests of the old Testament.

5. And what shall we say of Iaspar Sciopius in that his railing
Eccelesiasticus, which is stuffed with malepart reproachful speeches against
our Kings Majesty, who also in express terms maintains this doctrine of
killing Kings by the Popes authority. Christ, says he, Cap. 42. page 140.
when now the Church, which is Christ's body was come to full age, has armed
her with an iron red, or with the secular sword, etc. to be revenged of the
Heathens, and to rebuke the people, to bind their Kings in fetters, and their
nobles in manacles of iron, that they may judge them as it is written, Psalm.
149. Or, that his Viceroyes, to wit, Peter, and his Successors may judge them
according to Kingly right, and by prescript of the law: that is, when they will
not receive the law of Chrsst, and acknowledge him for their King, may deprive
them of their Kingdom, and withal also of their life. See also the argument
which heretofore in my Apology Nu. 43 and seq.
I urged to prove, that Kings, and Princes, if for the spiritual good, may by
the Popes authority be deprived of all their temporal goods, may in like
manner for the same spiritual good be deprived of their life, which is also a
temporal thing The same doctrine of depriving Kings of their life by the Popes
authority, haht now lately published Docter Schulckenius in his answer to
Widrington, page 413. and 490. and Doctor Weston, who affirms page 403. that
the Pope has authority not only to deprive Princes of their Kingdoms, but
also to dispose of the bodies of Christians, although in other places they
would gladly wind themselves out of this labyrinth: but all in vain, as
hereafter, God willing, we will manifestly show.
.

CHAP. VI. The fifth branch of the Oath.
ANd I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this oath, or any part
thereof.

Sect. I.
1. AGainst this branch five objections are commonly made. First, Cardinal
Bellarmine In respons. ad Apolog. page 10 of the Collen edition 1610.
obiecteth against those words, [That the Pope has not power to absolve me
from this oath, or any part thereof,] in which words, says he, the Popes power
to absolve, or loose is denied. For out of those words of our Savior,
whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in Heaven, all
Catholics do gather, that it belongs to the Popes authority, not only
power to absolve from sins, but also from Punishments, Censures, Laws,
Vows, and Oaths, whenever it is expedient to the glory of God, and the
health of souls.

2. To this objection it is answered, that in this branch of the oath is not
denied in general the Popes power to absolve from oaths, as some unlearned
Catholics do imagine, and Cardinal Bellarmine by urging this objection,
seems desirous to persuade them to the same; but herein is only denied the
Popes power to absolve me from this oath, or any part thereof. Neither is this
manner of arguing to be approved as lawful, but to be rejected as
deceiptfull, and captious. The Pope has not authority to absolve me from this
oath, therefore he has not authority to absolve from oaths.

3. All Catholics do acknowledge, that the Pope has power to absolve from
punishments, laws, vows, and oaths, but not from all: who will affirm, that
he has authority to absolve a Thief, or Traitor justly condemned by the
Secular Magistrate to death, from the gallows? Very many Divines both
virtuous, and learned do auerre, that the Pope has not power to absolve any
man from the solemn vow of Religion, and that he has not authority out of
his own territories, to make a bastard so legitimate in temporals, that he
shall have as much right to inherit as other lawful children have. And from
oaths, if the absoluing from them should tend to the temporal prejudice of a
third person, many Catholic Doctors are of opinion, that the Pope has no
authority to absolve, unless he have temporal jurisdiction over that third
person.

4. To that, whatsoever thou shall loose, I answer, says Ioannes Parisiensis
In tract. de potest. Regia, and Papali cap. 15
, according to Saint Chrysostom, and Rabanus, that by this is not understood
to be given him any authority, but spiritual, to wit, to absolve from the
bond of sins. For it were folly to understand, that by this is given
authority to absolve from the bond of debts. And therefore this manner of
arguing, from a particular to infer an universal, is not only deceitful, and
captious, but being in a matter of so great importance, as to prove, that no
Catholic can without flat denial of the Catholic faith take this oath, to
the perpetual loss of his liberty, and of all his goods, and to the utter
ruin of his whole posterity, it is, I speak it with grief, too too
pernicious. And whether Cardinal Bellarmine by these his sophistical
arguments giving cause to so great overthrow of Catholics, be bound to
restitution, I leave it both to his own conscience, and to the virtuous, and
learned Reader to examine.

5. Besides, what excessive, and almost illimitate power he gives to the
Pope, to absolve from punishments, laws, vows, and oaths, to wit, whenever
it is expedient to the glory of God, and the health of souls, (seeing that
there can scarcely be assigned any certain limit of those things, which are
expedient to the glory of God) and what great inconueniencies both to Princes,
and Subjects by this doctrine may arise, I have in an other place In my
Apology nu. 52. and seq.
partly insinuated, and partly the prudent Reader will easily comprehend. The
truth of Catholic faith necessary to eternal salvation can be no whit
prejudicial either to Pope, Princes, or Subjects, and therefore it ought by
Doctors, and Pastors to be clearly, perspicuously, and without artificious
coloring of words to be declared and propounded to the faithful people, who,
as they are fearful to disobey the Pope, whom they acknowledge to be their
supreme Pastor in spirituals, so also they are desirous to yield all
obedience by the law of God, and nature due to their lawful Prince, who^ they
profes to be their sovereign Lord in te^porals

6. Lastly, that the Reader may most clearly perceive, upon how weak a ground
Card. Bellarmine, and the rest, who condemn this branch of the oath as
unlawful, do rely, it is to be observed, that there are two kinds of oaths
assigned by the Divines, S, Thom. 22. q 89 ar. 7. and 9. Caiet ibidem. Petrus
Aragona ibidem art. 3. 7 and 9 Greg. de Valentia 2. 2. disp. 6. q. 7. punct. 4.
Sayrus lib. 5. Thesauri cap. 2. and 8. Syluester verbo Iuramentum 1. and 5. nu.
2. and alii Summistae.
the one they call an assertorie oath, and the other, a promissorie. An
assertorie oath is that which is taken for the affirming or denying of a thing
present or past. As for example, I swear that I have ever been a most loyal
Subject to King James. I swear, that I do truly, and sincerely acknowledge,
and profess, that King James is my Sovereign Lord in temporals, and that he
is lawful King of this Kingdom of England. I swear, that I do from my heart
detest this impious doctrine, which teaches, that Princes, although they be
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be murdered by their subjects, or
any other whatsoever, and so of the rest. And this assertorie oath can not be
dispensed withal, neither has the Pope power to absolve any man from the bond
of this kind of Oath. The reason is, because the matter of this oath, or, which
is all one, that thing which in this oath is affirmed or denied, being of an
act present or past, is now made altogether necessary, and irreuocable, for
that as soon as ever the Oath was made, it was either true, or false by reason
of the truth or falsehood of the act, which now is past. Wherefore seeing that
it is impossible, that the act, which is past, be not past, so also it is
impossible, that the Popes dispensation, or absolution can alter it, or recall
it. For it is impossible, that the act of swearing, which is now, or has been
true, be not now, or has not been true.

7 The Pope indeed has power to absolve any man in the Court of conscience
from the sin, or offense, if perchance by false, unjust, or inco^siderate
swearing he has offended, and being penitent does confess the same: but this
is not the plain and common meaning of this word [absolue] contained in this
branch of the Oath, as some unlearned Catholics with us do imagine, who
therefore are fearful to take this branch, suspecting that the Popes power to
absolve from sins in the Sacrament of Penance, is abiured herein. For to
absolve from an Oath, is all one, with to dispense therein, or to release the
obligation thereof; but no dispensation, or absolution can make, that the act
of swearing, which is, or has been false, is not, or has not bin false. And
therefore according to the common doctrine of all Divines, dispensation,
absolution, commutation, relaxation, irritation are not extended, neither do
they appertain to assertorie oaths,

8. A promissorie oath is that, which is taken for the performing, or not
performing of some future thing. As for example, I swear that I will always
bear true faith and allegiance to King James, that I will to the uttermost of
my power defend him from all conspiracies, and will do my best endeavor to make
them known to his Majesty. But in this promissorie oath, one thing I do
affirm, to wit, that, when I do promise, I do sincerely, and unfeignedly
promise; the other thing I do promise, to wit, that I will truly perform
what I do promise; or to use other words, which in sense are al one; in this
promissorie oath two kinds of truth are to be considered, one is already
present, which does consist in this, that he, who swears, do affirm the
truth, which is, that he have a prese^nt intention, unless he will be
perjured, to make that true, or, which is all one, to perform that, which he
has promised to perform; which act of swearing does not differ from the
nature and quality of an assertorie oath and therefore is altogether inuariable
and indispensable: the other truth is future, which does consist in this, that
he make that true which he promised, by really performing that thing which he
swore to perform, which thing to be performed, seeing that it is variable in
such sort, that in some case the performance thereof may be unlawful or hurtful,
therefore such a promissorie oath may be dispensed withal, because such a
dispensation and absolution is not from the act of swearing, but from the the
thing which is sworn, in such sort, that as by obligation of the oath I was
bound to perform that thing, which by oath I promised to perform, so by
virtue of absolution or dispensation, I am freed from performing the same. For
this is the effect of absolution and dispensation, that the thing, which before
was a fit matter to be sworn, and to be performed, now upon just occasion is
no fit matter to be sworn, or to be performed. As for example, if one should
swear to fast, and afterward he should be doubtful, that this fasting would
be either evil, or an hindrace of greater good, he might also justly doubt,
that it is now no longer a fit thing to be sworn, or performed: and therefore
according to the common opinion of Divines, an absolution and dispensation
therein may be justly demanded, and also granted by him, who has authority to
dispense in oaths.

9. Now in this oath of allegiance, which contains many particular oaths,
three only things I do promise to perform, all which are comprehended in the
third branch of the oath, to wit, that notwithstanding any declaration, or
sentence of Excommunication, or deprivation made, or to be made against the
said King, his Heirs or successors, or any absolution of the said subjects
from their obedience. First, I will bear faith, and true allegiance to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors. Secondly, I will to the uttermost of my
power defend him, and them against all conspiracies, and attempts whatsoever,
which shall be made against His, or their Persons, their Crown and dignity,
by reason or color of any such sentence, declaration, or otherwise. And
thirdly, I will do my best endeavor to disclose and mae known unto his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous conspiracies,
which I shall know or hear of to be against him, or any of them. Seeing
therefore that in this Oath I do promise to perform these three only things,
and all the other parts of the oath are merely assertorie, to which absolution
and dispensation do not belong, it is evident, that neither Cardinal
Bellarmine, nor any other can be moved with any show of reason to impugn this
fifth branch as unlawful, to wit, that the Pope has not power to absolve me
from this oath, unless he will contend, that the Pope has power to absolve
me from some one of those three things which I have promised, to wit, either
from bearing true faith and allegiance to his Maiesitie, or from defending him
from all Treasons, or from disclosing them to his Majesty.

10. From whence it does clearly appear, that the subjects cannot incur any
more danger of perjury, by swearing that they believe, and are resolved in
their conscience, that the Pope has not power to absolve them from these three
things, which they promise to perform, then by swearing, that they do
acknowledge, believe, and are resolved in their conscience, that the Pope has
not authority to deprive his Majesty. For this once supposed, it is most
certain, that all subjects, by the law of God and nature, wherein the Pope
has not power to dispense, or to absolve any man from the bond thereof, are
bound to bear allegiance, and true obedience to their lawful Prince, as also
Cardinal Bellarmine* In tract contra Barclaium cap. 21. p. 202.
does expressly auerre, and consequently by the same law of God and nature
they are obliged to defend him against al Treasons, and to make them known
unto his Majesty. Wherefore supposing that the Pope has not power to deprive
his Maiestiq, or to make him no King, which is a controversy among the
Scholasticks, and as yet the Judge has not decided it, as Trithemius In Chron.
monast. Hirsang. adannum 1106.
affirms, I may truly, and lawfully swear, that the Pope has not
authority to absolve me from this oath, or any part thereof, without denying
the Popes power to absolve in general. As also the kingdom of France
affirming that the Pope has not power to absolve the Kings subjects from their
obedience due to him for temporals, do not therefore intend to deny the Popes
power to absolve in general. And although Ioannes Maldonatus, a famous Divine
of the Society of Jesus, does confidently, as we have seen before Cap. 3.
sect. 1. nu. 12.
, affirm, that neither the Pope, nor the whole Church has power to dispense
in the solemn vow of chastity, and that they, who say the contrary, do seem
to him to have more regard of some examples of certain Popes, thou of the holy
Scripture, yet no Jesuit without all doubt will from thence conclude, that
Maldonate does thereby deny the Popes power to dispense in general.

Sect. II.
1. SEcondly, Gretzer In Comment. Exeget. cap. 6. page 106.
against these very same words [That the Pope has not power to absolve me of
this oath, or any part thereof,] propounds two objections, which yet in
substance are not much different, for that the later is contained in the
former, as a particular proposition in an universal.

The first objection, which in order is Gretzers fifth argument, is this:

Whosoever denies, that the Supreme Pastor of the Church has power to loose
all that the loosing whereof is evidently necessary to the preservation, and
propagation of Christ his flock, denies the Catholic faith; but he that
takes this oath, denies this, therefore he denies the Catholic faith.

The Mayor proposition is certain out of that Mat. 16. I will give thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven. For what? unless to open, and shut, or which
is all one, to loose, and bind, when evident necessity does show, that there
is need of opening, or shutting, loosing, or binding.

The Minor is proved; because in this oath the swearer denies generally, that
the Pope has power to absolve subjects from their oath of allegiance,
therefore he denies that then also it may be done, when the preservation and
safety of Christ's flock does evidently require the same, because the oath is
general, and without any exception. But this is contrary to that, whatsoever
thou shall loose upon earth, to wit, with reason, circumspection, prudence, and
discretion, shall be loosed also in heaven. When, I pray you, is the loosing of
a bond more necessary, then when it appertains to the preserving of the
Catholic, and Apostolic Religion, and to the repelling of heresy?

2. The second objection, which in order is Gretzers sixth argument, is this:

Whosoever believes, and in his conscience is firmly resolved, that the
Supreme Pastor of the Church, or his Lieutenant, has not power to absolve any
man from the bond of the oath prescribed by King James, if either willingly, or
for fear he took the same, denies the Catholic faith: But he that takes
this oath believes this, and in his conscience is firmly so resolved,
therefore he denies the Catholic faith. The Mayor is manifest out of that,
whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in heaven.
Wherefore under this [whatsoeuer] should not be comprehended this oath, which
is so pernicious to souls, and to the Catholic Religion? Truly it were
wonderful, if kingly power were so great, that it could make void, or diminish
that [whatsoeuer]. The Minor is apparent out of the aforesaid words of the
oath. The Conclusion good.

3. These are the arguments of Gretzer, which are different from the objection
of Cardinal Bellarmine 1. Sect. 1. nu. 1. and seq.
, before related, and answered in this, that Card. Bellarmine out of that,
whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. does for the ground of his reason deduce this
proposition, to wit, that according to the doctrine of all Catholics the Pope
has power to absolve, not only from sins, but also from punishments, laws,
vows, and oaths, whenever it is expedient to the glory of God, and health
of souls, whereby he makes the Popes power to absolute to be almost without
any limitation. But Gretzer proceeds more warily. For he out of those words,
whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. does for the ground of his arguments only
infer this proposition, to wit, that the Pope has power granted him to
loose, and bind every thing, when it is evidently necessary to the
preservation, and safety of Christ his flock. Nevertheless this ground of
Gretzer is in substance all one with the second, and fifth reason, which
Cardinal Bellarmine in his Controversies brought to prove the Popes authority
to dispose of temporals for the spiritual good. And therefore out of my
Apology, wherein I have out of Cardinal Bellarmines own principles clearly
showed the weakness of these his arguments, the answer to this ground of
Gretzers will most easily appear.

4. Wherefore to the first argument of Gretzers it is answered, that to make
his Mayor proposition to be undoubtedly true, those words, loose, and loosing,
are not to be understood of temporal, but only of spiritual loosing, and
only concerning such persons, over whom he has spiritual jurisdiction.
Otherwise out of that, whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. one might infer,
that the Pope has power to bind the Devil from tempting men, and withdrawing
them from the Catholic faith: For so the interlineall Gloss does understand
those words, Matthew. 18.
whatsoever you shall bind, etc. with the bond, says he, of Excommunication.
And Suarez Tom. 5. disp. 1. sect. 2. nu. 3.
, a most famous Divine of the Society of Jesus, writes thus: But that, which
is added, shall be bound also in heaven, does sufficiently declare, that this
power is not natural, but supernatural, and that bond to be spiritual, and
of an higher order. And to the same purpose Ioannes Parisiensis, before In this
chapter sect. 1. nu. 4.
related, cites S. Chrysostom, and Rabanus. Now it is manifest enough, that
to dispose of temporals, to deprive Kings of their temporal kingdoms, and
lives, are not spiritual, but temporal loosings.

5. If therefore the sense of the Mayor proposition be that the chief Pastor
of the Church has power by spiritual loosing and binding, to loose, and bind
all that, whose loosing and binding is evidently necessary to the
preservation, and increase of Christ his flock, we grant the Mayor, otherwise
we deny it. For out of this place, Matthew 16.
whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. and out of that other, John the last chapter.
Feed my sheep, no other thing can be certainly concluded, but that all
spiritual power, which is necessary to the government of the Church, has
been given to S. Peter, and the Church, which as by Christ his institution is
not a temporal, but a spiritual commonwealth, as I have heretofore In my
Apology nu. 83. and seq.
declared more at large, so also it ought to have all authority, which is
agreeable to the nature of a spiritual commonwealth.

6. Wherefore to the spiritual loosing of the bond of an oath two things are
principally required: the first, a power to dispense, or absolve from the oath:
the second, a sufficient cause, for which the oath may be dispensed withal;
to wit, that the dispensation, or absolution be granted with reason,
circumspection, prudence, and discretion, when necessity, or great utility
requires. For otherwise if an oath be dispensed withal without a sufficient
cause, although the dispenser or absoluer have sufficient authority to
dispense, or absolve, yet the dispensation, or absolution is rather a
dissipation, neither before God, and in conscience is it of any force at all.
Therefore reason, circumspection, prudence, and discretion, which Gretzer
mentions, do suppose indeed authority to dispense, but they give not
authority, and for that cause are required to dispensing, that he, who has
authority to dispense, or absolve, may rightly, lawfully, and without any
sin at all exercise his authority. For although the Pope should, for
example, dispense with any man in the solemn vow of chastity, and in so
dispensing use never so much reason, circumspection, prudence, and discretion,
nevertheless we could not from thence rightly conclude, that the Pope has
full and sufficient authority to dispense in that vow, seeing that according to
the doctrine of Maldonate the Jesuit, who follows herein the opinion of S.
Thomas, and other excellent Divines, that vow is not subject to the Popes power
of dispensing. And thus much concerning Gretzers Mayor proposition.

7. Concerning his Minor, we deny first, that to absolve subjects from their
temporal allegiance, to thrust Princes out of their temporal Dominions, and to
dispose of temporal things, are to be numbered among spiritual, but only among
temporal loosings, and which therefore are not agreeable to the nature and
condition of a spiritual commonwealth, which, as Pope John the eighth
affirms, Cap. Porro. 16 q. 3.
knows not corporal weapons, and, as Pope Nicolas Cap. Inter haec, 33. q. 2.
writes, has no other sword then spiritual.

8. Secondly, we also deny, that to deprive Princes of their kingdoms, or
life, to absolve subjects from their temporal allegiance, and to dispose of
temporal things, are evidently necessary to the preserving, or increasing of
Christ his flock, as heretofore In my Apology nu. 182. and seq.
out of Cardinal Bellarmines grounds I have most clearly showed. The visible
Pastors of Christ's flock in earth are bound by the law of Christ, to use all
those means instituted by him, which are evidently necessary to defend his
flock from the cruel assault of ravening wolves, and yet neither S. Peter,
nor any other of those holy Popes of the Primitive Church, who lived under most
cruel persecutors of the Church, ever used these means to depose Princes, and
to absolve subjects from their temporal allegiance, which without all doubt
they must, and would have used, if they had been necessary to the preservation
of Christ his flock. And might not Gretzer, I pray you have brought the
selfsame argument for the murdering of wicked Princes, when there is no other
way to depose them, or thrust them out of their kingdom? Might it not also by
this argument be convinced, that Christ our Lord has given to his Church, not
only sufficient authority to deprive Princes, but also sufficient force
actually to depose them, and to thrust them out of their actual possession,
considering that the actual deposing of wicked Princes is for the most part
more necessary to the preservation, and increase of Christ his flock, then is
her sole authority to deprive them by a iuridicall sentence of their Regal
authority?

9. To Gretzers second argument, whose solution will more clearly appear by
the answer to the next objection, it is answered by denying his Minor. For he
denies not the Catholic faith, who in heart and words does acknowledge,
believe, and firmly persuade himself, that the Pope has not power to absolve
him from the bond of this oath. For the bond of an oath, as well says S.
Thomas, 2. 2. q. 89. ar. 7.
with whom all other Divines do accord, is referred to some thing, which is to
be performed, or omitted: wherefore it does not appertain to an assertorie
oath, which is of a thing present, or past, but only to a promissorie oath. Now
in this oath, as I have said before In this chapt. sect. 1. nu. 9.
, three only things are promised, which the swearer is bound to perform, to
wit, to bear faith, and true allegiance to his Majesty, to defend him to the
uttermost of his power against all treasons and conspiracies, and to do his
best endeavor to make them known to his Majesty, from the obligation whereof
the Pope without doubt has no authority to absolve his subjects, as we In
this chapt. sect. 1. nu. 9.
have clearly deduced out of Cardinal Bellarmines doctrines, before Chap. 3.
sect. 5 nu. 3.
related, unless of a King he has authority to make him no King; which
authority, whether it be granted to the Pope, is not yet determined, but
thereof not only the Scholasticks do dispute, and as yet the Judge has not
decided it, as Trithemius affirms, but also the most noble kingdom of
France, if any credit is to be given to Petrus Pithaeus, does suppose the
contrary to be certain.

10. Wherefore Gretzer does without sufficient proof affirm, that this oath
is pernicious to souls, and to the Catholic religion: For neither Gretzer,
nor Cardinal Bellarmine, nor any other has with any firm and solid reason
hitherto proved, that in this oath is contained any thing, which is repugnant
to Catholic faith, or the health of souls. And, to use Gretzers words, It
were truly wonderful, if the Popes power were so great, that it could make
void, or diminish that Regal power, which the law of God and nature has
granted to Princes, and that temporal allegiance which by the same law of God
and nature is due to them. Neither is that [whatsoeuer] which Gretzer does so
often inculcat, to be taken generally, but with a convenient distribution, or
limitation, as the Logicians speak, as he may perceive by Maldonate, and those
other Divines, whom Maldonate does follow. And I would to God that Gretzer, and
some others, who are so vehement against the oath, would seriously consider
with themselves, what great account they are to make in the dreadful day of
Judgment to the supreme Pastor and Judge of all, for maintaining so stiffly
their own opinions, and those not grounded upon any solid reason, but only
upon sophistical deductions, will needs have the ignorant people, (who are not
able to examine their sophismes, but do only rely on their authority, as
being men of such singular learning) to believe them as an undoubted doctrine
of faith, and which without danger of heresy or error, may not be impugned,
and that in things of no small moment, but which, if they be not true, may
tend to the great reproach of the Catholic faith, to very much disgrace of the
Sea Apostolic, to the infinite wrong of Sovereign Princes, and to the
perpetual temporal overthrow of very many Catholics, and of their whole
posterity.

Sect. III.
1. THirdly, against the selfsame words, [That the Pope has not power to
absolve me of this oath, or any part thereof] others object in this manner:

In every oath, which is taken to confirm the performing of some future thing,
which is otherwise commanded by the law of God and nature, two sorts of
obligations may be distinguished: The first bond is natural, or civil, which
is precedent to the oath, and which has force to bind, before any oath to
confirm the same be taken. The other is sacred, or religious, which either
freely, and without constraint, or for fear is made to confirm the former
bond, and wherein the bond, or obligation of an oath does properly, and
formally consist, and which being taken away does not of necessity dissolve
the former bond. Seeing therefore that, according to Catholic doctrine, there
is given by Christ's institution authority to S. Peter, and his Successors to
dispense, or absolve from oaths upon a reasonable cause, it cannot doubtless
be denied, but that the Pope has power to dispense, or absolve, upon just
cause, from every oath, that is, from the sacred and religious obligation
thereof, although perchance it be denied, that he has authority to absolve
from the precedent natural, or civil obligation.

2. Now that there is a just cause, which may move the Pope to dispense, or
absolve from this oath, that is, from the religious obligation, wherein the
substance of an oath formally consists, is too too manifest. For as all
Divines, and Lawyers do confess, among other sufficient causes, which are
required to demand, and grant an absolution from an oath, these two are the
principal. The first is, if the oath be enforced, and extorted through fear:
the other, to punish him to whom the oath was made, for some notorious crime by
him committed: As to punish excommunicated persons, the oaths, which are made
to them, are released, and their subjects are resolved from their oath of
allegiance. can. Nos Sanctorum, and can. Iuratos 15. q. 6. and can. Absolutos,
extra, de haereticis. But in regard of both these causes the Pope may absolve
from this oath of allegiance. For first it is extorted from the subjects for
fear of losing all their lands, goods, and liberty. Secondly, our King is no
Catholic, but rather an adversary to Catholic Religion: and therefore in
consideration of both these causes this oath of allegiance, that is, at
leastwise the sacred obligation thereof may by the Popes authority be
released, if any credit be to be given to the Canons of holy Church: Therefore
it is not lawful for any subject to swear, that the Pope has not power to
absolve him from this oath, or any part thereof, which at the least, if we will
speak properly, and formally, ought doubtless to be understood of the
sacred, and religious obligation, wherein the substance of every oath does
formallie consist.

3. To this objection, in soluing whereof, for that some of our countrymen both
grave, and otherwise learned, do make great reckoning thereof, I must be
somewhat the longer; it is answered first, that the plain, common, and usual
signification of this proposition, The Pop has power to absolve me of this
oath, is, that the Pope has power to absolve me, not only from the thing
sworn, with this reduplication, as it is sworn, but also absolutely from the
thing it self, which is sworn; or which is all one, not only to absolve me
from the sacred and religious bond, but also from the natural and civil
obligation. Seeing therefore that a promissorie oath, which only is subject to
dispensation, or absolution, does formally consist in this, that God his holy
name is brought as a witness for the performing, or not performing of some
future thing, as in this oath I do only promise to perform these three
things, to wit, that I will bear faith, and true allegiance to his Majesty,
that I will defend him against all Treasons, and traitorous conspiracies, and
that I will do my best endeavor to make them known to his Majesty, if they
shall come to my knowledge; when it is affirmed, that the Pope has not power to
absolve me from this oath, or any part thereof, by this according to the common
meaning of the words it is signified, that the Pope cannot give me leave either
not to bear faith, and true allegiance to his Majesty, or not to defend him
against all treasons, or not to disclose them to his Majesty. And this also is
the usual practice of Popes, that when they release subjects of the oath of
allegiance, they do not only absolve them from their allegiance as sworn, but
simply, and absolutely from their allegiance it self, or from the natural
bond of their obedience, as plainly may be seen in the canon, Nos Sanctorum,
and the canon Iuratos 15. q. 6. before cited. And therefore this distinction of
the sacred and civil bond of an oath, little avails to prove this branch of
the oath to be unlawful.

4. Besides, this also seems to be the mind, and chief meaning of the
Lawmakers, which for the interpreting of the words of laws is principally to
be respected. For I think his Majesty does little regard, whether the Pope
has power to absolve his subjects from the sacred bond of this oath, so that
he may be assured, that notwithstanding the releasing of the sacred bond, yet
the civil and natural allegiance of his subjects, for confirmation whereof
this oath is moreover added, do remain inviolable, and indispensable, neither
by the Popes authority may it any ways be dissolved, but that his subjects,
after they be absolved by the Pope from the sacred bond of the oath, are
nevertheless by the law of God and nature, obliged to bear faith and true
allegiance to his Majesty.

5. Secondly, although we should grant, that the common meaning of these
words, to absolve me from this oath, were to absolve me only from the sacred
obligation, wherein the formal substance of an oath consists, yet supposing
that the Pope not so much as indirectly, that is, in regard of the spiritual
good, has not authority to dispose of the temporals of Princes, and to
deprive them of their kingdoms and dominions, which of necessity must be
supposed at the least as probable by him, who will take the oath: this, I say,
supposed, it is answered, that any man may lawfully think, and safely
persuade his conscience, and this his opinion, or persuasion confirm by oath,
that the Pope has not power to absolve him from his oath, that is, from the
sacred and religious obligation thereof. For, according to the common opinion
of Divines, the Pope has not power to absolve from oaths, when the absoluing
from them tends to the temporal prejudice of a third person, unless either
directly, or indirectly he has power to dispose of the temporal goods of that
persons.

6. From hence, says Dominicus Sotus Lib. 8. de Just. q. 1. ar. 9.
, a most learned Divine of the Order of S. Dominicke, do arise two other
differences to be considered in the dispensing of vows and oaths. The first
concerning those persons, who have power to dispense. For, although the Pope
can dispense in a vow, which is greater, yet he cannot in an oath, which is
less. For he has not power to release an oath, which one has made to another
man, to pay him that debt which he owes him. Neither does this proceed from
the less power of the Pope, neither from the worthiness of the oath, but from
the nature of the contract, which by oath is confirmed. For, because the Pope
is the Vicar of God, he has power to change the vow, which is made to God,
into that, which is more acceptable unto him. But because he has not power to
take from another man that which is his own, he cannot do him wrong in
releasing the oath, which was made unto him. And contrariwise, although a
private man cannot dispense in a vow, which is made to God, for that he is not
his Vicar, yet he, to whom an oath was made, has power to release the same;
not for that he has more ample power, then the Pope, but because he is Lord of
his own goods, and therefore as he has power to give them so also has he
power to release the oath made unto him concerning them. Wherefore this is not
a dispensing, but a remitting, or releasing. The second difference is
concerning the matter; that in changing and dispensing of vows that only must
be regarded, which is more pleasing to God, but in releasing of oaths great
caution must be used that no wrong be done to a third person. Hitherto Sotus,
from whom Petrus Aragona 22. q. 89. ar. 9.
, and our countriman Gregorius Sayrus Lib 5. Thesauri cap. 8. nu. 4.
have taken the selfsame words.

7. Seeing therefore, as oftentimes has been said, that the Pope has not
power to deprive our King, or to dispose of his temporals, or of his subjects,
from this supposall it does evidently follow, that he has not power to absolve
his subjects from this oath, which they have taken for the performance of those
three things before In this chapt. sect. 1. nu. 9.
rehearsed, which every subject by the law of God and nature is obliged to
perform. And truly, according to the probable doctrine of S. Thomas, and his
followers, who are of opinion, that the Pope, when he dispenses in vows, and
oaths, does not dissolve the sacred and religious bond of the oath, ( in that
manner as many, says Maldonate, do understand dispensation; for so, says he,
he should disanull, and altogether loose the law of God and nature, as commonly
it is done in many dispensatio^s, which is not to be a dispensator, but a
dissipator) but does only interpret the oath, to wit, by declaring, that the
thing promised by oath, which before was a fit thing to be sworn, and
therefore by virtue of the oath to be performed, so long as it remains so, is
now by reason of some particular event or circumstance become hurtful, and an
hindrance of a greater good, and therefore now no fit matter to be sworn, nor
by virtue of the oath to be now any more performed: According, I say, to this
doctrine of S. Thomas, which is also the more common of Divines, it is plain
enough, that this objection of our countrymen, taken from the difference
betwixt the sacred and civil bond of the oath, is of no force at all.

8. For whereas those three things before rehearsed, which by the law of God
and nature are due to lawful Princes (whereof only there can be made any
controversy concerning the Popes power to absolve from this oath, considering
that all the other parts of the oath are merely assertorie, neither are they
subject to absolution, or dispensation) are only in this oath promised to be
performed by the subjects; as the precepts of nature, the same circumstances
remaining, are immutable and indispensable, neither can God and nature command
an unlawful or hurtful thing, or which is an hindrance to greater good, so in
those three things, which, according to the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine
oftentimes related, are due by the law of God and nature to lawful Princes, no
interpretation or dispensation can be made. Neither can the Pope absolve from
this oath of allegiance, unless he do withal declare, that our allegiance,
which is due to the King by the law of God and nature, be unlawful, hurtful,
or an hindrance to greater good, which he cannot in any wise declare, unless
he has power to make a King no King. For consequently he should also declare,
that God and nature commanding subjects to bear true faith and allegiance to
their lawful Prince, should inioine them an unlawful or hurtful thing, or
which is an hindrance to greater good. It is plain therefore that, according
to the common doctrine of S. Thomas, and his School, the Pope cannot absolve
from the sacred and religious bond of this oath of allegiance, unless also he
do declare, that the natural bond of our allegiance be unlawful, hurtful, or
an hindrance to greater good; that hereby it may easily appear, how weak is
this objection of our countrymen to condemn this branch of the oath as
unlawful.

9. Now concerning the two causes alleged in the objection, for which an
absolution, or dispensation in an oath may be demanded, or granted by the Pope,
to wit, either to punish him to whom the oath was made, or when the oath was
extorted through fear; it is answered, that both these causes be sufficient,
to move the Pope to dispense in those oaths, wherein he has power to dispense.
I say, wherein he has power to dispense, because, as I insinuated a little
before Sect. 2. nu. 8.
, there is a great difference betwixt the Popes power to dispense in a vow, or
oath, and a sufficient and just cause for which he may dispense therein. For a
just and lawful cause to grant a dispensation, does suppose in the Pope a
power, but does not give him a power to dispense. And therefore if the Pope
has no authority given him by Christ to dispense, for example sake, in the
solemn vow of chastity (whereof, notwithstanding many examples of Popes, who
have dispensed therein, there is a great controversy among Divines even to
this day) then no urgent cause whatsoever, as the preserving of a kingdom from
eminent danger of some notable temporal, or spiritual harm, can give a true
and real power to the Pope to dispense in this vow.

10. Wherefore when Divines do affirm, that one sufficient cause, why the
Pope may dispense in an oath made to a third person, is to punish that third
person, this their assertion is to be understood of such third persons, upon
whom he has authority to inflict such a punishment. For otherwise a just
cause to absolve from an oath, does, as we now have said, suppose in the Pope
a power to absolve, but does not give him such a power. And so the Pope has
authority to absolve subjects upon a just cause from their allegiance, which
they owe to that Prince, over whom the Pope has temporal jurisdiction,
because he has authority to punish such a Prince, if he deserve it, of whom
he is a temporal Lord, with temporal punishment: But the Pope has no
authority to absolve subjects from their temporal allegiance, which they owe
to Sovereign Princes, who in temporals acknowledge no Superior beside God,
unless either directly, or indirectly he has power to deprive such Princes,
and of Princes to make them no Princes, which as yet neither Cardinal
Bellarmine, nor any other has sufficiently proved.

11. In like manner when Divines affirm, that one sufficient cause, for which
the Pope has power to absolve from an oath, is, if that oath be extorted
through fear, this their assertion is to be understood of such oaths, which
are wrongfully extorted, as if one, for fear of death, should swear to give a
thief a certain sum of money: for to absolve from such kind of oaths is
injurious to no man; but it is not to be understood of such oaths, which are
commanded by a just law, and a great punishment imposed upon the infringers
thereof. If therefore this oath of allegiance, and the law, which commands
it, be lawful, and contain no injustice, whereof there is now a controversy,
and the contrary has not hitherto been sufficiently proved, the fear of
incurring the penalty appointed by the law against the infringers thereof, is
not a sufficient cause, for which the Pope may dispense even in the sacred
obligation thereof. For otherwise every oath of allegiance, though it be in all
men's opinion never so just and lawful, if it be commanded by the Prince his
law, and a severe punishment imposed upon the refusers thereof, may be said to
be extorted through fear, and that the Pope in regard of this fear may
absolve the subjects from such an oath, which no Catholics, no not our
adversaries themselves, dare, as I suppose, presume to auerre.

12 Lastly, to those three texts of the Canon law, mentioned in the objection,
which seem to prove, that the Pope has power to absolve subjects from their
oath of allegiance, we answer, that the first canon, Nos sanctorum, is a
decree of Pope Gregory the 7, wherein by Apostolical authority he absolueth
those, who either by allegiance, or oath, are obliged to excommunicated
persons, and most straightly commands, that they do them no loialtie, until
they make satisfaction. The second canon, Iuratos milites, is of Pope Vrbanus
the second, who was next Successor to Gregory, after Victor the 3, who reigned
but six months, wherein he commanded the Bishop Vapicensis to forbid the
sworn soldiers to Count Hugo, to serve him so long, as he remained
excommunicated. Who if they shall pretend their oaths, let them be admonished,
that they ought rather to serve God, then men. For by no authority they are
bound to perform their allegiance which they have sworn to a Christian
Prince, who is contrary to God and his Saints, and contemns their
commandments. The third canon, Absolutos, is of Pope Gregory the ninth,
wherein he declares, that all those, who are obliged to manifest heretics, by
any covenant strengthened with never so great security, are absolved from the
bond of all allegiance, homage, and obedience.

13. But these Canons are not forcible to prove, that the Pope has power to
absolve subjects from their allegiance, which by the law of God and nature they
owe to Sovereign Princes, who in temporals acknowledge no Superior upon
earth. And first, if they were of sufficient force, they would evidently prove,
that the Pope has power to absolve, not only from the sacred bond of the oath
of allegiance, but also from the natural obligation thereof: and therefore they
avail nothing to confirm our countrimens objection, who endeavor to prove,
that the Pope has power to absolve from the sacred bond of the oath of
allegiance, without releasing the natural obligation thereof.

14. Secondly, neither do these Canons make any mention of absolute and
Sovereign Princes, who, unless they be specified by name are not to be
comprehended in penal laws: and therefore either they have force only to
bind in the territories of the Church, whereof the Pope is Sovereign Lord in
temporals, who therefore has authority to enjoin a temporal punishment, to
which all Princes, who be his Vassals, shall also be subject: (For out of the
temporal dominions of the Church the Pope has not authority in mere
temporal causes, as is the disposing, I do not say, the directing of
temporal things for the spiritual good, to enact laws, which shall bind
absolute and Sovereign Princes, who are not subject unto him in temporals: as
by the like reason may be evidently gathered out of the doctrine of Franciscus
Suarez Lib. 3. de Legibus cap. 8.
) or else, as Ioannes Parisiensis De potest. Regia, and Papali cap. 10.
, out of Cardinal Hostiensis, does answer to the Canon, ad abolendam Extra de
haereticis.
, wherein the Pope ordained, that the goods of heretics should be
confiscated, to wit, that he did not make this decree by his own authority,
but by the consent of the Emperor, who then was present at Padua, and
consented thereunto; So also it may be answered to the aforesaid three Canons,
that those Popes not only by their own authority, but by the tacit, and
vertuall at least wise consent of the Emperor, and other Sovereign Princes,
did ordain, that those subjects, who are obliged by any bond either sacred, or
civil to inferior, and not to Sovereign Princes, should forthwith be freed
from the same, if those Princes should either revolt from the Catholic faith,
or for any crime be excommunicated. For otherwise, if absolute and Sovereign
Princes be also according to our Adversaries comprehended in these Canons, they
must of necessity acknowledge, which yet I think they dare scarcely affirm,
that Kings and Emperors so soon as they either for heresy, or any other
crime, do incur into the general Censures of the Church, are presently
without any particular declaration, or sentence of deprivation deprived in very
deed of their Regal authority, which is both against the continual
practice, which Popes do use in deposing of Princes, and is also repugnant to
the common understanding of all men.

15. Thirdly, although we should grant, that those Canons do also include
Sovereign Princes, yet they may be answered in the same manner, as Cardinal
Bellarmine Lib. 4 de Romans pont. cap. 14.
answers the decree of Pope Celestine the 3, of which Canon Alphonsus de
Castro Lib. 1. de haeres. cap. 4.
makes mention, and withal affirms, that he has seen it in the ancient
Decretals In Can. Laudabilem de conuers. coniug.
, wherein the Pope did decree, and as the same Alphonsus relates, did define,
that the bond of Matrimony is by heresy so dissolved, that it is lawful for
the woman, whose former husband became an heretic, to marry another man;
which doctrine now is flat heretical, and condemned in the Council of Trent
Sess. 24. can. 5.
: I answer, says Cardinal Bellarmine, that Celestine did determine nothing
for certain concerning that matter, but did answer, what seemed to him more
probable. It is true indeed, which Alphonsus affirms, that the epistle of
Celestine was once among the Decretall Epistles, but from thence it cannot be
gathered, that Celestine made thereof a clear Apostolical decree, and out of
the Chair, seeing that it is manifest, that there be many other things in the
Decretall Epistles, which do not make the thing to be of faith, but do only
declare unto us the opinions of Popes concerning that matter. In like manner
we may also answer, that those three Decrees, o^ Canons of the aforesaid
Popes, do either declare those Popes opinions, or are only grounded upon
their private opinions. And truly unless we answer thus, we must be enforced
to affirm with Philopater, that Sovereign Princes as soon as they revolt
from the Catholic faith, are presently, before any sentence of the Supreme
Pastor denounced against them, deprived of their Dominions, and of all Regal
dignity and authority, and that all their subjects are by the law of God
absolved from the bond both of their oath and also of allegiance, as out of the
second decree of Vrbanus by evident consequence it may be deduced, which
nevertheless these our countrymen, who do so urge these Canons, will not,
unless I be deceived, easily admit.

16. Neither ought any man to marvel, that Pope Gregory the seventh, who was
the first Pope that ever deposed the Roman Emperor, as Godfridus In Chronico
part. 17. ad annum. 1047.
, Otho Frisingensis Lib 6. cap. 35
, Trithemius In Chron. Monast. Hirsaug ad annum 1106.
, and Onuphrius Lib. 4. de varia creat. Romans Pont.
do write, should also be of opinion, that he had power to absolve subjects
from the bond of their allegiance. Nevertheless from this fact, or decree of
Pope Gregory, as also from the two other decrees of his Successors, who
followed his example, it cannot certainly be gathered, that they had indeed
such authority to absolve subjects from their allegiance, but only that they
were of opinion, and did suppose at leastwise for probable, that Christ had
given them that authority. As also, although some Popes of this age following
the examples of their predecessors, yea even of S. Gregory Lib. 3. epist. 26
and habetur in can. peruenit. did. 95.
the great, should by their Decrees, Breues, or Apostolical letters, registered
also in the body of the Canon law, ordain, that some eminent Priests,
although they were not Bishops, should by the Apostolical authority have
power to minister the Sacrament of Confirmation (as some such persons do in
these days by the special grant of Popes minister this Sacrament)
nevertheless it could not from hence be certainly concluded, that the Pope
has authority to grant such licenses, seeing that many learned Divines,
notwithstanding the decrees of such Popes, do defend, that Christ has not
given to the Pope that authority.

17. In like manner, although some Popes, following the examples of their
Predecessors, have dispensed in the solemn vow of chastity; yet from hence
there cannot be drawn a firm and solid argument to prove, that in very deed
such an authority has been given them by Christ his institution, but at the
most from hence it may be gathered, that those Popes did persuade themselves,
and at the least suppose as probable, that Christ did grant them such
authority: which nevertheless does nothing hinder, but that other Divines, who
moved with probable reasons do hold the contrary, may lawfully reject the
opinions of these Popes, and may, if need require, with a safe conscience
swear, that they do profess, testify, believe, declare, and in their
consciences are resolved, that by Christ his institution no such authority
has been given to the Pope. And therefore notwithstanding this objection,
which some of our countrymen do so vehemently urge, I may with all dutiful
reverence to the holy Canons lawfully swear, that I do furthermore believe,
and am resolved in my conscience, that the Pope has not power to absolve me of
this oath or any part thereof.

18. But because some of our countrymen do wrongfully vpbraide us with not
bearing dutiful respect to the Canons of holy Church, in that we deny that
the Pope has power to absolve the subjects of Sovereign Princes from their
allegiance, (from which imputation we have nevertheless both here, and
elsewhere fully cleared our selves by answering sufficiently to all the decrees
of Popes, and Councels) we thought it convenient upon so fit an occasion
offered us, to admonish briefly the learned Reader, that with all due honor
and respect we do reverence the Canons of the holy Catholic Church. Yet we
must needs confess, that betwixt the Catholic Church, and the Pope, who is
only the first and principal member thereof, betwixt some Chapters, or Decrees
of the Canon law, and betwixt others, we make a great distinction; and
nevertheless to every one in his degree and place we give dutiful but not
equal credit. For in the vast corpse or great volumes of the Canon law are
contained either sayings, and assertions of the ancient Fathers; or sentences,
and decrees of Popes, or Councels; and these are either doctrinall, and which
are propounded as things to be believed by the faithful, or else moral, and
which in the external discipline of the Church are commanded to be observed.

19. And first, the doctrine, which the ancient holy Fathers either in
expounding the holy Scriptures, or in questions belonging to faith, have with
uniform consent delivered, we also do undoubtedly believe, as being certainly
persuaded, that it was inspired by the holy Ghost; following herein the sage,
and pious counsel of that renowned ancient writer For he wrote his book three
years after the Council of Ephesus, the year 434.
Vincentius Lirinensis in that golden book Aduersus prophanas nouitates, cap.
4.
of his, whatsoever not one, or two only, but all (the ancient Fathers)
together have with one, and the same consent plainly, frequently, constantly
held, written, taught, that must we without all doubt believe. Yet the
authority of many holy Fathers, if others, although the fewer do gainsay, we
account to be no certain, but only a probable ground for Catholics in
matters of faith safely to build upon. For, as well writes Melchior Canus Lib
7. de locis cap. 3. nu. 7.
, as there is one brightness of the Sun, another brightness of the Moon, and
another brightness of the Stars, for Star differs from Star in
brightness, 1. Cor. 15. So Ecclesiastical writers are approved, who having
received light from the holy Ghost, have given light unto the Church. But yet
there is one brightness of Matthew, another of Hierome; one of Isaias, another
of Ambrose. For Canonical Authors, as high, celestial, divine, do keep a
perpetual, and permanent constancy: But other holy writers are inferior, and
humane, and now and then are defective, and sometimes they do contrary to the
convenient order and course of nature, bring forth a monster.

20. And in this sense is to be understood S. Thomas of Aquine 1. Part. q. 1.
art. 8. ad ^m.
, when he affirms, that the authority of holy Scripture is alleged by
Divines, as a necessary argument, but the authority of other Doctors of the
Church as a probable. For, I know, says S. Hierome Epist. 62. ad Theophilum
aduersus Joan. Hierosolym.
, that I do otherwise esteem the Apostles, otherwise other writers, those as
always speaking truth, these as men in some things erring. And again S.
Austin Tom. 2. epist. 19. ad Hieron.
, I have learned, says he, to give this reverence and honor to those only
books of holy Scriptures, which are now called Canonical, that I do most
firmly believe, that no one of them has by writing erred any whit. But others
I do so read, that, be they never so holy, and learned, I do not think it to
be true, because they think so, but because, either by those Canonical
Authors, or by probable reason, they have been able to persuade me, that it
does agree with truth.

21. Secondly, although we make no doubt, but that the doctrine also of all the
holy Fathers in things, which do not appertain to faith, may piously, and
probably be believed by Catholics, yet we are also of opinion with Melchior
Canus Lib. 7. de locis cap. 3. nu. 9.
, and other Divines, that it ought not of necessity to be followed, as
certain, and infallible. For, as well writes Vincentius Lirinensis Aduersus
prophanas nouitates cap. 39.
, we ought with great diligence to search out, and follow the ancient consent
of holy Fathers not in all questions of the divine law, but only in the rule of
faith. Those things are said to appertain to faith, which Christ, or his
Apostles have delivered to the Church by word, or writing, and which from
thence by certain, and evident consequence are deduced: But as the same Canus
Lib. 7. cap. 2.
very well affirms, those things, which we neither have received from
Christ, or his Apostles, neither are certainly and plainly inferred from those
things, which we hold from the authority of Christ, and his Apostles, do not
appertain to faith; and therefore they may without prejudice to faith, or
piety be unknown not only to the unlearned, but also to the learned men, for
that they are neither assertions of faith, nor manifestly derived from them.

22. Among questions, which do not belong to faith, Canus relates these;
whether the blessed Virgin was conceived in original sin, or no. Whether
habitual grace, and other virtues as well Moral, as Theological are infused
by God into our souls, and some others. And I also am of opinion, that among
them is to be numbered this controversy concerning the Popes power to deprive
Princes, and to absolve Subjects from their allegiance. For although it be
plainly said to Saint Peter, Whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth etc. and
feed my sheep, yet cannot it from these places be gathered by any necessary,
but at the most by a probable consequence, that all manner of power to loose,
and authority to chastize offenders with all kind of punishments is granted to
Saint Peter, neither that this is the true meaning of those words, has it
hitherto by any certain definition been declared by the Church, as I my self,
and both the Barclaies have heeeretofore abundantly proved.

23. Thirdly, we also do profess, that the definitions of general Councels
lawfully assembled, and confirmed by the Pope, wherein any doctrine is
propounded to the whole Church to be believed by all men as of faith, are to
be received by Catholics as infallible rules of faith; most certainly
persuading our selves with S. Austin, Lib. 1. de baptismo contra Donatistas.
tom. 7.
that the sentence of a General Council, to wit, in things which it
determines to be believed as of faith, is the consent of the universal
Church. Nevertheless we do freely affirm, that those opinions, which in the
said Counsels are defined or supposed only as probable, and those
assertions, which either incidentlie, and by the way are inserted, or for
better declaration, and proof of their decisions be produced, are subject to
error, and may sometimes by Catholics without any wrong to the Catholic
faith be rejected. For the Fathers, says Canus, Lib. 6. de locis cap. 8.
in a question of faith do not always bring necessary, but sometimes credible
reasons, which if they be not necessary, not to say, apt, probable, convenient,
we must not greatly stand thereupon. For we do not strive to defend the
reasons alleged by Popes, and Counsels, wherein sometimes they are deceived,
as a point belonging to Religion. In the Counsels, says Cardinal Bellarmine,
Lib 2. de co^c. cap. 12.
the greatest part of the Acts do not appertain to faith. For neither the
disputations, which go before, nor the reasons, which are adjoined nor those
things, which are brought to explicate and illustrate the matter, are of faith,
but only the bare decrees, and those not all, but only such as are propounded
as of faith: and sometimes the Counsels do define a thing, not as certain,
but as probable. Was it not defined in the seventh general Council, Tom. 3.
Council. part. 1. act. 5.
that the Images of Angels might religiously be painted, and yet the reason of
this decree, (which is there propounded by Tharasius, who took it from John
Bishop of Thessalonia, and which the whole Council, says Vasquez, 3. Part.
disp. 103. cap. 5.
seems to approve) to wit, that the Catholic Church does think that Angels
have bodies, and can be circumscribed, is now by the Scholastic Divines judged
to be false; and Bannes, and Zumel 1. Part. q. 5. art. 1.
are not afraid to censure it as temerarious, although they dare not reject
the decree it self and conclusion of the Council, concerning the painting of
the Images of Angels?

24. This nevertheless I would have thee to observe, good Reader, which I have
oftentimes in other places signified, that although I, professing my self to
be a child of the Catholic Roman Church, do most willingly embrace
whatsoever general Counsels confirmed by the Pope, which do represent the
Catholic Church, do propound to the faithful as necessarily to be believed of
faith, and which certainly, and evidently is known to be the true sense, and
meaning of the Counsels, yet I do not undoubtedly believe every doctrine,
which either Cardinal Bellarmine, (speaking with due reverence) or any other
Doctor, seeing they are not appointed by God to be an undoubted rule of the
Catholic faith, do cry out to be Catholic Doctrine, to be the voice of the
Catholic Church, to be the meaning of the Scriptures, and Counsels,
especially if other Catholic Doctors do hold the contrary. Them truly, as
it is meet, I do reverence with all dutiful respect, and I do much
attribute to their authority, but that all those collections, which they in
their judgments do imagine, may be evidently concluded out of holy
Scriptures, or Counsels, (considering that oftentimes they are deceived, and
do deceive, and what they have written, when they were younger, they may
recall, when they grow elder) are to be accounted for undoubted assertions of
faith, and the contrary opinion of other Catholics to be rather esteemed an
heresy, then an opinion, this truly I cannot take in good part.

25. Fourthly, concerning the Canons or Decrees of General Counsels belonging
to manners, and the external government of the Church, we are most ready, and
willing to receive all those decrees, which in the places where we live are
generally received. For these are properly called the Decrees or Canons of the
Catholic or universal Church, which are by common consent admitted by the
universal Church. Neither doubtless is any Catholic bound to admit those
laws and precepts, which in the country where he lives, are not observed by
the people, according to that saying of Gratian Did. 4 can. in ill^ leges.
recorded in the Canon Law. Laws are enacted, when they are proclaimed; they
are established when by the practice of those, who use them, they are
approved. And this opinion, says Ioannes Az^rius Tom. 1. nstit. lib 5. cap. ^
the Jesuit, with whom In summa cap. 23. nu. 41.
Nauarrus, Lib. 2. variar. Resolut. cap. 16 nu. 6.
Couarrunias, Tom. 2. disp. 7 q. 5. punct ^. q ^
Valentia, Lib. 3. Thesau^i cap. 5. nu. 24.
Sayrus, Disp 13. de Leg. sect 1.
Salas, Lib 4. de Leg. cap. 16. conclus. 3.
Suarez and others do accord, is agreeable to the Canon, and Civil law; to
wit, that a Law both Ecclesiastical, and Civil, although it be enacted by
lawful authority, and rightly proclaimed, is not of force unless by custom
it be received.

26. And so the Kingdom and Prelates of France would not receive certain
decrees of the Council of Trent, among which was that before Cap 3. sec. 3.
nu. 13.
rehearsed, wherein Kings and Princes were forbidden to permit single combat
under pain of forfeiting the City, or place where by their sufferance it was
fought. This article, say they, is against the authority of the King, who
cannot be deprived of his temporal dominion, in regard whereof he acknowledges
no Superior at all.

27. And truly in my opinion those Prelates of France, who apprehended that the
aforesaid decree of the Council did contain not only Princes, who were
feudaries to the Church, but also absolute, and Sovereign Princes, as is the
King of France, (in which sense also many others understand this place) would
not for these causes receive that decree, either for that they thought it was
enacted not absolutely, but upon presumption, and hope that Princes would
ratify the same, and so conditionally if Princes would give their consent
thereunto; or which I judge to be more probable, for that they supposed, that
the Council in making that decree, did rely only upon a probable opinion,
concerning the authority of the spiritual power to dispose of temporalls for
the spiritual good, which opinion, since that it is only probable, and might
tend to the great prejudice of the King of France, and of other Princes, the
Prelates of France were not bound to follow. But what causes are to be
accounted just, and lawful for the which any Kingdom or Province is not bound
to admit the Canons, or decrees of a General Council, it is no fit time to
examine at this present; it being now sufficient, that, according to all
Divines, and Lawyers, although their may perchance, some fault be committed by
them who at the first do not receive the decree of a Council after it be
lawfully proclaimed, yet afterward it has no force to bind, if either by
sufferance or contrary custom not punished it be not observed.

28. Lastly, what we have said concerning the definitions, and decrees of
General Counsels may with far greater reason be proportionably applied to
the definitions, and decrees of Popes, and Provincial Counsels; especially
considering that many learned Divines, with almost the whole University of
Paris, as in the Preface to our Apologeticall answer, nu. 27. et seq.
we have already said, and beneath cap. 10. sec. 2. nu. 27.
we will repeat again, are of opinion, that the Popes definitions, and
decrees, if he define without a General Council, are subject to error; and
that the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost was promised to S. Peter, and
his successors, as he being head, does in defining matters of faith concur
with the whole body of the Church, which a General Counsel does represent. And
thus much concerning the answer to the third objection of our countrymen
against this fifth branch of the oath.

Sect. IIII.
1. FOurthly, some object against those words, [nor any person whatsoever has
power to absolve me of this oath, or any part thereof] which words being
general do seem to exclude all persons, and consequently the King himself.
Wherefore according to these words I am bound to swear, that neither the Pope,
nor the Kings Majesty has power to absolve me from this oath, or any part
thereof, which doubtless is altogether repugnant to truth, for that the same
authority, which has power to make a law, has also power to dispense therein,
or to absolve one from the obligation thereof: therefore this clause cannot be
taken without manifest perjury.

2. To this objection supposing that, according to the rules before related out
of Suarez, the true and common meaning of the words of any law is to be
gathered from the circumstances, Cap. 1. sec. 2. et seq.
the end of the Law, and especially from the intention of the Lawmaker, it is
answered first, that whenever a Law does bind in general words all persons
whatsoever to observe the same, those words are in common speech to be
understood only of such persons, which are subject to the Lawmakers, and not of
other persons, who are not subject to him; nor of the Lawmakers himself, for
that, according to the most certain, and approved rule of all Divines, and
Lawyers, the power of commanding, or Lawmaking, is in a Superior toward his
inferior, and consequently not toward himself, or his equal. In like manner
also when any law in general words affirms, that no person whatsoever has
power to dispense at any time in that Law, or to absolve any man from the bond
thereof, those words are in common speech only to be understood of those
persons, who are inferior to the Lawmakers, and not of the Lawmaker himself,
or his Successor, who is of equal authority with him. For both these, as they
have authority to make the Law, and also to repeal the same, so also according
to the common understanding of men they have authority to dispense in the same,
or to absolve any man from the obligation thereof. Whereupon very well said
Salas before cap. 1. sec. 3. nu. 4.
related in a general speech the person, who speaks, is understood to be
excepted.

3. Wherefore in this oath of allegiance, which is imposed by his majesty's Law,
those words [nor any person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this oath]
ought in common speech to be understood in this manner, that no person except
the King himself has power to absolve me from this oath. For otherwise if
those words [nor any person whatsoeuer] were to be understood in their whole
generality without any exception, from thence it might rightly be inferred,
that by virtue of this clause we are bound to swear, that no person either
humane, or divine has power to absolve me from this oath, or any part thereof;
And yet, according to the approved doctrine of all Lawyers, whenever the
words of a law do sound in such sort that they may be taken in a good or evil
sense, they ought to be applied to that sense, (although otherwise it be
improper) wherein the Law contains no injustice, or absurdity; for this is
presumed to be the intention of the Lawmaker, whose meaning is to make a true
Law, whereas an unjust, absurd, or unreasonable Law is to be accounted no true
Law. Whereupon in a doubtful word of the Law, says the law: Leg. in ambigua
F. de legibus.
That sense is rather to be taken, which is not faulty, especially seeing that
thereby the meaning also of the Law may be gathered.

4. Secondly, if we will interpret all the words of this oath, in such rigorous
a manner, as these severe Censours do wrest them, it is also lawful to
swear, that as the King alone without the Parliament has not, according to
the usual custom of this Realm, power to enact Laws, so also neither has
he alone without the Parliament power to absolve from the Laws, but this power
appertains only to the Lawmakers, who is the King and Parliament together.
The penalty imposed by the Law doubtless he may remit, but the Law it self
according to the custom of this Realm he cannot disanull. And so he has
power to absolve those, who refuse to take the Oath, from the punishment
appointted by the Law, but from the obligation to perform those things, which
one has promised by this Oath, he together with the Parliament, or rather
neither he, nor the Parliament, as shall appear beneath, nu. 6. and. 7.
has power to absolve. Now by these words, nor any person whatsoever, are
properly understood only singular persons, and not a community, or Parliament.
As the ancient Divines of Paris do in this sort expound those words, The first
See is judged by no man, to wit, that no particular person has power to judge
the first See, which nevertheless is no let, say they, but that a General
Council has authority to judge the first See.

5. I said a little before [according to the usual custom of this Realme]
because I do not intend to affirm, or to deny any thing concerning his
Majesty's absolute power, and prerogative, but only to satisfy this present
objection I thought good briefly to insinuate what is the present custom of
this kingdom in the establishing of laws. But whether this custom did first
proceed from the Kings free grant, or from the common wealth limiting the
Regal authority, I leave to others to discuss. It may only at this present
suffice to rehearse, what John Stow in his Chronicle has written in this
matter. In the life of K. Henry the first in the. 16. year of his Reign, and
of our Lord. 1116.
This year, says Stow, on the ninteenth day of April K. Henry called a
Council of the States of this Realm, both of the Prelates, Nobles and Commons
to Salisbury, there to consult for the good government of the Common Wealth,
and the weighty affairs of the same, which Council, taking the name, and Fame
of the French, is called Parliament. And this do the Historiographers note to
be the first Parliament in England, and that the Kings before that time were
never wont to call any of their commons, or people to Council, or Law-making,
etc.

Thirdly, it is evident, that those, who do so much insist upon this
objection, do seek rather to cauil, then really to except against this clause.
For that according to the common opinion of them, who are so vehement against
this Oath, an Oath being a sacred, and spiritual bond, it belongs only to
the spiritual power, as to Bishops; to absolve or dispense therein, and to
release directly the spiritual obligation, in which releasing these Doctors
will have dispensing, and absoluing from Oaths properly to consist. Therefore
if we will speak properly and according to the common understanding of those,
who do urge this objection, neither the King himself, according to their
doctrine, has power to absolve from this oath, that is, has power to release
directly the spiritual obligation thereof. He may indeed release an oath made
unto him, by taking away the matter of the oath, as Parents may with the oaths
of their Children, a Guardian with the oaths of his Ward, an Abbot with the
oaths of his Monks, and every private man may remit an oath made unto him; but
to dispense in oaths, or to absolve from them (taking dispensation, and
absolution in that sense, wherein these impugners of the oath do take them) no
temporal power has authority. Wherefore the Divines do make a great
distinction betwixt dispensing, and absoluing from an oath, and betwixt
annulling, or releasing of the same, and do affirm, that to annull, and
release an oath, a temporal power may suffice, but to absolve, or dispense
therein, a spiritual jurisdiction is of necessity required.

7. Fourthly, supposing that the common meaning of these words, [to absolve me
from this oath] is not to dispense with me, that I shall not take this oath,
but to absolve me from the obligation of performing those things, which I have
sworn to perform, it may also be answered, that although it were granted,
that the King has power to absolve me from the bond of taking this oath, yet
neither the King nor Parliament has power to absolve me from this oath once
taken, or which is all one, can give me leave not to perform those things,
which I have by this oath promised to perform. And the reason is manifest,
because there be three only things, as I have said before In this chapt. sect.
1. nu. 9.
, contained in this oath, which the swearer promises to perform, to wit, to
bear faith, and true allegiance to his Majesty, to defend him from all
Treasons, and to disclose them, when they come to his knowledge; but all these
are by the law of God and nature commanded to subjects, therefore neither the
King nor Parliament has power to absolve me from the performing of the
aforesaid three things; or which is all one, can give me leave not to bear
true allegiance to his Majesty, not to defend him against treasons, and not to
disclose them, when thereby great danger to his person or State may arise,
seeing that they have no power to absolve me from the obligation of the law of
God and nature.

Sect. V.
1. THe fifth, and last objection, which is insinuated by Antonius Capellus, is
against those first words of this branch, I believe, and in conscience am
resolved, that neither the Pope, etc. which words do seem to signify a
divine, and supernatural belief, with which belief nothing ought to be
believed, but that, which is defined as most certain by the Catholic Church;
but that the Pope has not power to absolve me from this oath, does not
appertain to the Catholic faith, but rather the contrary, (if we will give
credit to Cardinal Bellarmine, Gretzer, and Lessius) does belong to faith,
therefore I cannot without perjury swear, that the Pope has not power to
absolve me from this oath.

2. To this objection it is answered, by denying, that this word, I believe, is
taken in this branch for supernatural belief, but only for moral credulity,
and persuasion, whereof in common speech it is usually understood. And this
partly may sufficiently appear by the whole scope and tenor of the oath,
wherein is only exacted of us a true and sincere testification,
acknowledgement, and declaration, how in our consciences we are persuaded
concerning the Popes authority to depose our King, to dispose of his
dominions, to discharge his subjects of their obedience, and to absolve them
from this oath, etc. partly it is manifest by the words following, [and in
conscience I am resolued] which are a declaration of the former, and which were
altogether superfluously, and vainly added, if they should import less, then
the word, I believe; even as one should say, he is a man, and a sensible
creature, I know it most certainly, and also I think it to be so. For as,
according to our English phrase, not to be resolved in conscience to say, or
do any thing, does at the most signify an inclination of the mind to say, or
do that thing mixed with some wavering, or doubt of the contrary, but not a
full assent, or persuasion thereunto; so to be resolved in conscience to
embrace such a doctrine, imports only a full assent, and approbation of that
doctrine, which approbation only requires a moral credulity, and not a
supernatural belief, or a clear demonstration of that doctrine.

3. Moreover, whenever any word contained in a law has a doubtful and
ambiguous signification, to know in what sense it ought to be taken, many
rules are assigned by the Lawyers, concerning which, as we have said before,
cap. 1. sec. 2.
the end, and matter of the law, the circumstances precedent, and following,
and the intention of the Lawmakers are to be considered. The end of this oath,
established by the Kings law, which is expressed in the Preamble thereof, as
the ends of all laws are usually expressed, is to make trial how his
Majesty's subjects stand affected in point of their loyalty, and due
obedience, which their affection may sufficiently be made known by a moral
credulity, to wit, if they believe, and without any doubt persuade themselves,
or, which is al one, are resolved in their consciences, and this their sincere
credulity, persuasion, and resolution they do confirm by oath, that the Pope
has not power to depose the King, to discharge his subjects of their
allegiance, and to absolve them of this oath, or any part thereof, etc. The
matter, or thing, which in this branch of the oath we are compelled to believe,
to wit, that the Pope has not power to absolve me from this oath, or any part
thereof, does not appertain to the Catholic belief, but that among
Catholics there is a controversy hereof, the King and Parliament knew very
well. And therefore according to the certain, and approved rule of interpreting
laws, it is always to be presumed, unless the contrary do clearly
appear, that the Lawmakers did not intend to bind us by oath, to believe that
with supernatural faith, which with that faith is not to be believed, but
that he only desired this, that he might be assured of our sincere persuasion,
and firm resolution concerning this clause of the oath. Which general rule, to
wit, that we must not, if it may be, interpret the words of the law in an
absurd, or unlawful sense, all Divines and Lawyers do so understand, that if
the words of the law, being taken in their proper signification, do contain
any unlawful, or inconvenient thing, they ought to be transferred to an
improper, and metaphorical sense, because it ought always to be presumed, as
much as may be, yt the Lawmaker did not inte^d to bind us to any unlawful
thing. And truly, if those, who so vehemently impugn the oath, had diligently,
and dutifully considered this rule, they might doubtless have made a more
favorable construction of many words contained in this oath, against which it
is too too manifest, that with more rigor, then is fitting, and with lesser
soliditie, then beseems so excellently learned men, they have excepted.

CHAP. VII. The sixth branch of the Oath.
WHich oath I acknowledge by good, and full authority to be lawfully ministered
unto me, and do renounce all pardons, and dispensations to the contrary.

Sect. I.
1. AGainst this branch many exceptions are usually made, al which may be
reduced to five principal heads. The first is, that the King has no good, and
full authority to command his subjects to take an unlawful and false oath;
but this oath is unlawful, and does contain in it many false propositions, as
appears by the precedent objections, and by those which follow, shall also be
made more manifest.

2. To satisfy this objection no other answer is required, but by answering
all the arguments, which may be objected against any particular clause of the
oath, to the greater part whereof we have already answered, and the residue,
God willing, we will in due order satisfy.

Sect. II.
1. THe second is, that our King has no good, and full authority in
spiritual matters, unless we will grant, that he is supreme head, and
Governor of the English Church, as well in causes Ecclesiastical, as in
temporal, but in this oath many spiritual things are contained: Therefore,
etc.

The Mayor proposition needs no proof, but is supposed as certain, and
granted by all Catholics. The Minor is by diverse men diverse ways confirmed.
And first Cardinal Bellarmine proves the Minor in this manner: Whosoever
(says he) In Respons. ad Apolog. page 11.
affirms, that this oath is lawfully ministered unto him by good, and full
authority, does also affirm, that the King, by whom this oath is proposed,
has supreme power in spiritual things, seeing that he acknowledges in him
full authority to command, that the Popes Excommunication, or declaration be
contemned. The same objection Lessius does insinuate, as we before Cap 4 sect.
1. nu. 1.
out of his English Recapitulator have related.

3. And to the same effect are those four arguments of Gretzer In Comment.
Exeget. cap. 6. page 102. and seq.
, whereby he endeavors to prove, that in this oath is included a manifest
denial of the Catholic faith.

For his first argument is, that in this oath is denied, that the Pope has any
jurisdiction over the Churches of England, Scotland, Ireland.

The second is, that therein is affirmed, that King James, and not the Pope is
the supreme head of the Christians in great Britannie, even in Ecclesiastical,
and spiritual causes.

The third is, Page 103.
that therein is also denied, that the General Pastor of the Universal Church
has power to restrain, and punish wolves, who with ravening mouths do
assault, disperse, and destroy the flock of Christ.

Lastly, his fourth argument is, Page 105.
that in this oath is affirmed, that King James is universally without any
exception to be obeyed in all things, which he attempteth, although they be
joined with the overthrow of the Apostolic and Catholic religion.

4. And truly if these assertions were contained in this oath, as Gretzer over
confidently, to say no more, does affirm, no man doubtless could deny, but
that this oath, as impious, sacrilegious, and clearly repugnant to Catholic
faith, ought to be condemned by all Catholics. But, fie for shame, these his
four most false assertions he deduceth from principles partly clearly false,
and partly greatly controuerted, and which, if they were freely granted him,
were not sufficient to infer these his four propositions. To wit, because in
this oath (says he) is affirmed, that the Pope has no jurisdiction at all in
any case over the king, or his subjects, so that he can neither depose, nor
excommunicate the King, nor absolve his subjects from the bond of their
allegiance, nor bind them to obey a just Excommunication, whatsoever at all he
does to the prejudice, yea and overthrow of the Catholic, and truly Christian,
and Apostolic faith. For this is the express intention of the oath, neither
can it ever be so shadowed with any colorable show of words, but that it may
clearly appear.

5. Truly I cannot wonder enough at the wonderful boldness of this man,
otherwise learned, who with such confidence, and with so great vehemency of
words is not afraid to avouch things, which are so evidently false. For this
oath does not affirm, as we have showed before Cap. 4. sect. 1.
, that the Pope has not power to excommunicate the King, or that the Subjects
are not bound to obey a just Excommunication, and much less, that they may
lawfully contemn it, as Cardinal Bellarmine says; betwixt which two, to wit,
not to obey a just excommunication, and to contemn it, a great difference is
to be made. But the oath does only affirm this, that although the King be
excommunicated, yet he is to be obeyed in civil matters, for that
Excommunication, being only a spiritual Censure, has not force to deprive
Princes of their temporal kingdoms, and dominions, or, which is all one, of
their Regal authority, and consequently not to take away the temporal
obedience, which is due to Princes by the law of God and nature. Besides this
it also affirms, that the Pope has not power to deprive Princes, and
therefore neither to discharge Subjects of their allegiance, or to absolve any
man from this oath; But this is not to deny the Catholic faith, as we have
partly here before Cap. 3. and 6.
, partly in other places In Apolog. and Respons Apolog.
, and partly hereafter Against Doctor Schulckenius.
will more abundantly show.

6. Secondly, Gretzer in all his four arguments does cunningly join
deposition with Excommunication, as though whosoever denies, that the Pope
has power to depose Kings, is consequently bound to deny, that he also has
power to excommunicate Kings, which Lessius, as we have seen before Cap. 4.
sect. 1. nu. 1. and 7.
, does over boldly avouch, whereas many very learned Divines, and two also very
famous Jesuits, Suarez, and Becanus, do in plain words teach the contrary,
and moreover many Catholics, who, although they dare not deny the Popes power
to excommunicate Kings, yet they are not afraid to deny his power to depose
Princes, and to absolve subjects from their allegiance. And truly in my opinion
it is greatly to be wondered at, that men, otherwise so excellently learned, in
matters of so great importance as to establish new articles of faith, and to
withdraw faithful subjects from taking an oath of allegiance, and that to the
perpetual temporal overthrow of themselves, and their whole posterity,
should not be fearful to bring such exorbitant, paradoxicall, and
sophistical arguments, which to every man but meanly learned do evidently
seem to be most weak, in so much that our countrymen, who do not disallow
the oath, are thereby rather confirmed in their opinion, and those, who
disallow it, and are very desirous to devise some solid argument, which they
may object against it, to see such childish collections, I speak with due
respect, are greatly ashamed.

7. For what man is there of so mean understanding, who at the first fight
cannot perceive the weakness of these inferences?

In this oath is denied the Popes power to excommunicate, and depose the King;
therefore in this oath is denied, that the Pope has no jurisdiction, even
spiritual, over the Churches of England, Scotland, Ireland.

Secondly, in this oath is affirmed, that the King cannot be excommunicated,
that he cannot be deposed: therefore therein is affirmed, that King James, and
not the Pope is the supreme head of the Christians in great Britannie, even in
Ecclesiastical causes.

Thirdly, in this oath is denied, that the King can be excommunicated, that he
can be deposed: therefore therein is denied, that the universal Pastor of the
Church has power to restrain, and punish heretical Kings.

Fourthly, in this oath is affirmed, that the King cannot be excommunicated,
that he cannot be deposed, therefore in this oath is affirmed that King James
must universally without exception be obeyed in all things, which he does
attempt, although they be joined with the overthrow of Catholic Religion.

8. For all the antecedent propositions, for so much as appertains to the power
of excommunicating, are evidently false, as we before against Card. Bellarmine
have manifestly proved. And if they were only understood of the power of
deposing (besides that this power of deposing cannot be certainly confirmed
with any solid proof) it is also too too apparent, that the consequents are
not rightly inferred from the antecedents. For in Gretzers first argument the
consequent can no ways be deduced from the antecedent. For although one should
auerre, that by the peculiar privilege of God Kings are exempted from the
coerciue power of the Pope, yet from thence it would not follow, that the Pope
had no spiritual jurisdiction over any of the Kings Subjects. For the Pope
cannot excommunicate an infidel Prince, nevertheless he has spiritual
Jurisdiction over the Christians, who are subject to that Prince. How much the
more will this inference be insufficient, if we speak only of the Popes power
to depose a Prince? Secondly, the consequence also of the second argument is no
less false, especially if the antecedent proposition be understood of the
power to depose. And although we should grant, that the antecedent proposition
concerning also the Popes power to excommunicate were true, yet it is not from
thence rightly inferred, that ye King, and not the Pope, is supreme head of the
Christians in great Britannie, even in spiritual causes, as appears also in
Heathen Princes, who cannot be excommunicated, and yet the Pope is the Supreme
Pastor in spiritual causes of all the faithful, who are subjects in their
dominions.

Furthermore, in the third argument the antecedent proposition, for so much as
concerns the Popes power to depose, does not rightly infer the consequent:
for it is a fallacious arguing from a particular to an universal. As, for
example, the Pope cannot punish Kings with this punishment, therefore he cannot
punish Kings. The Pope may indeed, according to Catholic doctrine, punish
heretical Kings with spiritual punishments, but whether he has power to
punish them with temporal punishments is the very question which is now in
controversy. Lastly, the consequence of the fourth argument, although we
should grant both parts of the antecedent propositions, is so evidently false,
and absurd, that I am almost ashamed to repeat it, in so much that it is a
wonder, how so learned a man did not greatly blush to publish it to the whole
Christian world for proouing a thing of so great importance. I would willingly
also, that Gretzer would sincerely answer us, whether the selfe-fame
arguments, which he has framed against this oath, he might not allege in the
selfsame terms against that doctrine of the Kingdom of France above Cap.
3. sect. 3. nu. 13.
related out of Petrus Pithaeus, that the Pope has not power to deprive the
King of France of his Kingdom, and notwithstanding any excommunications, and
so forth, to condemn it as flat heretical, and containing a manifest denial
of the Catholic faith,

10. Secondly, others prove the aforesaid Minor proposition by this argument.
To determine, and define what the Pope can do, or cannot do in spiritual
causes, what power he has to depose Princes, to discharge Subjects of their
allegiance, and to absolve from oaths, what force Excommunication has, and
what effect it works, and to conclude, what position is heretical, or not
heretical, are all spiritual causes, but the King does in this oath determine,
and define all the aforesaid things, therefore many spiritual matters are
contained in this oath. This argument is insinuated by that namelesse Doctor,
Nu. 25. of his letter.
who falsely charge my Apology with heresy, and Ethnicisme, but it is
somewhat more largely urged by Lessius, Nu. 220.
Page the last. Sixthly.
as appears by his English Recapitulator.

11. To this objection it is answered, by denying also the Minor proposition.
For the King, and Parliament do not determine, and define, what spiritual
power Christ our Lord has granted to S. Peter, and his Successors, but they
knew right well, that there is a great controversy among Catholics concerning
the Popes power to depose Princes, and to absolve Subjects from the oath of
their allegiance: and that some do affirm, that the Pope has power to depose
Princes, and to discharge Subjects of their obedience, although it be confirmed
by oath, and that others do utterly deny the same: that some also do
affirm, that Excommunication, if not directly, at the least indirectly, and by
consequence, has this effect, to deprive Princes of their temporal
Jurisdiction, and that others, with the greater, and better part of Divines,
do utterly deny the same. and because the former opinion was neither in
practice, nor speculation known to the Primitive Church (as far as we may
conjecture by the histories of those times) and besides that it has given no
little occasion of great tumults both in this Kingdom, and in other parts of
the Christian world, the King and Parliament, who represent the whole body of
the commonwealth, and every member thereof, thought it convenient for
preventing of future tumults, and conspiracies, which they thought otherwise
would probably ensue, that the later opinion should be followed, and embraced
of all the Kings Subjects, and that thereof a public, and sincere profession,
testification, and declaration should with a solemn oath be made by all men.
As also the Doctors of Paris, although they knew right well, that there was a
vehement controversy among Catholics, whether the most blessed Virgin Mary
was conceived in original sin, nevertheless they bound all the professors
of Divinity under certain penalties proper to their community, that they
should not publickely preach, nor teach, that she had contracted original
sin, and yet they did not intend thereby to decide, and define that
controversy, but only to declare their great liking of the one opinion, and
their great dislike of the other.

12. This year 1501. says Surius, In Comme^t. breui the year. 1501.
the Theological faculty of the university of Mentz, imitating the decree of
the Council of Basil, and also the Divines of Paris, and of Colen, did make
this decree and ordinance, that it should be altogether held, that the most
blessed mother of God was conceived without the spot of original sin, and
that by a special privilege; and did strictly ordain, that none hereafter
should in that University be promoted in sacred Divinity, unless he did
before by oath make promise, that he would neither maintain in his mind, nor
in any wise approve the contrary opinion. May we therefore from hence rightly
conclude, that those Doctors intended to define that opinion as certain, which
Pope Sixtus the fourth not long before had by a particular Bull Dated the year.
1083. which is in the fourth to me of the Counsels after the life of Pope
Sixtus the fourth.
declared to be uncertain, and controuerted, and that the contrary might be
defended without mortal sin, and which also innumerable Divines of those
times did think not to be so probable, as the contrary?

13. Secondly, these, who do urge this argument, will scarcely, as I think,
deny, that the King and Parliament may, to avoid probable dangers of future
Conspiracies, compel all his Majesty's subjects, to profess, testify,
acknowledge and declare by oath, that the Pope is not by Christ his institution
the direct Lord of this Kingdom, nor that our King is the Popes Subject,
Vassal, and Vicar in temporalls, and nevertheless the Canonists do so
vehemently defend this direct dominion of the Pope in temporalls not only over
this kingdom, but also over the universal Christian world, that some of them
Bartholus F. de requir. reis. leg. 1.. 1.
do think it flat heresy to deny the same. Yet from hence it cannot rightly
be gathered, that the King should arrogate to himself spiritual power to
define, what spiritual Jurisdiction is by Christ his institution granted to
the Pope. And from hence it does evidently appear, that the denial of that
Papal power, which is a sacred thing and given from above, and which no
mortal man can take away or diminish is not denied in this oath, as Cardinal
Bellarmine In Respons. ad Apolog. p. 8.
does unworthily auerre; for this power is expressly found in the word of God
either written or delivered to the Church by tradition, or by evident
consequence deduced from thence, and which therefore all Catholics do
profess to appertain to the Catholic faith; but that only power of the Pope
is denied in this oath, which without any prejudice of faith may by Catholics
be lawfully denied. As also that power of the Pope, which the Canonists do
with might, and maine defend to be a sacred thing, and given from above,
Cardinal Bellarmine Lib. 5. de Ro^. Pont. cap. 1. et seq.
is not afraid to diminish, take away, and utterly deny as a profane thing,
and not given from above, but invented by man.

14 Now concerning the last part of this argument, we answer, that it is not
determined, or defined in this oath, what proposition is heretical, neither is
this position, Princes which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed by their subjects, or any other whatsouer, abiured as heretical, but
only by this oath we are compelled, as has been showed before, Cap. 5. sect.
2.
to abhor, detest, and abjure this doctrine, and position as heretical, and
heretofore defined, determined, and condemned by the Church, that it is in the
free power of the subjects, or any other whatsoever, to depose, or, if they
will to murder Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope.

15 And if any one reply, that it does not belong to the civil power, to
compel any man to abjure heresy, it being a spiritual offense, and therefore
only belonging to the spiritual power.

It is answered first, that although it does not appertain to the civil
power, to determine, and define what position is heretical, or not heretical,
or to punish heretics with spiritual punishments (because these are merely
spiritual causes) yet it can not be denied, but that it belongs to Christian
Princes, at least wise as they are appointed by God to be protectours 23. q 5.
can. Principes. et Council. Tride^t sess. 25 can. 20. de Reformat
of the Church, to root out heresies by means of the temporal sword, which
is proper to the civil power, to punish heretics, to defend the Church from
all manifest wrongs either temporal, or spiritual, and to command, and
procure all those things, which are necessary to her preservation, and
nevertheless they shall not be said therefore to usurp the jurisdiction of
the Ecclesiastical power. The Pope says, Cardinal Bellarmine Lib. 5. de Ro^.
Po^t cap. 7. in 5 ratione.
may, and ought to command all Christians those things, to which every man is
bound according to his state, that is, to compel all men, to serve God, as
they are bound according to their state, but Kings are bound to serve God, by
defending the Church, by punishing heretics, and schismatikes, as Saint
Augustine teaches in epist. so. ad Bonifacium, Le^ epist. 75. ad Leonem
Augustum, et Gregorius lib. 2. epist. 61. ad Mauritium. Therefore that saying,
which Alphonsus de Castro affirms of a Bishop, College, or Provincial
council, may in like manner, observing the proportion of temporal
punishments, be applied to temporal Princes. But although says he, Lib: 1:
aduersus haeres. cap: 8
a Bishop, College, or Prouincial council has not power to define matters of
faith, in those things, which may worthily be doubted of, nevertheless in
those things, which are already defined, or which by most evident testimonies
of holy Scripture may without any tergiuersation, or ouerthwarting be known,
they may minister justice, and punish the obstinate mainteiners of that
assertion: for that is not to give sentence; but to execute the sentence before
given.

16. Secondly, it is answered to the same Reply, that every sin, be it never
so spiritual, yea and heresy it self, not as it is a spiritual thing, and
against the spiritual health of our souls, but as it is a temporal wrong
hurtful to the common peace of the citizens, and usually causes great
perturbations in the commonwealth, is subject to the Jurisdiction of the
temporal power, by whom it may be punished with temporal punishments: as also
secular crimes, not as they are temporal, but as they are spiritual, and
hurtful to the spiritual health of souls, are subject to the spiritual
power, by whom they may be punished with spiritual punishments. And the reason
hereof, I have heretofore In my Apology nu. 94. et seq. et nu. 153. et seq.
, where I handled the matter more at large, alleged out of Victoria, and
Ioannes Parisiensis, because the temporal common wealth is a perfect common
wealth, and has in her self sufficient power, therefore she may by her own
authority defend her self from the wrong of any whatsoever, and by the
material sword repel the abuse of the spiritual sword, especially when it
tends to the hurt of the common wealth, whose charge is committed to the King.

17. Marriage, says Dominicus Sotus, Nu. 4. did. 29. 9. 1. ar. 4.
being a Sacrament in such sort, that it is also a civil contract, it nothing
lets, but that as in the former respect it belongs to the Ecclesiastical
Court, so in regard of the later it is subject also in some sort to the civil.
Not that Princes can alter those things, which are of the substance of
Matrimony, but that they may punish them, who contract Matrimony, when by
contracting they shall offend against the public good: for against those
crimes, whose judgment does belong to the Ecclesiastical Court, they may also
ordain punishments, as they disturb the peace of the Commonwealth. Which
saying of Sotus may in the very like manner be applied to heresy, which being
a spiritual offense in such sort, that also it disturbeth the temporal peace
of the civil commonwealth, it nothing lets, but that as in the former
respect it belongs to the Ecclesiastical Court, so in regard of the later,
it is subject also in some sort to the Civil, not that Princes can determine,
and define what is heresy, but that they may punish heretics, when by
defending heretical propositions, they shall offend against the public good.
For against those crimes, whose judgment does belong to the Ecclesiastical
Court, they may also ordain punishments, as they disturb the peace of the
Commonwealth. And so the Christian Emperors have enacted many laws, They are
to be seen in the end of the Directory of the Inquisition among the
Apostolical letters. page 18. 27. and 44.
which contain grievous punishments against heretics, by virtue of which
Laws the holy office of the Inquisition even at Rome does proceed against
them with capital punishments, as it may plainly be gathered by the
Apostolical letters of Pope Innocent the fourth, Alexander the fourth, and
Clement the fourth. In the place last cited.
For a King, says Dominicus Bannes, 2ae 2ae. q. 11. ar 4. q. 1. in fine.
does punish heretics, as most seditious enemies against the peace of his
Kingdom, which without unity of Religion cannot be preserved. And a little
beneath, from whence, says he, it follows, that a Secular King has power to
pardon sometimes the loss of their lives, and to punish heretics in some other
manner.

Sect. III.
1. THe third head of exception against this fixth branch of the oath is, for
that no humane power has good, and full authority over the internal actions
of our mind, and therefore neither the King, nor Parliament has good, and
full authority to compel the subjects to think inwardly this, or that, or to
punish any man for defending, or not defending in his mind this, or that
opinion: but this oath does compel the subjects, to believe, acknowledge,
profess, and to be resolved in their conscience, that the Pope has no power
to depose Princes, to discharge subjects of their allegiance, and to absolve
any man from this oath, and does grievously punish those, who do not so
acknowledge, profess, believe, and are so resolved in their conscience,
therefore this oath is not lawfully ministered by good and full authority.

2. To this objection it is answered, that although the internal actions of
our mind, directly, and as they are internal, are not subject to the command,
and jurisdiction of humane authority, (whereof nevertheless there is a great
controversy betwixt the Divines, and Lawyers, whose names are set down by
Ioannes Salas Disput. 9 de Legibus, sect, 1.
the Jesuit) yet all Doctors do agree in this, that internal actions of the
mind, as they do cause external disturbance in the commonwealth, and do
concur to external actions, whereof humane authority has, for the
external good of humane government, power to judge, and determine, may by
consequence, and indirectly be subject to humane authority, although by it
they are not punishable, until by some external sign they be sufficiently
made known. Wherefore, although the Church, as well says our learned
countriman Sayrus Lib 3. Thesauri cap. 6. in fine.
, whose words are in like manner verified also of the Civil commonwealth,
has not power over internal actions, if they be considered by themselves,
without any reference to external, yet she has authority over internal
actions, if they be considered as conditions of external, and may be referred
to external actions, whereof the Church has for the end of humane government,
full, and perfect power to know, and determine.

3. Whereupon in this kingdom a firm purpose to plot any treason against the
Kings person, if it be made known by any external sign, is punished with the
usual punishment of high Treason: And deadly hatred among citizens, although
internal, as it may probably breed outward seditions, tumults, and
perturbations in the commonwealth, may be forbidden by the Secular Prince,
and if outwardly it be made known, may also be punished with temporal
punishment: So likewise in my opinion it is manifest, that the internal
maintaining of this, or that opinion, as it may prudently be judged to be
either very necessary to preserve the public peace of the commonwealth, or
to be a probable cause of future sedition therein, may by a temporal Prince
be commanded, and forbidden under temporal punishments. Now, that internal
maintaining of these positions, to wit, that the Pope has power to depose
Princes, to absolve Subjects from their allegiance, and to give them leave, not
to bear true faith, and obedience to his Majesty, not to defend him against
Treasons, and not to disclose them, when they shall come to their knowledge,
and also that it is in the free power of the subjects, or any other whatsoever,
to depose, or if they will, to murder Princes, which be excommunicated, or
deprived by the Pope, will by all likelihood be a probable occasion of raising
tumults in this kingdom and of plotting treasons, and traitorous conspiracies
against his Majesty's person, Crown, and dignity, if the Pope should
excommunicate, and deprive him, is so manifest to prudent men, who have but
cursorily read the Stories of precedent times, that there can be alleged no
colorable reason to make any doubt thereof.

21. Seeing therefore that the King and Parliament do not directly command in
this oath the internal denying of the aforesaid positions, but do only
compel the Subjects to make an unfeigned external profession, acknowledgement,
and declaration of their inward dislike, and detestation of the said positions,
in regard that they cannot be inwardly maintained with the safety of his
Majesty, and the quietness of the weal public, no longer then it shall please
the Popes Holiness; truly in my opinion it is evident, that the King and
Parliament have; according to the approved principles of Divines and Lawyers,
good, and full authority to command the Subjects, to make a true and sincere
external profession, acknowledgement, and declaration of their inward dislike,
and detestation of the aforesaid positions, they being such, which may lawfully
be disliked, and detested, and the dislike, and detestation thereof, all things
prudently considered, being morally necessary to the outward safety of the
King, and common wealth; considering that internal actions, as they are
referred to external, and are causes, and occasions of them, are subject to
the jurisdiction of the Civil power, although by it not punishable, until by
some outward sign they be sufficiently made manifest.

Sect. IIII.
1. THe fourth head of exception against this sixth branch of the oath is, for
that a Secular Magistrate has no good, and full authority over Clergy men,
because they are exempted from the jurisdiction, and tribunals of Secular
Magistrates, therefore, although it were granted, that this oath in it self is
lawful, and consequently may by the Kings authority be imposed upon the
Laity, yet, by reason of Ecclesiastical immunitie, the King has no good, and
full authority to compel Clergy men without the Popes license to take the
same.

2. To this objection it is answered first, that all Subjects whatsoever,
whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Secular persons, are bound to allegiance,
and subjection in that degree of subjection, from which they are not exempted.
Seeing therefore that Clergy men, although by the privileges of Princes, and
Ecclesiastical Canons are in some degree exempted even in temporal causes
from the tribunals of Secular Magistrates, and cannot be conuented before them
without the Bishops license, yet as they are true members, and parts of the
Civil commonwealth, and also true Subjects, as well as Lay men, and are not
exempted from true subjection, and allegiance due to the temporal Prince, and
may as well as other subjects commit true treason against him, they are bound
also to yield true allegiance to the Prince, and if just cause require, they
may also, as other members of the commonwealth, and other Subjects, be
compelled by the Prince, under temporal punishments, to make a sincere
declaration of their allegiance, either by a bare promise, or by oath, as the
Prince shall prudently judge to be more expedient for his safety. Neither is
it sufficient, that Subjects do promise only in general words their
allegiance; for so they should not be tied to any certain form of swearing
their allegiance, but they might choose, what form, or manner of swearing
should be most pleasing unto them, which nevertheless reason it self, and the
common practice of imposing such oaths of allegiance shows to be false, and
inconvenient; but they are bound to give such security of their allegiance,
and to take such an oath for confirming the same, which, being in it self
lawful, the Prince shall with mature deliberation judge to be necessary for
preserving his own safety, and the quietness of the Commonwealth.

3. Wherefore if the King, and State, being moved with truly prudent, and
probable reasons, shall judge it necessary, for preserving his own safety,
and also the Commonwealths, to compel by oath all his Majesty's Subjects,
even Ecclesiastical persons, as they are subjects, to give security to his
Majesty of their true and constant allegiance, and subjection, it is lawful,
yea and sometimes it may be necessary, upon certain incident occasions, to
exact greater security of Clergy men, then of Laymen, if the Prince for
reasons truly probable shall more vehemently suspect the fidelity of Clergy
men. Neither does the King impose this oath of Allegiance upon Clergy men, as
they are Clergy men, but as they are Subjects, and true members, parts, and
citizens of the temporal commonwealth.

4. As in like manner he compels Bishops to come to the Parliament, not as
they are Bishops, but as by the King his privilege they are made Barons, and
Peers of the kingdom. Because Bishops (says Ioannes Azor Tom. 1. Instit.
lib. 5. cap. 14. in fine.
the Jesuit) are Peers, and Princes of the kingdom, it belongs to Kings to
command, that as they are such, and not, as they are Bishops, they meet
together with others, for the common safety, and good of the Kingdom. Which if
they refuse to do, or if they deny to take that Oath of Allegiance, which
other Barons are bound to take, the King has full, and lawful authority to
deprive them, not doubtless of any spiritual Jurisdiction, which they have
received from Christ, but of that temporal dignity, which by his Princely
Privilege they do enjoy. Whereupon we read, Surius ad annum. 1545.
that the Emperor Charles the fifth commanded the Archbishop of Collen, being
a Prince of the Empire, to appear within thirty days before him, to answer to
those accusations, which should be alleged against him; which in like manner
did Pope Paul the third commanding him, as he was a Bishop, to appear before
him within threescore days.

5. Secondly, it is answered, that although it were granted, that Clergy men
are exempted in all causes whatsoever, not only from the command, and power of
inferior Secular Magistrates, but also from the authority and Jurisdiction of
Kings (who unless they be expressed by name, are not to be ranked in the
number of Secular Magistrates, as may be gathered by many texts of the Canon
Law Cap. Venerabilem de exceptionibus et c. ad abolendam de haereticis.
) nevertheless when the Prince has no fit commodity to meet with the
Spiritual Judge to demand license of him, that he may convent Clergy men
before the Secular tribunal for treasons, or other enormious Secular crimes,
or it is morally certain, that he will not grant any such license, then the
Secular Prince in case of necessity has full, and sufficient authority granted
him by the Law of God, and nature, to defend himself, and his kingdom from
all present dangers, or which probably are like to ensue, and to procure not
only by the way of defense, but also by authority, to use Victoria his word,
all lawful means fitting the temporal power, which are necessary to the
preserving of himself, and his Kingdom, and to prevent all probable dangers,
which by means of any spiritual person may arise, as Ioannes Parisiensis, de
potest. Regia, et papali cap. 21. ad. 37.
Victoria, Relect. 1. de potest. Eccles. sect. 7. 6. Octaua propositio.
Couarrunias, Pract quaest. cap. 35.
and many others do plainly auerre.

Sect. V.
1. THe fifth and last head of exception against this sixth branch of the Oath,
because it might be somewhat dangerous to the obiectours, is only by some
muttered in corners, who do ground their objection in this, that for many
years together, to wit, since the putting down of Catholic Bishops, there
has not bin, as they imagine, any true, and lawful Parliament in this Realm:
And they argue in this manner.

No laws, which be of force in this Kingdom, can be enacted but by the
authority of a true, and lawful Parliament, but the Parliament, which enacted
this law for the ministering of this Oath of Allegiance, was no true, and
lawful Parliament, Therefore this oath is not lawfully ministered by good and
full authority. The Mayor proposition is granted by all the Lawyers of this
Realm, The Minor is proved: because every true, and lawful Parliament must
consist of these three States, to wit, the Bishops, the Nobles, and the
Commons, but the Protestant Bishops are not true, and lawful Bishops, therefore
the Parliaments of these times are not true, and lawful Parliaments. For by
whom were you consecrated, says Becanus M. Controuers. Anglicana. c. 4. q. 9.
nu. 6. page 170.
speaking to the English Bishops? Whether by the King? But he has not power
to consecrate. Whether by the Archbishop of Canterbury, or such like? Neither
that truly. For Thomas Cranmer, who under K. Henry the eight obtained the
Archbishopric of Canturbury, was not consecrated by any Bishop, but thrust in
violently, and designed only by the King alone, Therefore as many as were
afterward consecrated by him, were not consecrated lawfully, but by
presumption.

2. They that urge this objection, to prove thereby that this Oath contains
in it a flat denial of the Catholic faith, are very desirous to fly to this
controversy, to wit, whether the Protestant Bishops of this Kingdom be true,
and Lawful Bishops or no. For at the least by this way they think to
demonstrate, that in this oath is euidendy contained not only civil
obedience, but also other things which appertain to Catholic Religion, to
wit, to the lawful ministering of the Sacrament of holy Order. But with this
Controversy, whether the Protestant Bishops of this Kingdom have true
Ordination, and consequently are true Bishops, or no; that is, whether from the
beginning, and so successively from time to time, they were ordained by true
Bishops, and whether those Bishops from time to time used that due form, and
matter, which by Christ his institution is necessarily required to impresse the
Episcopal Character, considering that it is, both a question of fact, whereof I
have not as yet any certain knowledge and also altogether impertinent for the
satisfying of this present objection, I will not at this time intermeddle.

3. Yet before I come to answer the objection, I would have the Reader to be
forwarned of two things. The first is, that betwixt a true, and lawful Bishop
there is a great difference to be made. For that one be a true Bishop, it is
only required, that he have true Ordination, whereby the Episcopal Character
is impressed and which cannot be rased out, but always remains, whether he
become a Turk, Jew, or heretic. And so the Arrian Bishops, although they
were heretics, yet because they were truly ordained, they were also true
Bishops, neither were they reordained, when they returned to the unity of the
Catholic Church. But that one be a lawful Bishop, besides true Ordination is
also necessary lawful mission and Jurisdiction, which by Christ his
institution is only derived from the true, and Orthodoxall Church of Christ.

4. The second is, that Becanus very rashly and without any probable color of
reason, or authority, and against the plain records of this Kingdom does
affirm, that Cranmer was not consecrated by any true Bishop, but designed only
by the King. For (besides that King Henry at that time, when Cranmer was made
Archbishop, to wit, the twenty fourth year of his reign, had not altogether
renounced the communion of the Sea Apostolic, by whose authorite both the
election of Cranmer to the Archbishopricke was confirmed, and to whom also he,
when he was consecrated, swore obedience, which afterward his adversaries did
cast in his teeth; and therefore there can be made no doubt, that he was
consecrated by other Bishops with all rites, and ceremonies according to the
ancient Canons) this only argument may suffice to convince Becanus, that King
Henry the very next year after, to wit, the twenty fifth year of his Reign,
made a Law in public Parliament, that every Archbishop, and Bishop of this
Realm should be presented and nominated by the Kings Majesty, his heirs, and
successors, but that he should be consecrated by one Archbishop, and two
Bishops, or else by four Bishops appointed by the King, with all benedictions,
and ceremonies required thereunto; which custom in electing and consecrating
Bishops is used even at this present time. For first the King sends his
letters to the Chapter of the vacant See, wherein he grants them leave to
choose a Bishop, and presents unto them one, or more to be elected, who being
elected the King confirms the election, and afterward he sends his
letters to three Bishops at the least, requiring them to consecrate him Bishop.
Wherefore I marvel from whom Becanus, a man otherwise very learned, has taken
this so manifest a fiction, seeing that it is not credible, that he has
devised it out of his own brain.

5. These therefore being premonished, for satisfying of this present
objection four things are to be supposed. The first is, that the custom,
which any Kingdom has to enact no laws without the counsel, and consent of
the three States of the Realm, did originally proceed either from the King
alone, who, to govern his Subjects more quietly, and peaceably, did freely,
and of his own accord grant them this Privilege, that he would enact no
laws without the counsel, and consent of the three States of the Realm: or
it had it first beginning from the whole commonwealth, which at the first,
when it was subject to no Sovereign, and absolute Prince, but the Sovereignty,
or supreme power to rule was in it self, did choose their King with this
condition and limitation, that he should not have authority to make laws,
unless the whole commonwealth, which the Parliament does represent, should
also concur with him: But then we must of necessity confess, that King not
to be altogether an absolute Prince, seeing that he has not power to make
laws, which all absolute Princes, according to the Doctrine of all Divines,
and Lawyers doubtless have: or lastly it was first derived both from the King
and Commonwealth together, by reason of some covenant agreed on betwixt them.

6. The second Supposition is, that no humane law has so strong force to
bind, but that the Lawmakers, or his Sucessor, who has equal authority with
him, has power to repeal, and disanull the same. And although the Lawmakers
may perchance greatly offend by repealing without just cause a good, and
profitable law, yet all Doctors do with uniform consent agree in this, that
the abrogating thereof is valide, and that the aforesaid law has no longer any
force to bind. And the reason hereof they allege, for that every thing is by
the same causes dissolved, by which it is made, but the will of the Lawmakers,
intending to bind his Subjects by his law, being the principal cause, yea and
the soul of the law it self, may be altered, and revoked at his pleasure:
And so the law is so long, and no longer a law, then the Lawmakers, or his
Successor will have it to be a law: Neither is it in the power of the Lawmakers
so to tie his Successor, but that he has always free power, to abrogate the
law, when he shall please, according to that no less true, then vulgar saying,
Par in parem non habet imperium: No man has authority over his equal. For
the Successor to the Prince has not authority to make laws from the person
of the Prince, whom he succeeds, but from the office, wherein he succeeds
him. And what we have said concerning the repealing of laws, the same also is
proportionably to be understood of the reuoking of covenants, and contracts,
to wit, that every covenant, or contract, may by the mutual consent of both
parties be either in some part altered, or else wholly made void, and to have
no effect at all.

7. The third Supposition is, that the very same civil power, and authority
to enact laws, does now remain in this kingdom, which it had, before this
custom to enact laws with the counsel and consent of the Parliament did
first begin. Neither can any alteration of Religion deprive a kingdom, or
Commonwealth of that supreme Civil authority, which it received not from
Religion, but from the law of nations, and nature. So that if any Christian
kingdom should revolt from the faith of Christ, fall into heresy, or also
Ethnicisme, yet she should have no less full, and sufficient authority to
govern it self ciuilly, and to enact civil laws, then if it never had
received the faith, and religion of Christ. The reason is, because as a
temporal Commonwealth does by the faith of Christ obtain no temporal
dominion, kingdom, or jurisdiction, but only a right to attain by due means
to the kingdom of heaven; so by the want of faith it only loses ye spiritual
right, and not that temporal jurisdiction, which by the law of nations and
nature is granted to all absolute Commonwealths, what Religion soever they do
profess.

8. The fourth Supposition is, that in this kingdom two Houses, as we call
them, of Parliament are distinguished, wherein all those, who have suffrages,
do use to sit. The one is called the Lower house, which contains those
persons, who are elected by the people, or Commons: the other is called the
Higher house, which comprehends the Peers and Barons of the kingdom,
whether they be Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, or by
what titles soever they be called; Nevertheless all, and every one of the
aforesaid Nobles have their voice in the Parliament by this only title, that
by the Kings privilege they are made Barons of the kingdom, and not in regard
that they are Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Marquesses, or Earls. From whence
it comes to pass, that in this Higher house, which is only one composed of
the Barons of the kingdom, and not two houses composed of the Lords spiritual
and temporal, to the enacting of a law the suffrages of the Barons are
indifferently numbered, without regard how many voices there be of spiritual,
and how many of temporal Lords. Wherefore it may fall out, and sometimes also
it has so happened, that a law may be established by the authority of the
King and Parliament, and by the whole kingdom be accounted a firm and
forcible law, although every one of the Bishops, and Lords spiritual do
repugne, so that the greater part of the Barons, whether they be Lords
spiritual or temporal do give their consent.

9. From hence may easily be gathered a perspicuous answer to the aforesaid
objection. For whether we grant, that this custom, privilege, or covenant not
to enact any laws without the counsel and consent of the aforesaid three
States of the Realm did first proceed from the King alone, or from the
Commonwealth, or from them both, yet it cannot be denied, but that by the
mutual consent of the King, and Commonwealth, it may either in part be
altered, or wholly revoked. We grant therefore that no civil law, according to
the present custom of this kingdom, has force to bind, unless by the
authority of a true, and lawful Parliament, (which does consist of the
Prelates, or Bishops, of the Nobles, and of the Commons) it be established.
Nevertheless we also affirm, that as it is in the power of the King, and
Commonwealth, which the Parliament does represent, to ordain, that civil
laws be enacted either by the Kings sole authority, without the consent or
suffrages of the Prelates, Nobles, and Commons, or with their consent, so also
it is in the power of the King and Parliament to declare, what persons are to
be understood by the names of Prelates, Nobles, and Commons, whose voices must
be required to enact laws in the Parliament. And therefore as in times past
Catholic Bishops, and also Abbots were by the Kings privilege made Peers and
Barons of the kingdom, and gave their voices with other Barons in the upper
house of Parliament, so also the Kings Majesty might in like manner give the
same dignity, and authority to Deanes, Archdeacons, or to any other his
Majesty Subjects.

10. Seeing therefore that the Protestant Bishops of this kingdom are by the
authority of the King and Commonwealth made Lords spiritual, or Barons of
the kingdom, and by the whole kingdom are accounted for such, there can be
made no doubt at all, but that they have full authority with other Barons of
the kingdom, to prescribe to the whole kingdom civil laws being confirmed
by the King: especially seeing that they have not suffrages in the Parliament,
as they are true Bishops in very deed, but as being by the King and Parliament
esteemed for such, they are by the Kings privilege made Barons, and have their
place, and dignity in the Parliament with the other Barons of the kingdom:
And that the Protestant Bishops are by the authority of the King and
Commonwealth made Barons of the kingdom, it is manifest by an Act of
Parliament holden the first year of Queen Elizabeth (which cannot be denied
to be a true Parliament, seeing that the Catholic Bishops were present As D.
Harding witnesses against Master Iuels Apology part. 6. chap. 2.
thereat, and gave their voices with the other Barons of the kingdom) wherein
it was decreed, that whosoever hereafter shall by the Queens Royal authority
be preferred to the dignity of an Archbishop, and Bishop, and be consecrated
according to the rites and ceremonies prescribed by the Act of Parliament in
the fifth year of King Edward the sixth, shall have authoritre to do, and
execute all those things, concerning the name, title, degree, and dignity of an
Archbishop, and Bishop, which any Archbishops, and Bishops of this Realm did
heretofore do, and execute. And although one only Bishop, as D. Harding In
the place before cited.
relates, gave his assent thereunto, yet this, as may appear by that, which
we said a little before Nu. 8.
, nothing lets, but that the voices of the other Barons being more in
number, might, for the granting by the Kings special gift, a temporal
privilege, as is a temporal dignity, ouersway, and prevail. And by this it
is manifest, that the Parliaments of these times are true, and proper
Parliaments, and consequently that the civil laws enacted by them, and
confirmed by the Kings Royal assent, are established by good, full, and
lawful authority. And this now with far greater reason may be auerred,
seeing that at this day there are no Catholic Bishops, who can challenge any
place, or suffrage in the Parliament house.

11. And this may suffice for the satisfying of all the arguments, which are
usually alleged against the sixth branch of this oath. For against those last
words [and I do renounce al pardons, and dispensations to the contrary]
supposing, that the Pope has no power to dispe^se with me in this oath, or any
part thereof, of which we have before abundantly disputed, I cannot devise any
thing of moment, which can be objected. For that, which some unlearned
persons, hearing this name of pardons, do very unlearnedly imagine, that in
this clause is denied the Popes authority to grant Pardons, or Indulgences, is
plainly frivolous, and very ridiculous: For that by the name of pardons, no
other thing is signified in this clause of the oath, then that the Pope has
not power to dispense with me in this oath, or any part thereof, or to absolve
me from the same, and consequently to grant me any license, pardon, or
dispensation, by virtue whereof I am not bound, to bear faith, and true
obedience to his Majesty, to defend him to the uttermost of my power against
all treasons, and traitorous conspiracies, and not to disclose them, when they
shall come to my knowledge, which pardons, licenses, or dispensations that
every Subject may lawfully renounce, supposing that which has been said
before, is too too manifest.

CHAP. VIII. The seventh branch of the Oath.
ANd all these things I do plainly, and sincerely acknowledge, and swear
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain,
and common sense, and understanding of the same words without any equivocation,
or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.

Sect. I.
1. AGainst this branch two objections are usually made. The first, which
Lessius, Nu. 216.
as his English Recapitulator Page 51.
relates, does insinuate, is against that word [sweare] comprehended in the
first words of this branch, [And all these things I do plainly, and sincerely
acknowledge, and sweare] from which words it is plainly deduced, that I do not
only acknowledge, but also swear all the former clauses, and parcels of the
oath, and consequently that I do swear, that the Pope has not power to
depose the King, or to absolve his Subjects from their allegiance. Seeing
therefore that no Catholic can without danger of perjury swear that to be
true, whose truth is not manifest, but controuerted among Catholics, and no
Catholic can deny, but that at the least it is uncertain, and controverted
among Catholic Divines, whether the aforesaid positions do contain truth, or
falsehood, doubtless no Catholic can without danger of perjury swear, that
the Pope has not authority to depose the King, and to absolve his Subjects
from their allegiance, although he, who is of that opinion may, without any
danger of perjury, confirm by oath the acknowledgement, profession, and
declaration of his opinion.

2. To this objection it is answered first, that the true and proper meaning of
those words, [I do acknowledge, and sweare] is not, that I do not only
acknowledge, but also immediately swear all the branches, clauses, parcels, and
words, which are contained in this oath, for that the contrary concerning
certain parts of the oath does evidently appear, wherein I do immediately
confirm by oath the true and sincere declaration of my opinion, as is manifest
both by the former branch [which I acknowledge by good, etc.] and by the first
words of the oath, [I A,B. do truly, and sincerely acknowledge, profess,
testify, and declare, etc.] and by the fifth branch, [And I do believe, and
in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, etc.] and also by the last
branch [And this recognition, and acknowledgement I do make, etc.] For by
these words it is evident, that the immediate object, or which is all one, that
thing which is immediately sworn in many assertions contained in this oath, and
especially in those positions, which are mentioned in the objection, to wit,
that the Pope has not power to depose the King, or to discharge his subjects
of their allegiance, only a true and sincere profession, acknowledgement, and
declaration of my opinion, so that I do not in this oath immediately swear
the truth of the aforesaid positions in themselves, but a true and sincere
declaration of my opinion; or which is all one, what is my opinion concerning
the truth of them.

3. Wherefore the plain and proper meaning of these words [And all these
things I do plainly, and sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to these
express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense,
etc.] is, that all these things, which I do acknowledge, I do plainly, and
sincerely acknowledge according to these express words by me spoken, etc. and
all these things, which I do swear, I do plainly, and sincerely swear
according to these express words, etc. so that these words [and sweare] are
not to be referred to those words [and all these things] as though I should
swear all those things, which were before spoken by me, but to those words
[plainly, and sincerely] signifying thereby, that all these things, which I do
swear, I do plainly and sincerely swear according to the common
understanding of the words, without any equivocation at all. And that this is
the true and plain meaning of these words, any man, that will sincerely
compare this branch of the oath with the other parts thereof, will clearly
perceive: for otherwise they should most evidently contradict both the first,
and the last, and also the middle clauses of the oath. And what Divine or
Lawyer, I pray you, will, against the common and approved rules of interpreting
laws, affirm, that if in any law, or decree enacted by public authority,
there be contained any proposition, which has two senses, whereof the one
has in it no absurdity or inconvenience, and the other is absurd, and
evidently repugnant to other words, and sentences of the said law, the worser
sense is to be prefered, and that, which contains in it no absurdity is to be
rejected? And this also is to be observed for answering to the two next
objections.

Sect. II.
1. THe Second objection is usually made against those words [according to
these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain, and common
sense of the same words, without any equivocation, etc.] For it seems, that
whosoever swears these words must of necessity be forsworn; considering that
in this Oath are contained many equivocal words, and many common senses of the
same words: as for example, to depose the King, does signify, to deprive him
of his Regal authority, and also, to thrust him out of possession of his
Kingdom; to absolve from this oath, does signify; to absolve either from the
thing sworn, or only, from the thing as sworn: A Successor does signify,
both a lawful, and also an unlawful Successor: As heretical, may be taken
either for heretical indeed, or for heretical only in similitude: and so of
the like: Therefore he that takes the oath according to these express words,
and swears the aforesaid equivocal speeches, must of necessity use some
equivocation, and consequently be forsworn, seeing that he swears to use no
equivocation at all.

2. To this objection it is answered first, that although in this Oath there be
contained many equiuocal words, and many common senses of the same words, if
they be taken barely, and by themselves alone; yet as in this Oath they are
joined with other words, and with them do compound a full and perfect
sentence, they are not so equivocal, that all circumstances duly considered
according to the rules before Cap. 1. sect. 2. et seq.
assigned for the interpreting of the words of Laws, they have according to
the common understanding of men two senses equally proper, which properly is to
be equivocal.

3. Neither is it unusual, that a word, taken by it self, be equivocal, which
being placed in a sentence or proposition is not, all circumstances considered,
equiuocal. As this word [Dog] being taken nakedly by it self, has many
significations, yet if one talking with an other, in the time of ye Dog days,
of the intemperate season of the air, should say, I greatly fear the Dog,
this word by the circumstance of the time, and other precedent words would be
sufficiently determined to signify the celestial constellation, and not an
earthly Dog. And although there were in this oath many common senses of the
same sentence, or proposition, which nevertheless is not true, as by answering
all the particular objections we have showed before, yet we might lawfully
according to the rules before assigned, if there be no other let, choose that
common sense, which is more commodious to us, so that it contain no absurdity,
nor is repugnant to the mind, and will of the Lawmakers.

4. Secondly it is answered, that these later words [without any equivocation
etc.] do only declare those former [And all these things I do plainly and
sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to these express words by me
spoken, and according to the common sense, and understanding of the same words]
so that they only signify, that I do deal plainly, and sincerely without any
fraud or guile, and that I do not take the words in an other meaning, then the
common sense, and understanding of the same words do bear. And therefore
although there be some equiuocal words in this oath, if they be taken by
themselves without considering all circumstances, as has been said in the
objection, yet it does not therefore follow, that when I speak those words, I
do equivocate, or use equivocation. For first it is one thing to use
equivocal words, which may be called a material equivocation, and an other
thing to equivocate, or to use formal equivocation. For to equivocate
properly, or to use formal equivocation, as it is commonly understood in this
Kingdom, is to use equivocal words, or some secret reservation, of purpose to
delude the hearer, so that he who hears the words, understands them in
another sense, then he who utters them, and it does import an insincere
manner of dealing. And therefore if any man ask us, tell me truly do you
equivocate, or no, all men by this do usually so understand, tell me truly,
whether you deal with me sincerely, and do not take your words in an other
sense, then in common speech they are usually taken? And therefore it may be,
that the King, and Parliament did chiefly for this end add those words
[without any equivocation, etc.] that if perchance in this oath there were many
common senses of the same sentence, or proposition, we should take it in that
common sense wherein we thought the Lawmakers to understand it: for this is the
principal meaning, and intention of the Lawmakers, that we should deal with
him plainly, and sincerely And so his Majesty understands these words in his
Apology page. 51. nu. 14.
without any fraud, guile, or secret reservation.

5. Moreover, although we should admit, that in this oath there were not only
many equivocal words, but also many equivocal sentences, yet it does not
follow therefore, that in taking this oath we must of necessity use some
equivocation; but rather it might from hence be inferred, that, if perchance in
his oath there be contained many equivocal sentences according to the common
understanding of the words, by virtue of this clause we are bound, to declare
publickely before we take the whole oath, in what common sense we take that
proposition, which we apprehend to be equivocal, so that our sense be not
repugnant to the intention of the Lawmakers, and this is the most that the
aforesaid objection can prove; wherefore if any one be persuaded that those
words, to depose, Successors, as heretical, or any such like words be
equivocal, he may openly declare, in what sense he takes those words, and
so he shall easily avoid all equivocation, and all danger of perjury, which
otherwise by taking of this clause he may incur.

CHAP. IX. The eighth, and last branch of the Oath.
AND I do make this recognition, and acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and
truly upon the true faith of a Christian, So help me God.

1. If this branch be compared with the first, and diverse others before Cap.
8. sect. 1. nu. 2.
related, it will easily appear, what is the principal object of this oath, or
which is al one, what is that thing which chiefly in this oath I do
immediately swear; for it is my recognition, acknowledgment, and declaration
of my opinion concerning the truth, or falsehood of almost all the positions,
which are contained in this oath, and not the truth or falsehood it self of the
same positions, as they are considered in themselves. So that I do not swear,
that the Pope has no authority to depose the King, or to discharge his
Subjects of their obedience, and so of many other like clauses, but that I do
acknowledge, profess, testify, believe, am resolved in conscience, and do
declare that the Pope has no such power to depose the King, to discharge
Subjects of their obedience, and so of the rest.

Sect. I.
1. But against this branch some object in this manner. That oath cannot be
said to be taken heartily, and willingly, which one takes against his will,
and is wrested from him through fear, but this oath is taken by most men
against their wills, and if it were in their free power, and election, they
would not take it, but it is wrested from them for fear of loosing for ever
all their temporal goods, lands, and liberty, therefore they cannot truly
swear, that they do take it heartily and willingly. This objection is greatly
urged by Father Parsons in his English book entitled, The Judgment of a
Catholic Englishman living in banishment for his religion, concerning a late
book set forth and entitled; Triplici nodo: etc. or, An Apology for the Oath
of Allegiance, in which book he much labors Page 13. nu. 21.
to prove, that in this Oath besides civil obedience are couched, and craftily
conjoined also certain Ecclesiastical points, and which appertain indeed to
Catholic Religion with no small prejudice to the same. And this important
matter he confidently affirms, may easily be cleared by four several and
distinct ways.

2. The first way, says he, is taken from the plain express words, sense, and
drift of the oath it self, for that besides civil obedience, and the
acknowledgement of our Soueraign to be true, and rightful Lord over all his
Dominions, and other such like clauses, whereat no man makes difficulty, the
said oath contains further, that I must swear in like manner some points
concerning the limitation of the Popes authority, to wit, what he cannot do
toward his Majesty, or his Successors in any case whatsoever, and
consequently toward all Kings, for the like reason is also in others: that he
would say, that the Pope has not power to depose the King, and to absolve his
Subjects from their allegiance, etc. Which question being brought from the
particular Hypothesis, to the general Thesis, concerning all Kings, touches a
point of Doctrine, and Catholic belief concerning the sufficiency of
Pastoral authority left by our Savior in his Church to S. Peter, and his
Successors, for redressing of all inconveniences that may fall out, which I
(being a Catholic) cannot in my conscience forswear without peril of
everlasting damnation. And this is one way of clearing the question

4. But truly this way is not clear enough but very intricate, and encumbered
with many difficulties. For this question concerning the Popes power to depose
Princes, and to absolve subjects from their allegiance, does not appertain to
Catholic doctrine, or belief, as heretofore In my Apology.
we have abundantly showed, (where Nu. 203. and seq.
also we have more particularly answered those reasons, which Fa. Parsons his
Mitigation has brought to this purpose) and hereafter against D. Schulckenius,
we will, God willing, more distinctly prove the same: but this power may with a
safe conscience be denied by Catholics without danger of denying the Catholic
faith. All Catholics do indeed acknowledge that the Pope is the Pastor of
the Catholic Church, and that he has al sufficient, and necessary spiritual
power to govern the flock of Christ, but whether this his spiritual power is
to be extended to the deposing of Kings, and to the absoluing of Subjects from
their temporal allegiance, is a controversy, says Trithemius, In Chronico
Monasterii Hirsang ad annum 1106.
amongst the Schoolmen, and as yet it is not decided by the Judge, whether
the Pope has power to depose the Emperor, or no.

5. The second way, says he, to clear this question, is taken from the Popes
words in his Breues, wherein he declares, that this oath contains many
things, which are clearly repugnant to the Catholic faith, and the health of
souls. And this way is indeed, in some part, clear: for it is clear and
manifest, that the Pope in his Breues did so declare, but nevertheless it is
as yet unknown, and hidden from us, what in particular be those many things,
which are clearly repugnant to Catholic faith, and the health of souls:
which point, if Fa. Parsons had declared, and cleared, as English Catholics
did expect he would have done, he had then doubtless somewhat clearly
explained this question. But concerning the Popes Breues we will beneath The
next chap. sect 2.
treat more at large.

6 The third proof, faith Fa. Parsons, Page 15. nu. 25.
may be taken from Cardinal Bellarmines letter, who having diligently
considered with other learned men the nature of this oath, does therefore hold
it to be unlawful, for that it is so compounded by artificial joining
together of temporal, and spiritual things, civil obedience, and forswearing
the Popes authority. But this way is no whit cleerer, but rather more obscure,
than the former: for although Cardinal Bellarmine does indeed auerre thus
much, yet, as it is evident by that, which has been said before, he proves
it with such weak, and silly reasons, that those, who are of opinion, that the
oath is lawful, and that nothing is therein contained, which is repugnant to
Catholic faith, are rather thereby confirmed in their opinion, than any whit
auerted from the same. See also what concerning this point we have said before
in the 7. Chapter, Sect. 2. Number. 15.

7 The fourth way, which Fa. Parsons has devised for a more full, and final
clearing of this matter, is the framing of an other oath, to wit, to make this
real offer on the behalf of every English Catholic for better satisfaction
of his Majesty in this point, so much urged of their Civil, and Temporal
obedience, that he will swear, and acknowledge most willingly all those parts,
and clauses of the Oath, that do any way appertain to the Civil, and
Temporal obedience due to his Majesty, whom he acknowledges for his true, and
lawful King, and Sovereign over al his Dominions, and that he will swear
unto him as much loyalty, as ever any Catholic Subject of England did unto
their lawful King in former times, and ages, before the change of King Henry
the eighth: or, that any foreign Subject owes, or ought to swear to any
Catholic Prince whatsoever at this day.

8. But first this way does no whit clear this present question, whether the
oath be unlawful, and contrary to Catholic belief, or no. For what, I pray
you, do h it avail, to prove that in this particular Oath is contained, or not
contained any thing more then civil obedience, for that all Catholics will
swear in general words all those things, which appertain to Civil
obedience? Secondly, all Catholics will forsooth swear in general words,
that King James is their lawful King, and Sovereign Lord, and they will
promise unto him in general words Obedience, but in particular, for how long a
time he shall be their Lawful King, and Sovereign Lord, and for what time
they will promise unto him Obedience, to wit, whether for ever, or only for a
certain time, until the Pope depose him, and discharge his Subjects of their
Obedience, all Catholic Subjects will not perchance adventure to swear.

9. Thirdly, the Kings Majesty avouches, that in this particular Oath is
contained nothing besides that civil Obedience, and temporal Allegiance,
which every foreign Subject, if his Prince upon just cause shall demand it at
his hands, may with a good conscience, and also ought to swear. Yea in very
deed he in this oath requires of his English Subjects no other thing, then
which the Kingdom of France does publicly profess to be due unto their most
Christian King; to wit, that the Pope has not power to deprive the King of
France of his Kingdom, and that notwithstanding any monitions,
Excommunications, or Interdicts, which may be made by the Pope, yet his
Subjects are bound to yield obedience due to him for temporalls, neither that
they can therein be dispensed, or absolved by the Pope. Would Father Parsons,
trow you, if he were now alive, also affirm, that this assertion is repugnant
to Catholic Doctrine, and belief, for that it contains some things
concerning the limitation of the Popes authority, or would he auerre with
Cardinal Bellarmine that this assertion is compounded of a spiritual thing to
wit, of the denial of the Popes authority?

10. Finally, the last argument, which Father Parsons does as by the way bring
to impugn this Oath of Allegiance, is that objection, which we have set down
in the beginning of this Section, wherein he seems to please himself so
much, that he thereupon, as you shall perceive, takes occasion to triumph
against his Majesty.

11. For the satisfying therefore of this objection, we must first of all
suppose out of S. Thomas 1. 2ae. q 6. ar 6
, that according to Aristotle Lib. 3. Ethic. cap. 1.
, and Gregory Nyssene Lib 5. de homine cap. 1.
, Huiusmodi quae per metum aguntur, etc. Those things which are done for fear,
are mixed of voluntary, or willingness, and inuoluntarie or unwillingness: for
that, which is done for fear, if it be considered in it self, is not
voluntary, but it is voluntary in some case, to wit, to avoid the evil,
which is feared. But if one do well consider, they are more voluntary, then
inuoluntarie; for they are simply voluntary, but inuoluntarie in some sort.
For every thing is said to have it being simply, according as it is in deed,
and according as it has it being in imagination, it has not being simply, but
after some sort. But that which is done for fear, being a particular action,
has it being in deed, according as it is done in this place, in this time, and
with other particular conditions required to a particular action. And so
willingness is in that, which is done for fear, according as it has being
indeed in this place, and in this time; to wit, according as in this particular
case it is an hindrance of a greater evil, which was feared; as the casting of
merchandise into the Sea in the time of a tempest is made voluntary for fear
of danger: Whereupon it is manifest, that it is simply voluntary, and
therefore the definition of voluntary does agree unto it, for that our inward
will is cause thereof; But that the thing which is done for fear, be taken as
having it being out of this case, as it is repugnant to the will, this has
only it being in imagination, and therefore it is inuoluntarie in some sort, to
wit, as it is considered to have it being out of this case. Thus far S.
Thomas.

12. From hence it is easy to answer the aforesaid objection. For seeing that
those things, which are done for fear, have more of willingness, then of
unwillingness, and therefore simply they are to be called voluntary, or
willing, both for that they are actually chosen by our will, and also for that
all actions take their names chiefly from their end, but the end of these
actions, which are done for fear, which is to avoid a greater evil, is more
voluntary, and to be desired: therefore the actions themselves are simply, and
absolutely to be called voluntary, according to that vulgar axiom,
Denomination, or imposing of names, is taken from the greater part, or from,
that, which is predominant. And so a law, which is made by the greater part of
a Council, or Parliament, is absolutely said to be made by the whole Council,
or Parliament. From whence it follows, that although we should grant, that
some Catholics, partly because they do not thoroughly perceive the lawfulnes
of the oath, and partly for some other humane respect are for fear moved to
take the same, and so in some sort are not willing to take it, to wit,
conditionally, if the oath had not been imposed upon them by Act of Parliament,
under such grievous penalties, yet the law being now made, and the oath being
tendered unto them, which without great inconveniences they cannot refuse, they
do in very deed at this present time, for the reason alleged by S. Thomas,
take it heartily, and willingly. Yea, as it will beneath Nu. 20. and seq.
most manifestly appear, there is no man, who, if he please, may not take it
most heartily, most willingly, and most freely, without any repugnance,
displeasure, fear, or constraint at all.

13. Wherefore I cannot but greatly marvel, for what cause Father Parsons,
although he grant, that the casting out of ones goods into the Sea in the time
of a tempest for fear of drowning, is according to the doctrine of Catholic
Divines inuoluntarie in part, and simply voluntary, for that, all
circumstances considered, he resolves finally to be the best to cast out his
goods, and save himself, nevertheless to reprehend those words of his
Majesty, as having in themselves no great coherence, to wit, that very many of
his Majesty's subjects, that were Popishly affected, as well Priests; as
Laycks, did freely take the oath, dare presume to auerre so confidently, that
all Divines do agree in this, that freedom is taken away by this constraint
of the passion of fear. For that freedom requires full liberty to both
extremes, or objects, that are proposed; which is not in our case. For that
the displeasure of the Prince, the loss of goods, and liberty, the ruin of
his family, the terror, and persuasion of his friends, are heavy poyses, and
do mightily preponderate on the one side; and consequently the mention of this
freedom might have been pretermitted, for so much as no constraint of humane
will can be greater, then this: And yet it is said in the Oath, that he must
do it, both willingly, and heartily, and as he believes in conscience. Let
the discreet Reader consider, what coherence there is in their tale. Thus
Father Parsons.

14. But first of all, unless we will grossly equivocate, it is both evidently
false, and repugnant to the doctrine of Catholic Divines, and also erroneous
in faith to affirm, that freedom is altogether taken away by the constraint
of fear, for that, notwithstanding any fear, we have full and perfect
freedom, The Latin word is libertas, or perfect voluntarium.
and liberty, to choose which part we will. For otherwise, he that for fear
should commit any unlawful act, should be excused from sin, considering
that, according to Father Parsons doctrine, he has not full and perfect
freedom, or liberty, without which no grievous sin can be committed, as
all Divines with uniform assent do acknowledge.

15. Four therefore kinds of freedom, or liberty, are commonly assigned by
the Deuines See the Master of the Sentences in 2. did. 25. and Ioannes Azorius
tom. 1. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 2.
. The first freedom, or liberty is, whereby a man is free from sin, of
which the words of the Apostle 2. Cor. 3.
are to be understood, Where the spirit of our Lord is their is freedom, or
liberty. And those of our Savior Christ in the Gospel, Ioh. 8.
If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed. And this freedom does
free us from the bondage of sin, as contrariwise, the bondage of sin does
make us free to justice, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 6.18.
And being made free from sin, you were made servants to justice. And again,
verse. 20.
When you were servants to sin, you were free to justice. And this freedom
man did loose by sinning. The second freedom is whereby a man is free from
misery, and pain. Whereof the Apostle Romans 8.
writes, The creature also it self, shall be freed from the servitude of
corruption into the freedom of the glory of the children of God. And this
freedom man had before he sinned, for that he was then free from all misery,
and was troubled with no pain, or grief, and he shall have this freedom more
perfectly in the kingdom of heaven, where he shall for ever be free from all
misery. The third freedom is, whereby a man is free from necessity, which
freedom does consist in this, that he is said to do any action freely, when
supposing all conditions required to do that action, he has freedom to do it
and not to do it: and this freedom is required to sin, and to every action,
which deserves blame, or commendation; punishment, or reward, according to
that saying of Saint Augustine, Tom. 1. de vera religione. cap. 14.
speaking of man being tempted by Lucifer, If he had done that of necessity,
he had been tied with no bond of sin. And this freedom is in all men both
good and bad; and, as the Master of the Sentences says, Our will both before
sin, and after sin is equally free from necessity.

16. The fourth freedom is, whereby a man is free from violence, in regard of
which freedom no creature either reasonable, or unreasonable is said to suffer
violence in any action, unless that action do proceed from some external
cause against the natural inclination of that creature: As, for example, the
descending of a stone downward is free from violence, because it proceeds
from the inward, and natural weight of the stone: but the throwing of a stone
upwards, is altogether violent, because it proceeds from the outward
impression of the thrower, against the inward, and natural weight, and
inclination of the stone.

17. So likewise man, according to the doctrine of al Divines, and
Philosophers, in all those actions depending on our will, which do not
proceed from some external cause against our will, is said to be free from
violence, or constraint. And this kind of violence, or constraint, seeing that
it makes the action not only in part, but altogether inuoluntary, cannot be
found in voluntary, or free actions. Neither can our will in her own proper
actions, as to will, or to nill any thing propounded unto her, be constrained
with this violence; because at the same time, when she should be constrained
to will any thing against her will, she should both will, and not will the same
thing, which implies a manifest contradiction. Nevertheless it is most
certain, as well observes Ioannes Azorius, Tom. 1. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 9 ad
finem.
That man's will may be allured, enticed, or inclined by great prayers,
persuasions, fearer, and threatenings, and then the will is vulgarly said to be
drawn, and so also to be compelled, not because truly and properly she
suffers violence, but because the will would not otherwise will, but for
these, and such like motives and impulsions. And these be the general
acceptions of freedom, whereunto all other freedoms in particular, as to be
free from sickness, from bondage, from fear, and a hundred such like may be
reduced.

18. By this it may easily be perceived, that Fa. Parsons did without cause
carpe at those words of his Majesty, That very many Catholics had freely
taken this oath, seeing that, although they had taken it only for fear of
punishment, and incurring his Majesty's displeasure (in that manner as
Merchants do in tempestuous weather cast out their goods into the Sea, for
fear of being drowned themselves) yet, as we have showed before, it may be
said most truly, that they did take it indeed heartily, willingly, and also
freely (although this word [freely] be not in the oath at all) for that the
fear does not take away their freedom, and willingness, as free, willing, or
voluntary is both by Divines, and in common speech usually taken.

19. And although in some actions to do a thing freely, does signify all one,
as not to do it for fear, yet this is not common to all actions, but proper,
and peculiar only to some, as to gifts, and donations, to whose substance this
peculiar condition is required, that they be done freely, liberally, without
fear, compulsion, or any inward displeasure at all, in which sense freely does
only signify liberally, and so this word liberally is derived from the latin
word libere, which in English we call freely: but the proper, and usual
acception of freedom, as the Divines, and Philosophers take freedom, is no
other, then those four which we have rehearsed out of Azor. Which freedom
both from necessity, and violence or constraint (for the other two
significations of freedom are impertinent to our purpose) although by fear it
be somewhat diminished, yet it is not altogether taken away, nor so diminished,
but that those actions, which are done for fear, have more of willingness,
freedom, or liberty, then of the contrary, and therefore, according to the
doctrine of Aristotle, and the Divines, as also Father Parsons himself does
witness, they are absolutely, and simply said to be done hearttily,
willingly, and freely. Whereby it is manifest, that this first answer does
abundantly satisfy the aforesaid objection.

But to satisfy this argument of Fa. Parsons superabundantly, and to show most
evidently the weakness thereof, we will grant him for disputations sake, that
the meaning of those words, [And this recognition I do make heartily, and
willingly, let us add also, and freely] is that, which he desires, to wit,
that I do not take this oath for any fear of punishment; Nevertheless,
secondly and principally (supposing that all the precedent clauses of the oath
may lawfully, and with a safe conscience be taken, which at this present must
be supposed, and which by fully satisfying all the aforesaid objections, has
in my judgment been sufficiently proved) it is answered, that there is no
Catholic, that may not with a safe conscience take this branch of the oath,
and consequently swear most truly, that he does make this recognition, and
acknowledgement most heartily, most willingly, and most freely, without any
fear, repugnance, or displeasure at all, if he be sincerely moved to make the
same not for fear of any punishment, but for the lawfulnes, goodness, and
honesty of the act it self.

21. May not any man, I pray you, observe God his commandments most heartely,
most willingly, and most freely merely for his love, and not for fear of
punishment, although most grievous punishments are ordained by God against the
breakers of his commandments? Are we not bound by the law of God, to love him
with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength, that is,
most heartely, most willingly, and most freely, and nevertheless almighty God
has prepared for them, who do not love him, the everlasting torments of hell
fire, besides the losing of the kingdom of heaven? Is not the loss of a
celestial kingdom, and to be thrust together with the Devils into the
horrible prison of hell, there to be tormented everlastingly, far greater
poyses, then to be deprived for a little time of temporal lands, goods, or
liberty? Why then cannot I take this oath, supposing it to be lawful,
heartely, willingly, and freely, although it be imposed upon me by the Kings
command under pain of bodily imprisonment, and forfeiting all my temporal
goods, as well, as, observing due proportion, I can love God, and keep his
commandments most heartily, most willingly, and most freely, who nevertheless
has in the holy Scripture threatened far bitter punishments to those, who
do not love him with all their heart, and strictly observe his commandments?

22. Wherefore there is no repugnance at all, whatsoever Father Parsons says,
but rather great coherence betwixt these two, to wit, that great punishments
are by Act of Parliament ordained for those, who shall refuse the oath, and yet
that any man may take it not for fear of those punishments, if so be that he
be moved to the taking thereof, not for fear of any punishment, but only in
regard of the lawfulnes of the oath, not so much desiring to avoid, by taking
the oath, those punishments, as to obey the just command of his lawful Prince,
in those things, wherein he has full and lawful power to command him. And
this seems to be the chiefest end of the King and Parliament, in concluding
the Oath with these words, heartely, and willingly, (the reason whereof we
will allege beneath Nu. 26.
) that although very grievous punishments be appointed for them, who do refuse
the oath (as it is usual in all laws, which do command, or forbid any thing
of great importance) yet the Subjects should nevertheless take the said oath,
not for fear of those punishments, but merely, and sincerely for the
lawfulnes of the oath it self, which his Majesty by Act of Parliament has
commanded, which every devout subject, and well affected to his Majesty, who
thinks the oath to be lawful, may lawfully, and is also bound to do.

23. For, as well observes Gabriel Vasquez 1. 2ae disp. 51. cap. 3. and disp.
73 cap. 7. and disp. 86. cap. 5.
, and other Divines out of Aristotle 2. Ethic. cap. 4
, to make an act of virtue, to be morally good, and virtuous, it is not only
required, that it have a good, and virtuous object, but also it must be done
directly for the goodness, and honesty of the virtue it self, and not for
any other end, or motive. For otherwise if one do acts of virtue, as of
justice, or temperance, not for justice, or temperance sake, but for some other
end, as for lucre, vainglorie, fear of punishment, or any other motive
whatsoever, he shall do, says Aristotle, just, or temperate actions, but he
shall not do them justly, or temperatly, neither shall he for doing those
actions be reputed a just, or temperate man: which Aristotle declares by this
example. For it is one thing, says he, to make a Grammatical construction,
and another thing to make it Grammatically; for if one having no skill in
Grammar, does either by chance, or another prompting him, make rightly a
Grammatical construction, he makes doubtless Grammatical construction, but
he makes it not Grammatically; but if one make the same by art, he makes both
a Grammatical construction, and also Gra^matically, because he makes it by
the art, and skill, which is in him. And as in arts the knowledge of the art is
required, to do a thing artificiously, or according to art; so in virtues,
according to Aristotle, a virtuous intention (for to virtues, says he,
knowledge does little, or nothing avail) to do the act for virtues sake, is
necessary, that the act be done virtuously, or according to virtue.

24. Wherefore, as well says S. Thomas 1. 2ae. q. 96. art. 5.
, as the nature of a law does contain two things, first, to be a rule of
humane actions: secondly, to have power to compel; so may a man in two manner
of ways be subject to the law; first, as one, who is ruled, is subject to the
rule, and in this manner all men, who are subject to authority, are subject to
the law, which is made by authority: secondly, as one, who is compelled, is
subject to him, who compels him, and in this manner only wicked men, and not
the just and virtuous are subject to the law. As if he should have said, just
and virtuous men are subject to the directive power of the law, but not to the
coactiue power; or, which is all one, the just do not observe the law for
fear of punishment, as the wicked do, but for the love of virtue, wherein by
force of the law they are directed, and not to the observing whereof for fear
of punishment they are compelled; so that they are said to be in the law, not
under the law. For, it is one thing, says S. Augustine Tom. 8. in illud Psalm.
1. Sed in lege Domini etc.
, to be in the law, another thing to be under the law. He that is in the law,
secundum legem agit, does according to the law, he that is under the law,
secundum legem agitur, is drawn according to the law; as if he should say, is
drawn, enforced, and constrained as a slave to keep the law. And this
difference betwixt good men and bad men in observing laws, is well declared by
the Poet in those verses: Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore,
Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae.
For virtues love the virtuous man
from vices does abstain.
For fear of pain the wicked man
from sinning does refrain.


25. To conclude therefore this answer, it is false, which Father Parsons Nu.
29. before cited.
affirms, that there is no other freedom in taking this, then which a
Merchant has in a tempest, either to cast out his goods into the sea, for
lightening his ship, or to be drowned himself: For the only motive, which
causes the Merchant to cast out his goods into the sea, is to escape that
danger of drowning, which if it were not, he would be altogether unwilling to
cast away his goods: but the only motive, why a loyal subject, and well
affected to his Majesty, ought to take this oath, is not the fear of
punishments, but the love and desire he has to obey the just and lawful
command of his Prince, whom he is ready to obey, although he should impose no
punishment on them, who should transgress his law. The comparison of Father
Parsons, betwixt the taking of this oath, and the casting of ones goods into
the Sea, had been doubtless apt, and fit enough, if the Oath were in it self
unlawful, for then the only fear of punishment, and of incurring his
Majesty's displeasure, could move the subjects to take the oath: but unless
this first be proved, which doubtless the former objections have not yet
convinced, there can be no great coherence in Father Parsons discourse,
neither does the aforesaid objection against this last branch of the oath in
any wise convince the oath to be unlawful. And if notwithstanding all this,
which has been said, there be any one, who does not willingly take this oath,
let he himself look to that; it is sufficient, that, if with an attentive eye
he will read, and with an indifferent judgment consider what we have said,
he may most evidently perceive, that this oath contains in it no false, or
unlawful thing, and consequently, that it may be taken heartely, willingly,
and freely, without any fear of punishment, or any constraint at all.

26. Finally, the Kings Majesty and Parliament had far greater, and more
urgent reasons to command the subjects to take this oath heartely, and
willingly, then to observe heartely and willingly the other laws of the
Realm; because the principal end and intention of his Majesty in enacting
other laws is, that they be only outwardly observed; neither does he greatly
care with what inward affection his subjects do fulfill his outward precepts;
for that to the outward conservation of public peace and quietness in his
kingdom, he thinks it sufficient, that his precepts and laws be outwardly
and publicly observed. But this Oath of Allegiance was principally devised for
this end, to make trial, how his Subjects were inwardly affected toward his
Majesty in those things, which appertain to their loyalty, that by that
means he might have good assurance of their constant fidelity, and obedience,
and, as much as may be, be made secure from danger of future conspiracies. For
furious, and bloody opinions, as very well said his Majesty In Praefat.
Monitoria non long a principio.
, do now and then bring forth also bloody conspiracies, as was that of the
Powder Treason. And therefore it was necessary that he should compel all his
Subjects to take all the clauses of this Oath of Allegiance not only in
outward words, but also sincerely, unfeignedly, willingly, and truly with all
their hearts.

And thus much concerning the principal objections, which are usually made
against all the particular clauses of the Oath, it remains only that in like
manner we diligently examine all the chief objections, which are commonly
urged against the Oath in general.

The tenth and last Chapter.
Sect. I.
FIrst therefore Card. Bellarmine, In respons. ad Apolog. page 7. et 23.
and Lessius, Nu. 2 15.
as his English Recapitulator Page 47.
relates, do object against the Oath in general, that even from the
judgment, and confession of the King, and Parliament, and from the end, for
which this oath was devised, it may be concluded, that it does not only
contain civil obedience, and temporal allegiance, as his Majesty
pretends, and under color whereof he imposes it upon Catholics. And this
is the whole force, and substance of their argument.

2. That oath can not in the judgment of those contain only temporal
allegiance, and civil obedience, which by them was only invented for the
discovering, and repressing of Popish Recusants, but this oath was by the King,
and Parliament only invented for the discovering, and repressing of Popish
Recusants, therefore this oath can not in the judgments of the King, and
Parliament contain only temporal allegiance, and civil obedience.

The Mayor proposition is evident: because that thing can not be judged an apt
means to discover, or make known Popish Recusants, which is as well common to
Protestants, as to Popish Recusants; for otherwise it were no fit means to
discover the one, more then the other; but to swear temporal allegiance, and
civil obedience, is as well common to Protestants, as to Popish Recusants,
therefore to swear temporal allegiance can not be judged by the King, and
Parliament, to be an apt means for the discovering of Popish Recusants.

3 The Minor proposition is manifest, both by title of the Act it self,
wherein this Oath is commanded, which is; An Act for the better discovering,
and repressing of Popish Recusants; and also by the King himself, who in his
Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, does seem, as shall appear by Cardinal
Bellarmine, to affirm the same. We prove, says Cardinal Bellarmine In the
place before cited.
that this oath does not only contain the Civil Obedience of Subjects toward
their Prince in causes merely temporal, as the King in his Apology
affirms. First by the Kings Edict, wherein the form of this Oath is
contained, and prescribed. For the title of the Edict is this, An Act for the
discovering, and repressing of Papists. Wherefore is it not said, for the
discovering, and repressing of Rebels? but for that the end, why this Oath was
devised, is not the discovering of those, who deny Civil Obedience, which is
proper to Rebels, but the discovering of those, who deny the spiritual
Supremacy of the King, and acknowledge the spiritual Supremacy of the Pope,
which is known to be proper to Catholics, whom you call Papists. I add
lastly a confirmation In the place before cited. page 12.
hereof out of the words of this Author, to wit, the Kings Majesty; for
although he has a thousand times repeated, that in this oath is only contained
Civil Obedience, nevertheless in the 88. page It is in the English Edition
page 84.
it escaped him unawares, that this Oath was devised to forbid the people to
drink so deeply in the cup of Antichristian fornications. For what do our
Adversaries usually call Antichristian fornicatians, but the reuerencing of the
Popes authority? Therefore not only Civil Obedience, but also the detesting of
spiritual obedience is contained in this Oath.

4 This objection has been long since so largely and fully satisfied in
Tortura Torti, By D. Andrews then Bishop of Cichester, now of Ely. p. 13. et
seq.
or in the Answer to Cardinal Bellarmines book against his Majesty's
Apology for the Oath of Allegiance then published under the name of Matthaeus
Tortus, that I marvel, with what boldness learned Lessius, if he did see
the aforesaid Answer, and especially the English Recapitulator of Lessius,
(who, at that time, when this Answer came forth, living in this kingdom,
did, as it is probable, both see it, and read it) durst presume to inculcate
again so nakedly the self same objection.

5 The whole force therefore of this objection is only grounded on the bare
title of the Act of Parliament, wherein the taking of this Oath is commanded.
But if it had pleased Cardinal Bellarmine, and Lessius, to have perused, not
only the title of the Act, but also the whole Act it self (which undoubtedly,
according to the received rule of the Civil Law related in the first Chapter,
Sec. 2. nu. 2.
they ought to have done, before they had delivered their judgment concerning
the whole Oath, or any part thereof, for that it is an uncivil part, says the
Law, Leg. Inciuile F. de legibus.
to give an answer, or judgment, concerning any one particular clause of the
Law, unless the whole law be first perused) they might most evidently have
perceived, what was the end, and intent of the Parliament in framing this Oath
of Allegiance, and that their objection taken from the end, and reason of the
Oath, is vain, frivolous, and of no force at all.

6. For first it is manifest, that in this Act of Parliament are enacted many
laws, and Cardinal Bellarmine himself numbreth fourteen, whereof the far
greater part do not appertain to the taking of this Oath, but only to the
discovering, and repressing of Popish Recusants for points of Religion; And
therefore the Act might rightly be so entitled, by reason of the greater part
of the Laws therein contained, according to that vulgar Maxim of the
Philosophers, Denominatio fit ex maiori part. Denomination, or the imposing of
names is to be made from the greater part. Wherefore no forcible argument can
be drawn from the title of the Act to prove that the Oath, which is the least
part of the laws comprehended in that Act, was either devised to discover, and
repress popish Recusants, or that it contains more then the profession of
civil obedience.

7. But if Cardinal Bellarmine, and Lessius had diligently considered not
only the title of the whole Act, wherein, as we have said, very many laws are
contained, but also the Preamble to this particular Law for taking the Oath,
which Preamble does vertually imply the title thereof, they might easily have
perceived, what was the end, for which the Parliament framed this Oath: For the
Preamble to the Law for taking the Oath, is by the Parliament expressed in
these words: And for the better trial, how his Majesty's Subjects stand
affected in point of their Loyalty, and due obedience, Be it also enacted etc.
This therefore was the true end, and meaning of the King and Parliament in
framing this Oath, to make a trial what Catholics were loyal Subjects, and
who were disloyal. They had long before clear and manifest means by many
laws established in this Kingdom, as by the Oath of the Kings Supremacy in
causes Ecclesiastical, by the Law for repairing to the Protestant Churches
once every month, and by many such like, to discover Catholics, whom they call
Papists, and Popish Recusants in points of Religion, without devising such an
unfit, and altogether insufficient means, as is the taking of this Oath of
Allegiance.

8. Secondly, that it may clearly appear how weak and unsound is this
argument, which is drawn from the bare title of the Act, to prove that this
Oath contains in it more, then civil Obedience, be it so as these men say,
that not only the title of the Act in general, wherein nevertheless many
other laws appertaining to Religion are, as we said before, contained, but
also the title of the Oath it self in particular be, for the discovering, and
repressing of popish Recusants, yet what from hence can be rightly inferred to
impugn the Oath, I cannot truly in any wise perceive. And if Cardinal
Bellarmine do demand, if this Oath contain only civil Obedience, why then is
the title thereof, an Act for the discovering, and repressing of popish
Recusants, and not rather for the discovering of Rebels, and of such as deny
civil Obedience, which is proper to Rebels? To this question both the
Parliament it self, and also the Kings Majesty have fully answered, as any
man may easily perceive, who shall but slightly read over his Majesty's
Apology, and the very next words of the Parliament, which do immediately
follow the title of the aforesaid Act. And because the words of the Parliament
are in effect al one with those which his Majesty has published to the whole
Christian world, it shall be sufficient at this time to rehearse his Majesty's
words for the clearing of this matter.

9. And although, says he, In his Apology. page 2. number. 2.
the only reason these Traitors gave for plotting so heinous an attempt, was
the zeal they carried to the Romish Religion; yet were never any other of that
Profession the worse used for that cause, as by our gracious Proclamation
immediately after the discovery of the said fact does plainly appear: only at
the next sitting down again of the Parliament, were there laws made setting
down some such orders, as were thought fit for preventing the like mischief
in time to come. Amongst which a form of Oath was framed to be taken by all my
Subeects, whereby they should make clear profession of their resolution,
faithfully to persist in obedience unto me, according to their natural
Allegiance; to the end that I might hereby make a separation, not only
between all my good Subjects in general, and unfaithful Traitors, that
intended to withdraw themselves from my obedience; but specially to make a
separation between so many of my Subjects, who although they were otherwise
Popishly affected, yet retained in their hearts the print of their natural
duty to their Sovereign; and those, who being carried away with the the like
fanaticall zeal that the Powder Traitors were, could not contain themselves
within the bounds of their natural Allegiance, but thought diversity of
Religion a safe pretext for all kind of Treasons, and rebellions against their
Sovereign. And in his premonition to all Christian Princes, This Oath, says
he, Page 9.
was ordained only for making of a true distinction, between Papists of quiet
disposition, and in all other things good Subjects, and such other Papists, as
in their hearts maintained the like violent bloody Maxims, that the Powder
traitors did.

10, Wherefore, we may freely grant to Cardinal Bellarmine and Lessius, that
the intent of the King and Parliament in framing this Oath was, to discover
Papists, or Popish Recusants, but such Recusants, who refused to give assurance
of their allegiance due to his Majesty, such Popish Recusants, who maintained
in their hearts those bloody Maxims, and opinions, that those barbarous
Powder-traitours did, to murder the Kings Majesty for advancement of
Religion: such Popish Recusants, who do hold it not repugnant to Catholic
faith, that it is in the free power of Subjects, or any other whatsoever to
depose, or if they will, to murder Princes, which be excommunicated, or
deprived by the Pope; such Popish Recusants, who do firmly believe, that
Princes may by the Popes spiritual power be thrust out of their temporal
kingdoms, which they lawfully possess, and that this doctrine is so certain,
that no Catholic can with a good conscience, and without denying the
Catholic faith defend the contrary opinion, and by oath, if need require,
confirm the same. And by this we may clearly perceive the meaning of his
Majesty's words, which Cardinal Bellarmine has wrongfully (I speak with
reverence) retorted against his Majesty, yea and he has shamefully controld
his Majesty's sentence, cutting off half the words of the whole sentence, which
do evidently explain the meaning of the rest. For thus writes his Majesty
In his Apology. page 84.
.

11. And this Oath given upon so urgent an occasion, for the apparent saftie of
me, and my posterity, forbidding my people to drink so deeply Observe those
words of his Majesty, drink so deeply, but that, etc.
in the bitter cup of Antichristian fornications, Cardinal Bellarmine in his
objection leaves out those words, but that they may keep and so forth, which
do plainly declare the meaning of the former.
but that they may keep so much honey in their hearts, as may argue them still
espoused to me their Sovereign, in the maine knot of true allegiance. For his
Majesty in these words does not affirm any other thing, but what in other
places he has often repeated, neither did these words slip from him unawares,
but he spoke them advisedly, and with mature deliberation, to wit, that this
oath was devised, not to forbid his Catholic Subjects, that they should not
reverence at all the Popes spiritual authority, but that they should not
reverence it so excessiuely, Observe those words of his Majesty, drink so
deeply, but that, etc.
but that, they may argue them selves still espoused to his Majesty in the
maine knot of true Allegiance; that they should not reverence it so
excessiuely, that they should believe, that the Pope had authority to give
them leave to bear Arms, and raise tumults against his Majesty, not to
reveal treasons and traitorous Conspiracies against him, and finally to depose
him, or if they will, to murder him, if he should be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope: that they should not reverence it so excessiuely, that
they should imagine, that temporal obedience, and constant allegiance due by
the law of God and nature to every lawful Prince, although he be an heretic,
can not stand long together with Catholic Religion, and with spiritual
obedience due to the Pope by Christ his institution.

12. To the objection therefore in form it is answered, by declaring the Mayor
proposition, whereby also the sense and meaning of the Minor will be very
easily made manifest. For although this oath which is common both to
Protestants and Catholics, or Popish Recusants, can not be a fit means for
the discovering of Popish Recusants in points of Religion, yet it may be a very
fit means for the discovering and distinguishing of Popish Recusants among
themselves in points of their loyalty, and how concerning their allegiance
they are affected toward his Majesty, which was the cheifest, yea and only
intent of the King and Parliament in devising this Oath, and not to distinguish
Catholics from Protestants in points of Religion. And although to swear true
allegia^ce to a temporal Prince, be as well common to Protestants as to
Catholics, as being commanded by the law of God, and nature to all Subjects
toward their lawful Prince, what Religigion soever he does profess; yet, as
in those things, which are required to Civil obedience, and true allegiance
there may be great disagreement in opinions, both among Catholics themselves,
and also among Protestants, as for example, whether civil obedience be due to
a Prince, after he be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope? Whether a
spiritual power has authority to deprive Princes not only of their
kingdoms, but also of their lives? Whether the Pope be supreme temporal
King, and direct Lord in temporals of all the kingdoms of the Christian world,
and such like? So also there may be a great disagreement among them concerning
those things, which Princes may command their Subjects to swear for
confirming of their true Allegiance.

13 And undoubtedly a temporal Prince has full power and authority, to require
of his Subjects, an oath of allegiance, not only in general words, but also
such an oath in particular, which supposing that it be in it self lawful,
the King and State for the preventing of future conspiracies, and tumults in
the Commonwealth, and for the discovering of those Subjects, who are not well
affected in points of their loyalty, shall prudently and probably judge to be
necessary. And because at that time, when this oath was devised, the King and
State (by reason of that barbarous, and altogether inhumane conspiracy of the
Powder Treason, but then newly discovered) had many, and strong reasons offered
them, rather to suspect the loyalty of Catholics, who were the chief
Captains, Authors and Actors of that most detestable treason, then of the
Protestants, therefore the Act, wherein this oath is prescribed, might rightly
be entitled, An Act for the discovering and repressing, not only of Rebels in
general, nor yet of Protestant rebels, but for the discovering, and after they
be dsicouered for the repressing, with grievous punishments, rebellious
Catholics, whom they call Popish Recusants, because their loyalty, as has bin
said, was then through out the whole Kingdom more suspected, then the loytie
of Protestants.

Sect. II.
1. THe second Objection against the oath in general, is taken especially from
the authority of the Popes Holiness, who by his Breues has declared the oath
to be altogether unlawful, which declaration the Kings Majesty taking in
evil part, did set forth an Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, at the first
concealing his name, but afterward he put it forth in his own name,
adjoining thereunto a Premonition to all Christian Kings and Princes. Which his
Apology gave occasion to Cardinal Bellarmine, and many other Divines to
enueigh bitterly against the said Oath, and also the Kings Apology, and to
defend with might and maine the Popes Breues directed to the English
Catholics. His Holiness therefore that now is, Pope Paul the first in his two
Breues directed to the English Catholics, does expressly forbid them to take
the said oath, for that, as he affirms, it must evidently appear unto them
by the words themselves, that it can not be taken without prejudice to the
Catholic faith, and the salvation of their souls, seeing that it conteines
many things which are clearly repugnant to faith, and Salvation. And in this
third Breue directed to Master George Birket Archpraesbyter of the English
Priests, he enioyneth, and commands him, and for this he gives him special
faculty, that he observing certain conditions in that Breue expressed, which
we beneath Nu. 60.
will rehearse, do by the Authority of the Sea Apostolic deprive and declare to
be deprived all those English Priests, and every one of them, who have taken
the said Oath, or have taught, and do teach, that it may lawfully be taken, of
all faculties, and privileges granted to them, or to any of them from the
said Sea Apostolic, or by her authority from any other whatsoever.

2. From hence therefore this argument may be framed.

In doubtful, and disputable matters, especially such, as do merely concern
the Catholic Faith, and the eternal salvation of souls, every Catholic is
bound in conscience to follow the surer part, to wit, that part, wherein there
is no danger of sinning at all, or wherein less danger of sinning can be
feared: But whether this Oath of Allegiance may lawfully, and without danger of
denying the Catholic faith be taken, is at the least wise a doubtful and
disputable matter, and less danger of sinning can be feared by refusing it,
then by taking it, therefore every Catholic is bound in conscience rather to
resuse it, then to take it.

3. The Mayor proposition is evident out of that vulgar Maxim of the Canon
Law, In cap. ad audientiam, et in cap. significati 1. et. 2. de homocidio. et
in cap. Juuenis de sponsalibus.
and approved by all Divines, and Lawyers, that in doubtful matters the surer
part is to be chosen. The Minor also is manifest enough to every Catholic. For
first no Catholic can deny, but that at the least it is a doubtful question,
whether this Oath may lawfully, and without perjury be taken, seeing that not
only the most eminent Divines of these days, as Cardinal Bellarmine,
Gretzer, Lessius, Becanus, and many others, have in their public writings
condemned the same, as impious, sacrilegious, and clearly repugnant to
Catholic Faith, and the salvation of souls, but also the supreme Pastor of
the Church, has, as Lessius Page vltima, and also his Engl sh Recapitulator p
vltima.
, and some others affirm by his Breues expressly defined the same, and that
which no man can deny, has strictly commanded all Catholics not to take the
same, for that it conteines many things, which are clearly repugnant to faith
and Salvation.

4. Secondly, that there is either no danger at all, or at least wise less
danger of sinning by refusing it, then by taking it, is also evident out of the
same Maxim, or principle. For according to all reason, that Catholic does
incur less danger of sinning, who in spiritual matters, and which belong to
the eternal salvation of his soul, as what position is heretical, or not
heretical, what Oath is lawful, or sacrilegious, when action deserves Gods
wrath, or does not deserve it, does follow not only the direction and command
of him, whom God has appointed to be the spiritual Guider, Directer, and
Governor of his soul, but also the universal consent of Catholic Divines,
who do condemn this Oath, as impious, and contrary to Catholic faith, then
he who follows the counsel and command only of a temporal Prince, and
Parliament, (who especially are no Catholics, and to whom although they were
Catholics, the charge of souls is not committed by Christ, neither have they
any authority in spiritual affairs) and the singular opinion of one, or two
Catholic Priests, who also rather for fear, as being detained in prison, or
for some temporal respect, as to please the Prince, in whose kingdom they
live, or to deliver themselves from the troubles of the time, then for any
sufficient reason do hold the Oath to be lawful,

5 Moreover, the danger of loosing for ever the eternal kingdom of Heaven, is
far greater, then the danger of loosing for a time all temporal goods; but
in taking this Oath their is great danger of perjury, and of denying the
Catholic faith, and consequently of loosing the Kingdom of Heaven, in
refusing it there is only danger of loosing all temporal goods, and liberty
for a short time, this statute for taking the Oath being merely penal,
therefore in taking the O th, there is far greater danger; then in refusing
it.

6 This objection does much trouble the consciences of the vnlearnedder sort of
people, who for want of sufficient skill in Divinity, are not able to
discern, what opinion they may with a good conscience follow, when Catholic
Divines themselves do not agree in their opinions. And therefore for the fully
satisfying of timorous consciences, I thought it necessary to examine this
objection somewhat at large, and out of the Doctrine of Catholic Divines to
set down certain general rules, by the which, if they be well observed, any
Catholic man as well unlearned, as learned, may clearly perceive, how he may
with a safe conscience, and without danger of temeritie, or any other crime
follow both in speculation and in practice, this, or that opinion, whereof
there is disagreement among Catholic Divines. And in setting down these
rules, I have for this especial cause chosen to follow before others that most
learned Divine of the society of Jesus Gabriel Vasquez, for that the chief
impugners of this Oath, to wit, the Jesuits will not doubtless condemn the
Doctrine of this famous Divine concerning this point as improbable, both in
regard of his singular learning, and also for that he is one of their own
society.

7 First of all therefore Vasquez 1.2 disp. 62. c. 1. nu. 1.
observes, that among opinions, one is more secure, an other is less secure;
it is called a more safe, or secure opinion, not for that it is more probable,
but because he, that follows it, can commit no sin: As if there be two
contrary opinions concerning restitution, that, which says that any thing is
to be restored, is called the more safe or secure opinion, because in
restoring there can be no offense: and the contrary opinion is said to be the
less secure, because in not restoring there may be some sin committed, and
so in other matters. Likewise disp. 66. c. 4. nu. 21.
the more secure opinion is accounted that, wherein there would be the lesser
sin, then in the contrary, when it is necessary to choose one of those two
opinions, in both which there is sin. For whenever two evils do so meet
together, that of necessity one of them must be chosen, that doubtless is to
be chosen, which otherwise would be the lesser evil, and consequently in
choosing that there can be no sin at all. And the reason thereof is
manifest, for considering that no man can in any case be so perplexed, but that
he may choose one part without any sin, and if of two evils the one must of
necessity be chosen, there is great reason, that we should choose the less, it
follows that we do not sin in the choosing thereof, and so that evil,
which otherwise considered by it self, would be a sin, is in that case no
sin, and therefore that part is the more secure, if it be chosen, when it
occurreth with a greater evil, according to that vulgar Maxim, A lesser evil,
in comparison of a greater, is a kind of good. And of this case you may read
an example in Vasquez in the place last cited.

8. Furthermore, among opinions, one is more probable, an other is less
probable. That is more probable, which has the better grounds; that is less
probable, which although it has not better grounds, yet the grounds thereof
want not sufficient probability. It may therefore fall out, that an opinion,
which is less secure, to wit, wherein perchance there may be sin, be more
probable, and contrariwise, that part wherein there can be no sin, to be
less probable: as in the aforesaid example of making restitution, that part
which says that we ought not to make restitution, may be more probable, that
is, may have better grounds, and yet it is the less secure; and contrariwise
that part, which says, that we ought to make restitution, which is the more
secure, may have the weaker grounds, yea and sometimes it may be altogether
improbable.

9 Secondly, he observes, Disp. 62. cap. 3. nu. 8. et disp. 79. cap. 3. nu.
13. 14.
that to assent to any opinion, or proposition, is nothing else, then to
perceive that there is a greater connection, betwixt the subject and the
predicate in one part of the contradiction, then in the other, or which is all
one, to judge that opinion, or proposition to be true: To dissent, is nohing
else, then to perceive, that there is a greater disconuenience betwixt the
subject, and the predicate in one part of the contradiction, then in the other;
or which is all one, to judge that opinion, or proposition to be false; To
doubt, or to be doubtful of either part, or opinion is neither to perceive,
that there is greater connection, nor greater disconuenience in one part of the
contradiction, then in the other, or which is all one, neither to judge one
part, or opinion to be true, nor false, but to suspend his judgment on both
parts; which proceeds from this, that neither the reasons for the one part,
nor for the other are sufficient to show greater conuenience, then
disconuenience, or to show rather the truth, then the falsehood of either part:
for then the understanding stays, or staggereth, and does not assent more to
the one part ihen to the other. As if to one, who knows not the number of the
stars, this question should be propounded, whether the stars be odd, or
even, he would stacker thereat, and remain doubtful, neither would he give
his judgment thereof, for that he does not perceive the predicate to agree to
the subject or to disagree, or which is all one, he does not perceive whether
part is true or false.

10. Thirdly, he observes, Disp. 62. cap. 3. nu. 10.
that he, who does assent to an opinion by proper, and intrinsecal grounds, or,
which is all one, judges that opinion to be true, although his assent, or
judgment be only probable, (for sometimes the assent may be evident, when the
proofs be evident, and sometimes only probable, when the proofs be only
probable) cannot also assent to the contrary opinion by intrinsecall and
proper grounds, but he may well by extrinsecall grounds judge the contrary
opinion to be probable. Proper and intrinsecall grounds we call the cause of
the thing, or the effect thereof, or the absurdities, and impossibilities, to
which they are driven, who hold the contrary opinion. For all these, and every
one of them do show, that there is a proper connection betwixt the subject, and
the predicate in themselves, or, which is all one, do show that proposition,
or opinion to be more true, then the contrary. Extrinsecall grounds, are
only the authority of those men, who defend the contrary opinion, by reason
of which, we do judge the contrary opinion to be probable. And as it is
impossible for one at the same time to assent to two contrary opinions by
intrinsecall grounds, for so he should at the same time have two contradictorie
judgments of the same thing, which is impossible; so it is not impossible to
assent to one opinion by intrinsecall grounds, and by extrinsecall grounds, to
wit, by reason of the authority of those Doctors, who hold the contrary, to
judge that part to be probable. For these two assents, or judgments, are not
of the same thing, and therefore they are not contradictorie: because the
former assent by intrinsecall grounds, is concerning the truth of the
proposition in it self, or which is al one, concerning the absolute
proposition; as in this, The Pope has not power to depose the King: but the
other assent by extrinsecall grounds is concerning the probability of the
proposition, or which is all one, concerning the modall proposition, as in
this, It is probable, that the Pope has not power to depose the King. And as
this later proposition is not contradictorie to the former, so also the assent
to this later, is not contradictory to the assent of the former.

11. These rules being observed, Vasquez Disp. 62. cap. 4. nu. 12.
affirms first, that if a learned man, who has taken no small pains in
studies, and has also thoroughly seen, and examined the reasons of the
contrary part, shall judge against all other writers, who have gone before him,
that his opinion is the more probable, he may, although it b^ the less secure
opinion, lawfully embrace it, and practice follow it. And this his doctrine he
gathers, as he says, from the common consent of Doctors. And the reason is
manifest; For if one has a sharp wit, and a ripe judgment, and has
thoroughly seen, and diligently examined all the reasons of the contrary part,
and judges them not to be sufficient, he does not seem to commit any
imprudence by following in practice his own opinion, because in moral
matters, which are not certain, but exposed to opinions, he also judges with
maturitie. For we cannot deny, but that a company of Doctors do sometimes
follow an opinion without any choice of reasons, or at the least, not so
exactly considering the reasons; against whom an other Doctor of great
authority may afterward bring into the Schools an opinion, which is by him
with maturitie invented.

12. But if any man upon some light reason, Vasquez cap. 4. nu. 13.
and without due consideration do against all other Doctors embrace an
opinion, which is less secure, he sins doubtless, not for that he judges
against his conscience, as some do think, but for that he judges rashly, and
inconsideratly of that matter, as Navarre Cap. Si quis de poenitentia did. 7.
nu. 50. 51 52.
does well affirm: But when it is to be accounted a rash judgment, and a
light reason, it is left to the judgment of a prudent man. Neither is the
opinion of one Doctor against all others in a doubtful and disputable matter
to be accounted rash, or temerarious, if it be invented upon a mature ground,
or reason. For as well observes Corduba, Lib. 1. quaestion. 6. 17. q. 13.
that opinion is absolutely to be accounted temerarious, not which is contrary
to the common understanding of Scholasticall Doctors, but which is invented
without sufficient ground and reason: for many opinions were in the beginning
invented, and brought into the Schools, which then were not common.
Nevertheless in this matter, to wit, in inuenting new opinions, great
maturitie, or consideration must be observed.

13. Secondly, he affirms and says withal, Cap. 4. nu. 14.
that it is now, and has been long since the common opinion in Schools, that
it is lawful for a learned man to follow in practice against his own opinion,
which he judges to be the more probable, the opinion of others, although
there opinion be the more secure, and also in his judgment the more probable,
so that it be not void and destitute of all reason, and probability.
Nevertheless, that one may lawfully follow in practice Cap. 13. nu. 11
another man's opinion against his own, he must frame in his understanding a
particular, and determinate judgment, or dictamen of conscience, by which
determinate judgment he do believe, and persuade his conscience that it is
lawful for him in that case to follow in practice the opinion of others; for
otherwise if he should not have this determinate judgment, he should do
against his conscience, which in no case is lawful. And this particular
judgment, or dictamen of conscience no man can frame, or deduce from proper, or
intrinsicall grounds, if he persevere in his own opinion; because it is
impossible, that with an universal judgment, wherewith one by intrinsical
grounds believes that such an action in universal is unlawful, he should
also by intrinsecall grounds have a particular judgment, by which he may
believe, that particular action comprehended under that universal to be
lawful. Therefore this particular dictamen of conscience, by which he
persuades himself, that it is lawful for him in his time and place to follow
an other man's opinion against his own opinion in universal, must of necessity
be had by extrinsecall grounds, to wit, for that he believes the contrary
opinion to be probable in regard of the authority of those men who do follow
it.

14. And this assertion Vasquez Cap. 4. nu. 14.
proves, because for this only cause that any opinion is probable, and
defended by men skillful in that Art, and grounded upon probable reason, as we
cannot justly be reprehended for defending it in Schools, so also with a safe
conscience we may follow it in practice. For as in speculatiue things any man
may Medina 1a. 2ae q 19. ar. 6.
without any note of error follow the opinion of other men, who are skillful
in that Art against his own opinion, so also in moral, or practical things
any man may without any spot of sin, or imprudencie, follow the opinion of
prudent men against his own opinion.

15. But to know, when the opinion of other men is probable enough, that a
learned man may in practice follow it against his own (for if the opinion of
other men be not probable, no man says, that any man may in practice follow
it) it is here by the way to be observed first, Cap. 4. nu. 17.
that it must not be a singular opinion, and of one only Doctor. For if I
like not the proper, or intrinsecall grounds of that singular opinion of one
only Doctor, but of the contrary, and see it to be grounded only upon the
authority of one Doctor, I ought not to account it probable to this effect,
that I may prudently follow it in practice against my own, and the common
opinion of all others. He said [to this effect, etc] for although the contrary
opinion may be probable to the Author thereof according to that, which has
been said before, In this sect. nu. 11.
yet to me, who believe the contrary opinion to be true, it ought not to be
accounted probable, so that I may prudently follow it in practice. Secondly, it
must be such an opinion, which a learned man may lawfully follow against his
own, that it be not commonly thought to contain in it any error, but yet to
have in it probability, and so that it be an opinion not utterly rejected, and
hissed out of Schools. Thirdly, We may then at last with far greater reason
follow the opinion of others against our own, when we perceive the Authors of
the contrary opinion to have seen and considered all the grounds and reasons
for our opinion, and that they have in some sort answered them, and that they
were not convinced by them. For then we may justly think, that we may lawfully
and prudently follow in practice the opinion of other men against our own:
neither ought we to suppose, that our reasons are evident demonstrations, and
which do make the contrary opinion to be void of all probability.

16. Nevertheless it is greatly to be observed, says Vasquez, Cap. 4. nu. 18.
that it may sometimes fall out, that the ancient Writers, whose opinions are
now in controversy, did not consider some reason, law, or decree, which is of
great force against their opinion, but contrariwise that the later Doctors,
being convinced with that reason, or law, do now defend the contrary opinion.
If therefore a learned man, seeing that law, or decree, or considering that new
reason, does defend the opinion of the later Writers against the ancient, he
can not follow in practice the opinion of the ancient writers against his own
opinion: because the opinion of the ancient, who have not seen or considered
that decree or reason, ought not now to be accounted probable. But if some
later Writers have observed the objection taken from that law, and decree
against the opinion of the ancient, and have endeavored to answer it, we
ought not to judge the opinion of the ancient writers to be void of
probability, so that we may not lawfully follow it. In the same manner, if a
learned man has only considered some peculiar argument against the contrary
opinion, which seems to him to be altogether insoluble, he ought not
therefore to judge the contrary opinion to be improbable, so that he may not
lawfully follow it, because he ought not by his own proper judgment to think
the opinion of other men to be improbable.

17. And for the same reason, a learned man may lawfully follow in practice
Cap. 4. nu. 18. 19.
the probable opinion of other men against his own, not only when he has a
determinate assent of his own opinion, but also if by intrinsecall grounds he
has an assent of neither part, but remains doubtful of both. Yea, in this
case he may with far better reason follow in practice the probable opinion of
other men, on either part, as he shall please, although it be the less
secure, so that by extrinsecall grounds he have a determinate judgment or
dictamen of conscience, that it is lawful for him to follow that opinion,
because he sees either part to have his learned and prudent Authors and
Patrons, who do embrace it as probable. For if it be lawful to follow in
practice the opinion of other men, against our own opinion, whereof we have a
determinate assent, because we think the contrary opinion, by reason of
extrinsecall grounds to be probable, much more will it be lawful, when by
intrinsecal grounds we have no contrary assent, to follow in practice the
opinion of other men.

18. Thirdly he affirms, Cap. 5. nu. 25.
that it is not necessary for a learned man to follow in practice his own
opinion against others, or the opinion of others against his own, to have no
fear of the contrary part, but he may lawfully follow in practice an opinion,
having only a probable assent, although he has some fear that the contrary
part be true, and although he has this fear not only by intrinsecall
grounds, but also by extrinsecall. I purposely said with fear of the contrary
part, and I did not say with doubt or staggering, because if any man were
doubtful concerning any action, whether it were lawful, or not, he could not
do that action with a safe conscience, for that he could not have a
particular, and determinate judgment, and dictamen of conscience with an
assent, but also he should have a doubt concorning that particular action,
whether it were lawful, or not, but no man can lawfully do any thing with a
doubtful conscience, as Vasquez does show beneath Disp. 65.
, and all men do confess.

19. For the better understanding whereof the same Vasquez does observe, Disp.
62. cap. 5. nu. 26.
that it is one thing to fear, and another to stagger and doubt; for to doubt
and stagger, as also has been said before, In this sect. number. 9.
is to be in suspense betwixt both parts, and to give to neither of them any
determinate assent, for that neither part seems to be the truer, and with
this staggering or doubtful conscience, no man can lawfully do any action,
Vasquez disp. 65. cap. 1. and disp. 66. cap. 1.
unless he follow the surer part: for otherwise he should in his conscience
expose himself to danger of offending God, and consequently he should in his
conscience offend, according to that saying of the wise man, Ecclesiasticus
cap. 3.
who loves danger, shall perish therein. For as he, who does any action,
doubting in his conscience, whether it displeases his friend, or no, does
offend against the law of friendship, and seems to love more dearly that
person, for whose sake he does that action, then his friend, whom he doubts
it will offend; so also he that does any thing doubting whether it be a sin,
and consequently displeasing to God, offends against the law of friendship
toward God, and seems to love him more dearly, for whose sake he does that
action, then God, whom he doubts it will offend.

20. But to fear one part to be true, does not exclude a determinate assent to
the contrary part, but to fear consists in this, that one reflecting in his
mind upon the reasons of that part, whereunto he assenteth, thinks that they
are not evident, but only probable, and therefore he also thinks, that the
contrary part may in very deed be true, although the reasons thereof do not
yet show the same, So that to doubt does include no assent at all, but to fear
implies two assents; the one, whereby he judges, that the opinion which he
follows is in very deed true; the other, where by he judges that it may in
very deed be false, for that the reasons thereof are not conuincing, but only
probable. Seeing therefore that this fear of one part, although it be
express, does not exclude a determinate assent to the other part, and with
every probable assent, which is not evident, there may be fear, it follows,
that any action may be lawfully done with this fear, considering that,
according to the doctrine of all Divines, an evident assent, which in moral
matters can hardly be had, is not always necessary to do lawfully any action.

21. And what has been said concerning a learned man, that he may with a safe
conscience do any action, although he fear it to be unlawful, the same also
is for the same reason to be understood of an unlearned man, who perceiving
that there is diversity of opinions among Doctors concerning the same matter,
must of necessity have some fear, although he does by extrinsecall grounds
determinately assent to one part without any doubt at all. Wherefore that
vulgar Maxim of the Divines and Canonists, In doubtful matters the surer part
is to be chosen, Vasquez does understand of true doubts, whereof we have no
determinate assent, or probable dictamen of conscience, for in disputable
matters, and which are in controversy, which the vulgar sort do sometimes
call doubtful, (taking doubtful for all that, which is not certain and
evident) it suffices to follow that part, which is secure, or which is all
one, a probable opinion, neither is it necessary to follow the surer part, or
the more probable, or more common opinion, as out of the doctrine of Vasquez
we now have showed. For as no man is bound, as well says Bartholomaeus Fumus
in his Aurea Armilla, Verbo opinio number. 2.
to do always that, which is better, but it suffices to do that which is
good, so no man is bound to follow always the better opinion, but it suffices
to follow that opinion, which some skillful doctors judge to be true.

22. Fourthly, and lastly he affirms Disp. 62. cap 8. nu. 42.
(in which also assertion the Divines do commonly agree) that it is sufficient
for an unlearned man, who is not able of himself to examine the reasons and
grounds of those questions, which are in controversy among Catholic Doctors,
to follow that opinion, which he thinks to be probable, and which he sees is
taught by virtuous and skillful men in that art, although it be neither the
more secure, nor the more common opinion. He purposely said, [by skillful men
in that art] for as well observes Michael Salon 2a. 2. q. 63. ar. 4.
controuers. 2 conclus. 4.
, That man's opinion is not forthwith to be accounted probable, for that he has
taken Degree in Divinity, or Canon law, because it happens sometimes, that
also some of these are unlearned. The reason which Vasquez brings to prove
this assertion, is, Because if a learned and virtuous man may safely follow his
own opinion; although it be the less secure, against the opinion of others,
why may not also an unlearned man, who ought according to reason trust to the
learning, and honesty of that learned and virtuous man, follow in practice his
opinion? For every man, although unlearned, does well perceive that Doctor to
be virtuous, and that with a safe conscience, he follows that opinion in
practice, and in giving counsel to others, therefore also the unlearned man
may from thence frame a particular judgment, or dictamen of conscience, whereby
he may believe, that it is lawful for him to do that, which he judges
lawful for a virtuous and learned man to do. And from hence also Vasquez does
gather, That although that Doctor, whose counsel the unlearned man demands,
does affirm, that the opinion which he follows and which he propounds to
the unlearned man to follow, is against the common opinion, yet the unlearned
man may lawfully follow in practice his opinion: For the reason before alleged
does also in this case prove the very same. And therefore most learned Navarre
before Cap 3. sect. 3. number. 14.
cited, did very well affirm, That in the court of conscience to the effect of
not sinning it suffices to choose for true, his opinion, whom for just cause
we think to be a man of a good conscience, and of sufficient learning.

23. From this doctrine of Vasquez it follows first, that if a learned man,
and who has for a long time studied Divinity, may lawfully, and with a safe
conscience follow in practice his own opinion against the opinion of all other
Divines, with far greater reason may he lawfully follow in practice his own
opinion, when diverse other learned men do agree with him in the same opinion.

24. Secondly, it follows, that it is one thing to defend an opinion, and to
follow it in practice, thinking it to be true; and an other to defend an
opinion, and to follow it in practice, thinking only that it is probable. For
it may happen, that one may be truly doubtful, and by intrinsecall grounds
have no determinate judgment, or assent, that such an opinion is true, or
false, and yet he may be morally certain, that the same opinion is probable,
for that he sees it to be defended by virtuous and learned men.

25. Thirdly, it follows, that those learned Catholics, and others not so
learned, who trusting to the learning and honesty of them, do follow in
practice their opinion, are not forthwith to be censured of Heresy, error,
or temeritie, when they depart from the more common, the more probable, and the
more secure opinion of other Catholic Doctors, yea although this common
opinion seem to be grounded upon any Decree, Law, or Canon of Pope, or
General Council; which Decree, Law, or Canon those learned Divines have
seen, examined, and answered thereunto, although their answer does not
satisfy the contrary side.

26. Wherefore the same Vasquez a little beneath Disp. 79. cap. 1. and disp. 86.
, conformably to the doctrine, which here he teaches, disputes the
controversy of infused habites two manner of ways: First, of the absolute
question, to wit, whether according to his opinion there be certain habits
infused in our soul by God alone; secondly, of the modal question, to wit,
whether it be certain, or only probable, that such habits are infused in our
souls by God alone, and he answers, that it is a constant, without
controversy, and undoubted opinion of the Schoole-me^, which also he himself
allows, that there be certain virtues which we call Theological, to wit,
Faith, Hope and Charity, which of their own nature are infused by God alone;
and nevertheless he affirms Disp. 79. cap. 1. et disp. 86. c. 1
, that this opinion is only the more probable, although some Doctors do hold
it to be certain, and of faith. And he in the same place disputing the same
question concerning moral virtues affirms, Disp. 86. cap. 1.
that it is the more probable, and the more common opinion, and to which he
also with the same Doctors does subscribe, that there be also moral virtues,
which of their own nature are infused by God alone; and yet he blames
certain Thomists, for condemning the contrary opinion as temerarious. But
although, says he, Disp. 86. cap. 2.
I think this opinion to be the more probable, and thereunto with the
aforesaid Doctors I do subscribe, yet the severity, not to say, rashness of
certain Thomists, does much displease me, who do so adhere to this opinion,
that they are not afraid upon slight and weak grounds, to censure the
contrary opinion as temerarious. From whence it is clearly inferred, that,
according to Vasquez Doctrine, the constant, common, without controversy, and
undoubted opinion of Scholasticall Divines may sometimes without any note of
temeritie be impugned, seeing that the contrary opinion may now, and then be
probable.

27 To come therefore nearer to the proposed objection, which does consist of
two principal parts, the first that his Holiness has by his Breues condemned
this Oath, as clearly repugnant to faith, and Salvation; the second, that also
the chief learned men of these times have in their public writings censured
it in the same manner, it is to be supposed first, that although it be in
these days the more common opinion among Catholic writers, that the Pope is
above a General Council, and that he can not err in his definitions, when he
prescribes to the whole Church any thing to be necessarily believed as of
faith, for that in such definitions he is directed by the infalliable
assistance of the Holy Ghost, in so much that some Divines, among whom is
Cardinal Bellarmine Lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 2. in fine.
, do over boldly avouch, that the contrary opinion is altogether erroneous,
and most near to heresy, and almost of faith, and that it can not be excused
from great temeritie, and that they who defend it, do show them selves, to be
scarce Catholics Li. 2. de Council. cap 17.
, yet notwithstanding these too too severe censures, the contrary opinion is
not void of all probability, seeing that it is very vehemently maintained by
most grave, most learned, most virtuous, and ancient Divines, and Lawyers, to
wit, by Pope Adrian the sixth In quaest de Confirmat.
, by the Cardinal of Cambray De authorit. Eccles.
, by the Cardinal of Cusa De Concord. Catholica lib. 2. cap. vltimo.
, by Cardinal Panormitane In cap. significasti extra de electione.
, otherwise called Abbot Panormitane, by the Cardinal of Florence Ibidem.
master to Panormitane, by Alphonsus Tostatus In cap. 18. Matthew q 108. et in
defensorio part 2. cap. 69.
Bishop Abulensis, by John Gerson In suis tractatibus de potest. Eccles.
, John Mayor In suis tractatibus de potest. Eccles.
, Ioannes Parisiensis In suis tractatibus de potest. Eccles.
, Iacobus Almainus In suis tractatibus de potest. Eccles.
, and others.

28 But if any one reply, as I have heard one of our Countriemen answer, that
indeed in times past this second opinion for the reason alleged was probable,
yet now it being against the torrent of Scholasticall Divines, it is altogether
improbable, and can not be defended by any Catholic, without some note at the
least of temeritie, Hear what Franciscus Victoria a religious man of the Order
of Saint Dominicke, a most learned Divine of this age For he dyed in the year
of our Lord 1546
, and as Posseuine Verbo Franciscus Victoria.
the Jesuit calls him, a public, and indeed famous professor of Divinity
in the University of Salamanca writes concerning this matter: There are two
opinions, says Victoria Relect. 4. de potest. Papae, et Concilij propositio 3a.
, concerning the comparison of the Popes power; the one is of S. Thomas, and
many his followers, and of other learned Doctors both Divines, and Canonists,
that the Pope is above a Council; the other is the common opinion of the
Divines of Paris, and also of many Doctors, both Divines, and Canonists, as of
Panormitane, and others, contrary to the former, that a Council is above the
Pope. It is no place at this present to dispute whether of them be the truer. I
think that both of them is a probable opinion. See also what in the Preface of
my Apologeticall answer Nu. 28.
I related to this purpose out of Navarre a most famous Divine of this age.

29 Yea also Cardinal Bellarmine, in my judgment not much agreeable to
himself herein, although he brings the Council of Florence, and of
Laterane under Pope Leo the tenth to prove, that the Pope is above a General
Council, which two Councels are in my opinion the strongest arguments, which
he brings to confirm this Doctrine, yet very clearly confirms that,
which we have said, in these words: And although, says he Lib. 2. de Council.
cap. 13.
, this question seems to be afterward defined in the Council of Florence,
and in the last Laterane Council, yet because the Council of Florence, has
not, so expressly defined it, and concerning the Council of Laterane, which
has most expressly defined it, some make a doubt, whether it were truly a
General Council, therefore even to this day it remains a question also
among Catholics. Truly it is not agreeable to Christian charity to impeach
upon slight grounds, virtuous and learned Catholics of manifest error, great
temeritie, and with this greiuous censure, to be scarce Catholics. Our
school, says that most learned Melchior Canus, Lib 8. de lo cis cap. 4 out of
Tully Lib. 3. de Officijs.
gives us great liberty, that what soever seems to be most probable we may
by our right defend, but it is not lawful for us to condemn rashly* and
lightly those, who do hold, against us.

30 But this supposition we do not therefore here put down; for that we
think it necessary to the full satisfying of this present objection, but to
repress the rashness of some few of our English Catholics, who upon
indiscreete zeal toward the Sea Apostolic, are not afraid to the reproach
of the Sea Apostolic, and contempt of Catholic Religion, publicly to
affirm, that every Popes Breue does define that thing, which it prescribes,
to be believed as of faith, and fear not to charge with inobedience, schism,
yea, and also with heresy those Catholics, who for any cause, or for what
pretext soever do not obey those Breues; and moreover to show, that from the
authority of the Popes Breues no sufficient or demonstratiue argument, as also
beneath it shall more plainly appear, can be brought to prove, that those
things, which are therein declared, commanded, or forbidden, do belong to
Catholic faith; and consequently that this oath is not for that cause
repugnant to Catholic faith, for that the Pope has by his Breues expressly
declared, that it is flat contrary to faith, although we should also freely
grant, that his Holiness did not only by his Breues declare his opinion, but
also did out of the Chair define the same; seeing that many learned, and
virtuous Catholics do probably defend, that the Popes definitions are subject
to error, if he define without a General Council; for that according to these
Doctors, Christ has not promised him the spirit of truth to prescribe
infallibly any thing to the universal Church, unless he as head of the
universal Church does concur with the mystical body of Christ, or with all
the memhers thereof, which a General Council does represent, to propound to
the universal Church any Doctrine to be necessarily believed as of faith: And
that Christ praying for S. Peter, that his faith should not fail Luc. 22.
, did not pray for the person of Saint Peter, but for the universal Church,
whom Saint Peter did represent Petrus de Aliaco de Authoritate Eccles. part 3.
ca. 1. Mayor de Author. Concilio paru a principio. Almainus de potest. Eccles.
q 1. cap 16.
, according to that saying of Saint Augustine Tract. 50. in Joan. ad ca. 12.
no^ long a fine, et sermon. 15 de Apost. Petro, et Paulo.
recorded in the Canon law, 23. q. 1. Can. quodcunque.
Peter, when he received the keys, represented the holy Church; And again,
In Psalm. 108.
Some things are said, which seem to belong to the Apostle Saint Peter, and
yet they have not a plain understanding, but when they are referred to the
Church, whose person he is acknowledged in figure to represent, for the
Primacie, which he had over the Disciples, as is that, I will give to thee the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and if there be any of this like sort.

31 Secondly, it is to be supposed that the Popes Breues (which, as Hugolinus
Part. 2. de Ce^suris cap. 6. in principio.
notes, are nothing else, then the Popes letters, which are made only by his
Secretaries, and are sealed by the Pope in red wax with the Fishers ring To
wit, with a ring wherein is engraven the picture of St Peter fishing.
, and they have the same force, which the Popes letters have which are written
in answer to other letters, and they are for that cause called Breues,
because they are written briefly, and in few words; whereas the Popes Bulls are
so called, for that they are signed with a round piece of lead hanged on the
parchment, A round tablet hanged about childrens necks for an ornament, is in
Latin called Bulla.
wherein the pictures of Saint Peter, Rebuf. in prax. benif. 3. part. nu. 4. et
sec. Archidiac. et G^n minia. in cap. quis nesciat. did. 11.
and Saint Paul are impressed) can not contain in them any thing of moment
besides one of these three things. For first the Pope by his Breues does either
define something to be necessarily believed as of faith by them, to whom he
writes, or secondly, he commands them some thing, which they must observe;
or thirdly, he only by the way of counsel exhorts, and admonishes them, and
declares his opinion, that such a thing is to be believed or observed by them.

32 And to begin with the first Breue, which was dated the three and twentieth
of October in the year 1606, Cardinal Bellarmine Li 4 de Romans Pont. cap. 4.
et 5. et lib 2 de Conc. l. ca. 12.
, Melchior Canus Lib. 5. de locis cap. 5 q. 4.
, and the rest of those Divines, who hold, that the Pope can not err in his
public definitions, although he define without a General Council, do withal
affirm, that to make the Popes definitions in points of Doctrine to be
infallibly true, and not exposed to error, two things chiefly are required;
first, that the Popes decrees, wherein he prescribes any thing to be believed
as of faith, be directed to the whole Church; the second, that he have an
intention to bind all Christians undoubtedly to believe it, as a most certain
doctrine of faith: and if either of these two be wanting* it is the constant
opinion of all Divines, that the Popes decrees or definitions are subject to
error, and do not make the thing which he, decrees, to be of faith. For in
his particular judgments opinions, and decrees, which do not appertain to
the whole Church, but to some private persons, Bishops, or particular Churches
all Divines do acknowledge that the Popes may err.

33 We also grant, and that willingly, says Canus In the place cited.
, that not forthwith, if any thing be contained in the volumes of the Canon
law, it is to be believed as a doctrine of faith; But then especially when
either the Judges use words which declare their opinion, or when there
answeares are not directed to the universal Church, but to private Churches,
and Bishops. For they are to be understood only in this case to pronounce of
faith, when the sentence belongs to all Christians, when it binds all. For
infallibility is promised, and granted to them who are by God appointed to be
judges of faith, not for private Churches, whereof every one may err, but for
the Universal Church, which can not err. Therefore the Doctrine of Popes, and
Councels if it be propounded to the whole Church, if it be also propounded with
an obligation to be believed, then does their sentence concern a point of
faith. Wherefore also in General Councels, says Cardinal Bellarmine Lib. 2.
de Council. cap. 12.
, the greatest part of the Acts do not appertain to faith. For neither are of
faith the disputations which go before, nor the reasons which are added, nor
those things which are brought to explicate, and illustrate, but only the bare
decreees, and those not all, but those only which are propounded as of faith.

34 For in the Decrees of Popes, says Canus Lib 6. De locis cap. 8. ad 4.
, two things are to be distinguished, the first is the intention, and
conclusion of the decree, the other is the reason, and cause which the Pope
gives of that thing which he has decreed. And in the conclusion the Popes can
not err, if they define the question from the Apostolical tribunal. But if the
Popes reasons be not necessary, not to say, apt, probable, fitting, we must
not make any regard thereof. For the Fathers do not always in a question of
faith bring necessary reasons, but sometimes probable. And it is easy to
discern (say the aforesaid Authors Canus lib. 5. q. 4. et Bellarmine, lib. 2.
de To. Pont. ca 12.
) by the words of the Council, or Pope, when any decree is propounded to all
Christians to be believed as of faith: as if those who hold, or believe I said,
(Who (...) or believe) for it may fall out, that as well a General Council, as
the Pope, may to avoid scandals, and schisms excommunicate all persons what
soever, who do teach, or preach such a Doctrine, and yet not therefore, that
they intend thereby to define that Doctrine to be certainly believed as of
faith, or that those, who obstinately do teach, or preach the contrary be
accounted heretics Whereof see Canus in the place before cited concerning the
Doctrine of Caietane about the preparation to the receiving of the Eucharist
and Suarez tom. 2. in 3. part disp. 3. sect. 6 in fine, concerning the Doctrine
of those who should obstinately affirm, that either of those two opinions, to
wit, that the B. Mother of God was preserved from original sin or was
conceived therein, is of faith.
the contrary should be excommunicated, or judged and reputed for heretics,
or if any thing be affirmed expressly, and properly to be firmly believed by
all the faithful, or to be received as a doctrine of the Catholic faith, or
in other like words, to be contrary to the Gospel, and doctrine of the
Apostles. Be affirmed I say, says Canus, not by opinion, but by a certain,
and firm decree: But when none of these things be affirmed, it is not
certain, that it is a point of faith.

35 Now by the express words of these Breues it is evident, that it was not
his Holiness meaning in these Breues to define, and determine by any public
decree, as an infallible doctrine, and to be firmly believed by all Christians
as a point of faith, that this Oath contains in it many things, which are
clearly repugnant to faith, and salvation; both because they are written only
to the Catholics of this Kingdom, for which cause they are by Ioannes
Eudoemon the Jesuit In praefatione Paraleli To^ti.
rightly called private letters, and therefore according to the Doctrine of
Cardinal Bellarmine they are subject to error, although they should contain
an express, and manifest definition; and also for that there is no one word
comprehended in those Breues, which can signify any such decree, or definition
of faith.

36 And although in the first Breue, to which the other two have relation, the
Pope forbids all English Catholics to take this oath, for that it
contains many things, which are clearly repugnant to faith, and Salvation;
yet notwithstanding this prohibition, it being not any decree of faith, whereof
now we treat, but a precept belonging to manners, whereof presently we will
speak, and moreover those words, [for that it contains many things, which
are clearly repugnant to faith, and saluation] being only the reason of this
decree, (which reason according to the aforesaid Doctrine of Cardinal
Bellarmine, and Canus even in those decrees of faith, which by a General
Council are propounded to the whole Church, may be false, although the decree
it self be certainly true, for that the Councels may allege the reason of
the decree according to their fallible opinion, but the decree it self of
faith is grounded in their most certain judgment, and in the infallible
assistance of the holy Ghost) it is most evident by the words of the Breue it
self, that no infallible definition of faith is contained therein, although
we should grant it to be most certain, and not only probable, that the Pope
in his definitions can not err, and also that this Breue was written not only
to the English Catholics, but also to the universal Church.

37. Concerning the second, to wit the Popes command, whereby he forbids
all Catholics to take this Oath, for that it contains many things, which are
clearly repugnant to faith and Salvation, to know what force this precept has
to bind, it is also to be supposed first, that what we have already said
concerning the Popes definitions in determining matters of faith, and which are
to be believed, is with like proportion to be understood of his decrees
concerning manners, or of his precepts, and laws which he commands to be
observed. And* first, that it is not an improbable opinion, which teaches that
the Pope may err in his definitions of Faith, or in those things, which he
propounds to the whole Church to be believed of Faith, if he define without
the approbatio^ of the universal Church, or of a General Council, which
represents the universal Church, seeing that it is maintained by most grave,
most virtuous, and most learned Divines: so also that is not an improbable
opinion, which affirms, that the Pope can err in his decrees, laws and
precepts of manners, which he prescribes to be necessarily observed by the
whole Church, if he enact laws without the approbation of the Universal
Church, or of a General Council, which represents the universal Church,
seeing that most grave, most virtuous, and most learned Divines do defend this
opinion.

38. Secondly, we do not therefore here put down this supposition, for that
we think it necessary for the full satisfying of this present objection, but
to repress the rashness of some few of our English Catholics, who are not
afraid to charge with inobedience, schism, yea and also with heresy those
Catholics, who do not obey every Popes Breue, and moreover to show, that from
the authority of the Popes Breues, and from the Popes command no sufficient, or
demonstratiue argument can be brought to prove, that those Catholics, who
either have taken the Oath, or think that it may lawfully be taken, are not
to be accounted Catholics, although they should approve the Oath in that
sense, wherein his Holiness has condemned it, which nevertheless they do not,
as more clearly it shall appear beneath, Nu. 51. et seq
seeing that many learned, grave, and virtuous Catholics do hold, and that
not without probability, that the Pope may err as well in prescribing to the
whole Church precepts of manners, as in propounding definitions of faith, if he
define, or prescribe Laws without the approbation of the universal Church, or
of a general Council, which represents the universal Church.

39 But supposing for this present that this opinion for the Popes infallible
judgment, both in imposing to the whole Church precepts of manners, and also
in defining matters of faith to be not only the more common, and the more
probable opinion, but also to be certain, and most near to faith, as
Cardinal Bellarmine, without sufficient ground does affirm, yet according to
the former doctrine of the said Cardinal Bellarmine, Canus, and other
Catholic Divines, this is to be understood only in case he prescribe Laws to
the whole Church: For in his particular judgments, and decrees of manners,
which are imposed not upon the whole Church, but upon some private persons, or
Churches, they grant that not only the Pope, but also a general Council, or
the Church may through ignorance err, the Church may err, I say, says Canus,
Lib. 5. de locis cap. 5. q. 5. concl 3.
not only in her judgment of Facts, (as whither such a one is to be promoted
to a Bishopric, or was rightly promoted, whither he committed such a sin,
whither he has lost his faculties, and such like) but also in her private
precepts, and laws themselves. And the true and proper reason of this
assertion is alleged by Pope Innocentius the third in a decree of the Canon
Law. Can. a nobis 2. de sent excom.
The judgment (says he) of God is always grounded upon truth, which neither
deceives, nor is deceived, but the judgment of the Church is now and then led
by opinion, which oftentimes does deceive, and is deceived, for which cause it
happens sometimes, that he who is bound before God, is not bound before the
Church and he that is free before the Church, is bound by an ecclesiastical
Censure. Wherefore I do not approve, says Canus q. 5. cit. co^cl. 2
, all Church-lawes, I do not commend all punishments, censures,
excommunications, suspensions, Irregularities, Interdicts. I know that there be
some such laws, which if they want nothing else, yet doubtless they want
prudence, and discretion.

40 This nevertheless is diligently to be observed, that although it be most
probable, that the Pope may err in his private Judgments, laws, decrees and
precepts, and both through ignorance and malice, says Canus In fine concl. 1
ae.
, be deceived and abuse the power of the keys, yet to affirm forthwith
without very great, and sufficient reason, that he has erred in his private
laws, and decrees is temerarious, scandalous and irreligious: As also there
can be made no doubt, but that Secular Princes may now and then err in
enacting temporal Laws, yet he that without very great and sufficient reason
should affirm, that the Prince has erred in enacting this, or that law,
should justly be accounted a temerarious, scandalous, and seditious person. But
supposing that the Pope cannot err in his definitions, laws and decrees,
which he prescribes not to the whole Church, but only to private persons, or
Churches, if one moved with very great, and pregnant reasons should affirm,
that he in defining, commanding, or forbidding this or that thing has erred,
and through ignorance, inconsideration, or evil information was deceived, he
ought not therefore to be condemned of temerity, scandal, or any other crime.

41. Secondly, it is to be supposed out of the Doctrine of Suarez before cap.
1. sect: 4.
related, that every decree of the Pope, or Council belonging to manners, is
either a mere constitutiue precept, to wit, which of it self makes the act,
which it forbids, to be unlawful for this only cause, for that it is
forbidden by that precept, as is the eating of flesh in Lent, and the doing of
Servile works upon Sundaies, which if they were not forbidden by the
Church-lawes, they would not be unlawful, or else it is a declaratiue precept,
which does not induce a new obligation, but only confirms a former, neither
does it make, but suppose the act which it forbids to be otherwise unlawful;
as being forbid before by some other former Law. A constitutiue precept of
humane power although it may sometimes bind with danger of some great temporal
loss, as of goods, liberty, yea and now and then also of life; yet the
Ecclesiastical Law setting aside scandal, and contempt, which are forbidden
by the Law of God, and nature, does seldom, or never bind with very great
temporal harm. And therefore we are not bound to abstain from flesh in Lent,
or not to do servile works upon the Sunday, which are commanded us by the
Church -- Laws, when we are like to incur any probable danger of some great
temporal hurt thereby.

42. A declaratiue precept, as well notes Suarez In the place before cited.
, depends only upon the reason, for which the act is commanded, or
forbidden, and upon the obligation of the former precept: in so much that if the
reason for which the precept is imposed, be not true, and no former Law, or
obligation, as in the declaratiue precept is affirmed to be, can be found,
the declaratiue precept has no force to bind at all. As for example, his
Holiness forbids al English Catholics to take this Oath, for that it
contains many things, which are clearly repugnant to Faith and Salvation; If
therefore in this oath no thing can be found, which is repugnant to faith, or
salvation, this declaratiue prohibition of his Holiness, which is founded in
this reason, is according to the doctrine of Suarez of no force, neither does
it bind English Catholics to observe the same.

43 Nevertheless it is to be observed, that the Popes reason, or declaration
may be either definitive, whereby he intends to bind all English Catholics
to believe certainly as a point of faith, that his reason, or declaration is
true, and then we are bound to believe with the same certainty that his reason,
and declaration is true, wherewith we are bound to believe that he has power
infallibly to define: or else it is only opinatiue, to wit, grounded in his
opinion, for which he probably thinks that the reason which he alleges is
true, and that in very deed there is such a former precept as he supposes; and
then his declaratiue precept, does bind no more then his reason, and opinion
can bind, and consequently we are more no bound to obey his declaratiue
precept, then we are bound to follow his opinion, whereon his declaratiue
precept does only depend.

44. First therefore it is certain, that this decree of the Pope, wherein he
forbids English Catholics to take this Oath is a mere declaratiue precept,
as it is manifest by the words of the first Breue, to which the other two have
relation. For after that his Holiness had in his Breue related the whole Oath
word by word, he writes thus: Which being so it ought to be manifest unto you
by the words themselves, that this Oath cannot be taken without hurt to the
Catholic faith, and to the salvation of your souls, seeing that it contains
many things which are clearly repugnant to Faith, and salvation. Therefore we
admonish you, that you altogether abstain from taking this, and the like
oaths, which truly we do the more earnestly dema^d of you, for that we
having had trial of your constant faith. etc. So that it is evident that the
only cause for which his Holiness forbids the taking of this Oath, is for
that he thinks it to be otherwise unlawful, and to contain in it many
things, which are clearly repugnant to faith, and salvation, and consequently
that this is not a constitutiue, but a mere declaratiue prohibition.

45. Secondly, it is also certain, that it is such a declaratiue precept,
which is founded not in any infallible definition of the Pope, whereby he
decrees, that the reason which he alleges is most certain, and to be
believed as a point of faith, as has been showed before, Nu, 32. and sect
but it is only grounded upon his opinatiue judgment, whereby he probably
persuades himself, that his reason is true, and that the oath does contain
in it many things, which are flat contrary to faith and salvation. Which being
so, it is most manifest, that we are no farther bound to observe this command
of his Holiness, then we are bound to follow his opinion, whereon his
Declaratiue precept does only depend. Wherefore, if this oath be not of it
self unlawful, nor does contain any thing which is repugnant to faith or
salvation, especially in that sense, wherein the English Catholics do take
it, and wherein the words of the oath, according to their proper and usual
signification are commonly understood, but only temporal allegiance, which
every temporal Prince may, if need require, lawfully demand of his subjects,
as by examining every clause of the oath I have, as I think, sufficiently
proved, truly there can be made no doubt, but that every English Catholic*
notwithstanding the Popes prohibition, may with a safe conscience, and without
any prejudice to the Catholic faith take the same. And this may suffice
concerning the particular precept or command of his Holiness.

46. Now concerning that third thing, to wit, the Popes judgment, opinion and
advise, which besides his definition and command may, as we have said, be
contained in a Breue, it is most certain, that no man is bound to follow his
opinions, admonitions, counsels or exhortations. Every man may, if he will,
follow his admonition and advise, so that he counsel him no unjust, or
unlawful thing, but that we are bound to follow his counsel in lawful
things, is against all reason, as evidently appears by the Evangelical
counsels, which are much superior to the Popes counsels. The Popes judgment,
and opinion when it is contrary to the opinion of other learned Catholics, any
man may lawfully reject; and especially if to follow his opinion, should be
very prejudicial to himself, or others; and also if it be grounded upon
slight reasons and false informations, as partly we have showed before how
weak those arguments be, which are commonly objected against this Oath, and
partly we will beneath Nu. 51. and sect.
by Father Parsons letters make it manifest, that his Holiness was not rightly
informed concerning the true meaning of this Oath. And truly to dislike
whatsoever the Popes Holiness disliketh, and to approve whatsoever he
approves, and to grant him without due examination all that authority, which
some Popes have claimed or may claim, does seem to favor rather of over much
flattery, then of moderate discretion, whereof the examples of many Popes do
yield sufficient testimony; in so much that Cardinal Bellarmine in his
Controversies, has much ado to excuse many Popes, not only from believing,
but also from teaching publicly flat heresies; and nevertheless he does
freely acknowledge that some Popes did publicly teach and maintain, although
not manifest heresy, yet false doctrine.

47. Did not Pope Nicolas the first in a Decretal epistle, which is registered
in the books of the Canon Law De consecrat. did. 4. can. a quodam Iudaeo.
, and in the Tomes of the Sacred Councels Tom. 3. council in responsis Nicolai
ad co^sulta Bulgauorum. cap. 104.
, publicly teach, that Baptism given only in the name of Christ, without
expressing the three Persons of the Trinity is valide and sufficient? Which
doctrine Cardinal Bellarmine Lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 12.
affirms to be false, and therefore to excuse Pope Nicolas he affirms,
that he did not by defining the question to be of faith, affirm that
proposition, but only as a particular Doctor, declare by the way his opinion.
Did not Pope Celestine the third, in a Decretall Epistle, which was once extant
in the body of the Canon Law, among the Popes Decretal Epistles, In cap
laudibilem de conuers. coniugat.
publicly teach, and according to Alphonsus de Castro Lib. 1. de haeres. cap.
4.
did also declare as Pope, that Marriage was so dissolved by heresy, that the
party, whose consort was fallen into heresy, might lawfully marry an other?
Which doctrine is now flatly condemned in the Council of Trent Sess. 24. de
reformat can. 5.
. And Cardinal Bellarmine to excuse Celestine does affirm, That he did not
define anything for certainty concerning that point, but did only answer what
seemed to him more probable. And although, says Cardinal Bellarmine In the
place before cited.
, it is doubtless true, that this Epistle of Celestine was once among the
Decretall Epistles, yet from thence it can not be gathered, that Celestine made
a decree plainly Apostolical, and out of the Chair, seeing that it is
manifest, that there be many other things in the Decretall Epistles, which do
not make the thing to be of faith, but do only declare unto us the Popes
opinions concerning that matter.

48. Did not Pope John the 22. publikly teach, and if he had not been
prevented by death, was resolved Adrianus Papa in quaest. de confirm. circa
finem, etc. Alphons. de Castro lib. 3. co^tra haeres. verbo Beatitudo. haeres.
6. and Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 14.
to define, that the souls of the Blessed should not see God before the
Resurrection? Did not Pope Boniface the eighth, writing to Philip the fair
King of France affirm, Nicolaus Vignerius ad annum 1300.
that he does account them for heretics, who do believe that the said King is
not subject to him in spirituals and temporals? in so much that Ioannes Tilius
Bishop of Meldime in his Chronicle of the Kings of France does boldly
affirm, that the impudency of Boniface was so wonderfully great, that he
durst auerre, that the Kingdom of France was a benefit of the Pontifical
Majesty. I omit to rehearse certain later examples, for that they are not as
yet so publicly known, neither would I, being desirous with Sem and Iaphet,
to hide the imperfections of our parents, for reverence to the Sea Apostolic
have put in remembrance the aforesaid examples, although they be most public,
if certain Catholics with over much bitter zeal, censuring both wrongfully,
unchristianly, and inconsideratly their christian brethren, for such enormous
crimes of disobedience, error, and denial of their faith, had not for their
defense compelled me thereunto.

49. Now tell us, we pray you, would our Adversaries, if they had lived in
those Popes times, have so vehemently enueighed against all those Catholics,
and have exclaimed against them, as being scarce Catholics and good believers,
who had not approved the opinions, decretall letters, or Apostolical Breues of
the aforesaid Popes? What they would have done, God he knows, that they
ought not so to have done, it is too too manifest. Why then are they now so
void of Christian charity that they are not afraid to persecute learned and
virtuous Catholics, and to condemn them of heresy, and of abiuring their
faith, who upon forcible and sufficient grounds, and which their most learned
Adversaries are not able with solid arguments to convince (and if they be
able, we humbly request them, and by the tender passion of our Savior Christ
Jesus, we conjure them, that they will endeavor rather with sound reasons to
satisfy timorous consciences, then to enforce them with threatening, and
reproachful speeches) in a matter of so great moment, belonging to their
Allegiance, and tending to the temporal overthrow of themselves and their
whole posterity, do not obey the Popes letters, which are not founded in his
public definition, but only grounded upon his private opinion, which
therefore hereafter (as the aforesaid opinions of Pope Nicolas, Celestine, John
and Boniface are now rejected) will peradventure be impugned, especially seeing
that they labor by all probable means to excuse him with all dutiful
reverence, and do not presume malapartly and unseemly to oppose against him?
If they would have all Catholics to affirm without due examination whatsoever
he denies, let them hear, I beseech them, attentively (for the words do
nearely concern themselves) what writes Melchior Canus a religious man of the
Order of Saint Dominick, a most learned writer of these times, Bishop of the
Canaries, and not long since For he wrote his book in the year 1562
chief Professor of Divinity in the University of Salamanca. Those, says
he, Lib. 5. de locis cap 5. prope finem.
who rashly and without election do defend every judgment of the Pope
concerning every thing, do weaken, not strengthen, do overthrow, not
establish the authority of the Sea Apostolic. For what will he in the end
gain by disputing against heretics, when they perceive that he takes upon
him to defend the Popes authority, not by judgment, but by affection, neither
that he endeavors to find out the truth by force of his disputation, but to
apply himself to an other man's will and pleasure? Peter has no need of our
lying; he has no need of our flattering.

50. To make therefore now at the last a compendious Answer to all the three
Breues, and so also to the whole objection. To the first Breue, whereon the
other two do depend, It is answered first, that although his Holiness
thinking, and in his opinion supposing the oath to be of it self unlawful,
and to contain many things which are contrary to faith and salvation, does
therefore by his letters or Breue forbid English Catholics to take it, yet
seeing that this his prohibition is only a declaratiue precept, and founded in
the private judgment and opinion of his Holiness, as before Nu. 44. et sect.
we have showed, as we are not bound to follow the Popes opinion against the
probable opinion of other Catholic Divines (then especially when by following
it, very great prejudice is like to come to our selves, and many others; and
when the reasons and grounds for his opinion, are for the most part by all men
accounted to be very unsound, as are almost all those arguments, which our
learned Adversaries have objected against the oath) so also we are not bound to
obey the Popes declaratiue precept, which is founded in his opinion, and in the
reason, which he alleges, which precept, according to the aforesaid doctrine
of Franciscus Suarez, has no greater force to bind, then has his reason and
opinion whereon this declaratiue precept does wholly depend.

51. Secondly it is answered, that there is no English Catholic, who, if he
be well instructed, will take the Oath, or approve it to be lawful in that
sense wherein his Holiness, as we probably conjecture, has condemned it. For
it is probable, and in my judgment morally certain, that his Holiness did
understand the words of the Oath in that sense, wherein the Divines of Rome did
conceive them, and especially Cardinal Bellarmine, whose advice and opinion in
this so weighty a Theological controversy, which must needs bring great good
or harm to this Kingdom, his Holiness, as it is very probable, both demanded
and followed, who therefore, according to his Holiness mind, and by his
permission wrote in defense of his Breues against his Majesty's Apology for
the Oath. But Cardinal Bellarmine understood the Oath in that sense, as though
it denied the Popes Primacie in spirituals, his power to excommunicate, to bind
and loose, and also to dispense in oaths, in which sense, doubtless it can
not be denied, but that it conteines many things, which are flat contrary to
faith and salvation: but no Catholic does in this sense either take the Oath,
or defend it to be lawful.

52. Moreover, that his Holiness did think, that in this Oath is denied his
spiritual authority to inflict Censures, is plainly gathered by a letter of
Father Parsons, who did greatly urge and solicit his Holiness to send hither
his Breues, as both some Jesuits here with us do freely confess, and also no
man, who knows, how our English affairs at Rome were carried in his days,
can make any doubt hereof. This therefore is the true coppie of a letter, which
Father Parsons, before any Breue was sent hither, wrote to one here in England,
which letter he presently showed to diverse, and gave them leave to take a copy
thereof, and to impart it to other Catholics.

53. About some four or five months ago, it was consulted by seven or eight
of the learneddest Divines that could be chosen, who gave their judgment of
it. Their reasons are many, but all deduced to this, that the Popes authority
in chastising Princes upon a just cause, is de fide, and consequently can not
be denied when it is called into controversy without denying of our faith, nor
that the Pope, or any other authority can dispense in this.

54. For if the question were de facto, and not de iure, to wit, whether the
Pope might justly in this or that occasion excommunicate or depose this or that
Prince, upon these or these causes, or whether precedent Popes have done well
therein or no, then might some of those reasons, which you say your friends do
allege, be admitted into consideration; to wit, whether it could be in
aedificationem, or destructionem, do hurt or good, be profitable or
improfitable; or whether the causes be sufficient or no, for without cause none
holds that the Pope may depose; or whether the due form of admonition
touched in your letters were observed. But for so much as the question is de
potestate of the Sea Apostolic power, what it may do upon any cause* or
against any Catholic Prince whatsoever, these considerations of temporal hurt
can not enter.

55 Besides these I have conferred the matter with Cardinal Bellarmine, and
sundry others of great learning and conscience, and all are of one opinion in
this case, that the form of the Oath as it lies, is heretical, and no way
may be admitted by him that will not deny the Catholic faith.

56. I had occasion twice to speak with his Holiness, the first in company of
M. Thomas Fitzherbert, where we proposed certain manners of mitigation
suggested by friends, etc. Whereto his Holiness answered, that as for any
actual using Censures against his Majesty, he meant not, but rather all
courtesy, but as for the Authority of the Sea Apostolic (to wit, for using of
Censures) he was resolved, and would rather loose his head then yield one jot.
The second, he being informed that some Priests did seem to incline to the
taking of the Oath, he answered, he could not hold them for Catholics, etc.

57. By which it is manifest first, that all the reasons why the Divines of
Rome did hold the Oath to be unlawful, were deduced to this, that it is de
fide, and consequently can not be denied without denying the Catholic faith,
that the Pope has authority to chastise Princes upon a just cause, and that
neither the Pope, nor any other authority can dispense in this. Secondly, also
it is manifest, that his Holiness did think that in this oath is denied his
authority to use Censures, and that therefore he could not hold those Priests
for Catholics, who is c^^^ed to the taking of the Oath. As though forsooth,
the English Catholics who take the Oath do deny the Popes power to use
Censures, or to chastise Princes upon a just cause; whereas it is most clear
that no such thing is denied in this Oath, as in my opinion I have plainly
showed by answering Cardinal Bellarmines arguments, unless perchance he
would have us to approve for good and lawful, against the received rules of
the Logicians, this manner of arguing from a particular to infer an
universal; as for example, The Pope can not chastise Princes by depriving them
of their temporal dominions, or of their life, Therefore the Pope can not
chastise Princes. We grant that the Pope may chastise Princes by using
Ecclesiastical Censures, which truly in this Oath is not denied, but we
utterly deny, that to deprive Princes of their dominions, or of their life, are
to be ranked among spiritual or Ecclesiastical Censures.

58 Wherefore Cardinal Bellarmine, Father Parsons, and those other Roman
Divines using such sophistical collections to prove, that in this oath are
contained many things which are flat contrary to faith, and salvation, were
very grossly mistaken. And if his Holiness trusting to the learning and
conscience of these men, was therefore emboldened to send hither his Breues for
the condemning upon that cause the taking of this Oath, how greatly he was
deluded to no small reproach of the Sea Apostolic, to the great scandal of
Protestants, and to the utter temporal overthrow of very many Catholics, it
is, alas I speak it with grief, too too manifest. For, to omit that
protestation of those thirteen English Priests Above chap. 3. sec. 3. nu 10.
, who perceives not that from that position, which Petrus Pithaeus Above chap.
3 sec. 3. nu. 13.
affirms to be the approved Doctrine of the Kingdom of France, to wit, that
the Pope has not Power to deprive the King of France of his Kingdom, and that
the Subjects, notwithstanding any Excommunications whatsoever which can be
made by the Pope, are bound to yield obedience due to the King for temporalls,
neither that in this they can be dispensed, or absolved by the Pope, Cardinal
Bellarmine, Father Parsons, and those other Roman Divines might in the very
like manner infer, that therein is denied the Popes Primacie in spirituals,
his power to excommunicate, to bind and loose, to dispense, and absolve? And
nevertheless they will doubtless be afraid to condemn therefore the
Kingdom of France of heresy, and of denying their faith for constantly
maintaining that the Pope has not power to deprive the King of France of his
Kingdom. Why then are they not afraid to censure English Catholics of
heresy, and denial of there faith for acknowledging the very same concerning
the not depriving the King of England of his Kingdom by the Popes authority,
which French Catholics without any danger of heresy, or error do constantly
avouch concerning the not depriving of their King by the said authority of the
Pope? And thus much concerning his Holiness first Breue.

59 In the Second Breue, which was dated the first of September in the year
1607, it is only declared, that the former letters of his Holiness concerning
the forbidding Catholics to take the oath, (wherein, says his Holiness, he
strictly commanded the English Catholics that they should in no wise take the
said oath) were not false and surreptitious, but written not only upon his
certain knowledge, and by his own proper motion, and will (by which words
nevertheless he does not intend to deny that he in writing of them used the advice, and opinion of others) but also after long, and great deliberation had
concerning all the things which are contained in them, and that therefore they
were bound to observe them exactly, setting aside all interpretation which may
persuade to the contrary. Which last words are so to be understood, that there
must be made no frivolous interpretation of those letters, or no such
interpretations, which should make any man to think, or make any doubt, that
they were not written of his Holiness own knowledge, and by his proper will.
For as Ioannes Salas Disp 21. de leg. sec. 2.
and Emanuell Sa Verbo Interpretatio. nu. 5.
, both of them Divines of the Society of Jesus, do well observe, It is
lawful for Doctors so inteprete all laws not indeed by a necessary, public
or iuridicall interpretation, but by a private, and not binding interpretation,
although the Prince should say, It shall be lawful for no man to otherwise
interpret this our writing, for then he only forbids frivolous
interpretations, and which are expressly contrary to his mind. Which there
Doctrine is with far greater reason to be understood of the Popes declaratiue
precept, which is only grounded upon presumption, and upon his own opinion, and
private judgment, whereby he persuades himself, that the thing which he
forbids, is otherwise unlawful, as being forbidden by some former law:
Whose opinion, and also command founded only in his opinion, when it is against
the probable opinion of other Catholic Divines, may not only be interpreted,
but also contradicted. Seeing therefore that this Second Breue is only an
approving, and confirming of the former, it can have no more force to bind
then the former has, for confirming whereof it was written by his Holiness.

60 The third Breue being dated the first of February in the year 1608, was
sent to Mr. George Birket, wherein his Holiness does ordain, and substitute
him Archpresbyter of the English Priests of the Popes Seminaries in the place
of Master George Blackwel; and does i^^^^e, and command him, and for this
gives him special faculty, that by authority of his Holiness he do
admonish all, and every one of those English Priests, who have taken a certain
Oath (wherein many things are contained, which are clearly repugnant to faith
and the salvation of souls) or have taught, and do teach that it may lawfully
be taken, to repent them, and to abstain from such an error. And if within the
time (extraiudicialiter notwithstanding) at his arbitrament to be prefixed unto
them, they shall not do accordingly, that by the same authority he deprive,
and declare depri^ed them, or him of all faculties, and privileges granted to
them, or to any of them from the Sea Apostolic; or by her authority from any
other whatsoever.

61 Concerning this third Breue five things are to be observed. The first is,
that this Breue contains partly a constitutiue, and partly a declaratiue
precept, or rather a declaration of a former precept. The declaratiue precept,
or rather the declaration of a former precept does consist in this, that his
Holiness by this precept does not make, but suppose, and declare the oath to
be of it self unlawful. And although this declaration of his Holiness should
vertually contain in it a precept, it is for that it supposes, and presumes
that many things are contained in this Oath, which are clearly repugnant to
faith and salvation. Which declaration, or vertuall prohibition being only
grounded on presumption, and on his Holiness opinion has no more force to
bind Catholics to believe that this Oath is of it self unlawful, and that
it contains many things, which are clearly repugnant to faith and salvation,
then binds his opinion, when it is against the probable opinion of other
Catholics, who can not perceive, that in this Oath is contained any thing,
which so much as obscurely is against faith or salvation; especially in that
sense, wherein they take the Oath, and think it to be lawful, and which
sense they persuade themselves to be agreeable to the proper and usual
signification of the words, and to the meaning of the Lawmaker. And therefore
as we are not bound, according to that which has been said before, to follow
the opinion of his Holiness, when other learned Catholics do disagree from
him, so neither are we bound to obey his Declaratiue precept, and much less a
bare declaration thereof, when it depends only upon his opinion.

62 The constitutiue precept of his Holiness does consist in this, that he
commands Master Archpriest, that he observing certain conditions, do
deprive, and declare deprived of all faculties those Priests, who either have
taken the Oath, or have taught, and do teach that it may lawfully be taken. And
this precept being a mere penal constitution in respect of the Priests who
have taken the Oath or have taught, and do teach that it may lawfully be
taken, does not of it self forbid the taking of the Oath, but supposes that
it is before otherwise forbidden. And therefore no stronger, but rather a far
weaker argument can be drawn from this Breue, then from the former to prove,
that this Oath is unlawful, and contains in it many things, which are
clearly repugnant to faith, and salvation. But in respect of Master Archpriest
it is not a mere penal constitution, but a true, and proper constitutiue
precept, and binding him (as it is manifest by those words, and we enioine, and
command thee) to observe all that which in this Breue is commanded him; so that
he may as easily transgress his Holiness command by exceeding his commission,
to wit, if he deprive of faculties those Priests, whom he has no authority to
deprive, as by neglecting to deprive them, whom by his Holiness command he is
bound to deprive.

63 Secondly, it is to be observed, that although some of the vnlearneder sort
may perchance from this Breue take some occasion to imagine, that his Holiness
did by a firm decree define, that this Oath contains in it many things,
which are clearly repugnant to faith and salvation, for that, if according to
the rules before Nu. 34.
related out of Melchior Canus, and Card. Bellarmine the Popes Holiness had
excommunicated all those, who should teach that the Oath may lawfully be taken,
it had been doubtless a manifest sign, See there in the marginall note how
manifest a sign it had been.
that his Holiness intended to make a firm decree, and definition of faith,
why then may we not now rightly infer, that in this Breue he has defined
the same, seeing that he inflicteth so grievous an Ecclesiastical Censure, and
which is most near to excommunication, to wit, Suspension from jurisdiction or
depriving of all faculties, upon all those English Priests, who do teach that
the Oath may lawfully be taken.

64. But this objection is altogether frivolous. For first, there is a great
disparity betwixt Excommunication, and Suspension, or taking away of faculties,
for being a sign to know when any thing is by the Pope, or Counsels firmly
decreed to be a point of faith. For when the Pope or Counsels do define any
thing to be of Faith, they intend to account all those, who presume to believe
the contrary, for heretics, and to exclude them from the company of the
faithful and right believers, which separation from the Society of the
faithful is very well expressed by Excommunication, but not by Suspension, for
that one may be deprived of all faculties, and suspended from all Jurisdiction,
and nevertheless be partaker with the rest of the faithful in all those
Divine rites, ceremonies, and spiritual graces, which are common to all
Christians, and right believers. Wherefore no Divine, that I have read, did
ever affirm, that depriving of faculties, or Suspension are sufficient signs
to discern when the Pope or Council defines any thing to be of Faith.

65. Besides although the Pope had not only taken away their faculties, but
also had excommunicated those English Priests, who taught that the Oath may
lawfully be taken, yet from thence it could not be rightly concluded, that he
had by a firm, and infallible definition of Faith condemned the Oath, seeing
that according to the Doctrine of Melchior Canus, and Cardinal Bellarmine
before Nu. 32.
related, to make the Popes definitions to be infallible, and to be believed
as a point of Faith, it is necessary that they be propounded to the universal
Church, and not to private Bishops, or Churches; for they are to be understood
says Canus, Nu. 33.
only in this case to pronounce of faith, when the sentence belongs to all
Christians, when it binds all. But this Breue is directed to one only
Archpriest with an express command, not to excommunicate, or otherwise to
punish all the Catholics even of one kingdom, but to deprive only those
Priests, who have taken the Oath, or have taught, and do teach that it may
lawfully be taken, of all those faculties, and privileges, which they have
received from the See-Apostolike. And therefore to gather from this third Breue
that his Holiness has defined the Oath to be unlawful it is vain,
frivolous, and altogether ridiculous. Wherefore his Holiness did not intend to
bind English Catholics more by this Breue, but rather less then by the former
not to take the Oath: for that in his former Breues he does by a declaratiue
precept expressly forbid Catholics to take the Oath, but in this Breue no
express prohibition is contained, but rather supposed, and a punishment
inflicted not upon all English Catholics, but upon those Priests only, who
have taken the Oath, or have taught, and do teach that it may lawfully be
taken: therefore a far weaker argument to prove this Oath to be unlawful
can be drawn from this Breue, then from the former.

66 Thirdly, it is to be observed, that it is not all one to deprive a Priest
of his Faculties, and to forbid him to say Mass, and others to be present with
him at Divine Service, as some of the vulgar sort through ignorance do
imagine, who think that if a Priest be deprived of his faculties, he is
forthwith suspended from the Altar. For as there be many Priests beyond the
Seas, who daily say Mass, and others are present thereat, and yet they have no
faculties at al, nor authority to hear confessions, so also the taking away of
their faculties does not debar them from saying Mass, nor others to be
present at it. But considering that no Priest by virtue of his ordination has
full authority to minister the Sacrament of Penance, or to exercise any other
act of spiritual Jurisdiction, as to excommunicate, to dispense in vows, or
oaths, and such like, although he has full authority to say Mass, no
Jurisdiction being required thereunto, as the giving of faculties does consist
in this, that full power, license, and faculty is given to a Priest to minister
lawfully, and with effect the Sacrament of Penance, or to exercise any other
spiritual Jurisdiction, according as he has more or fewer, greater or lesser
faculties granted him, so the taking away his faculties does consist in this,
that he is deprived of that spiritual Jurisdiction, which by the privilege
of the Pope or Church, he has received; so that the depriving a Priest of
faculties is a certain partial Suspension, as the Divines do speak, not
from Order, and from exercising those functions which belong to Order, but from
Jurisdiction, and from exercising those functions which depend thereon.

67 Fourthly it is to be observed, that the Church does not usually, and
perchance cannot suspend, or excommunicate any man with Mayor suspension, or
excommunication but for some mortal sin; for that these kind of censures are
punishments, and medicines, which always suppose some precedent sin, and
spiritual malady. And therefore it is a general, and certain principle, says
Suarez, De Censuris disp. 4. sec. 4.
that the fault for which the censure, is to be imposed, ought to be
proportionable to the censure, because, according to Natural reason, the
punishment ought to have equal proportion to the fault, and contrariwise. For
it is against commutatiue justice to inflict a great punishment for a small
fault. Wherefore it is certain, that a great censure, that is, which depriueth
of goods of great moment and of it self causes great harm: and therefore may
aptly be called a greater, or Mayor censure, does at the least suppose a
mortal sin, that it may justly be inflicted. Seeing therefore that the
judgments and opinions of Popes, as well said Pope Innocentius Above cited nu.
39.
, are not always grounded upon truth, and therefore they may sometimes judge
that to be a sin, which is no sin indeed, and one to have committed that
crime, which in very deed he has not committed, it may also sometimes fall out,
that one is excommunicated or suspended in the outward face of the Church, who
before God, whose judgment is not grounded on presumption, but upon truth, is
not in very deed either excommunicated, or suspended.

68 Seeing therefore that the depriving one of faculties which is inflicted for
a fault committed, and which truly, and properly is a punishment (for
concerning an absolute reuoking of a privilege, faculty, or Jurisdiction
granted there is not the same reason) is a certain Mayor suspension not from
the use of his Order, but from the exercising of his Jurisdiction, we may well
suppose, that his Holiness had no intention to punish with so great
punishment, as is the taking away of faculties, those Priests who have taken
the Oath, or have taught, and do teach that it may lawfully be taken, but for
that he certainly persuaded himself that they had committed perjury, so that
if in very deed they have committed no such crime, we may justly presume, that
his Holiness did not intend to deprive them of their faculties, and consequently
that they are not in very deed deprived of them: although by reason of scandal
they ought not (supposing that Mr. Archpriest has lawfully, and according to
his commission proceeded against them) to use their faculties publickely, and
before them to whom their innocence is not yet sufficiently known, least they
should seem to contemn the keys of the Church; yet doubtless no man, who
will confess that this taking away of faculties is inflicted upon those
Priests properly as a punishment for some fault by them committed, can make any
doubt, but that in very deed their Sacramental absolutions, their
dispensations, and such like acts of Jurisdiction are valide and effectual.

69 For, as Suarez Disp 4. de ce^suris sec. 7. nu. 2. 4. 23. et seq.
does well affirm, a Censure, which in the only external Court, or in the
face of the Church is just, (to wit, for that the crime, for which the Censure
is inflicted, is probably presumed, and is in judgment sufficiently proved)
has no force in the court of conscience, or to take away or suspend in very
deed his Jurisdiction, who in very deed has committed no such crime. Therefore
Sacramental absolution given by such an Excommunicated, or suspended person is
in this respect valide, and of force; and the same is to be understood of
absolution from a censure, of dispensation in vows, and the like. Wherefore
according to the common opinion of Doctors he may secretly, and without
scandal, or in the presence of them to whom his innocence is known, exercise
all the acts of his Jurisdiction; Suarez in the place cited.
and therefore well said Navarre, In Manuali cap. 27. nu. 3.
that such a Censure, which in very deed is unjust, is of force a little more
then nothing, unless in the external court, and to avoid scandal.

70 Fifthly it is to be observed, that the authority which his Holiness has
delegated to Mr. Archpriest to deprive the English Priests of their faculties,
is not absolutely, and simply granted unto him, but with certain limited
conditions, which if he neglect to observe he, doubtless exceeds his
commission, does great wrong to these Priests, against whom he proceeds, and
all his sentences, or declarations, whereby he depriueth them, or declares
them deprived of their faculties, are for want of Jurisdiction inualide, and of
no force at all. Because a delegate Judge, as well says Suarez, Disp. 3. de
ce^sures sect. 12. nu. 6.
must not exceed the form, and commission granted him, otherwise he does
nothing, seeing that he has no authority, but from the delegante, that is from
him who does delegate it unto him. Cap. dilecta de Rescriptis et cap. Pisanis
de restitut. spoliat.

71 These being observed it is certain first, that Mr. Archpriest by virtue
of this Breue has only authority granted him, as also he himself has
acknowledged, to take away faculties only from Secular Priests, over whom he
has Jurisdiction, and not from religious Priests, who are exempted from the
Jurisdiction of the Ordinaries, (that is the Bishops of the Dioces, or those
who have Episcopal Jurisdiction) and are immediately subject to the Sea
Apostolic, and their own Superiors. For besides that in their privileges
of exemption granted them by the Popes Holiness it is usually specified, that
he intends not to take away their Privileges, and to subject them to the
Ordinaries by general words, it is also the common and approved custom of all
Catholic countries, that whenever the Popes Holiness enioyneth the
Ordinaries to punish with any extraordinary punishment by him appointed all
those Priests, which shall commit such, or such a crime, Religious Priests,
unless they be expressly named, are not comprehended, for that the punishment
of them, unless he declare the contrary, he leaves to their own Superiors.
And this also is for the most part observed in General Counsels, that
whenever in any decree of Reformation they intend, that all Priests as well
Religious, as Secular shall be comprehended, they do use these express
words, Every Priest as well Religious as Secular, etc. And although the name
Priest does signify in general every Priest as well Regular, as Secular, and
the Monk be common both to Abbots, and private Monks, and the name Deacon,
and also Bishop may be taken for all Deacons, or Bishops as well Cardinals, as
not Cardinals, nevertheless as in penal laws a Deacon and Bishop Cardinal
are not usually comprehended under the bare name of a Deacon, and of a Bishop,
nor an Abbot under the name of a Monk, so also in the same penal laws,
especially in those whose execution is committed to the Ordinaries, from whose
jurisdiction Religious men are exempted, Regular or Religious Priests are not
signified by the bare name of a Priest.

72. Secondly, it is also certain, that by virtue of this Breue Mr. Archpriest
has authority granted him to take away faculties only from those Secular
Priests, who have taken the Oath, or have taught, and do teach that it may
lawfully be taken. So that two only sorts of Priests are comprehended in this
Oath, first the takers of the Oath, and of these not al, but only those who
have taken it, secondly, the teachers that the Oath may lawfully be taken, and
of these not only who have taught, but also who do teach that it may lawfully
be taken. Whereby it is manifest that his Holiness did more severely proceed
against the teachers, that the Oath may lawfully be taken, then against the
takers thereof. And truly supposing that his Holiness was fully persuaded
that this Oath can not lawfully be taken, there want not probable reasons,
whereby he might be prudently moved to punish more severely the teachers, then
the takers of this Oath, and to give authority to Mr. Archpriest to take away
all faculties from those Priests who have already taken the Oath [and do not
repent them thereof] reserving the punishing of those who hereafter shall take
it to himself, as hereafter in his wisdom he shall judge it to be most
expedient.

73. And from hence thirdly it may also certainly be gathered, that, supposing
in penal laws the words are not to be extended, but to be restrained, which
is a most certain rule, and approved by all Lawyers, if any Secular Priest
has neither taken the Oath, neither has taught, nor does teach that it may
lawfully be taken, although he should inwardly in his mind think it very
probable, that the Oath may lawfully be taken, and for that cause he should
outwardly carry himself negatiuely, and neither positiuely defend it, nor
positiuely condemn it, Mr. Archpriest by virtue of this Breue has no
authority granted him to deprive this Priest of his faculties. The reason is
evident, for that to teach the Oath to be lawful is positiuely to defend it,
and outwardly to approve it, but this Priest does outwardly neither defend it,
nor condemn it, but outwardly he carries himself negatiuely, and therefore
he does not teach that it may lawfully, or may not lawfully be taken.

74. From whence also it follows, that although such a Priest having
diligently examined all the arguments, which are brought against the lawful
taking of the Oath, and clearly in his own judgment perceiving the
weakness of them dare not condemn of mortal sin those Catholics, who have
taken the Oath, or do teach that it may lawfully be taken, and therefore in
the Sacrament of Penance he absolueth them from all their other sins which
they have confessed, and whereof they are contrite, not examining them whether
they have taken the Oath, or taught it to be lawful (if he suppose they have
no scruple thereof) but leaving them in this point to their own consciences,
Mr. Archpriest by virtue of this Breue has not authority granted him to
deprive this Priest of his Faculties. For in property of speech beyond which
words in penal laws are not to be extended it can not rightly be said, that
this Priest does teach that the Oath may lawfully be taken, considering that in
this point he carries himself mere negatiuely, and does not exercise any
positive act of teaching, or maintaining. Wherefore betwixt preachers, teachers
and believers of heresy, although this their inward opinion or belief be
outwardly made manifest, there is a great distinction, as is evident by the
Bulla Caenae, and the Expositor thereof: neither will any Divine or Lawyer
affirm, that, if there be any punishment appointed against preachers or
teachers of heresy, only believers, although they should express their mind
by some outward sign, are also comprehended. Neither by any word at all of
this Breue can it be gathered, that English Priests under pain of loosing
their faculties, are bound to condemn positiuely the taking of this Oath,
although his Holiness in this Breue does bind them not to teach, that it may
lawfully be taken.

75. Fourthly, it is certain that Mr. Archpriest by virtue of this Breue has
not authority granted him to take away faculties from those Secular Priests,
who have taken the Oath, or who have taught, and do teach, that it may
lawfully be taken, unless he do before admonish al, and every one of them to
repent them and abstain from this error, for these are the express words of
the Breue. So that he must admonish not only all those Priests who have taken
the Oath, or have taught, and do teach that it may lawfully be taken, but also
every one of them. Wherefore it is the opinion of learned Lawyers, whose
judgment has been demanded of this point, that it is not sufficient for Mr.
Archpriest to admonish all those Priests who have taken the Oath, or have
taught, and do teach that it may lawfully be taken by a general admonition, but
also he must admonish every one of them particularly, otherwise he goes beyond
his commission, and does them very great wrong, and his sentence and
declaration is inualide, and of no effect at all, if he deprive or declare
them deprive of their faculties, being only in general and not in particular
admonished.

76. Fifthly, to conclude; it seems to me also to be certain, that those
Secular Priests, who have taken the Oath, or have taught, and do teach that it
may lawfully be taken, are not by the sentence of Mr. Archpriest denounced
against them by authority granted him by virtue of this Breue, deprived of
their faculties, if he only declare them deprived, and do not in very deed
deprive them of their faculties. For (as it is manifest by the command of his
Holiness imposed upon Mr. Archpriest, and by the authority given him in this
Breue, for that purpose) he must both deprive such Priests of their faculties,
and also declare that they are deprived. Wherefore, considering that in penal
laws, as has been said before Cap. 1. sect. 3.
, words are not to be extended, but rather to be restrained, neither can a
delegate Judge, as well said Suarez Above nu. 70
, exceed the form and commission granted him, otherwise he does nothing, if
Mr. Archpriest should only denounce or declare those Priests who have taken the
Oath, to be deprived of their faculties, and should not in very deed deprive
them of their faculties, he should both exceed the commission, which by his
Holiness was delegated unto him, and those Priest^ should not by virtue of
such a declaration, either in the external Court, or in the Court of
conscience be deprived of their faculties. And this is a maine ground why
certain Priests, who although they are thought by many to be deprived of their
faculties by the sentence of Mr. Archpriest, yet they are not afraid to use
them publicly, for that Mr. Archpriest, as they do avouch See Master
Warmington in his moderate defense of the Oath of Allegiance. page 159. and seq.
, did never in very deed deprive them of their faculties, but only did
publicly denounce or declare, that they were to be deprived, or at the most, yt
they were deprived of their faculties.

77. I omit to examine at this present what kind of publishing and notice
either of his Holiness Breues, or of any declaration of his Holiness concerning
any difficulty in the same Breues is necessary, that those Secular Priests,
who have taken the Oath, or have taught, and do teach that it may lawfully be
taken, are bound to give credit to such Breues, or to such declarations of
them, wherein is granted a special authority and commission to any man to
deprive them, or to declare them deprived of their faculties: to wit, whether
it be necessary that some authentical copy, both of the Breues, and also of
the declaration of the said Breues be showed unto them (for that as well the
words of the Breues, as also of the Popes declaration of them, may sometimes
have difficulties, and may by diverse men be diuersely understood) or whether
in such an odious matter, and of so great moment, as is the depriving of all
faculties by a iuridicall sentence for some crime committed, either the
aforesaid Priests, or Mr. Archpriest himself, or any other person are, to such
great prejudice of Reverend Priests, bound to give undoubted credit to the bare
word, or letter of some one or other Priest, either Secular or Religious living
beyond the Seas, who write that there is such a Breue, or such a delaration of
the said Breue, without seeing any authentical copy both of the Breues it
self, and also of the declaration thereof. And thus much concerning the former
part of the obobiection, which was taken from the authority of his Holiness
Breues.

78. To the second part of the objection, which is drawn from the testimony of
the most learned writers of this age, it is very easily answered. For as before
Nu. 11.
we have showed out of the doctrine of Gabriell Vasquez, Nu. 11.
and others, the multitude of Divines does not make the opinion, which they
follow to be undoubtedly true, and the contrary opinion of other Catholics,
although they be far fewer in number, to be void of all probability, unless
the reasons and grounds, which they bring to confirm their doctrine, be so
strong and conuincing, that they make the contrary opinion to be altogether
improbable. Now that the reasons and grounds, which these most learned Divines
have brought to prove this Oath to be unlawful, and clearly repugnant to the
Catholic faith, as his Holiness has declared, and for which only cause he
has forbid Catholics to take this Oath, are very weak, and in my opinion not
beseeming the learning of such famous Divines, is manifest enough, both by the
Answers which we have made unto them, and also by the Confessions of almost all
our country men, even of those who do favor Cardinal Bellarmines opinion,
who do acknowledge not without a little blushng that his arguments are very
weak and unsound.

79. Wherefore, even from the authority of the most learned Divines of these
days may also on the contrary be drawn a probable argument to prove, that
this Oath is not unlawful, and that it does not contain many things, which
are clearly repugnant to faith. For if in this Oath many things are contained
which are flat contrary to faith, as his Holiness in his Breues has affirmed,
and these most learned Divines have in their books endeavored to confirm,
without doubtsome one among so many most learned men would have brought at the
least one thing among so many which are clearly repugnant to faith, but none
of them has as yet brought one only proposition contained in this Oath which
is flat contrary to faith. Theresore it is a most evident sign, that these
Divines did not rightly understand the true sense of the Oath, and did publish
to the world their uncertain, not to say false collections for an undoubted
doctrine of faith, and that some of them did both wrongfully inform his
Holiness (who trusted to their learning and conscience) of the true and plain
meaning of the Oath, and also did take upon them to impugn the Oath, rather
upon affection, then moved with any sound reason, persuading themselves
perchance at the first, as a certain Jesuit here with us has freely
affirmed, that no Catholic either was able, or surely durst adventure to gain
say, and write against men of such singular learning, who were also armed with
the supreme authority of the Popes Holiness. But great is the truth, and it
does (in the end) prevail, it may for a time be assaulted, but it can never
be overcome.

80. The Catholics therefore of England, who have taken the Oath, were moved
from the beginning to take it, both for intrinsecall and extrinsecall grounds,
that is, both for sufficient reason, and also probable authority, Their reason
was, for that they were assuredly persuaded, that they were bound by the law of
God to obey the just command of their lawful Prince, so long as they could not
perceive that he commanded them any thing that was unlawful. But those
Catholics could never perceive, that in this Oath is contained any heretical,
erroneous, or improbable position, and afterward seriously considering how
sillily and insufficiently men of such excellent learning had impugned it, they
were more strongly confirmed in their opinion. The authority was, for that
very many, if not the greater part of the learned Priests of this Realm, and
also M. Archpriest himself did then either approve the taking of the Oath, or
durst not condemn it as unlawful. And although some of those learned Priests,
who at the beginning before any Breue was sent hither for condemning the oath,
did with all their might defend the lawfulness thereof, yet afterward, when
they saw it was forbidden by his Holiness, they seemed to draw back,
nevertheless that very many Priests, not only who were prisoners, but also
who were at liberty, did still continue in their former opinion, which for
fear of incurring his Holiness displeasure they durst not openly defend, is
so manifest here with us, that if need were, we could prove it by many
witnesses, (whereupon a certain very learned Priest did aptly say, that his
Holiness by his Breues had tied their tongues, but not satisfied their
understanding) yet notwithstanding the Breues very many both virtuous and
learned Priests, even now are not afraid either to defend publike^y the
lawfulness of the oath, or else although for fear of endangering their
faculties, they dare not outwardly teach, that the Oath may lawfully be taken,
howsoever in their hearts they are persuaded, yet they are nothing afraid
openly to confess, that they will not positiuely condemn the Oa^h, and
therefore they carry themselves in such sort, that they will neither positiuely
persuade any man to take it, nor to refuse it, least they should seem either to
co^tradict his Holiness Breues, or else to be a cause that Catholics should for
so uncertain, and disputable a question be utterly ouerthrown in their
temporal state.

81 Furthermore, that which is avouched in the objection, that one only, or two
Priests do approve the taking of the oath, and that rather for fear, then
from their heart, as to please the Prince, and to free them selves from the
troubles of the time, then for any sufficient reason, partly is most false,
seeing that it is manifest by that which has been said, that they were moved
thereunto for strong and sufficient reasons, partly it belongs rather to
reproachful words, then to solid reasoning: and with the very same facility
it may be retorted back against themselves. For to use the words of Ioannes
Parisiensis De potest. Regia et Papali ca. 21. ad 41.
, to say that so worthy men did write or speak against their conscience in
favor of Princes, or for fear of them, is to stretch forth his mouth into
Heaven. For contrariwise it might be said more probably, that those Doctors,
who do so vnmeasurably advance the Popes authority do speak for fear, or
favor of him, seeing that they are Ecclesiastical persons, who may by him get
greater preferment. And especially since that they say (although not well) that
the Pope does graciously embrace them, who do amplify his authority, and
depresseth them, who do speak against the same.

82 To make an end therefore now at the last of this Solution, and to answer
in form to the foresaid objection, it is answered first, that the Mayor
proposition, to wit, In doubtful, and disputahle matters the surer part is to
be chosen, is equivocal. For if by a doubtful matter be understood that, to
which our understanding gives no assent, or dissent at all, or which is all
one, which we neither judge to be true, nor false, we grant the Mayor, for in
such doubtful matters the surer part is to be chosen, as has been showed
before Nu. 21.
. But if by a doubtful matter be understood a disputable matter, to wit, which
is not certain, but is by Catholics disputed probably on both sides, in which
sense the vulgar sort do usually take doubtful, then we deny the Mayor: For in
such doubtful matters, whose truth, although it be not certain, yet is
probable, the surer part is not of necessity to he chosen, but, as we have
showed, it is sufficient to follow a secure, or probable opinion, to wit, which
prudent, and learned men do follow, although the greater part of Divines, and
also the Popes Holiness himself do defend the contrary: neither does he,
that follows such a probable opinion against the more common, and the more
probable opinion even of the Pope himself, expose himself to any danger of
imprudence, temeritie, or any other crime.

83 Secondly, the Minor also is easily answered; for the authority of the
learned Divines of these days, who think that the Oath is unlawful, and that
it contains in it many things flat contrary to faith, and salvation, does
not make their opinion to be certain, or doubtful, but only to be disputable,
and at the most to be more probable, then the contrary, if we regard only
extrinsecall and not intrinsecall grounds, that is, if we do not regard reason,
but only authority. Neither has his Holiness defined by his Breues, but only
declaring his opinion has affirmed, that the oath can not lawfully be taken,
for that it contains many things, which are clearly repugnant to faith and
salvation: for which cause he forbade Catholics to take it. But it is manifest
by that which has been said before, that the Popes declaratiue precept, which
is grounded on his own, or the probable opinion of others, is subject to
error, and that it has no more force to bind, then has the reason, or his
opinion, whereupon only it does depend. Neither are Catholics bound to follow
the Popes opinion, although it be far the more probable, or to obey his
declaratiue command, which is founded in his opinion, when it is repugnant to
the opinion of other Catholics, although it be the less probable: and then
especially, when to follow his opinion is very prejudicial to himself, or
others as it happens in this Oath, seeing that the refusing, thereof,
supposing that it contains no unlawful thing, is very hurtful to
Catholics, and greatly injurious to his Majesty.

84 The other parts of the objection, which seem to prove, that there is
greater danger of sinning by taking the oath, then by refusing it, are of small
moment: for greater, or less danger supposes a danger, but, as before we have
proved, there is no danger at all of incurring perjury, or any other crime by
taking the Oath, it being commanded by the authority of our lawful King, and
probably thought by virtuous and learned men to contain no unlawful
assertion. And so this Statute for taking the Oath, is not a mere penal law
binding only to punishment, and not to sin, but also a commanding precept,
and which also binds in conscience the Subjects to fulfill the lawful
command of their Prince, especially in those things, which are probably thought
to appertain to temporal allegiance, which is due to all lawful Princes by
the law of God, and nature. Neither do Catholics for that cause take the
oath, or think it to be lawful, because Protestants do command it, and
think it to be lawful, as though the Catholics, who take the Oath, do
prefer the opinion of Protestants before the judgment of Catholics, and of
the supreme Pastor over all the faithful, in things, which in some sort do
belong to Religion, as is the Religious taking of an oath; But because the
Kings Majesty being our lawful Prince, and Sovereign Lord in temporals what
Religion soever he be of, has commanded al his Subjects to take this Oath of
allegiance, which virtuous, and learned Catholics for probable reasons are of
opinion that it is truly an oath of Allegiance, and that it contains nothing,
which is contrary to Catholic faith, or Salvation, therefore Catholics to
obey the lawful command of their Prince do take this oath of Allegiance.

85 And doubtless, if the King and Parliament should command the Subjects, to
acknowledge by oath, that the Pope is not direct Lord of this kingdom in
temporalls, and that he has no direct power to depose our King, which
(nevertheless according to the doctrine of the Canonists does belong to the
Popes Primacie) and that notwithstanding any sentence of deprivation denounced
or to be denounced by the Pope by virtue of this direct power against our King,
they will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty etc. and that the
Pope by virtue of this direct power in temporals has no authority to absolve
him from this oath or any part thereof, and so of the rest, and his Holiness
following the Canonists opinion (who do with such vehemence defend this his
direct power in temporals over the whole Christian world, that the contrary
opinion they think to be heretical) should forbid by his Breues this manner
of oath, and declare that it contains (as the Canonists do imagine) many
things flat contrary to faith, and moreover the learned Divines of these days
should for the same reasons condemn the aforesaid oath, The very same
objection in the very same words, to wit, in doubtful and disputable matters
etc. which we have alleged against the oath of Allegiance commanded by the
King and Parliament, might also be brought against this oath, if the King and
Parliament should command it to be taken. And nevertheless without doubt
Cardinal Bellarmine, and those other learned Divines, who do vtturly reject
the Canonists opinion, would easily in the same manner, as we have now answered
to this objection, satisfy also the other. Wherefore this present objection
taken from the authority of his Holiness, and the other learned Divines of
these days in a disputable matter, which is probably disputed by Catholics on
both sides, can not even in the judgment of Card. Bellarmine be accounted a
forcible, and conuincing proof.

And thus much concerning this second objection, in examing whereof I have
been somewhat long, being desirous to give full satisfaction to timorous
consciences, and also for that the vnlearneder sort of persons might easily
discern, how far the Popes Breues, which are founded in his opinion, and
also in the probable opinion of other Divines, can bind Catholics to observe
them.

Sect. III.
1 THe third objection against the oath in general. which is made by Leonard
Lessius Nu. 214. et seq.
as also his English Recapitulator Page 46. and seq.
does rehearse, is taken from the great sca^dal, which may justly arise by the
taking of this Oath. And although Lessius urges this objection in such sort,
that he rather supposes, then thereby proves, the oath to be unlawful
according to the common understanding of the words, and that the swearer does
by some mental reservation take the words in some true, and lawful sense, yet
because, as we have said, this objection does not prove, but suppose the Oath
to be of it self unlawful, and sacrilegious, it may be further urged in this
manner.

2 According to the doctrine of Saint Paul 1. These. 5.
we must refrain ab omni specie mala, that is, according to the English
translation, from all show or apearance of evil: but no prudent man can make
any doubt, but that the taking of this oath, the former objections being duly
considered, has some show, and appearance of evil, and of denying the
Catholic faith, therefore we must refrain from the taking thereof.

3 To the first part of the objection, which Lessius urges, it is easily
answered. For he supposes, the Oath, according to the common understanding of
the outward words to be unlawful, and to contain in it other things besides
civil obedience, and that the swearer either by mental reservation, or
public protestation does take it so far forth as it contains only civil
obedience: Even as, says Lessius In the places before cited.
and his English Recapitulatour In the places before cited.
, if to obey an Heathen Magistrate a Catholic should put incense before an
Idol, although he did it not with the intent to worship the Idol, but to
honor God, who is every where present, yet should this external action be
accounted Idolatry, for that the circumstances of place, and time, and the
person, that commands, being considered, it would be judged a worship done
to the Idol, notwithstanding that he who offered the incense intended thereby
some other matter.

4 But this example, and diverse others brought by Lessius to the same purpose
do suppose the outward action of taking this Oath to be, all circumstances
duly considered, of it self unlawful, and to contain in it some other thing
then civil Obedience; and nevertheless it is evident by that which has been
said, that this external oath, whereof we treat, is not by any circumstances
of words, time, place or persons made unlawful, or that it contains any
thing which is contrary to faith or salvation: and therefore this objection
taken from this kind of scandal is altogether frivolous. Yea supposing that
this Oath does not contain in it any thing, which may not appertain to civil
obedience, and that moreover it is under great penalties commanded by good
authority of our lawful Prince, no man can make any question but that to
refuse it, were very scandalous to Catholic Religion very injurious to the
Kings Majesty, and very pernicious both to the temporal, and spiritual safety
of the refusers.

5 To the Second part of the objection taken from the authority of S. Paul it
is answered first, that if those words be understood in that sense, wherein
they seem to be taken in the objection, we might out of them evidently
convince, that no man can lawfully follow in practice the more common, and the
more probable opinion of Doctors, if the contrary opinion, which is less
probable, be more secure, which notwithstanding, as we have seen out of
Vasquez, is against the common opinion of Divines. The reason is manifest: for
supposing that the opinion, which is less probable, but more secure, be not
void of all probability, it must needs be, that the Authors, who do follow it,
have some probable reasons, which do show some appearance of evil to be in
that part less secure which the common opinion of Catholic Doctors does
follow; and consequently, if this objection were of force, we must according to
Saint Paul restrain from that part which is the more probable, but less
secure, as having in it some show, and appearance of evil. As for example it
is now the more common, and the more probable opinion o^ Divines, although many
Doctors especial Canonists do follow the contrary opinion, that it is not
mental usury to lend money with hope and expectation to receive some profit,
or gratuity thereby, so that this profit be expected not as due by justice, or
by virtue of any civil contract or obligation, but as a free, and liberal
gift upon mere benevolence, for that one good turn deserves another, and yet
according to this objection it were altogether unlawful to expect any such
gratui+:ty, or benevolence, seeing that therein is some show, and appearance of
evil, as is manifest both by the reasons which are brought to impugn this
common opinion, and also by those words of our Savior, Luc 6.
Mutuum date nihil inde sperantes. Lend hoping for nothing thereby.

6 Besides, as the arguments which are brought against the Oath do show that
there is some appearance of evil, and of denying the Catholic faith in taking
thereof, so also the answers which have been made unto them do evidently
show, that there is great appearance of evil, and of civil disobedience in
refusing thereof, considering that the taking of the Oath is commanded by the
just law of our lawful Prince, and therefore this text of holy Scripture may
be alleged to prove the refusing of the Oath as well as the taking thereof to
be unlawful.

7 Wherefore the aforesaid words of S. Paul, Refrain your selves, ab omni
specie mala, are to be understood one of these two ways; first, that we must
refrain ab omni specie mala, that is, from all kind or sort of evil, as the
latin word [species] is taken by the Logicians, and in which sense also it is
sometimes used in holy Scripture, as in the first Chapter of Genesis Verse.
12.21.24 25.
And God made the beasts of the earth, iuxta species suas according to their
kind. And the 28. of Ecclesiasticus. Tres species, etc. Three things, or three
sorts of men my soul hates, a poor man that is proud, a rich man that is a
liar, a foolish, and senseless old man; fo that the meaning of the words of S.
Paul may be this, Omnia probate, Prove, or try all things, to wit, which are
doubtful, as S. Thomas expounds, for things that are manifest, need no
trial: quod bonum est tenete, hold, or keep that which is good, Ab omni
specie mala, abstinete vos, from all kind of evil, both in words, deeds, and
writings, as well in things that belong to doctrine, as to manners refrain
your selves. And this exposition seems agreeable to that, which some of the
ancient Fathers do write upon this place, Probate, says S. Hierome, Try
whether that which is said be against the Law, if there, be any such thing
refrain from it. And Theophylactus, neque enim hoc, etc. Neither does the
Apostle bid us to refrain from this, or that thing, but utterly from every
thing, both from every false Prophet, and from all wicked deeds.

8 Or Secondly, the meaning of those words of the Apostle is, that for the
avoiding of scandal we must refrain not only from all kind of evil, or
from every evil thing, but also from all show, and appearance of evil, as S.
Anselme, S. Thomas, the Gloss of Nicolas de Lyra, and other later writers do
commonly interpret, and in our English Testament it is translated. And then the
aforesaid counsel, or command of the Apostle is either so to be understood,
that we must refrain from all show of evil, when in refraining there also
appears no show of evil, and so by refraining no scandal can arise: for
otherwise this text might be alleged both against the taking of the oath,
and also the refusing thereof, for that not only in taking it, but also in
refusing it there is, as we have said before, no little show or appearance of
evil: or else that we must refrain not only from all evil, but also from
all that wherein appears some show of evil, until it be declared that it is
in very deed lawful, as the Gloss upon that place does interpret these
words. But that this Oath may lawfully be taken has now been sufficiently
declared to Catholics, both for that there be now very few lay Catholics,
who if it be tendered them by the Magistrate, do refuse it, and where one
refuses to take it, almost twenty do take it, and do think that with a
safe conscience they may lawfully take it: and especially because there can be
alleged no one particular clause of this Oath, which contains any thing
which is clearly repugnant to faith, and salvation, as we have showed by
examining every particular clause. As for Protestants, those frivolous
exceptions, which Cardinal Bellarmine, Gretzer, and others do take against the
Oath, do give exceeding great scandal unto them, who therefore are persuaded,
that the doctrine which Cardinal Bellarmine maintains to be Catholic is a
Seminary of treason, and that according to it no evil Prince, or who is not a
Catholic, can be secure of the true, and constant allegiance of their
Catholic Subjects, which whether this give just occasion of scandal, and be
a cause that the Catholic faith does not so much increase as otherwise it
would, I remit to ye judgment of the prudent Reader.

9 Lastly, and principally it is answered, that the aforesaid, and such like
texts of holy Scripture, wherein we are forbid to give any scandal either by
word or deed which is evil, or has in it show and appearance of evil, they are
to be understood, as also we have insinuated elsewhere, In my Apologet.
Answer nu. 87. and in the Preface to the same nu. 21.
not of passive, as the Divines do speak or received scandal, but of active,
and given scandal: to wit, that neither by word, nor deed we give our neighbor
any cause of offending: but if any one by our good deed will take scandal where
it is not given, not we but himself is to be blamed therefore. Yet in this al
do agree that no action at al either belonging to doctrine or manners, which is
commanded by a just Law, can be a true and sufficient occasion of scandal; and
if any one perchance be thereby scandalized, it is accounted by the Divines to
be a passive, not active, a taken not given scandal.

10 Wherefore Alphonsus Salmeron a very learned Jesuit, and one of the first
ten by whose help that Society was instituted, upon that place of the Gospel
Matthew. 15. Let them alone, they are blind, etc. writes thus: By these words we
are instructed, that scandals taken by proper malice, (which we call passive)
are not to be regarded, and scandal is rather permitted to arise, then the
truth of Faith, or of life, or of justice to be forsaken. For these sorts of
scandalls are, as we have said, called passive, which another man through his
own frailty takes by my good life, or by the faith and justice which I
embrace. But the scandal of the weak, or of the little ones is to be avoided,
as our Savior Christ commanded, when he said, Whosoever shall scandalize one
of these little ones etc. He also by his own example taught the same in this
place; because by these words he taught that the scandal of the Pharisees is
not to be regarded. Otherwise Christ should never have preached, nor the
Catholic truth against heretics, who were scandalized, have been defined.
But the multitude he called unto him, and instructed, and taught them that they
should not be scandalized. But if now and then there be some, who are not so
capable of the truth, then if the doctrine or action which does scandalize be
not necessary, or very convenient and profitable, we must yield somewhat to the
weakness of the lttle ones. But if the great ones take this scandal, they
are not to be regarded, for they are incurable, because they are blind, that
is, they will not see, and understand what God inspireth in them, etc.

11. According therefore to this doctrine of Salmeron, which also is the common
of other Divines, to make this argument, which is drawn from the nature of
scandal, to have any force, (to wit, that although this Oath of it self be
not evil, yet there is in it no little show and appearance of evil, and
therefore according to the doctrine of the Apostle, we must refrain from the
taking thereof) it must first be proved that the taking of this Oath, and the
acknowledging of the doctrine therein contained, is neither necessary, nor very
profitable to Catholics, which doubtless, supposing this Oath to be of it
self lawful, and that it is imposed upon the Subjects by the command of the
Prince, under very great penalties, our Adversaries will never be able to
demonstrate. For what exceeding great dangers Catholics do incur if they
refuse it, and what great scandal so weak a confuting thereof does give to
the Protestants, we have sufficiently showed before.

12. And truly, if we once suppose that this Oath, is not unlawful, nor does
contain in it any thing flat contrary to faith and salvation, I do not see
with what show of probability this argument which is taken from the scandal,
can be urged, seeing that now the greater part of Catholics do take it,
neither can the taking thereof give to Catholics any other just cause of
offending, then that other Catholics by the example of these who have taken
the Oath, should also do the like, which if it be once granted to be lawful,
can give to others no occasion of offending. But if any great ones interpreting
the Oath in an evil sense, do take occasion of offending by their
detractions, reproachful speeches and rash judgments, whiles they Judge
rashly, and are not afraid openly to auoch, and do with all their might
endeavor to persuade the common people, that those Catholics, who have taken
the Oath, have denied their faith, are revolted from their Religion, and are
not to be accounted true Catholics, but Apostates, the cause of their
offending in this sort, is not the taking of the Oath, but either their own
ignorance, or malice, and therefore as Salmeron did very well say, as being
blind, and incurable, they are not to be regarded. They hurt in deed greatly
the good name, and credit of other men, but their own consciences they do
wound more grievously, and they are to remember, that the sin is not forgiven
unless restitution be made: and that acording to the most certain rule of
charity, and approved by all Divines, doubtful matters, and which may have a
good interpretation, are not to be interpreted in the worser sense, and much
less to be wrested to that sense which is most bad; which is now, I speak it
with grief, very frequent among some of our country men, who as soon as they
do perceive any man to oppose himself against their opinions or actions, and
not to favor their proceedings, they are not afraid to assault him with all
their power, to speak of him reproachfully, to charge him with any wicked
crimes, and to diuulge them among the commong people, although they have their
first beginning from some idle rumor, or from their own mere suspicion.
These be the scandals, from which the Apostle warns us to refrain, wherein
there is not only a show or appearance of evil, but which in deed are most
wicked evils, and clearly against the laws of charity and justice, whereby the
Catholic Religion is laughed to scorn, and by our adversaries is greatly
disgraced.

Sect. IIII.
1. THe fourth objection against the Oath in general is taken from the ill hap,
and badde success which chanced to those Priests who took the Oath, and
defended it to be lawful. For the first Captain of them Master Blackwell was
taken away upon the sudden and unawares, and did also at the hour of his
death, as some give out, recall his former error. An other also died suddenly:
two others revolted from their faith; and the fifth lives now in the house of
the Bishop of Winchester, and what in the end will become of him, may with
just cause be greatly feared, therefore by these examples other men may be
forewarned, that they take heed how they take the Oath, or to defend that it
may lawfully be taken.

2. To this objection it is answered first, that as it is not a sufficient
argument to prove such a doctrine to be false, or such an action to be
unlawful, for that it is defended by heretics, when especially true
believers do also defend the same, seeing that no heretic does in all points
of faith dissent from true believers: So also it is not a sufficient argument
to prove, that this Oath, or any other action is unlawful, for that it was
maintained by certain Priests, who then were Catholics, but now are revolted
from the Catholic faith, especially if other Catholics who still persist in
the Catholic faith, do with all their might defend the same.

3. Secondly, if the bad success of some few Priests who have defended the
Oath be a sufficient reason to condemn it as unlawful, by an argument from
the contrary, as the Logicians term it, also the bad success of some
Priests, who have been vehement against the Oath, is a sufficient cause to
prove it to be lawful, but not only some few Priests who have taught that the
Oath is lawful, but also who have exceedingly exclaimed against the oath, have
had somewhat bad successes; as may appear by three Priests, to say nothing of
Lay men, who lived in the North parts of this Realm: Whereof one being a man
otherwise very healthie, was so suddenly stricken with a deadly disease, that
scarce sixteen hours before his death he feared any sickness at all; an
other falling down a pair of stairs, was bruised in such sort that he lived
not long after Another leaping in haste over an hedge fell into a pit, which was
on the other side the hedge, and o was cast away.
: the third, who did the most vehemently of them all enueigh against the Oath,
as soon as he was taken by the officers, and brought before the Magistrate to
be examined, did not only refuse to take even the Oath of the Kings Supremacy
in Ecclesiastical causes, but also as it were in an instant before he was
committed to prison, he did to the great admiration of all those who were
present, utterly revolt from that Catholic faith, which for many years before
he had professed.

4. Thirdly, if the evil success of some few Priests, who have defended the
lawfulness of the Oath, be a sufficient reason to prove it to be unlawful,
by an argument also from the contrary the good success of certain Priests,
who have taught it to be lawful, is also a sufficient reason to prove that it
may lawfully be taken. But our Adversaries will not, as I suppose, deny, but
that Master Drury and Father Roberts the first a Secular Priest, and the other
a Religious of the Order of Saint Bennet, made both of them happy ends; and
nevertheless it is known to all men, that Master Drury as soon as the Oath
was published, did even to the last gasp openly maintain the same, and this
he did publicly protest at his Arraignement before the Judge and all the
standers by, whereof there was a very great multitude: And nevertheless he
being desirous to dye for that cause, for which he was condemned by the Judge,
did himself refuse to take the Oath, even to save his own life, which was
freely offered him by the Judge, if he would take the same, being assuredly
persuaded by the advice of some whom I could name, that neither he, nor any
other Priest, (for concerning Laymen he was of an other opinion) by reason of
the diversity of opinions which were then freshly begun among Catholics,
concerning the lawfulness of the Oath, was bound in conscience to take the
same, although he thought undoubtedly and also avouched the same, that any man
whatsoever might lawfully take it.

5. Likewise it is also certain, that although Father Roberts, did not
publicly teach that the Oath was lawful, for that his Holiness by his
Breues, had declared the contrary, and had commanded the English Priests, not
to teach that it might lawfully be taken, nevertheless even until death, he
perseuered in this opinion, that there was nothing contained in the Oath, which
was contrary to faith or salvation, neither would he put any scruple into the
minds of his ghostly children concerning the refusing of the same. For two
principal reasons (as he has oftentimes acknowledged to my self and others)
he was persuaded that the Oath might lawfully be taken; the first was, for that
he could not yet perceive, that those learned men, who had written against it,
had hitherto sufficiently proved, that it contained any thing, which was
contrary to faith or salvation. The other was, that when he was at Paris, he
craved the opinions of two most learned Divines of that nation, concerning the
lawfulness of the Oath, and at length through his great entreaty, they gave
him this answer, that they for their own parts had not hitherto observed in
it any thing which might not be taken, and that scarce any subject of the King
of France, as they thought, would stagger to take the like Oath, if it were by
public authority, commanded them under so great penalties: And that this is
most true, he has diverse times protested to me, and many others, and his own
hand writing, which is kept even until this day, can, if need require, yield
sufficient testimony hereof.

6. Fourthly, and lastly, to say somewhat in particular concerning those
persons, who are touched in the objection, first of all it is false, that
Master Blakwell did ever recall his opinion concerning the lawful taking of
the oath; but, as it shall presently appear, did even to his last hour
persist therein. His death may doubtless in some sort be called sudden, for
that very few hours he lay sick in bed, neither did he expect any certain
day or month when he should dye, before almost the very last hour of his
departure. Yet because both in regard of his old age, his spirits almost
exhausted, the unsound constitution of his body, and especially of an
extraordinary shortness of breath, and diverse obstructions wherewith he was
continually oppressed, he oftentimes and seriously avouched to me and others,
that he should for the aforesaid causes be taken away suddenly, and therefore
having death in continual expectation, his death although it may be called
sudden, yet doubtless it came not unawares and unexpected. In this manner
therefore he departed this life. Upon a Satterday Being the 25. of January.
1612.
in the after noone he went down from his chamber to make his confession, as
usually he was wont to do, which after he had ended, and departing from the
chamber of his ghostly Father, he perceived a great faintness, and a
disposition to sowneing to grow upon him, but a little after he came into a
more pure and open air, he found himself far better. After he was come to
his own chamber, he fell into a sudden sown, but by the diligence of those
Priests, who incontinently were present, he was brought to himself again, and
after he had put off his clothes, and was laid in bed, he humbly craved those
Ecclesiastical rites, which usually are given to those who are extremely sick,
if they should judge it requisite. And being demanded by a certain Priest,
what his opinion was now concerning the Oath, he answered, that he did that
which seemed to him more probable, that he had done nothing against his
conscience, and that even now he continued in the same opinion concerning the
lawfulness of the Oath, which he had heretofore mantained. Afterward diverse
Priests hearing of his sudden sickness came to his chamber, and then he
earnestly requested the whole world and all them who were present, and
especially one by name, with whom in former times he was in great controversy,
to pardon him, if he had offended them in any thing, and protested, that he was
a child of the Catholic Roman Church, and that he so intended to dye. And as
for opinions, that he followed his conscience, and that which seemed to him
just, and probable, yet if he had offended God in any thing, that he humbly
asked him forgiveness. Which speech being ended, he falling into a sown
again, so departed this life. By which asking God forgiveness can not be
gathered, that he had any doubtful, but rather a pious and timorous
conscience, it being the part of pious minds, as witnesses Saint Gregory the
great, there also in some sort to acknowledge a fault where there is no fault,
and yet he did not absolutely acknowledge this fault, for that he found not
himself guilty thereof, but conditionally if peradventure he had offended,
he humbly requested God to cleanse him from his hidden sins. I omit to speak
how religious, and without blame his conversation was after he had taken the
Oath, for of this all those who have lived with him in prison, can give
sufficient testimony.

6. Concerning Master Iackson, it is true doubtless, as it is thought, that
he dyed of the plague. But have not also very many holy men, as Saint Jews
King of France dyed of the same disease? But what if he did get that infection
by doing some good and charitable work, as Saint Jews did in that war
against the Saracines, may we rightly from hence conclude, that action by
reason of the ill success which followed, if it ought to be called evil, to
be unlawful? He dyed indeed, as it is credibly thought, of that infection, but
his death was not unexpected, for day by day he looked when he should depart
this world, and being strengthened with all the Sacraments of holy Church, he
prepared himself every minute of an hour to dye.

7. Concerning Mr. Warmington, so the case stands. After he had written a book
in defense of the Oath, he was wholly deprived of that common Alms, which from
the benevolence of some good persons, is sometimes sent to those, who are
detained in prison: whereof he being deprived, and having no other thing to
provide him necessaries for his sustenance besides the benevolence of pious
men, he most clearly perceived, that if he should remain any long time in
prison, he should be in danger to perish of famine; neither did he think it
safe for him to go beyond the Seas (although perchance he might have obtained
leave of his Majesty to depart the Realm) for that he was accounted by these
vehement impugners of the Oath to be a schismatike, an heretic and an
Apostata. He being therefore in this distress, and withal persuading
himself, that by taking or defending the Oath he had committed no offense, he
thought he had no other remedy to deliver him from extreme beggary, then to
make humble petition to his Majesty, that out of his Princely commiseration,
he would be pleased to bestow upon him something, whereby his extreme want
might be relieved: especially, seeing that the chiefest cause of his misery and
poverty was, for that he had publicly by word and writing professed himself
to be a faithful and constant subject unto his Majesty. Whose petition his
Majesty mercifully granting, wrote his letters to the Bishop of Winchester,
that he would provide him in his own house those things which were necessary
for his relief. Which answer Master Warmington having received, was
exceedingly troubled, as he protested to all the Priests who were in that
prison, doubting that his abode in the Bishop of Winchester his house, would
give some scandal to weak Catholics. But after he had diligently considered
the matter, and calling to his mind that ancient proverb, that beggars must
be no choosers, least that not being contented with that which is offered them,
they get nothing at all, he thought it his best course of two evils to choose
the lesser, and to accept of the condition which was offered him by his
Majesty, and the Bishop, and by that means to preserve his life, which by
lawful ways the law of nature does give us leave to do, then by miserable
famine, which is a continual dying, to pine away in prison, Assuredly
persuading his conscience with the common opinion of Divines, that a thing of
it self lawful, if it be necessary, yea and also according to Salmeron if it
be very profitable, can be a just occasion of any scandal given.

8. Wherefore although that sentence of Saint Chrysostom, no man is hurt, but
by himself, be most true, and every man ought rather to suffer whatsoever
calamities, then to forsake his faith; nevertheless, if any mishap, either
spiritual or temporal, has afterward fallen to them who have taken the
Oath, it ought not to be imputed to the taking of the Oath, which being of it
self lawful, can be no just cause of any spiritual ruin, but rather it is
to be attributed to the immoderate detractions, backbytings, persecutions, and
unchristianlike proceedings of some, who are so vehement against those Priests,
who have taken the oath, or taught it to be lawful, as to a more immediate
cause. And truly if this argument drawn from the bad success of some Priests,
be sufficient to prove the Oath unlawful, in the like manner it might be
proved, that any just action whatsoever is evil and unjust, if one for it
should be persecuted and brought into great miseries, and so at the length
thereby to forsake his Religion, and become an Apostata. As for example, if a
Catholic Priest, being wrongfully oppressed by his Bishop, should lawfully
appeal to the Metropolitan, and coming to his court for redress, should not
only find there no succor, and easing of his vexation, but also by reason of
the potencie of his Bishop, and the evil information which he has given
against him, should there be used far more hardly then before, should be cast
into prison, be suspended from using his Orders, and enjoying his benefice, and
at the last should be confined into some corner of the Land, and he seeing such
bad dealing, should desperately forsake the Catholic faith, and become a
runnagate to the adversaries thereof, were it lawful, I pray you, to conclude
from hence, that the appeal of this Catholic Priest, by reason of the bad
success, was unjust, or that his reuolting from his faith, is to be imputed to
his just appeal, or rather to the iniquity of his Bishop unjustly oppressing
him? The chiefest cause doubtless of his Apostacy, was either his own
infirmity, or malice, but no small occasion also of his fall is to be ascribed
to his unjust vexation, neither is his lawful appeal to be accounted any
cause or occasion at all of reuolting from his faith. And this very same may in
some sort be applied to those Priests, who after they had taken the Oath, and
taught it to be lawful, being exceedingly enueighed against, accounted no
others then Apostates, and deprived of the common benevolence which relieved
their wants, did at the length revolt from their faith.

9. Finally, all that which at the most can be gathered, from the bad success
of some few Priests, who have taken the Oath, is this, that every one who has,
any doubt concerning the lawful taking of the Oath ought diligently to examine
all, and every clause thereof, but doubtless no sufficient argument can be
drawn from the bad success, and evil event to conclude the Oath to be
unlawful, and that with a safe conscience it cannot be taken.

Sect. V.
1 THe fifth, and last objection against the Oath in general is, that it has
been sufficiently proved that the Oath is unlawful, not only by the
aforesaid reasons and authorities, but also the same has been confirmed by
divine revelations. For to omit some uncertain rumors, and which are scarce
credible, of certain visions and apparitions, it is known to most Catholics,
and it is also published abroad, that a Catholic young man, called Thomas
Newton does constantly relate, (which his relation he has both oftentimes
confirmed by word of mouth, and also for a perpetual memory thereof, put it
down in writing) that the most blessed Virgin S. Mary did upon a certain night
To wit the fourth of September. 1612. a little before midnight.
appear unto him lying in his bed with a Protestant young man called Edward
Sutton, and did expressly command him that he should not take the Oath. And that
this apparition is very true it is proved also by the testimony of this
Protestant young man, who with his loud crying out did awake the said Newton
being a sleep, and did foretell him of the vision which was presently to
appear unto him, and with all cried out pitifully, that he was damned only
for that he had already taken the Oath. Seeing therefore that this doctrine,
which defends the Oath to be lawful, has been confuted by so many
invincible reasons, impugned by so many most learned men of these days,
condemned by his Holiness in his Breues, and now at the last expressly
forbidden by the most blessed Mother of God, what Catholic, unless he be
stark mad dare avouch, that notwithstanding all this it may with a safe
conscience be taken by Catholics.

Before I answer this objection, I thought it expedient to set down in this
English Edition the true copy of the Relation word by word as it lies, which
is as follows.

A Relation of Thomas Newton Gentleman of Pickworth in the county of Lincoln
concerning a vision appearing unto him, and to one Edward Sutton of Kellam, in
the county of Nottingham Gentleman, this 4. of September. Anno. 1612.
BEing in my journey toward London, in Standford in the countye of Lincoln,
about the space of five or six hours with Mr. Sutton in my company, I was
upon the sudden in the street staid by the Constables for having beaten an
Irish boy which attended upon me, who said also, there was other matters to be
laid to me; and my companion adjoining himself unto me, and expostulating the
matter with them about my apprehension, we were both committed to the Town
Hall upon Sunday the 29. of August, where we continued until Wednesday
following, having no bed to lie upon, and for the space of four and twenty
hours having no meat allowed us to eat; and upon the Wednesday we were both
brought before the Earl of Excester, who finding no matter of accusation
against us, we were both set at liberty. In the mean time searching the place
where we lay, they found a Primmer and a pair of beads and thereupon the
Friday following we were both again brought before my Lord, who first
demanded of Mr. Sutton whether he was a Papist, to which he answered, he might
as well prove him an Atheist as a Papist; then he asked him whose were the
book and beads, to the which he answered, that they were his, and that he had
kept them for the love of a Gentlewoman, which once gave him the book and
beads, and that for her sake he had kept them; and then being demanded whether
he would take the Oath of Allegiance, he desired at the first to be excused,
for that he had taken it before, but in fine being urged again, he took it
according to the statute, and the same being proposed unto me, I desired time
to consider of it, because I never perused it, nor conferred with any
Catholic about it, which was given me for the space of two days, whereupon
I was committed to the Towne-Hall again, and my companion with me, because he
could not bring bail, as the Constables required, urging before my Lord, that
we might both be bound to the peace. Being returned to the Towne-Hall, and
discoursing together with my companion, he demanded what we should have to
Supper, I told him I was not wont to sup on Fridaies, and that I would have
nothing but a few pears, and a cup of water, to which he answered that he
would take such part as I did; and so eating of those pears, and drinking
water together, he told me that it was the most pleasing supper, that ever he
had eaten; and he desired also to wash himself with that water which was
brought up in a bucket for us. And entering into some discourse with my
companion about the Oath, alleging my reason why I refused to take it, he
answered that he had never considered of the matter, but that he had done as he
saw others do; whereupon I betook my self to my devotions, desiring almighty
God to direct me in my answer, when I should be called next before my Lord;
and so spent about the space of three hours or more upon my knees commending
my self to God, and to all the holy Saints of heaven, and in particular to the
Blessed Virgin of whose glorious assumption in body into Heaven I suffered at
that time some scruple and distraction in my prayers; and also another scruple
I suffered about the prayers of Saints, whether they were available for me or
not, which distraction I desired almighty God to put away from me, I finding
my self troubled therewith in my prayers.

Now my companion being gone to bed before me, after some few prayers that he
had said (where he refused to make the sign of the cross as I had willed him)
I went also to bed, and after I had commended my self to almighty God, I began
to fall a sleep, which was about eleven of the clock, and within less then
half an hour after I was in bed, my companion began to rise out of the bed,
crying out he was a damned wicked wretch, only for taking the Oath, and how
happy are you, said he, that are to receive such heavenly comfort by having
only taken time to think of it, desiring me to pray for him. Then I willed him
to make the sign of the cross, which he did willingly, and then crept down
into the bed, saying that he durst not look up to behold the vision which was
for me to look upon, but desired me to pray for him, saying that he was only
to be a witness of the favor which God vouchsafed to do form; and so
lifting up mine eyes I saw the room where we were shining with a most
glorious resplendent light, and brightness, and with all the mystery of the
blessed Trinity was represented to my understanding with great comfort; and
after this there appeared the B. Virgin all shining in a white Robe, and with
an innite number of Angels about her, holding a crown over her head, singing
in honor of the blessed Trinity, Alleluia, gloria in excelsis Deo, etc. Then I
thought the blessed virgin spoke unto me in this manner, behold, see, and
believe my assumption in body and withal said, take not the Oath, but rather
endure all torments, for I will be with thee and assist thee in all, and will
strengthen and preserve thee from all pains and torments with such
consolations as thou now feel. This vision of our Lady and the angels
continued about the space of half an hour, and a little before they vanished
away, there appeared also a multitude of holy Saints and Martyrs offering up as
it were incense unto almighty God, which I conceived to be the fruit of those
prayers wherewith I recommended my self unto them; and me thought they said
unto me, double thy devotion unto the Saints, for nothing is more acceptable
unto almighty God: New for the time of this vision both my self and my
companion were without the use of our tongues, I looking upon the Blessed
Virgin and the Angels and Saints then appearing, and he crowching down in the
bed as fearing to look upon them; but the vision being ended our speech
returned unto us, and I begun to cry with a loud voice Alleluia, gloria etc.
which my companion did also in like manner, uttering those prayers which never
in all his life he could say nor scarce understand, as I think before that
time, saying unto me, that now he was taught how to pray, and so we continued
the space of three hours or thereabouts, crying out with so loud a voice, that
we were heard more then a furlong off from that place; and diverse of the town
hearing us came near unto us, and cried out against us using words unto us
which I do not remember. Thus we continued for the space of three or four
hours, so long as the light continued in the room, being not able in all this
time to rise out of our bed: And in the morning the keeper with some others
brought us again unto my Lord, telling him how we had cried out all that
night, and called upon the Saints, and bringing with them a paper, which as
soon as we were risen out of our bed, we had written of that vision, which
appeared unto us, which I did by the persuasion of Master Sutton, who told me
that he was a witness of all that had appeared unto us and that it appeared
principally to me and to him also for his better instructions in Religion; as
also of his fathers and friends, and that he might be a witness of the favor
which God had showed me, and so appearing again before my Lord, and being
demanded of the vision we both confirmed it, and as well he justified the
truth of that Religion, whereunto he was called, and I also the like,
confirming also the doctrine of prayer to Saints by many places of Scripture,
as also the assumption of our Blessed Lady in body, to the which purpose I
alleged the place in the Apocalips ca. 12. signum magnum in coelo, the which
place I never had seen, or heard before in all my life, but that time I
uttered as readily as if I had seen it before mine eyes. Upon this I was
delivered over to the Sheriff and by him brought to the Bishop and by him set
at liberty. Master Sutton was delivered over to Protestants and ministers, who
told him that he was mad, and that vision was from the Devil, and so by
whipping his hands, and binding him, with want of sleep and such hard usage,
and terrifying speeches of the Devil, and such like, he became distracted of
his wits, and so remains for any thing that I know; though for two days
after this vision upon my knowledge he was not only in perfect sense, but very
civil and modest and much reclaimed from swearing, and other disorderly
behavior, and finding him about eight days after in Grantham, though
otherwise he seemed distracted, yet to me he spoke very sensible, and desired
to have private speech with me, which would not be permitted.

2 This vision may perchance somewhat move the ignorant people, and some other
over credulous persons, who do use to make great reckoning of every idle rumor
which may serve their own turn: but to prudent and learned men, who know
right well what a hard matter it is to discern when any spirit comes from
God, and which apparition, although it be true, and not feigned, proceeds
from a good or evil spirit, who sometime transfigureth himself into an Angel
of light, it is a very friuoulous proof. For concerning visions, and
apparitions, as it does not belong to all men, says Gerson In tract. de
probatione spirituum versus principium.
, to prophecy, nor to all men to Euangelize, nor to all men to interpret
speeches, but to some by office until the end of the world, so it does not be
long to all men to try or prove the spirits if they be of God, but to whom it
is given, as are spiritual persons, whom the unction teaches of all things,
also do judge of all things even between day, and who day.

3 First therefore although we grant an apparition to be true, not forged,
real, not imaginary (for now and then they also that be awake, do through a
vehement imagination think that to have happened in very deed, which was only
done in imagination) yet by reason of the daily illusions also of spiritual
persons Martinus Delrius lib. 4. Disquit. Magi. cap 1. q 3. in principio.
, it is a hard matter for him, that has a revelation to know certainly
whether it come from God, or the Devil, seeing that oftentimes the wicked
spirit, when he intends under pretense of good to draw a man to evil, does
appear in the form of an Angel, or of an other Saint, yea, and sometimes
which the ears do abhor to hear, also of Christ our Lord crucified,
whereof many examples are related by Martinus Delrius In the Book above cited
ca. 1. q. 3. sec. 5.
a Divine of the Society of Jesus, of which three only at this present I will
rehearse.

4 The first is of Secundellus a Deacon, of whom Gregorius Turonensis Lib. de
Vitis Patrum cap 10.
writes thus: Saint Friardus with Secundellus the Deacon did remain in the
Island Vindunita without ever departing from thence; yet both of them had there
peculiar cells, but a goodwaie distant one from the other: And being fervent at
their prayers the tempter appeared in the night to Secundellus the Deacon in
the shape of our Savior, saying, I am Christ whom thou do continually pray
unto: Thou art now a Saint, and I have written thy name in the book of life
with the rest of my Saints: Depart now from this Island, and go do cures among
the people. And he being enticed with these deceits departed from the Island,
neither did he acquaint his companion therewith; nevertheless when in the name
of Christ he did put his hands upon sick persons they were cured: neither did
he perceive that he was deluded by the tempter until after a longtime when
he was returned back to the Island, by the prayers, and admonitions of Saint
Friardus he certainly knew the same.

5 The second example he relates out of Iacobus Vitriacus Lib. 1. vitae B.
Mariae Oeniacens. cap. 9.
who writes thus: One of her chief friends (to wit of B. Marie Oeniacenae)
was one time by so much the more dangerously by how much the more craftily
molested with a noone day Devil walking in the dark. For the crafty enemy
transfiguring himself into an Angel of light did under show of godliness
appear unto him familiarly in his sleep some times reprehending some faults
of his, and also guilefully exhorting him to do some good deeds, that having
first offered him a false show of godliness as a certain preservative against
poison, he might afterward more secretly by little and little pouer in his
poison, and having flatteringly put forth his tongue ointed with honey, he might
afterward fasten in his tooth, and at the last stretch forth his tail as a
Cedar tree. For when now he was believed as one who tells truth, then this
traitor like a cosener, and deceiuer did mix falsehoods with some truths,
pretending trecherously by his mingling of good things some color to his
falsehoods. And at the last by his deceiptfull shifts, he drew that brother so
far, that his proceedings had come to a most wicked end, unless the handmaid
of Christ, the holy Ghost revealing it unto her, had learned the deceipts of
this crafty beguiler, etc.

Ex annuis literis Iesuitaru^ prouinciae Mediolanensis anno. 1590.
6 The third example he relates out of Franciscus Beucius, who writes, that
in a village near to Arona the Devil appeared in the night to a certain
maid in the likeness of Saint Vrsula carrying before the banner of the cross
with a troop of many Virgins, and thus spoke unto her: God sees and loves
this thy purpose to keep thy virginity, but because it is a very hard matter to
keep thy mind altogether undefiled in thy Fathers house among so many
dangers, which are oftentimes cast before thy eyes, he has sent us to guide
thee to a monastery of sacred Virgins, who having left all cares do serve him
devoutly. Here the maid, God inspiring her, when fearing the deceits of the
Devil she had made the sign of the cross drawing her right hand from her
head to her breast, and presently from her left hand to her right,
acknowledges her self to be most unworthy of such visions, and of so great an
honor. Neither truly, says she, do I greatly believe you, and I do fear
feigned guile in your fair speeches. But if you are sent by God, do humble
reverence to these Saints relics (for she had relics hanging about her
neck.) It is wonderful to speak the evil spirits fell down upon their knees
worshipping the Relics, and so much the more they urge her to hasten her
departure. But it is not lawful for me, (says she) to do any thing of
importance without my Ghostly Fathers leave, neither is it fitting for me to
go unto him at this unseasonable time of night, go you unto him, and declare
the commandment of God, when it is day I will go unto him and follow his
advise. With this answer the Devils setting aside all dissembling did hide
themselves in their darkness, raging against the maid, crying earnestly out
against her with reproachful words, she laughing them to scorn that they did
only fight with their tongues, and humbly giving thanks to almighty God.
Hitherto Bencius. By which it is plainly gathered, how hard a matter it is
even for spiritual persons, and much more for them who are little or nothing
practiced in spiritual life, to discern, whether an apparition be a revelation
from God, or an illusion of the Devil, especially in these times: For in times
past, as Delrius says, q. 3. cit. sec. 1.
Divine visions were more frequent, because they were more necessary, now a
days being not so necessary, they are less frequent, and therefore more to be
suspected, that for just cause they ought both to be examined by the
Ecclesiastical Magistrate, and also shunned by private men. Of wc visions John
Gerson Loc. cit. et in tract de distinct verarum visionum a falsis.
, Delrius Lib. 4. c. 1. q. 3.
and others cited by Delrius do largely treat, and do assign many rules to
try spirits, if they be of God, of which I will set down some which are more
chiefly to be observed.

7. One therefore, as says Delrius, q. 3. cit. sec. 1.
either judges of his own apparition, or of an other man's, and there is more
danger in the former case, in both he must be a spiritual and devout person,
for the sensual man perceives not those things that are of the spirit of God
1. Cor. 2.
. And to discern ones own apparition there may be considered as it were two
manner of ways: the one is experimental, which together with his own
revelation is infused in him who has the revelation; [which manner, as Gerson
says, is done by an inward inspiration, or an inward feeling and delight^, or
by an experimental sweetness, or by an enlightening from the heavenly
mountains putting away all darkness of any doubt.] And this manner is rare,
and granted to few, and they, to whom it is not granted, may not in their own
revelations stand to their own judgments, and these to whom it is granted by
God, may not use it to discern the revelations of other men; For as no man
knows the things of the spirit, but the spirit himself, 1. Cor. 2.
so no man knows with an infallible certainty by this experimental feeling
those things which are in an other man's mind.

8 The other way to discern spirits, which they call doctrinall, which also is
in some part common to the discerning of other men's visions, is by a diligent,
and pious using of the holy Scripture, which prescribes rules to discern
false Prophets from true, Also the reading of the holy Fathers, and
Ecclesiastical Histories are very profitable to distinguish by peculiar signs,
and marks illusions from revelations. To these if the observation of
spiritual men, and experience be added, and in doubtful, and obscure things
be asked the counsel of learned, and godly men, and who have made great
progress in the way of the spirit, and have been long practiced in fighting
against the trecheries of the Devil, there is hope that deceipts will that way
be perceived and avoided. Without doubt to this second manner of giving ones
judgment only doctrine does not suffice, but there must be added unto it ones
own experience, that he be learned and contemplative, and that he has not
slightly learned the holy Scripture, and the rest of Divinity, and that he
has had experience in him self, says Gerson, of the strife and combat of
spiritual afflictions, as though now he ascended up to the heavens, and now
descended into bottomless gulfes, and saw the wonders of God in the depth. For
they that sail upon this mystical sea of diverse affections, as wauesbeating
together, do declare the wonders thereof. But he that has not had experience
of such things, what knows he of them?] And to this there is not found a more
necessary disposition then of solid humility, for as Moses does say, as we
read in Cessianus, this knowledge is given by God only to humble men.

9 Finally, we must not be too rash in giving our judgment, but we must first
diligently commend the matter to God, and make many examinations in our mind,
which Delrius confirms by the testimonies of many Saints, and especially of
the most Blessed Mother of God, who before she made answer to the Archangell
Gabriell, saluting her, thought what manner of salutation this should be, and
that not lightly, but (...) with mature and long deliberation she considered in
her mind, whether that salutation was an illusion or no, and proceeded from
God, or the Diaell, as Euthymius very well does note. Verily when the thing is
doubtful, it is far more safe to reject it with a godly humility, then
greedily and confidently to admit it, and assent unto it, as the examples of
holy Fathers do witness, who shunned this curiosity of visions and miracles,
as a thing most pernicious and deceitful. As one Saint when the Devil
transfiguring himself into the shape of Christ, said unto him, I am Christ
come to visit thee personally, for that thou art worthy, presently with both
his hands closed his eyes crying out, I will not here see Christ, it suffices
if I shall see him in glory, and forthwith he vanished away. An other did with
other words observe the like humility in the like illusion, Look, says he,
to whom thou art sent, I undoubtedly am not such a one, that am worthy here to
see Christ. And the blessed Virgin Coleta answered even God himself, who was
willing to reveal unto her many secrets, My Lord God it is sufficient for me
to know only thee and my sins, and to obtain pardon for them from thee.
Stephanus Iuliacus in her life. ca. 5.
See also many other things which the aforesaid Doctors do observe for one to
examine his own visions.

10. Concerning the examining of other men's apparitions, whether they come from
a good or an evil spirit, many rules are prescribed by the same Doctors. If
there come unto thee, says Gerson In tractat. de distinct. veraru^ visionum a
falsis parum a principio.
, any one who earnestly affirms that he has had a revelation, as we know by
the sacred history, that Zacharias, and other Prophets have had, what shall we
do, in what manner shall we behave our selves? If presently we deny or scorn,
or reprove all, we shall seem to weaken the authority of divine regulation,
which is now, as well as heretofore potent, for his hand is not shortened that
he can not reveal. We shall also scandalize the simple who may say, that so we
might calumniate or slander all I think the word [nostris ours] is an error in
Gerson, it is to be read [uniuersis all] or [diuinis divine.]
revelations and prophecies, and account them to be idle fantasies or
illusions. Therefore we will keep a mean betwixt both, and according to the
admonition of the Apostle Saint John 1. John. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
, We will not believe every spirit, but we will prove and try the spirits if
they be of God, and being obedient to the Apostle f Saint Paul, Let us hold
that which is good.

11. First therefore the examiner of these visions ought to be a Divine,
skillful in knowledge, and also in experience, not like to those, who always
learning, never come to the knowledge of truth, as are bablers, men full of
words, arrogant, contentious, etc. For to such persons every new divine
revelation is so unknown and barbarous, that as soon as it is related unto
them, with great laughter and derision they reject it, scorn it and reprove
it. Others there be, I confess, that on the other side run headlong into the
contrary vice, who do attribute to revelations even the superstitious, vain,
and deceitful facts and dreams of maddoting men, and the idle fantasies of
sick and melancholy persons. And perceiving that these have too light and
credulous a heart to believe, and the other too intractable and harsh, I know
that to be most certain which Ovid writes, Thou shall go most safe by keeping
the mean.

12. And because there be very many signs and tokens, whereby a divine
revelation may be discerned from a diabolical illusion, John Gerson In tract.
de probatione spirituum.
(whose authority in such like things doubtless is great, says Delrius q. 3.
cit. sec. 1.
) to avoid confusion, does reduce them, as it were, to fix heads

What is he who has the revelation, what it contains and affirms: for what
end it is said to be: to whom it is disclosed for counsel: in what manner he
is known to live: and from whence it is found to proceed.

13. First therefore he that will examine spirits, must have consideration of
the person who has visions, if he have a good and discrete judgment of
natural reason, for that the brain being crased, the judgment of his
natural reason is disturbed. If for want of good health, abundance of
melancholy humors, for over great want of food or lack of sleep, Delrius
sect. 2 cit. nu. 4.
or by reason of a disordered imagination he be troubled with fantasies, there
need no great inquiry to be made, from what spirit these melancholy fantasies
and illusions do proceed, as appears in frantic and diverse sick persons,
who being awake, think that they do see, hear, and taste, etc. that which those
that be in a dream imagine they do. Besides every extreme passion has her
crasinesse, her drunkenness, and as Origin says, her Devil. This is seen in
those that be overcome with extreme love, in jealous, angry, envious and
covetous persons, according to that of the Poet, They that be in love, feign
dreams to them selves. For the Devil does easily delude these kind of
persons who have a crasie brain, and are too apprehensiue and of a troubled,
Delrius loc. cit.
and over vehement imagination, for that they do stiffly adhere and assent to
the present representations of false things.

14 There must also be inquiry made Gerson loc. cit. et Delrius nu. 7.
, whither the person that has the vision be a nouice in the zeal of faith,
and spiritual exercise, for that young fervor is easily deceived, if it want a
governor, especially in young men, and women, whose fervor is over vehement,
greedy, variable, unbridled, and therefore to be suspected. By this token
Franciscus Picus Sec. 2. nu. 7.
says Delrius, did at the first discover the falsehood of a certain revelation,
and vision; and afterward other signs did appear, as that the Devil in the
shape of our Savior Christ did counsel him certain vain things mixed with
good. Also it behooves much to consider of what quality the person is, and
has been, what learning he has, to what things he is accustomed, with what
things he is delighted, with whom he has conuersed, if he be rich or poor, in
the first pride, or secret delight, in the second fiction is to be feared.
Neither is the distinction of ages, and sexes be neglected. For if it be a
falling, and decaying age, there is danger of dotage, if young, there is danger
of leuitie, and some fantastical infirmity, for that boys have a more moist
brain then is fitting, and do abound with vapors, which are easily moved.
And therefore in times past the Devils were desirous to utter their oracles by
them as more fit persons for their purposes, and also now a days they use to
do the same in their apparitions in water, and Cristall. Concerning the
feminine sex it is manifest that it is more to be suspected.

15 Above all things it is convenient to observe Gerson loc. cit.
, that there lie hidden no inward spiritual pride, which S. Bernard calls,
and that truly, a subtle evil: for that this does arise from the humbling of
ones self, from base apparel, and hair cloth, from fasting, and virginity,
yea, and takes beginning from his own death, and from his contrary, what
therefore will be safe from pride, seeing that virtue it self is not safe from
it? And there is a certain pride in the understanding when it will not be
subject to an other man's judgment, but relyeth only on his own, and a
certain pride in the will, while it refuses to obey, and this is sooner
perceived then the first, and therefore more easily amended.

16 Secondly, in the examining of spirits, we must not only regard the person
who has visions, but also the quality of the visions; if all things even to
the least proposition be true, for that falsehood is not in the spirit of truth,
but in the spirit of lying there be sometimes a thousand manifest truths, that
in one only hidden falsehood he may deceive. For this cause Christ forbade those
that were possessed with Devils, and Paul the wench that had a Pythonicall
spirit to testify the truth. Moreover if in the visions there be that
wisdom, which is from above, with those titles which James rehearses, first,
says he, it is chaste, then peaceable, modest etc.

17 Thirdly, the examining of spirits requires, that the person to whom these
visions are disclosed, behave himself very prudently; and circumspectly: and
especially in the beginning let him consider diligently for what end this
person is moved to make known his secret: whereupon this consideration may be
made. Be wary therefore whosoever thou be that art a hearer, or counsailer,
that thou do not applaude such a person, nor commend him, or admire him as a
holy man, and worthy of such revelations, and miracles; gainssay him rather,
rebuke him sharply, revile him whose heart is so haughty, and eyes so lofty,
that he walks in great and wonderful matters above himself, that he seems
to himself worthy not to work his salvation as other men do, to wit, by the
doctrine of holy Scriptures and Saints, with the dictamen or judgment of
natural reason. Admonish such a one not to be high minded, but to be wise unto
sobriety, for that he spoke most truly that said, Pride deserves to be
deluded, and the Holy Ghost, who gives himself to the humble, will not
withdraw himself from any for using an act of humility.

18 Fourthly, in the examining of spirits we must consider the end for the
which visions are said to be, and not only the immediate and manifest end, but
also the remote and hidden end. The first end therefore may appear good and
wholesome, devout, and to the edification of others, which at the length will
grow to a plain scandal, whiles either the last shall not be answerable to
the first, or else any other false or feigned thing shall be found to have
been in those persons which was thought to have proceeded from sanctity and
devotion. Moreover if a thing be done by humane diligence, whether it be in
manners or in doctrine, why is it needful either to seek or to expect, that
God should speak from heaven? This truly is more like to the tempting then to
the honoring of God. Wherefore if without any revelation, one may by humane
understanding attain to that, which is said to have been revealed, that
revelation is to be suspected and superfluous, and not necessary Delrius sect.
5. Sect. 3. a consideratio.
. Furthermore, we must also consider the end for which these visions are
disclosed to an other person, whether for ostentation, or necessity, whether
to give or to receive counsel, whether to one that is skillful or unskillful
in such things. And if this person does seem only to demand counsel for
fear of being deceived, it must be considered whether he show himself to be
ready to follow counsel, otherwise there will be scarce any hope of curing
him, because, as John Climachus says he needs now no Devil to tempt him,
for that he is become a Devil to himself. And doubtless if the vision came
from God, it will not come to naught in one who humbles himself for God under
the judgment of an other, but it will be more strengthened and prevail.

19. Fifthly, in the examining of spirits we must consider of what manner of
conversation the person is who says he has had visons, whether he conuerseth
in secret, or in public, in an active or contemplative life, whether in over
much devotion, which causes a singularity in apparel and such like, or if
his common conversation be conformable to those with whom he lives. This
especially is needful to consider if she be a woman, how she conuerseth with
her Ghostly Fathers, and instructours, if she be given to continual talking,
under pretense now of often confessing, other times of a long rehearsing of her
visions, or of any other tatling. Believe them that have had experience,
especially S. Austine and S. Bonauenture, there is scarce any contagion either
of greater force to hurt, or more incurable. And if it had no other hurt then
this so great a wasting of such precious time, it were abundantly enough for
the Devil.

20. Sixthly, in the examining of spirits we must consider from whence the
spirit does come, or whether it does go, and how he does insinuate himself.
For the evil spirit does insinuate himself to them who go forward in virtue,
harshly, unpleasantly, and violently, Detrius sect. 6.
as it were with a certain vehemence as a shower of rain falling upon stones:
but the good spirit does insinuate himself to the same persons, softly,
pleasantly, and sweetly, as water does wet a sponge. But with them who go
backward, experience teaches that it falls out quite contrary. Therefore S.
Bernard does witness, Gerson. loc. cit.
that he had not this gift given him to know this in himself, to wit, from
whence the spirit comes, or whether it goes, who nevertheless humbly
confesses that he often times perceived the presence of the holy spirit by an
inward motion of the heart or mind. Therefore perchance one will wonder, how a
person of an inferior state can say, that he oftentimes does discern, from
whenee the spirit comes, especially seeing that Christ said to Nicodemus,
Joan. 3.
Thou hear his voice, but thou know not whence he comes, and whether he
goes. And moreover in diverse spirits there is to be seen a great similitude
in inspirations. For God is a spirit, a good Angel is a spirit, a bad Angel
is a spirit, there is also a humane spirit, both reasonable and sensual. And
the like vision may be inspired by every one of these spirits, although in a
different manner, but by reason of some similitude the difference can not
easily be perceived by them, who are not skillful in such things, who neither
of themselves by their sharpness of wit, neither by their learning in
Divinity, or natural Philosophy, nor by the instruction from others do know
how to distinguish them. Neither doubtless is it to be meruailed at, seeing
that we find very few men, who do perfectly know how to discern the
cogitations and affections of their reasonable soul as it is reasonable, from
those which are sensual, to wit, which are in the common sense, or in the
organe of the fantasy. Whom, I pray you, will you find of those men who
fear God, and fley from sin, who always and in all things does clearly
perceive, when temptations do abound, whether he has only some sensuality
in his imagination, or also some consent in his reason? So hard a matter it is
to discern sensuality, or a sensual delight from consent. How much more
difficult a matter is it to examine those four spirits before mentioned, to
wit, when a vehement instinct, or inspiration comes to our mind, whether it
be from God, from a good Angel, or a bad, or from our own proper humane
spirit, of which also there are two parts or portions the superior, or
reasonable, and the inferior or sensual part? The distinction of which two to
discern perfectly, is only granted by that word of God which does pearce even
to the dividing of the spirit and soul, which division she found in her self,
who cried out, My soul does magnify the Lord, and then dividing the spirit
from the soul, she added, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

21. Lastly, to make trial whether this spirit comes from God, Delrius sect.
6 Sect. secundo.
we must examine the cogitations, which went before, or followed the
revelation. For from the imagination of former things may easily proceed a
fantastical illusion. To one who is troubled and tossed with evil thoughts,
the holy spirit or a true revelation does never come: and nevertheless a true
and divine revelation does not always follow a good and holy thought. For in
the very fervor of prayer, the Devil many times does endeavor to creep in.
After a true revelation good desires, and good effects do always follow, and
sometimes accidentally, and for a time also good effects do follow an illusion,
which nevertheless are by the Devil referred to a greater evil. That has
been observed before by Hucbaldus, who when he had related the visions of
Saint Aldegundis, he adds In vita sua cap. 2.
, In all these revelations the prudent Virgin did more, and more humble her
self, she came nearer the kingdom of God, she did more fervently adhere to
her heavenly spouse. This doubtless is the proper effect of true revelations,
those effects which are contrary to this, do plainly show that it was an
illusion, which went before. He that desires to know more concerning this
matter, may read Martinus Delrius, and John Gerson In the places above cited.
, who very well compares In tract. de distinct. verarum visionu^ a falsis.
a divine revelation to a golden piece of money, and describes five virtues
which are like to the properties of gold, whereby this coin of divine
revelation may be distinguished from the counterfeit money of a diabolical
apparition: to wit, if it have the weight of humility, without curiosity, and
vain loftiness: if it have the flexibilitie of discretion, without a
superstitious esteeming, or rejecting of counsel: if it have the durabilitie
of patience in adversities, without grudging and fained emulation; if it have
the configuration of truth, without any false or vain assertion; and finally,
if it have the lively and pure color of divine charity, without any dross of
carnal sensuality.

22. By this which has been said, it is manifest, that very great diligence is
to be used, and much examining is to be made both by him, who is said to have
had an apparition, and also by others who are to judge thereof, before we
publish any vision as a divine revelation, especially if it be alleged to
confirm any doctrine, least that otherwise we broach a false or uncertain
doctrine for an undoubted truth; for the precious coin of a heavenly vision,
we fell hay, straw, and diabolical illusions, and under a fair show and
color of godliness, we throw headlong into dangerous errors devout people,
who are over much given to believe pretended visions and miracles. Now what
great diligence, and what means both Master Newton, who says, that he saw
this vision, and also those to whom he did disclose it, have used in examining
thereof, to wit, whether it was a true apparition or a fantastical
imagination, a divine revelation, or a diabolical illusion, it is not as yet
known to me. But verily if that be true which is reported, they were too
headlong in publishing thereof, seeing that both Master Newton, as himself
affirms, did by the persuasion of his companion Master Sutton a Protestant,
presently put it down in writing, and showed it to others, and also those to
whom he did disclose it, doubted not forthwith, and without any more examing,
to publish it as a true revelation. But how seeuer it was, there are diverse
strong arguments drawn from the aforesaid rules, which do probably show, that
it was not a heavenly revelation.

23. And first of all, although it may fall out, that one for lucre, vain
glory, or for some other private, or in his judgment also public commodity
may of set purpose forge false miracles and revelations, as it happened at
Berna in Swizerland Surius ad annum. 1509.
, where certain chief Priests of a Religious Order were burnt for faigning of
revelations to impugn the immaculate Conception of the blessed Mother of God,
yet God forbid, that I should have but the least suspicion, that Master Newton
being a Catholic man, would have committed so heinous a crime. Nevertheless I
am undoubtedly persuaded, that according to the aforesaid doctrine many clear
signs may be alleged, whereby we may make a probable conjecture, that this
vision is either to be ascribed to the vehement imagination of a troubled
brain, or else to be accounted a mere illusion of the Devil.

24. For first it is sufficiently known, that both of them were very young
men, and that in prison, as in the relation we read, they were hardly used, and
therefore both for want of food, and lack of sleep, they (having not eaten
for twenty four hours any meat at all, nor sleept in any bed for many
days) might easily suffer some harm and crasinesse in their imagination Mr.
Newton himself in his relation, attributes the frenzy of Master Sutton to
his hard usage, want of sleep, etc. Why then might not also Mr. Newton for the
same causes be somewhat distempered in his imagination at the time of that
pretended vision?
. Secondly, the relation affirms that Master Newton was suddenly awaked out
of his sleep by the outcries of his companion Master Sutton a Protestant, who
cried out, that he was a damned wicked wretch, only for taking the Oath, and
who also had before a weak, not to say, a crasie brain, (for not long after
he was clean distracted of his wits, as Master Newton himself confesses)
and therefore it was a very easy matter for Master Newton, through a vehement
apprehension of the vision, which Master Sutton did foretell him, being yet
scarce fully awake, should instantly appear unto him, to imagine that he saw,
and heard that, which in very deed he neither saw nor heard, which oftentimes
happens also to them that be awake, as we before have noted. And doubtless
it is evident by the relation it self, that the apparition was only
imaginary, for as much as concerns the words, which Master Newton affirms
he did hear. For although he says, that he saw the blessed Virgin, with an
infinite number of Angels about her, and that there appeared unto him a
multitude of holy Saints, yet when he repeateth the words that they spoke unto
him, he does not absolutely say, that they spoke this or that unto him, But I
thought, says he, the blessed Virgin spoke to me in this manner, Behold, see
and believe my Assumption in body, and withal said, take not the Oath, but
rather endure all torments, etc. And a little after, Me thought, says he, the
Saints said unto me, Double thy devotion unto the Saints, for nothing is more
acceptable unto almighty God. So that all the certainty of this revelation
depends upon the sole cogitation and imagination of a young man, who is
neither a Saint nor learned, nor exercised in contemplative life; which kind of
testimony, to know what authority it can bear for giving credit to a
vision, I remit the Reader to that, which we have before related out of Gerson
and Delrius.

25. But be it as it will, let this vision be real, let it be imaginary (for
undoubtedly both ways Almighty God may appear to men, either immediately by
himself, or by his Angels and Saints) nevertheless there be many probable
signs, which according to the rules before set down, do plainly show, partly
that this revelation may be justly suspected, and partly that it was no divine
apparition, but a mere illusion. For first it is known that Master Sutton,
who foretold Master Newton, that he should have an apparition, and so was the
first man to whom the vision was revealed, was not only no Catholic, but
also, as is gathered by Master Newtons relation, was much given to swearing,
and other disorderly behavior. It is also manifest that Master Newton was not
only a Nouice in the course of spiritual life, but also not well confirmed in
the Catholic faith, seeing that, as appears by his relation, he doubted of
the Assumption of the blessed Virgin, and also of the lawful praying to Saints.

26. Besides, many things are in Master Newtons relation, which do not seem
to be agreeable to truth. And first those things do not hang well together,
which are said of Master Sutton, to wit, that he was to be a witness of the
favor which God vouchsafed to do far Master Newton, considering that Master
Sutton did neither hear, nor see almost any thing of that apparition, whereof
he could be either an ear or an eie-witnesse. For Master Sutton, as Master
Newton in his relation affirms, crept down into the bed, saying, that he
durst not look up to behold the vision, which was for me to look upon, but
desired me to pray for him, saying that he was only to be a witness of the
favor, which God vouchsafed to do for me, and so lifting up my eyes, I saw
the room shining, etc. Now those things, which were spoken by the Blessed
Virgin, and the holy Saints, unto Master Newton, he did not hear with his
corporal ear, but with his inward imagination. I thought, says he, that the
blessed Virgin spoke unto me, Take not the Oath, etc. Me thought the Saints
said unto me, Double thy devotion, etc.

27. Secondly, that also is false, which in this revelation Master Sutton
affirmed, to wit, that he was a damned wretch only for taking the Oath, seeing
that, as appears by the relation, he had committed many other youthful
sins, for the which he deserved damnation. And although in some later copies
that word [onely] is now rased out, yet for certainty in the first copies,
whereof many are yet extant, that word [onely] is expressly contained. Thirdly,
those words, Double thy devotion to the Saints, for there is nothing more
acceptable to almighty God, spoken generally are not also agreeable to truth,
for that it is evident, that charity, which is a Theological virtue, to
speak nothing of other virtues, is more acceptable to God, then devotion unto
the Saints.

28. Fourthly, that this apparition was not a divine revelation, but an
illusion, is also proved by the effect thereof. For, besides that madness and
phrensinesse do seldom follow divine consolations and revelations, as it
happened to Master Sutton, (unless that one will say, that before that
revelation he was distracted of his wits, from whence a far stronger
argument may be drawn to disprove this revelation) Master Newton himself
against the express prohibition of the Blessed Virgin did take the Oath, as
the Bishop of Peterborow, who did tender it unto him, and many others, who were
present, do constantly affirm. Neither is it probable, that the aforesaid
Bishop either would, or durst release Master Newton, whom the Earl of Excester
had committed to prison for that he refused to take the Oath, before he had
taken the same. And doubtless the great silence, which Master Newton uses in
passing over so slightly the manner, and conditions, upon which he was set at
liberty, only affirming, that he was by the Earl of Excester delivered over
to the Sheriff, and by him brought to the Bishop, and by him set at liberty,
seeing that he is not negligent in rehearsing diverse other things of lesser
moment, is no small argument, that some frailty lay hidden, which Master
Newton was not willing should be known.

29. Lastly, that other miracle, which Master Newton related of himself, does
not seem to be very probable, to wit, that he before the Earl of Excester to
confirm the Assumption of our Blessed Lady in body alleged the place in the
Apocalips cap. 12. Signum magnum in coelo, the which place, as he says, he had
neither seen nor heard in all his life, but at that time he uttered it as
readily, as if he had seen it before his eyes. For considering that the
miraculous works of God are always perfect, it is not credible, that the holy
Ghost would by the mouth of Master Newton, to prove the Assumption of the
Blessed Virgin allege such a place of Scripture, which according to the
doctrine of Catholic Divines is no conuincing proof, but according to the
common doctrine of Divines, the literal sense of that place is not to be
understood of the Blessed Virgin, but of the holy Church, and no text of holy
Scripture according to the mystical or allegorical sense thereof, unless by
some other place of Scripture it be declared to be that sense, but only
according to the literal sense, is a sufficient argument to prove a position
or doctrine of faith. I omit, that in this relation of Master Newton, there
does not appear to be in him so perfect humility, as, according to the rules
before set down, ought to be in one, unto whom almighty God does truly
reveal himself. as every one, who reads the relation, may clearly perceive.

30, Wherefore if Bartholomaens Medina z a most learned Divine of the Order of
Saint Dominicke, and diverse other Divines, in answering to those arguments
which are drawn from the revelations of holy women, and Saints, and famous for
working miracles, (commonly cited in Schools, and by the Popes permission
printed and published) to confirm the doctrine of the immaculate Conception of
the Blessed Virgin, are not afraid to say, that those revelations are not
authenticke, and have not weight of authority, how much the more may one for
the causes and arguments before rehearsed justly, and boldly answer, that this
apparition is not authenticke and of weight, it being founded in the sole
authority of one young man, who neither is a Saint, nor a learned man, nor
exercised in a contemplative life?

31. These be the answers which the defenders of the Oath do commonly bring
to Master Newtons pretended revelation, which truly, for that it concerns
the facts of particular persons yet living, I was very loath to have examined,
had not Master Newton himself by his own hand writing making it known
publicly to all men, altogether compelled me to show the weakness of this
argument, which is drawn from his revelation, which nevertheless many have
greatly urged to impugn the Oath, and have exceedingly gloried therein. From
all which it may very well be concluded, that no sufficient argument at all can
be taken, either from divine revelation, or from any other reason or authority
whatsoever, which certainly and evidently is able to convince and demonstrate,
that the aforesaid Oath of Allegiance can not be taken by any Catholic with a
probable, and consequently with a safe conscience, or that those Catholics,
who do take it are therefore to be excluded from the Society of the
faithful, and right believers, or not to be admitted to the participation of
the holy Sacraments.

The Conclusion.
BEhold now (most holy Father) all the cheifest arguments, which are usually
alleged, as well against the Oath, as in favor thereof, by me faithfully and
sincerely here laid down: in the examining of which I intend to affirm
nothing of my own opinion, but only as representing the persons of them, who
of set purpose do publicly maintain that the Oath either may lawfully, or
may not lawfully be taken, leaving it to the fatherly care of your Holiness,
that when you have been fully informed of the whole progress of the matter,
and have diligently examined all the reasons, for which the English Catholics
obeying the Kings command, have taken the Oath, you will be pleased
particularly to approve them, or to condemn them; that the Catholics in this
so most weighty a matter, which does so nearly concern the prerogative of
your spiritual authority, and of his Majesty's Royalty, being fearful to
resist your Holiness precept declared in your Breues, and also being desirous
to obey, as much as with a safe conscience they may, his Majesty's command, may
clearly perceive, which particular clauses of the Oath they are bound to admit,
and which they are bound to reject, and may in plain and express terms,
without any ambiguitie of words be instructed by your Holiness in what manner
they may satisfy their own conscience, your Holiness will, and also his
Majesty's desire, concerning all the particular parts of the Oath. For as they
are very ready to hazard their whole temporal estate, and also to loose their
lives for the Catholic faith, which by the Church (to whom this office
belongs to define matters of faith, and not to private Doctors, who may
deceive, and be deceived) is declared to be truly the Catholic faith, so
doubtless they are unwilling to expose themselves, and their whole family to
eminent danger of their temporal utter ruin only for opinions, although they
be maintained by the greater and better part of Divines, so that others,
although far fewer in number, do defend the contrary. But as they are
desirous with all their hearts to obey your Holiness in spiritual matters,
and in those things which can not be omitted without sin, so also they might
justly think themselves to be more hardly used, then children are wont by their
parents, if, especially in these times wherein by reason of the Catholic
faith, which they profess, they have grievously incurred his Majesty's high
displeasure, who is of a contrary Religion, they should without sufficient
reason be forbidden to give that temporal allegiance to his Majesty, which by
the law of Christ they think to be due unto him, having always before their
eyes that command of Christ our Savior, Render to Caesar, the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods.

Whatsoever I have written in this Disputation, or else where, I humbly submit
to the judgment of the Catholic Roman Church, if there be any thing escaped
me through ignorance, which she does not approve, I do disprove it, condemn
it, and will not have it for written.

ROGER WIDDRINGTON an English Catholic.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO THE FORMER DISPVTATION, WHEREIN ALL THE ARGVMENTS, which that
most learned Divine Franciscus Suarez has lately in a Book of his alleged
against this Oath of Allegiance, are sincerely related, and answered.
IT was my fortune (Christian Reader) not long after my Latin Disputation of
the Oath was printed, to have the viewing of a certain book lately published
by that most learned Schoole-Diuine Franciscus Suarez against his Majesty's
Apology for the Oath of Allegiance Entitled desensio fidei Catholicae, etc.
printed at Conimbria this year 1613.
, wherein he handles this question of the Oath more largely, then any one man
hitherto has done before him. And although the arguments, which he brings to
impugn the Oath, are in substance no other, then which I already in this
Disputation have alleged and answered, yet for that the only noise, that such
a famous learned man as Suarez is, has written at large against the Oath, may
perchance give occasion to suspect, that this question of the Oath has not
been by me sufficiently handled, and that I have not exactly set down all the
reasons which can be objected against the same, I thought it necessary for the
fully satisfying of al persons, to declare sincerely all the particular
exceptions, which he has taken against the Oath, that thereby it may clearly
appear to all men, upon what grounds as well the impugners as the favorers of
the Oath do chiefly rely. And this Appendix I will divide into two several
parts. In the first I will sincerely examine all the arguments, which Suarez
brings to prove the Popes power to depose Princes, whereon all his particular
exceptions against the Oath do chiefly depend. In the second I will faithfully
relate, and answer all the particular objections, which he brings to
convince, that the Oath is clearly unlawful.

THE FIRST PART.
Sect. I.
1. FIrst therefore Suarez Lib. 6. cap. 1. nu. 8.
does in part rightly propound the true state of this present controversy,
which is, says he, whether in this form of the Oath prescribed by his
Majesty is only demanded of the Subjects civil obedience, and the profession
of supreme Kingly power in it degree and place, or whether besides Civil
obedience also Ecclesiastical obedience, and the Popes spiritual Primacie, is
any way either expressly or covertly abiured? The defenders of the Oath do
affirm the first part, Suarez endeavors to confirm the second.

2. This indeed is the true state of the question, so that it be not
understood, as I have also heretofore In my Epistle to his Holiness. nu. 2. 3.
4.
declared, of the absolute proposition, but only of the modall, that is,
whether it can be demonstrated by invincible arguments, to which no probable
answer can be given, that in this Oath is abiured the Popes Primacie in
spirituals, and more then civil obedience is comprehended? For no Catholic
Divine, as I suppose, will contend with Suarez, that he can not bring some
probable arguments to prove the Oath unlawful, and to contain more then
Civil Obedience; but the only intent of those, who defend the Oath, is to
show by probable arguments and answers, that the reasons, which Suarez, or any
other hitherto has brought to prove, that the Popes spiritual Primacie, or
any other unlawful thing is denied in this Oath, are not so clear, evident
and demonstratiue, but that probable answers may be made unto them, and
consequently that Catholics may with a probable, and therefore with a safe
conscience according to the doctrine of Vasquez before related take the same.
And therefore I purposely said, that Suarez did in part propound the state of
the question aright, understanding of the modall and not of the absolute
proposition, as I have declared.

3. The true state of the controversy now being known, the chief and maine
ground, whereon all Suarez his arguments against the Oath do principally
depend, is the Popes authority to depose Princes, and to dispose of all their
temporals, of lands, goods, bodies and lives. But this question also concerning
this so absolute and unlimited power of the Pope to dispose of the kingdoms
and lives of Princes, and of all that is theirs, is in like manner to be
understood only of the modall proposition, to wit, whether there has hitherto
by Suarez, or any other been produced any authority, or reason so invincible
and demonstratiue, to prove this doctrine to be so certain, and without all
doubt, that without note especially of heresy, error, or also of temeritie,
it can not be contradicted by any Catholic.

Sect. II.
1 THis question concerning the Popes authority to depose and kill absolute
Princes, Suarez handles in the 23. chapter of his third book. And although to
prove this doctrine his only grounds in substance are those reasons, and
authorities which Cardinal Bellarmine has brought in his Controversies, and
which have already been answered by my self, and since by Mr. John Barcley,
to which answers Suarez makes no reply, as though he never had seen any
such books, yet for the Readers satisfaction I will repeat them, and answer
them again, reserving a more full and perfect answer for a more convenient
time.

2 First therefore Suarez supposes, Lib 3 cap. 23. nu. 1.
that there is no Catholic Doctor, who ever denied this authority of the Pope
to depose Princes, and to dispose of all their temporalls; which supposition of
Suarez, is very untrue; for that it has always been contradicted by some
Catholics, and I have cited many, both ancient, and later writers In my
Apology nu. 4. and some of them in this Disputation cap. 3. sect. 3 nu. 5. etc
, who have impugned the same, and I also have yielded sufficient reasons In the
same place nu. 15.
, why there be so many Catholics of the one opinion, and so few of the other.
And therefore that also which Suarez affirms, is very false, that only
Marsilius of Padua, and other enemies of the Church do deny this temporal
authority of the Pope. For although Marsilius was indeed of this opinion, as
also he maintained almost all the chief points of Catholic Doctrine, which
are not therefore to be disallowed, because he did maintain them, yet neither
Suarez, nor any other can sufficiently prove, that either Marsilius, or his
books were condemned by the Church, for defending this opinon. For he also
held many erroneous positions, for which his books deserved to be censured, as
first, that S. Peter was not head of the Apostles, In defensorio part 2. cap
15.16.22. et 28.
Secondly, that one Bishop was not superior to another, Cap. 15. 16. et 22.
Thirdly, that Ecclesiastical persons could not have the property of temporal
lands and livings. Cap. 13. 14. for he did not deny that they might possess
lands although Castio and Prateolus do impute the same to him.
Fourthly, that no Bishop, Priest, or particular community of them had
authority alone to excommunicate any Prince, Province, or any other civil
Community, or forbid them the use of Divine service, but this authority to
excommunicate did belong to the university of the faithful in that co^munity
Cap. 6. et 26.
.

3 Wherefore that which Suarez, Lib. 3. cap. 23. nu. 9.
affirms citing Azor Tom. 2. lib. 4 cap. 19.
in the margent, that Marsilius himself, as they say, durst not deny that the
Pope had power to punish Kings and Princes especially heretics by the
Ecclesiastical Censures of Excommunication, and also Interdict, but he denied
that the Pope could proceed against them any further, is very untrue, and it
plainly shows that neither Suarez, nor Azor, did read Marsilius himself,
but were content to believe what perchance they had read in some other Author
concerning Marsilius his doctrine. Neither does Aluarus Pelagius, Alphonsus de
Castro, or Prateolus, who relate Marsilius his errors, note this for one, that
he denied the Popes power to depose Princes, which is an evident sign, that
they did not apprehend this doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, to
be a point of faith, and the contrary to be heretical, for if they had, they
would doubtless have noted it among Marsilius his errors for the defending
whereof he chiefly wrote his book to Lewis the fourth Emperor, whom Pope John
the 22. had deposed.

4. That also which Suarez Lib. 3. cap. 23. nu. 1.
does seem to insinuate that only the enemies of the Church denied this
temporal authority of the Pope, is altogether false; for both the Kingdom of
France, as Petrus Pithaeus witnesses, See above c. 3 sec. ^. nu. 13.
held it ever for certain concerning the King of France, and Albericus de
Roxiato, and Ioannes Parisiensis, In the same place nu. 1. and 7
who is greatly commended by Trithemius, (both of them living about the time of
Marsilius of Padua, in the reign of Pope John the 22. and L^wes of Bauaria the
fourth Emperor) did also hold the same opinion; and Abbot Trithemius, In the
same place nu 5.
whom all men have hitherto accounted a learned and virtuous Catholic, does
expressly affirm, that it is a controversy among the School men, and as yet
the Judge has not decided the question whether the Pope has power to depose
the Emperor, or no. And very many Doctors, (as John Gerson De potest. Eccles.
considerat. 4.
, and Iacobus Almainus De dominio naturali, ciu. et Eccles. in probatione. 2.
conclusionis.
both learned, and virtuous Catholics do relate,) that the Pope by Christ his
institution has not so much as power to imprison, but only to excommunicate
or to inflict some such like spiritual censure, and not to adiudge any man to
be deprived of his temporal goods or life, to be whipped, banished, or
imprisoned, but when the Ecclesiastical Judge does this, he does it by the
grant of Princes, as the Clergy by the great devotion of Princes has
received authority of temporal Jurisdiction, which Jurisdiction or censure is
nevertheless called spiritual, as also the temporal goods of Ecclesiastical
persons are called spiritual, because they are dedicated and applied to them
who serve the Church, as also the breds of proposition, the first fruits, the
tithes, also the vessels of the temple, the vestments and such like were in the
old law called sacred, or holy, so also the new law does observe the same. Thus
Gerson.

2. Secondly, Suarez having sufficiently confirmed by Scriptures, and reason,
that the Church and chief Pastor thereof, have authority not only to direct
and command Princes in spiritual matters, but also to compel and punish them
if they be disobedient at the least with spiritual punishments, for that
otherwise Christ had not instituted his Church a perfect and sufficient
Commonwealth, if he had given her only power to command, and not to punish
them who should not obey her just command, which doctrine for that it is
approved by all Catholics, no Catholic Divine will contradict, he now
comes to the maine point, and labors to prove that the Popes authority to
punish rebellious Christians, is also extended to all temporal punishments
which the Pope in his discretion shall think expedient. And all his arguments
to prove this doctrine are drawn from three heads, 1. from the authority of
holy Scriptures, 2. from the practice of the Church, 3. from natural reason
grounded upon holy Scriptures, and the authority of the Church.

Sect. III.
1. TWo principal texts of holy Scripture, which are commonly alleged by the
defenders of the Popes power to depose Princes, Suarez produces to prove this
doctrine to be certainly true. The first place is that of Saint John, Feed my
sheep. From whence he gathers this argument Nu. 9.
.

Our Savior Christ has given to Saint Peter, and his successors authority
to correct, and punish all wicked christians, even also Kings, who also are
Christ's sheep, but this power to correct and punish he has not limited to
Ecclesiastical censures, therefore it ought not to be limited by us, or any
Prince of the Church, but it belongs to the Pope to appoint, and determine
the punishment, as occasion, and necessity shall require.

The Mayor proposition has before in the same chapter been by Suarez
sufficiently proved. The Minor he proves thus, For the words of Christ, Feed
my sheep are indefinite, therefore, for as much as the power to correct and
punish which is necessary in every shepherd is included in that word [Feede,]
that power to correct is not determined to Censures, but it is left to be
determined to this or that punishment, by prudence and equity. For every
Shepherd has power to correct his sheep, not according to any determinate
manner in general, but as it shall be convenient and expedient for the sheep.

2. To this Objection I have at large answered in my Apology, it being the
self same argument which Cardinal Bellarmine urged in the very like manner.
But before I do here set down again the answer, which there I gave, I do
earnestly request, and conjure Suarez, as he shall answer at the day of
judgment for his doctrine and all his actions, that if he be pleased to reply
to that which I have here written against his reasons, he will sincerely,
unfeignedly, and without any equivocation, or mental reservation declare unto
us two things. The first, whether in his conscience he be certainly persuaded,
that both himself and all other Catholics are bound under pain of heresy,
or error, from which by no probable reasons which can move them to the
contrary they can be excused, to believe that this text of holy Scripture, or
any other does evidently convince the Popes power to depose Princes: the
second, whether with the same certainty al catholics are bound to believe, and
embrace this doctrine which Suarez, affirms Lib. 6. c. 3. nu. 20.
to be true and certain, that the Pope has also authority to kill Kings, and
to give leave to others to kill them. For his reason out of this place of holy
Scripture is indifferent both to deposing and killing, because Christ did not
limit that power, which he gave to the Pope to correct and chastise, rather to
deposing then to killing, but he left it to the Pope to appoint, and determine
it according to prudence and equity, as occasion and necessity should
require. Yea and that example of Ananias and Saphira which Suarez brings a
little beneath, does prove more strongly his authority to kill, as Saint Peter
did Ananias, then to depose.

3. To the argument therefore I grant, that Christ by these words, Feed my
sheep, did appoint S. Peter to be the spiritual Pastor of his Church, which
is his mystical body, and not a temporal, but a spiritual Commonwealth,
and consequently he gave him all spiritual power, which is sufficient and
necessary for the government of this spiritual Commonwealth, and this is all
that can be directly and clearly inferred from this place; but what
authority is spiritual, and what temporal, what spiritual authority to
punish is necessary and sufficient for the governing of a spiritual
commonwealth, and whether it be limited to inflict only spiritual
punishments according to the nature of a spiritual Commonwealth, (for that
every commonwealth of her own nature has authority to punish her subjects
offending, by depriving them of the goods and privileges of that
Commonwealth) or it is also extended to deposing, killing, and all other
temporal punishments, can not be sufficiently gathered from these words,
Feed my sheep, but it must be deduced from some other discourse grounded upon
reason or other authorities.

4. My opinion is, that by no humane discourse grounded either upon reason or
authority, it can clearly and evidently be demonstrated by any invincible
argument, to which no probable answer can be given, that this sufficient
Pastoral authority to govern the mystical body of Christ does by his
institution extend to deposing, killing or inflicting temporal punishments by
way of correction, but only to Ecclesiastical and spiritual censures, which
are more agreeable to the nature, quality and condition of a spiritual
commonwealth. And this I did probably prove in my Apology two manner of ways,
first positiuely by alleging certain probable reasons and authorities, which
might sufficiently persuade any man to think this opinion to be probable, and
then negatiuely by alleging probable answers to all the arguments, which
Cardinal Bellarmine brought to prove the contrary. Neither has D.
Schulckenius, howsoever to the world he would seem to make a show, so
inuincibly impugned either my reasons or answers, but that as yet they remain
probable, as hereafter, God willing, I will sufficiently make manifest. By
this thou may perceive (courteous Reader) that albeit our Adversaries do
cry out against us, that we denying this authority of the Pope to depose
Princes, do contradict the words of our Savior, Feed my sheep, yet in very
deed we embrace the holy Scriptures, as also the Sacred Councels and Doctrine
of the Catholic Church with as much reverence, speaking with all dutiful
respect, as they do, but we only contradict as forthwith thou shall better
understand, the uncertain inferences and collections, which they out of holy
Scripture endeavor to conclude.

5. First therefore in my Apology Number. 239. and seq.
I answered, that Christ by those words [Feed my sheepe] gave to S. Peter, and
his successors all sufficient Pastoral authority to feed, correct and
punish his sheep, and to govern the Church which he instituted a spiritual
and not a temporal Commonwealth. But considering that neither by these words,
feed my sheep, nor by any words of holy Scripture, our Savior Christ did in
express terms extend this Pastoral authority of Saint Peter to punish with
temporal punishments, which do belong to a temporal Commonwealth, he did in
the very instituting of the Church, which he made a spiritual, and not a
temporal commonwealth, and in the appointing of Saint Peter to be a
spiritual and not a temporal Pastor or governor thereof, limit his
spiritual authority to spiritual censures and punishments, which are
agreeable to the nature, quality and condition of a spiritual commonwealth.
Neither is that true which Suarez affirms in the end of his argument, that
every Shepherd has power to correct his sheep, not according to any
determinate manner in general, but as it shall be convenient or expedient for
the sheep. For inferior or under Sheepheards have no more authority, then it
pleases the chief Shepherd to grant unto them, as reason and experience do
plainly show. And by this assertion of Suarez, it would follow that Kings and
Princes, who are appointed by God to be Sheepheards of men in temporal causes,
had power to correct their sheep with spiritual punishments, if according to
no determinate manner in general their power to punish were limited: and so
Suarez brings a pretty argument to prove the spiritual supremacy of all
Christian Kings over their christian Subjects.

6. There be therefore two kinds of Sheepheards, which do govern
unreasonable sheep, as I observed in that place, the one who are mere
Sheepheards and not Lords or owners of the sheep, as Jacob, who fed his father
in law Labans sheep Genes. ca. 29.
, the other who be both Sheepheards and also Lords of the sheep they feed,
as was Abraham and Lot. Betwixt these two Sheepheards there is this difference,
2. Gec. 13.
that the second kind of Shepeheards have an absolute and unlimited power over
their sheep, that if either they go astray, or be scabbed, or any way
troublesome to the flock, they may either pin them up, or if they will, punish
them otherwise, or also kill them, but this unlimited power to punish the
sheep, these Sheepheards have not merely as they are Sheepheards, but as the
Lords and owners of the sheep. But the second kind of Sheepheards have indeed
authority given them to feed and govern the sheep, but not in so absolute
and ample a manner as the others have. For it is their office to feed the
sheep and to keep them in good order, and consequently to provide them good
and wholesome pasture, if they go astray, to recall them with their voice,
with their staff, with their dogs; if they be infected with the scabbe, or
have taken any other contagious disease, to shut them up and sever them from
the rest, to cure them as conveniently as they may; and lastly to defend them
from wolves, and all other devouring beasts. But to kill the sheep, if they
offend, or any other way to punish them for any fault past, as it is past, they
cannot without the owners leave. Now when the Pope is resembled to a Shepherd
of unreasonable sheep, this comparison, for as much as concerns the killing
of his sheep, or otherwise punishing them with temporal punishments, is to be
applied to the first kind of Sheepheards.

7 For God almighty, the chief Shepherd and Lord of all, both unreasonable,
and reasonable sheep, has appointed under him here in earth two sorts of
Sheepheards, or Governors of all mortal men, the one a temporal Shepherd,
who in matters merely temporal, and as they tend to the outward preserving of
temporal peace, are subject to no other Shepherd, or Superior in earth, and
who have supreme power to direct, command, and punish all their sheep who
shall offend and break their just command by means of the temporal sword, or
which is all one, with temporal punishments, for that these are agreeable to
the nature, quality, 1 Paralip. 11.
and condition of a temporal commonwealth. Whereupon God said to King David,
Thou shall feed my people Israel, and thou shall be a Prince over them. And of
King Cyrus God almighty said, Isai. 44.
I say unto Cyrus, Thou art my Shepherd: The other, a spiritual Shepherd,
or Governor, to whom he has given supreme authority to direct, command, and
punish in all spiritual matters, and as they tend to the eternal salvation of
souls, and to punish all his sheep, even Kings, and Princes, who transgress
his just command with spiritual punishments, for that these are agreeable to
the nature, quality, and condition of a spiritual commonwealth: Neither can
it be proved by invincible arguments, that this mystical body of Christ,
which is a spiritual Commo^-wealth, has by his institution, authority to
punish by way of correction with temporal punishments, but ye excommunication,
or some such like spiritual censure or punishment is the last which an
Ecclesiastical Judge by Christ his institution can inflict as out of Io.
Gerson, and Iacobus Almainus I showed a little before; Whereupon Pope Nicolaus
Cap. inter haec. 33. q. 2.
affirms that the Church of God has no other sword then spiritual: And
Gratian 2. q 7. can Nos 1.
the compiler of the greatest part of the Canon laws, which is called the
Decree, it belongs (says he) to Kings to inflict a corporal punishment,
and to Priests a spiritual: and Petrus Damianus, In epist. ad Firminum
Diaconum.
who lived when Pope Gregory the seventh, was Cardinal, affirms that the
Kingdom and the Priesthood are so distinguished by their proper and peculiar
offices, that a King may use wordlie weapons, and a Priest is girded with a
spiritual sword; and therefore very well said S. Austin, In lib. de fide, et
operib. c. 2.
that in the Church of Christ the visible sword was to cease, and excellently
S. Chrysostom, Homil. 4. de verbis Isaiae.
It is the office of a Priest only to reprove, and to give a free admonition,
not to raise arms, not to use targets, not to shake a lance, nor to shoot
arrows, nor to cast darts, but only to reprove, and to give a free
admonition. And although under this word (reprove) be contained all Priestlike
sort of reproouing, as is to use Ecclesiastical censures, yet temporal
coercions are expressly by S. Chrysostom denied to belong to the function of a
Priest. And if it do not beseem Ecclesiastical mildness to use corporal
weapons, for so Cardinal Bellarmine, Schulkenius, and Suarez do answer to
such like places, affirming that Priests do not use such weapons, not for that
they have not power to use them by Christ his institution, but for that it is
indecent, and therefore forbidden by the positive Law of the Church, how can
these Authors clearly demonstrate that Christ gave them such an authority
which to exercise is not convenient or does not beseem their function?

8 Secondly, in the same place I did observe, that betwixt unreasonable, and
reasonable sheep there is this difference, that unreasonable sheep have no
weapons whereby they may defend themselves from ravening wolves, nor any
outward remedy to cure themselves of any disease, but all their safety relyeth
only upon the Shepherds care and industry, but Christian souls, which are
the sheep of the spiritual flock of Christ, have spiritual weapons, whereby
they may fight and defend themselves against all the assaults of their enemies,
and they have spiritual remedies to cure themselves of all diseases, yea they
cannot be wounded or diseased unless they themselves be willing thereunto.
And from hence I gathered, that in a spiritual Pastor, there is not necessary
so great a power to govern his sheep, only for the salvation of their
souls, which is the chief end of his authority, (seeing that they cannot be
hurt unless they will, and if they will, they may cure themselves with
spiritual medicines which God has appointed in his Church,) as is necessary
in an ordinary Shepherd to govern unreasonable sheep, whose safety does
chiefly, and almost only depend upon his care and diligence. And this
distinction betwixt an ordinary Shepherd of sheep, and of souls, Saint
Chrysostom does well observe. Lib. 2. de Sacerdotio ante medium.
It is not lawful, says he, to cure men with so great an authority, as a
Shepherd does cure his sheep. For here it is free to bind, to keep from
pasture, to burn, and to cut, whereas there the power to take the medicine and
to be cured does not consist in him who applies the medicine, but in him only
who is diseased.

9 And afterward he declares the difference betwixt a Secular Magistrate,
and a Pastor of souls: Secular Judges says he, when they do find wicked men
to have offended against the Laws, do show themselves to be endued with great
authority and power, and do constrain the same offenders, yea although they
be unwilling, to change their manners; but here thou must only counsel not
enforce, and by this way make him better whom thou take upon thee to correct,
for there is not so great a power given to us by the laws to constrain
sinners. And this distinction of S. Chrysostom betwixt a Shepherd of
unreasonable, and reasonable sheep, and betwixt a Bishop and a Secular
Magistrate, also Cardinal Bellarmine does approve. For the former, faith he,
Lib. 4. de Ro^. pont. cap. 21.
being exercised about natural diseases of sheep can cure his sheep
although they will not, but this later being exercised about voluntary
diseases of sheep cannot cure his sheep unless they will, and therefore this
later has a harder charge then the former. And likewise I say of the Secular
power. For a Secular Judge is exercised about outward actions, and therefore he
can constrain a man, although he be unwilling, to change his manners, to wit,
outward, but a Bishop is exercised about inward manners, which cannot be
changed against the will of him who has them. For although a Bishop can
excommunicate, and inflict other punishments, If he mean spiritual
punishments we agrnt, if temporal it is the thing which is now in
controversy.
yet they will profit nothing, unless he will that is punished. And so I
understand those words of Saint Chrysostom [for there is not so great a power
given to us by the laws to constrain sinners.] For a Bishop has not power to
constrain a man to change his mind, as a Judge has to constrain a man to
change his outward manners. Thus Cardinal Bellarmine. From whence we may gather
a reason of yt saying of S. Chrysostom before related, to wit, that it is not
the office of Priests to raise arms, etc. but only to reprove, for that there
is not required in a Bishop or spiritual pastor so great an authority over
his sheep, whom he cannot compel against their wills to change their inward
manners, which is the chief end of a spiritual Pastor, as in a Secular Judge
who can compel his Subjects to change against their wills, their evil outward
manners, which is the chief end, and intent of a Secular Magistrate. And
therefore from hence we may well conclude against the last part of Suarez
argument, that a spiritual Pastor has power to correct his sheep in that
manner, as shall be convenient, and expedient for the sheep, but yet
determined, and limited to the nature, quality, and condition of a spiritual
flock, whereof he is appointed by Christ to be a spiritual, and not a temporal
Pastor.

Sect. IIII.
1 THe second place of holy Scripture, Nu. 11.
which Suarez alleges to prove the Popes authority to depose of the
kingdoms, and lives of Princes, is that text so often inculcated, Whatsoever
thou shall bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
loose in earth it shall be loosed also in heaven, Matthew. 16. from which words
Suarez gathers the same authority in this manner. For those words (says he)
are general and indifferent, and therefore they ought not to be limited by
us. And if any one should say, that Mat. 18. they were declared, and determined
to the bond of censures by those words: And if he will not hear them, tell the
Church, and if he will not fear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen,
and the publicane, Amen I say unto you, what things soever you shall bind upon
earth, etc. We answer, that it was there declared, that in that general power
to bind was included the bond of exco^municatio^, but that power was not
limited only to impose that punishment, both because no such limitation can be
gathred from that text, as also because although there be made mention in that
place only of Excommunication, nevertheless other censures are comprehended
under it, as interdict, suspension, and also other Ecclesiastical punishments:
yea also the bond of precepts, and Laws are included in that power, and by
virtue of those words, that power as it is a directive, or comma^ding power is
not determined to this or that manner of directing, or commanding, which
binds in this or that manner by a personal command, or a permanent Law, but
does without limitation comprehend all convenient directing, or commanding,
therefore the same is to be understood of the coerciue, or chastising power.
And so Pope Innocent the fourth with the Council of Lions does out of this
text of Scripture gather this power to depose Princes. Thus Suarez.

2. To this text of holy Scripture I have also answered heretofore both in
this Disputation, Cap. 6. sec. 1. nu. 4. et sec. 2. nu. 3. etc.
and in my Apology, Nu. 35. et seq.
that it is to be understood of spiritual binding and loosing, to which it is
limited both by the nature and condition of the Church it self, which by
Christ his institution is a spiritual Commonwealth, and also by the former
words [I will give thee the keyes] not of an earthly kingdom, but of the
kingdom of Heaven; And also Suarez Tom. 5. disp. 1: sec. 2. nu. 3.
himself by those words [shal be bound in heauen] gathers this power to be
supernatural, not natural, and that bond to be sprituall and of an higher
degree. And whereas Suarez does urge, that the Ecclesiastical power as it is
directive, or commanding, is not determined to this, or that manner of
direction, or commanding, which binds in this or that manner by a personal
command, or a permanent law, but does comprehend all convenient direction,
therefore the same is to be understood of the coerciue, or chastising power.
We answer first, that as the commanding power of the Church is not limited to
a personal, or permanent command; so also the coerciue power to punish is not
limited to a personal, or permanent coercion or punishment, for, as daily
experience teaches, the Pope may either as it were personally inflict an
Ecclesiastical censure, or which shall continue for ever, and be permanent as a
Law; and in this manner the similitude betwixt the not limiting of direction,
and chastising is good.

3 Secondly, if that assertion of Suarez be so understood, that as the
Ecclesiastical, or spiritual power to command is not limited to any certain
manner of commanding, so that it be convenient, and beseeming the nature and
condition of an Ecclesiastical or spiritual body, or society, so also the
Ecclesiastical power of punishing is not limited to any certain manner of
punishing so that it be convenient and beseeming the nature and condition of
an Ecclesiastical or spiritual body, or Society, we also grant his
comparison. But then we affirm, that as temporal coertion or punishing is
only convenient, and proper to a temporal body or Society, so also only
spiritual or Ecclesiastical punishments or censures are convenient and
beseeming a spiritual, or Ecclesiastical body or society, as out of many
Catholic Authors we have showed but a little before.

4 Wherefore there is a great difference to be observed betwixt the power to
command, and to punish. For the Ecclesiastical power to command is as it were
unlimited, and may be extended to all things both spiritual, and also
temporal, but not as they are temporal, but as in regard of the virtue or
sin therein contained they become spiritual: because the object of the
Ecclesiastical directive or commanding power is virtue, or vice, which may be
found in all things whatsoever as well temporal as spiritual: and so the
Ecclesiastical power forbidding a temporal thing as it is a sin, does not
do any thing, which is not beseeming the nature and condition of a spiritual
body or Society, but the depriving one of temporal lands, goods, liberty, or
life are always temporal punishments for what crime soever, either spiritual
or temporal they be inflictd, and therefore are not convenient or beseeming the
nature and condition of a spiritual commonwealth, as I have showed before.

5 And this distinction betwixt the commanding and chastising power does
evidently appear in the Civil Commonwealth, which having for the object of
her directive or commanding power public peace, and public disquietnes, as
the Ecclesiastical has virtue and vice, may forbid al things even
Ecclesiastical matters as they are truly manifest wrongs to the Civil society,
and unjust hindrances to the public peace, for that these unjust oppressions
although principally and of themselves are spiritual, yet secondarily and by
accident they are temporal wrongs, and in that regard may be punished by the
Civil Magistrate, not with spiritual, but with temporal punishments, as
before in this Disputation cap. 7. sec. 2. nu. 17.
I have showed out of those two most famous Dominicks, Sotus and Bannes, both
of them most learned professors in Divinity in the University of Salamanca,
and both of them Religious men of the renowned order of S. Dominicke. Whereby
we may perceive that this manner of arguing, which Suarez uses in comparing
the directive power with the correctiue is not allowable, for otherwise we
might in like manner conclude, that as the Civil power to command is not so
limited, but that it may sometimes be extended to Ecclesiastical and
spiritual matters, so also the civil power to punish is not so limited, but
that it may sometimes be extended to punish with Ecclesiastical and spiritual
punishments.

6 Now concerning that which Suarez in the end of this argument affirms, that
Pope Innocent the fourth with the Council of Lions did out of this text gather
the Popes power to depose Princes, we have also answered heretofore In my
Apology nu. 251. etc.
; first, that the deposing of Frederike the Emperor was not done by the
Council of Lions, but in the Council, or rather in the presence of the
Council, but without the Councels consent: which we probably deduced from the
very title of the Popes Bull wherein Frederike was deposed; which is this:
Innocentius Bishop Servant of Servants, etc. the sacred Council being present
to the perpetual memory hereof. And then begins the Bull, wherein this
text of Scripture Whatsoever thou shall loose etc. is alleged. For it is not
usual, or scarce ever seen in any general Council, that when the Council
decrees any thing, those words are used. The sacred Council being present,
but the sacred Council approving. And doubtless Pope Innocent being so
notable a wise man as he was, and desiring to give satisfaction to the whole
Christian World for deposing such a potent Emperor as Frederike was, whereby
great dissentions throughout all Christendom were like to arise, as indeed
they did, in so much that Pope Innocent Trithemius in Chronico Monasterij
Hirsaugiensis ad annu^ 1244.
was weary of his life, and wished that he had never thought of deposing him,
if the whole Council had approved that deposition, he would not only have
said, The sacred Council being present, but, the Sacred Council approving, as
in all other decrees when the whole Council decrees any thing it is usually
said, especially seeing that immediately after in the very next decree this
latter manner of speech is used, which argues a great diversity in the
making of these two decrees. Neither can Suarez in my opinion demonstrate, that
this answer which I have given is not probable, for I will not deny, but he
may bring probable reasons to prove that the aforesaid deposing of Frederike
was done by the consent of the whole Council, but that is not sufficient, we
expect from him evident demonstrations, otherwise he will never prove his
opinion to be certain. I added also another conjecture, which was, that the
aforesaid sentence of deposition was denounced not without astonishment of all the hearers and standers by, as it is related in the Councels, but there was
not such great cause why all the Fathers of the Council hearing that sentence
should be astonished, if before they had given their assent thereunto.

7 Secondly, how far the reasons not only of Popes, but also of general
Councels, which they allege for any decree can bind, we have showed before
in this Disputation Cap. 6. sec. 3. nu. 23.
. Thirdly, if we should grant to Suarez, that not only the Pope but also the
Council did hold it as a far more probable opinion that the Church has
power to depose Princes, and thereupon did proceed in giving that sentence,
but that they did not hold it as a matter of faith, Suarez will never be able in
my judgment with invincible arguments to demonstrate the contrary.

8 Lastly, as that Matthew. 16.
What thing soever thou shall loose etc. was spoken to Saint Peter, and his
Successors, so also that Matthew. 18.
, what things soever you shall loose etc. was spoken to the rest of the
Apostles and to their Successors, and so not only the Pope, but also all
Bishops have by Christ his institution power to deprive Princes of their
Dominions, and lives, which whether it be convenient to affirm, I remit to the
judgment of the discreet Reader: And that very same reason, which Almaine De
potest. Eccles et Laica q. 1. ca. 9.
brings to prove that there is some likelihood that Christ gave not to the
Pope that unlimited power, may with far greater reason be applied to other
Bishops, for that, says he, it would be an occasion, that the Pope by reason
of this power would be puffed up with very great pride, and that fullness of
power would be very hurtful to the Subjects, therefore it would be hurtful
both to the Pope, and to the Subjects, and therefore it is not like, that
Christ did give him such a power.

Sect. V.
1 THirdly, Suarez Nu. 12.
proves out of holy Scripture this unlimited power of the Pope to punish with
all sorts of punishments, even death it self, by two particular facts of Saint
Peter, and Saint Paul, wherein, says he, this authority is imperfectly as it
were in a shadow signified. For at Saint Peter's reprehension Ananias Act. 5.
, and his wife were slain, and Saint Paul 1. Cor. 5.
did not only excommunicate the fornicatour, but also did deliver him to Satan
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For those words [for the destruction of the flesh] do
clearly show, that besides the spiritual censure he was also punished with
some corporal vexation, and constrained to do penance that his soul might be
saved, as the Fathers, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, Anselme, Pacianus, Ambrose
do expound that place. Therefore according to the exposition of the Fathers we
gather out of that place, that Ecclesiastical correction and punishment does
consist not only in spiritual, but sometimes also in corporal punishing, and
therefore that the Pastors of the Church may use temporal punishment in order
to spiritual good.

2 To this objection we answer, that those particular facts of Saint Peter,
and Saint Paul did belong to an extraordinary power to do miracles, which was
personally granted to the Apostles, and did not descend to all their
Successors, and therefore they can not be rightly applied to prove the Popes
ordinary power to kill, or depose. And so the ancient Fathers affirm, that it
was necessary that the Apostles should in the first planting of the Church
have authority to do miracles, that thereby the Christians, and Christian
faith might be had in greater reverence. Therefore we deny this consequence,
Saint Peter and Saint Paul did by an extraordinary Apostolical power punish
offenders with death, and other corporal afflictions and so the Fathers
affirm, therefore there Successors may by an ordinary power inflict the like
punishments. I omit that it is not certain that Ananias was slain by Saint
Peter, as Lorinus upon that place declares but immediately by God, or an Angel,
or with a great passion of grief being stricken died suddenly as Saint
Gregory insinuates. And thus much concerning the arguments, which Suarez
brings from the authority of holy Scripture.

Sect. VI.
1 THe second head, from which Suarez Nu. 14. 15. 16.
brings a forcible argument in his opinion to prove this Doctrine concerning
the Popes power to depose, is the practice, as he says, of the Church. And to
this purpose he sets down almost all those facts of Popes, who have
deposed Kings, and Emperors, which in my Apology Nu. 308. and seq.
I have rehearsed, and answered. And all these and the like, says he, were
not done rashly, nor in corners, but some of them in most frequent Councels,
and sometimes in a General Council as in that of Lions, and in the sight of
the whole Christian world by whom they were approved, and put in execution,
therefore it is incredible, that they should be actions of an usurped, and not
of a true authority. To these may be added that the Council of Lateran under
Pope Innocent the third supposed this power saying Si Dominus temporalis etc.
If a temporal Lord etc. From all which this argument is concluded.

2 The Universal Church can not err in those things, which appertain to
faith, and manners, but the Universal Church did consent to these facts, and
did approve them as agreeable to the Law of God and nature, and likewise does
approve the Canons imposing such punishments upon temporal Princes for
enormious crimes, and obstinacy in them, and especially in heresy, therefore
it is as certain, that the Pope has power to chastise and punish temporal
Princes with these kind of punishments, as it is certain, that the Church can
not err in faith and manners. Thus Suarez.

3. To this Objection I have also heretofore In my Apology nu. 442. and seq.
answered in these words: that none of all those examples do prove that,
wherein the principal controversy does consist, to wit, that the Pope by
Christ his institution has authority to depose Princes, and to dispose of all
their temporalls, but at the most they do show, that the Popes have actually
deprived Kings and Emperors of their Crowns, but that they did it by
rightful power and authority, none of those examples do prove. And therefore
the same Answer may be given to those examples of Popes, which Cardinal
Bellarmine gives to a certain argument, wherein it was objected, that
Christian Emperors have oftentimes judged Popes, and deposed them. I answer,
says Cardinal Bellarmine Lib. 2. de Romans Pont. ca. 30. ad 4m.
, that in deed these things were done, but by what right, let them look to it.
And a little beneath, It is sufficiently known, says he, that Pope John the
twelfth was deposed by the Emperor Otho the first upon good zeal, but not
according to knowledge, for this John of all the Popes, was the very worst: And
therefore no marvel if a pious Emperor as was Otho, but not skillful in
Ecclesiastical matters did judge that he might be deposed, especially seeing
that many Doctors were of that opinion.

4. In the very like manner it may be answered, that certain Popes deprived
Princes of their dominions, translated Empyres, and disposed of the temporals
of Christians, but by what right let them look unto it. For we must not draw
arguments, says Ioannes Parisiensis De potest Regia, and Papali cap. 5. ad 5.
, from such particular facts, which sometimes are done upon devotion to the
Church, or for some other cause, and not by right of law. And Gregorius
Tholosanus Lib. 26. de Repub. cap. 5 nu. 11.
, after he had repeated many examples of Popes, who deposed Princes, writes
thus: From these that only I do gather now, that it is a hard question
whether Popes have power to depose an Emperor, or King, who once had power to
create the Pope. Yea and there are found many deposings of Popes by the
Emperors, no less then deposings of Emperors, by the Pope so that a very
great interchangeable course is found in these. Whereupon it is ill to dispute
of facts and examples of depositions. And a little beneath, By all which, says
he, the ambitious changers of Commonwealths, and the usurpers of Kingdoms,
and Rebels to lawful Princes may gather first, that not every deposing of
Princes is just, for that it is actually done, for all facts are not just;
secondly, that from hence must not be made a consequence, that by that example
the like is to be attempted. For it is one thing, says Cardinal Bellarmine In
respons. ad Apologiam pro Iuramento page 126. Edit altera.
, to relate the facts of Kings, I also may add of Popes, and another thing to
prove their authority and power. Neither is it to be meruailed, that some
Popes partly moved with zeal, partly with probable reasons, and partly incited
by the persuasions of some, who were of their counsel, did judge, that they
had such a temporal power in order to spiritual good, especially seeing that
very many Doctors were of that opinion. Thus I answered in my Apology.

5. I grant therefore, that these facts were not done rashly, but advisedly;
not in corners, but in the face of the whole Christian world, and that
therefore it is incredible, but that those Popes did probably think that they
did them not by an usurped, but by a true authority; but that they were done
by a true authority, which not only in opinion, but also in very deed was
true, these facts, although never so publicly done, do not sufficiently
demonstrate. Nevertheless, that which Suarez affirms, is untrue, to wit,
that these facts or depositions were approved and put in execution by the whole
Christian world: For if we run over the Stories of former times, from the
time of Henry the fourth Emperor, who was the first Emperor that was ever
deposed by the Pope, we shall find that they have always been contradicted by
many Catholics.

6. And besides the authorities of those Catholic Doctors, which I have
brought in my Apology, and some of them I have before Nu. 4. et. seq.
related, who hold that the Pope by Christ his institution has no such
authority to dispose of temporals, and to inflict temporal punishments by way
of coercion, if that deposition of Frederick the second, which was done in the
presence of the Council of Lions, had been approved by the whole Christian
world, it is not likely, that Frederike could have been able against the whole
Christian world, to bring the Pope, and his Dominions into so great
extremities. Frederike says, Trithemius In Chroinco Monast. Hersang. ad annu^
1244.
, after he was deposed, came into Italy, and did afflict the Pope, and the
people subject to him, with so great evils, that the Pope was weary of his
life, and wished, that he had never thought of deposing him. Read also Otho
Frisingensis Lib. 6. cap. 36.
, who relates the great miseries that Pope Gregory the seventh suffered by
the potencie of Henry the fourth, whom he had deposed. It is true that the
Popes do commonly, not to say always, when they depose any Prince, join
deposition with Excommunication, and so the second may be approved by the
whole christian world without approving the first: whereupon I have elsewhere
In the preface to my Apologet. Answer nu. 34.
observed against Cardinal Bellarmine, that the Excommunication of Henry the
fourth Emperor was approved by many Provincial Roman Councels, which
nevertheless make no mention at all of his deposition.

7. To the Council of Lateran, whose authority Suarez alleges, I have
heretofore In the preface to my Apologetical answer nu. 43. et seq. see it
beneath.
sufficiently answered, as also to the reason which from all these authorities
he concludes, which almost in the same words, but more largely was before
urged by Lessius, and therefore I remit the Reader thereunto. And truly it
seems strange to me, that this authority of the Council of Laterane should
now of late be accounted so strong an argument, which Cardinal Bellarmine in
his Controversies clean omitting, whereas so many facts of Popes he
particularly relates, seemed then to make little reckoning thereof. Wherefore
seeing that the Pope is not the Church, but a principal member thereof, there
is to be made a great distinction between the facts and practice of Popes, and
between the facts and practice of the Church, neither is the practice of many
Popes to be accounted the practice of the Church, unless by the whole Church
it be received, as that opinion of the Popes power to depose Princes, and to
inflict temporal punishments by way of coercion never was, and therefore that
argument which Suarez, says, is drawn from the practice of the Church,
considering that this practice was never approved by the whole Church, is of
little worth, and may rather be brought to scarre simple people, then to
persuade any prudent or learned man. And whereas Suarez affirms in the end of
his argument, that the universal Church does approve the Canons imposing such
temporal punishments upon Princes, for enormious crimes and obstinacy in
them, especially in heresy, those Canons which are commonly urged for this
purpose are those three, Nos sanctorum, Inratos, Absolutos, which Suarez
beneath alleges, and to which in this Disputation I have already Cap. 6.
sec. 3 nu. 12. etc.
answered.

Sect. VII.
1. THirdly, Suarez Number. 17.
confirms this doctrine by reason; and this is the whole substance of his
argument.

Christ our Savior has given to Saint Peter, and his Successors, whom he
has appointed to be the supreme head, and Pastor of the Church, all
authority which is necessary to the governing of his flock, but authority to
depose Princes is necessary for the government of the Church, therefore Christ
has given authority to S. Peter and his Successors to depose Princes. The
Mayor proposition is not in express words set down by Suarez; but it is
supposed; for he only declares the Minor for what cause, or by what title
this authority is necessary. And he affirms Nu. 17.
, that for two causes, or by reason of two titles this authority to chastise
Princes with temporal punishments is necessary: the first title is for the
Emperors, Kings, or temporal Princes themselves, the other for the people,
who are subject unto them. By reason of the first title this authority is
necessary, that the Pope may either correct, or amend a rebellious Prince, or
also punish him according to his deserts; for both of these do appertain to a
Pastor: but oftentimes it falls out, that only Censures are not sufficient
to those effects, and daily experience does sufficiently show, therefore of
necessity we must also affirm, that Christ has given this power to his
Vicar, considering that he has appointed him to be his Pastor, as well of
Christian Princes, as of the rest of the people.

2. And this reason may be confirmed, Suarez nu. 18.
because the Church has power over other faithful persons, and Christians
baptized not only to correct them by Censures, that they may amend their
fault, but also to punish the offenses committed by other temporal or
corporal punishments according to the manner, which is agreeable to an
Ecclesiastical Judge and Pastor, therefore the lawful Prelates of the Church,
and especially the Pope has the same power even over supreme temporal
Princes,

3. The Antecedent proposition is manifest by the perpetual practice of the
Church. For the Canons do usually impose a pecuniarie mulct sometimes to
confiscation of goods: now and then also they do impose corporal punishments
without danger of losing life or member, as is whipping, and sometimes sending
to the Galleys, and when a capital punishment is necessary, although
Ecclesiastical Judges for decency of their Order are not wont to give
sentence thereof, yet they may commit the person offending to the Secular
Judge, commanding him to punish the offender according to the equity of the
laws. All which may especially be considered in the crime of heresy. For
Heretics are not only excommunicated by the Church, and punished with other
spiritual punishments, but also are deprived of all their temporal goods, not
only by the laws of the Emperors, but also by virtue of the Canons. And
finally, if either he shall remain obstinate, or be relapse, he is by the
laws of the Emperous punished with death, but by the Canons he is left to the
discretion of the Secular Judge, to receive punishment according to the
condition of his fault, according to cap. abolendam de haereticis, with such
like.

4. And that these punishments are just, the practice of the Church does
sufficiently convince, Suarez nu. 19.
and Saint Austin does very well defend epist. 48. and 50. and lib. 3. contra
epist. Parmeniani cap. 2. And that this power is necessary in the Church of
Christ, as it is instituted by him, reason does convince. For if the Subjects
of the Church could not be punished by these kind of punishments, they would
easily contemn spiritual punishments, and they would very much hurt
themselves and others. For as it is said, Proverb. 29. A child that is left to
his own will does confound his mother. Wherefore the Christian Commonwealth
were not conveniently instituted, neither were it sufficiently provided for, if
she had not power to constrain rebellious persons, who would not obey
Censures. Neither will he satisfy, who shall say, that it is sufficient, that
temporal Christian Princes have this power, both for that these Princes may
also offend and have need of correction (as I may say) and also for that the
punishing of offenses does of it self only belong to Civil Magistrates, as
they are contrary to the politic end, and to the peace of the Commonwealth,
and to humane justice, but to punish them as they are contrary to Religion and
the health of souls, does of it self belong to the spiritual power, and
therefore to her chiefly ought to appertain power to use temporal punishments
for such correction, either by inflicting them by her self, or by using the
help of the Secular Magistrate, that all things may be done decently, orderly,
and effectually.

5. It remains that we prove the former consequence, Suarez, nu. 20.
to wit, that if the Church has this power over the rest of the faithful of
inferior degree, she especially in S. Peter and his Successors, has it also
over supreme temporal Princes. The consequence therefore is proved out of the
principle before set down, that these Princes are as well Saint Peter's sheep
as all other Christians, neither does temporal dignity, or potencie exempt
them from that power or punishment, for neither by Christ's words, neither for
any other ground or reason such a liberty, or rather license to sin can be
gathered. Yea rather this power is more necessary in the Church, to punish such
kind of Princes then their Subjects, first, because they are more free, and
therefore do more easily fall, and being fallen, are more hardly corrected.
Secondly, for that Princes sins, especially such which are contrary to Faith
and Religion are more pernicious, for they do easily draw their subjects to
imitate them, either by their example and by gifts and promises, or also by
threatenings and terrors: whereupon well said the Wiseman Ecclesiasticus 10. An
unwise King will destroy his people, for what manner of man is the Governor of
a city, such also are the inhabitants therein. Finally, because Princes do
more grievously offend then the rest, and therefore they ought also to be more
grievously punished by their Pastors; as of Pastors themselves Saint Gregory
said in his Pastoral part 3. cap. 5. and it is related by Pope Nicolas against
Lotharius King of France, in an epistle to the same King, and it is rehearsed
in cap. praecipue 11. q. 3.

Suarez. nu. 21.
6. And from hence now at the last may easily be showed the other title of this
power over Kings, to wit, for the defending of the Subjects. For it does not
only belong to a Pastor to correct the sheep that go astray, or to recall
them to the sheepefold, but also to defend them from wolves and enemies, least
that they should be drawn out of the fold, and be destroyed. But a wicked
King especially a schismatike, and heretic, does put the subjects in great
danger of perdition, as is manifest by that, which has been said before, and
therefore it belongs to the Popes office to defend the Subjects of an
heretical or perverse Prince, and to deliver them from evident danger,
therefore Christ, who has done, and instituted all things well, has given
this power to Saint Peter, and has contained it under that word feed, and
under the power of binding and loosing, therefore by it he may also deprive
such a Prince of his Dominion, and hinder him that he hurt not the subjects,
and absolve these from their Oath of Allegiance, or declare them to be
absolved, because that condition is always understood to be included in such
an Oath.

Suarez nu. 21.
7. Which title Saint Thomas, and approved Divines think to be of such weight
and force, that of it self only it suffices to deprive an infidel King of
his kingdom and power over the faithful, although the former title of
chastising and just punishing should cease. From whence the same Divines do
gather, that the Pope can not punish a heathen King, who is not baptized for
infidelity or other sins. And nevertheless if he have Christian Subjects,
he may release them of their subjection, for moral and evident danger of
subversion: as Saint Thomas teaches 2. 2. q. 10. ar. 10. And it is gathered
from Saint Paul 1. Cor. 6. For he reprehendeth the faithful, for that they had
controversies befere infidel Judges, and to persuade them to this he says,
Know you not that we shall judge Angels? how much more secular things? Which
words Saint Gregory alleges lib. ^7. epist. 21. and does from thence
infer, Therefore is it not lawful for him to judge of the earth to whom
power is given to open and shut heaven? God forbid. Hereupon also may a
faithful wife be separated from her husband, who is an infidel, if she can
not dwell with him without injury to the Creator, according to the doctrine
of Saint Paul. 1. Cor. chap. 7. Suarez. nu. 23.
And from the same root children baptized are freed from the power and company
of their parents, who are infidels, least that they should again be entangled
with their errors, as is it said in the fourth Council of Toledo cap. 59.
Therefore by the like, or with greater reason a Christian King, or who is
subject to the Church, by reason of Baptism, may be deprived of his power and
dominion over his vassalls, therefere it is a title of it self sufficient that
the Pope may punish these Princes, and deprive them of their kingdoms, and for
this purpose use the sword of other Princes, that so the sword may be under the
sword, that they may mutually help each other to defend the Church.

8. I might in this place declare, confirm and defend other titles, for which
the Pope may upon just causes dispose of temporals, as he did in the
translation of the Empire, and in instituting a new manner of choosing the
Emperor, and in administering it when it is vacant, but the brevity of this
work does not permit to prosecute al these, neither are they necessary to our
intent and purpose, and therefore I remit the Reader to other Authors who have
most learnedly disputed hereof.

9. These be all the reasons which Suarez brings to prove this unlimited
power of the Pope, to punish Christian Princes with all sorts of temporal
punishments, which although I might have reduced to a more compendious form,
for that in substance they are the very same reasons, which Cardinal
Bellarmine has brought in his Controversies to prove the Popes power to depose
Princes, and to dispose of all their temporals, and to which in my Apology a
Nu. 176.
I have answered at large, yet least that the Reader should imagine that by
altering or displacing his words or sentences, I might change and alter the
true sense and meaning of some sentence, and so the true force of his argument
could not so easily be perceived, I thought it expedient to set his reasons
down word by word as they are found in him. And although I have already in my
Apology answered this argument of Suarez, yet for satisfaction of them who
either have not seen or read my Apology, I will repeat in substance the same
answer here again.

Sect. VIII.
1. FIrst therefore to the Mayor proposition I answer, that Christ has
granted to Saint Peter and his Successors all sufficient and necessary power
to govern his Church, and to bring the faithful to life everlasting, which is
the principal end wherefore this power is given to the Church. But because the
aforesaid proposition is equivocal, and may be understood two ways, neither
is it so clear and manifest what things are required to this, that such a
power may be said to be sufficient or necessary for such an end, if any one
should strive to conclude an article or doctrine of faith from the aforesaid
proposition, being taken so generally and without any further explication,
might easily give occasion to those who are not skillful in Divinity, to fall
into some error.

2. Wherefore a power to govern the Church, and to bring souls to heaven may
be called sufficient or necessary in this sense, that the Church has all
sufficient and necessary power actually to bring souls to heaven, and actually
to take away all the impediments which can hinder one from the attaining to the
kingdom of heaven, which sense those words of Cardinal Bellarmine may aptly
bear, although perchance it was not his meaning, which he has in an answer
of his to, a treatise of John Gerson of the validity of excommunication In
considerat. 11.
, to wit, that the Pope can effect all that, which is necessary to bring
souls to paradise, and to remove all impediments, which the world, or the
Devil with all their strength, and subtilties can oppose: And this sense is
clearly false, both for that the Pope has no sufficient means to save an
Infant in the mothers womb who can not be borne alive; for it is not lawful
to open the mothers womb before she be dead, that the child may be Christened;
or to save one who being in mortal sin is bereaved of his wits, until he
return to them again, which to effect is not in the Popes power; and also for
that the Pope has not power over the internal actions of the mind, which are
most necessary to salvation and lastly for that there should be neither
Turks, nor Infidels, nor heretics, without the Popes default, if he had power
to effect all that, which is necessary to bring souls to Paradise, and to
remove all impediments, which may hinder one from the attaining to the same.

3 Secondly, it may be understood that the Church has all sufficient and
necessary power to govern the faithful, and to bring souls to Paradise, if
we regard only the power it self, and not all those things, which are
otherwise necessary to bring men to salvation. As for example the power of the
Sun to give light may be understood to be sufficient either in regard of the
power it self to enlighten, or in regard also of those things which are
otherwise necessary for the Sun to give light, and which if they be not
present will hinder the Sun from giving light. And although the Sun has
not sufficient power to take away all those things, which can hinder it from
giving light, for so it should have power to draw the body which it has power
to enlighten toward it, that the body may be in a convenient distance, and
also to make it perspicuous and capable of light, Which nevertheless to effect
are not in the power of the Sun, and yet there is no man who will therefore
deny, that the Sun has all necessary, sufficient, and perfect power to give
light. And in this sense the Mayor proposition is true: for the Church of
Christ, which is a spiritual Commonwealth, has all necessary, all
sufficient, and perfect spiritual power to govern the faithful, and to bring
them to the Kingdom of Heaven, for as much as is required on the behalf of
the power it self, which power nevertheless does suppose the subject to be
otherwise apt, and sufficiently disposed.

4 For the spiritual Church of Christ has power given her to give spiritual
grace to men, whereby they may come to the Kingdom of Heaven; to Infants and
persons not baptized by the Sacrament of Baptism, to men of discretion and who
are baptized by other Sacraments, especially of Penance, by means whereof a
Priest as the Minister of Christ by virtue of the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which by his Ordination and lawful Jurisdiction he has received, does
absolve from sins, and gives spiritual grace; Nevertheless to make this
power to be effectual, and actually to bring men to the Kingdom of Heaven,
are required certain dispositions, which are necessary on the behalf, or in
respect of the persons who are to receive these Sacraments, which dispositions
the Church has not of her self always power to cause in the faithful, nor
to take away al impediments, which every way does hinder the working of this
effect. Besides this power, which the Divines call power belonging to the
Sacrament of Order, the Church has also power, which they call of
Jurisdiction, to preach the word of God, and to govern the Church by making
laws, and imposing commands, and to punish all offenders with spiritual
punishments. For as the Church of Christ and the Ecclesiastical power is
spiritual, so also Christ has given her all sufficient and necessary
spiritual means, for as much as belongs to the power it self, to the
effecting of that end, for which this spiritual power was granted her.

5 We grant therefore the Mayor proposition in that sense as we have now
declared. Now concerning the Minor, if Suarez understand, that Christ has
given to his Church absolutely all spiritual authority without limitation to
govern his Church, as he himself had a power, which Divines call of
excellency, whereby he could miraculously, and as it were by force convert men
from sin, and bring them to the kingdom of Heaven, which power in some part
he gave to his Apostles, as to do miracles, to deliver men over to Satan, by
whom they should sensibly be punished, that thereby they might be recalled from
sin, to S. Peter to kill by word of mouth Ananias and Saphira, and Simon
Magus, as Stories relate, we deny his Minor proposition. But if he understand
that Christ has given to the Church all sufficient and necessary power and
authority, not temporal but spiritual, not absolute, but limited with such
conditions as beseems the nature and condition of a spiritual commonwealth
in such sort as it was instituted by Christ, and as the power is considered in
it self, and not in regard of the means, which are otherwise necessary to the
actual executing of this power, we grant the Minor: But then we deny yt the
authority to depose Princes, and to dispose of all temporal is necessary or
convenient to a spiritual commonwealth in that sort as it is instituted by
Christ, for as much as by Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, or the practice of the
Primitive Church can be gathered.

6 Wherefore as before in this disputation Cap. 6. sec. 2. nu. 6.
I answered to Gretzers argument, that to dispense in an Oath, or vow two
things are required, the one a power to dispense, the other a just and
sufficient cause or title for which he may use that power to dispense, and
without which that power to dispense shall work no effect at all, yet that
just cause or title does not give the Pope authority to dispense, but does
suppose authority to be given him, and therefore from a just cause, or title
to dispense in a vow we cannot rightly infer a true authority to dispense. In
like manner we answer now, that those two titles, which Suarez alleges, are
indeed sufficient causes, which may justly move the Pope to chastise Princes
with temporal punishments, if he had authority to punish them in that kind,
and without which causes, or the like, although he had such an authority to
punish them, yet the exercising thereof would be unjust, nevertheless these
causes do not prove, that the Pope has such a temporal power to punish, but
by other ways it must be proved, that Christ has given to S. Peter and his
Successors such a temporal power, which has not hitherto been sufficiently
convinced by Scriptures, or any other proof. It appertains indeed to a
Pastor to punish, but according to the authority as is committed to him by the
chief and supreme Pastor of all. Now whether Christ has given to the Pope
all that temporal authority to punish Princes in order to the spiritual good,
which he has given to Princes to punish their subjects in order to the
temporal good, is the very thing which is in controversy: And therefore Suarez
unless he will commit that fault in arguing which the Logicians call Petitio
principij, which is to take that for proved, which he is to prove, must not
suppose that the Pope has power to correct and punish temporal Princes, not
only with spiritual punishments which are proper to a spiritual
commonwealth, but also with temporal, which seem only to belong to a
temporal commonwealth, but he must also prove the same with invincible
arguments, and and not only to bring certain causes, and sufficient titles
for which the Pope may justly put in execution such an authority if he had it.

7 And whereas Suarez affirms, that only spiritual censures are not
sufficient to correct and amend wicked and rebellious Princes, as daily
experience does sufficiently show, and therefore this power is necessary in the
Church of Christ as it is instituted by him, for otherwise they would easily
contemn spiritual censures, and would very much hurt themselves, and others.
We answer, that spiritual censures being such grievous punishments as they
are, and far greater then any corporal torment or death, as S. Austin Lib.
1. contra Aduersatium legis, et prophet. cap. 17.
affirms, are sufficient to correct, amend, and punish al Christians
whatsoever, for as much as belongs to the spiritual power it self of
correcting: but if they be not so sufficient as actually to cause Princes to
amend, this is not for want of sufficient power, but for want of sufficient
disposition in those Princes, who are not terrified with those censures.
Neither is it necessary that the Pope must have such a sufficient power to
correct, and punish Princes, whereby they shall actually be brought to
amendment, for so he should not only have all sufficient power to correct and
amend, but also all sufficient means whereby this power must have effect, but
it suffices that he has sufficient authority to inflict such spiritual
punishments, whereby any Christian Prince or Subject may be justly terrified,
and for fear of such grievous punishments withdrawn for their wicked life.

8 If therefore wicked Princes shall contemn al Ecclesiastical Censures, the
Pope has performed his office, neither can he proceed to any further
punishment, for that according to the opinion of very many Doctors, as I showed
before, Ecclesiastical censures are the last punishments which an
Ecclesiastical Judge by Christ his institution can inflict: and therefore in
this case, they are to be left, says Abbot Wincet, In velitatione contra
Buccanum p. 180.
to the judgment, and punishing of Almighty God, by whom only, says Alexander
of Hales, 3. part. q. 40. memb. 5. q 4. ad 1m. 2m. 3m.
they are to be punished with temporal punishments, and who wants not
means, says Gregorius Tholosanus, Lib. 26. de Repub. cap. 5. nu. 25.
by which he is able, when he shall please, either to take away these wicked
Princes, or to amend them. And therefore in this case we must suffer patiently,
says Aeneas Syluius, In lib. de ortu et authoritate Imperij Romani c. 16.
who afterward was Pope Pius the second what a Prince does although unjustly,
and we must expect either an amendment of his Successor, or the correction of
the Judge above, who does not suffer violences and wrongs to be perpetual.

8 And the very like answer does Cardinal Bellarmine make concerning a wicked
Pope, who oppresses the Church, and endeavors by his bad life, or deeds to
ouerthtow it, and nevertheless according to his doctrine the Church has no
effectual remedy whereby to redress her self: It it no marvel, says he,
Lib. 2. de Council. cap. 19. ad 2
that the Church in that case remains without any effectual remedy of man,
seeing that her safety does not chiefly rely upon man's industrye, but upon God
his protection, for that her King is God. Therefore although the Church has
not authority to depose the Pope, yet she may and ought to pray humbly to God
that he will bring some remedy. And it is certain that God will have care of
her safety, who will either convert such a Pope, or take him away, before he
destroy the Church. And the like answer in the very same words may be applied
to temporal Princes, who persecute the Church.

9 Wherefore these temporal weapons, as power to depose, to kill, and such
like are not so necessary for the spiritual government of the Church, she
being principally protected by God, and by persecutions does rather increase,
then is diminished. For as the water of Noe his flood, says Cardinal
Bellarmine Lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 6.
, did throw down the Palaces of Kings, but the Ark of Noah they did more and
more lift up; so persecutions do easily overthrow temporal kingdoms, but
the Kingdom of Christ, which is the Church, they do not only not destroy,
but they do also illustrate. The same teaches Justinius Martyr, In Tryphone
Tertullian Cap. vltimo Apologetici.
and Pope Leo Sermon. 1. de. ff Petro, et Paulo.
the great. And therefore it is not absolutely necessary, says the same
Cardinal Bellarmine, Lib. 1. de Council. cap. 10.
that the common enemy, as is the Turk, be resisted. For if the Church could
continue (and rather increase then be diminished) under the most cruel
persecutions of Nero, Domician, Decius, Dioclesian, why may she not also under
the persecution of the Turks? Seeing therefore that the Church may be well
governed, wicked Princes punished, and also amended, and the souls of the
faithful saved without deposing of Princes, and using these temporal
punishments, they are not necessary, as by the definition of necessary does
clearly appear, to the good government of the Church, to the punishing of
wicked Princes, and to the salvation of souls, which is the chief,
principal, yea and only end of all Ecclesiastical authority.

10 To the Confirmation, which Suarez brings, we answer as before, that the
Church of Christ has power to correct all Christians, and to punish all
offenses with those punishments which are agreeable to an Ecclesiastical Judge
and Pastor, as he is instituted by Christ: but whether these punishments which
by way of coercio^ the Church can inflict, as she is instituted by Christ be
only Ecclesiastical Censures, or also temporal punishments, is the maine
question which is now in hand, and of which I now do dispute with Suarez,
always understanding of the modall, and not of the absolute proposition.

10 I said first by way of coercion, for I do willingly acknowledge, as
oftentimes I have in other places affirmed, that by way of direction and
command the Church may impose or inflict (for these two we now do take for
all one) temporal punishments, if they shall be necessary for the health of
souls, and so we grant, that by Christ his institution the Church may command
one to be whipped, to be banished, to be sent to the Galleys, to pay such sum
of money, yea and to be hanged according to the Laws, if these punishments
shall be necessary to the salvation of his soul, but if the Church commading
these punishments be not obeyed, to what then does her power extend? Has an
Ecclesiastical Judge, as he is Ecclesiastical, authority by Christ his
institution to execute by himself these punishments, as to take away his money,
to thrust him into ye Galleys, to deprive him of his life, or only to punish
the disobedience with Ecclesiastical censures? In this point remains the
whole difficulty. My opinion is, that it is the doctrine of many Catholics,
who are not therefore to be condemned of heresy or error, that the last
punishments, to which the authority of an Ecclesiastical Judge, as he is
Ecclesiastical, can by Christ his institution be extended, are only
Ecclesiastical censures. And so the common practice of the Church is, that
when an Ecclesiastical Judge imposes any pecuniary mulct, or punishment, the
executing thereof is commanded under pain of incurring Ecclesiastical
censures. Wherefore in the provincial constitutions of England Cap et venit de
paenis.
we have this Decree. We ordain, that Laymen precisely by the sentence of
Excommunication be compelled to perform all punishments as well corporal as
pecuniary. But that those who do hinder that these punishments be not
performed, be constrained by the sentences of Excommunication and Interdict.

11 I said secondly [by Christ his institutio] for I do not deny, but that
Ecclesiastical persons by the grants, privileges, and positive Laws of
temporal Princes, have authority to punish offenders with temporal
punishments, not only by the way of direction, but also of coercion, as before
I related out of Gerson and Almaine. And therefore we grant to Suarez all which
he brings to confirm the Antecedent proposition, to wit, that the Popes and
Councels do many times impose pecuniary mulcts and other corporal
punishments, yea and death it self, as appears by the Canon in Synodo did.
63. and cap. delatori 5. q. 6. although Suarez in those words, without danger
of losing life or member, would dissemble the same: But this is that we stand
upon, that if Suarez will needs have these temporal punishments to be imposed
by the Canons not only by way of direction, but also of coercion, that either
they are of force only in the temporal territories of the Church, or else they
are a confirmation of the punishments before imposed by the Civil Laws, or
else they are done by the consent of temporal Princes, or else they are a
declaration what the Secular Judge ought to do, or finally that they are not
imposed by them as having power granted by Christ his institution, but as
having such authority from the positive grants and privileges of Princes,
according to the opinion of very many Doctors, who hold, as I related out of
Gerson, and Almaine, that an Ecclesiastical Judge has not by Christ his
institution power so much as to imprison, but this proceeds from a pure
positive Law and grant of temporal Princes.

12 And so Cardinal Hostienis, who although he defend the Popes direct power
in temporals, yet to that Canon Ad abolendam, wherein the Pope decrees that
the goods of heretics are to be consiscated, he relates an answer, which
he does not reject as improbable, that the Pope made this decree by the assent
of the Emperor, who was then present, and consented. And the Gloss upon the
can. Adrianus did. 63. wherein the Pope commands the goods of them to be
confiscated who do not observe his decree, and upon the Canon Delatori 5. q.
6. wherein he ordains that the tongue of a false promotour be pulled out, and
the head of a convicted persons be stricken off, answers thus: Here the Pope
does teach what a Secular Judge ought to do.

13 I said thirdly [ always understanding of the modall proposition, for I will
not deny but that Suarez has made here a very plausible discourse, and that
he has brought many probable arguments out of Scriptures, and Councels to
prove the aforesaid temporal authority of the Pope; but that any one argument
of his or of any other, does clearly convince the contrary opinion to contain
in it any heresy or error, this is that I utterly deny.

14 We grant therefore to Suarez, that it is necessary that there be in the
Church authority to punish wicked Christians, and heretics with capital
punishments, if by the Church we understand the whole congregation of the
faithful including both the Clergy, and the Laity, for we freely confess
that Christian Princes have authority to put heretics to death, and that the
Laws for punishing them in that sort are just; and this only S. Austin
defends against the Donatists, as Parmentan, Petilian, and Gaudentius, who
held that it was not lawful to deliver an incorrigible heretic to the Secular
Magistrate to be punished capitally; but this is not the question which is now
in hand, but the only controversy betwixt me and Suarez is, whether
Churchmen as they are Churchmen, or which is all one, whether the spiritual
power of the Church is by Christ his institution extended to punish heretics
with temporal or capital punishments, without the concurrance of the Secular
Magistrate. Whereby thou may perceive (courteous Reader) how cunningly Suarez
proceeds in alleging S. Austin for the approouing of the Church laws for
the Chastising of heretics with temporal and capital punishments, as though
he would have his Reader to believe, that S. Austin approved the Popes
authority or Church-mens authority to inflict temporal, and capital
punishments, whereas S. Austin never dreamed of any such authority, but his
opinion was, as I have signified before, that in the Church of Christ the
visible sword was to cease, and to capital punishments which were used in the
old Law, excommunications and degradiations were to succeed in the new.

14 Wherefore if private men do contemn Ecclesiastical censures, they may
easily be corrected and punished by the Secular power, who is bound by the Law
of Christ to aid and assist the spiritual; but if a wicked Prince do not
regard the censures of the Church, the Church having used the last punishment
to which her power does extend, as I have showed before, must instantly pray to
Almighty God for the conversion of that King, and leave him to the judgment of
the eternal King, who will ever protect his Church, and will amend or correct
that King when it shall please him, in the self same manner as Cardinal
Bellarmine affirmed, that the Church must proceed with a wicked Pope. And if a
wicked Prince should not only contemn the Popes sentence of Excommunication,
but also of deprivation, I would gladly know of Suarez, what authority were
then left in the Church, (I mean in Churchmen as they they are such) to
punish this Prince, and to defend Christians from his tyranny. Truly if Suarez
argument were good, it would prove that the Church should have power to do
miracles, and either to kill him, as Saint Peter did Ananias, or else to
deliver him to Satan, as Saint Paul did the fornicatour, that being tormented
by the Devil with corporal afflictions, he might be brought to repentance.
And thus much concerning the first title, why the Pope may according to Suarez
depose Prince.

Sect. IX.
1. THe second part of Suarez reason, which is taken from the second title or
cause for which the Pope, as Suarez says, has power to depose Princes, and to
dispose of all temporals is easily satisfied in the self same manner, as the
first part was answered. For if it could once be certainly proved, that the
Pope had authority to depose Princes, etc. then doubtless this second title
to defend the faithful people, were a sufficient cause, that the Pope might
lawfully and without sin put in execution this his authority; but it does no
other way prove, that the Pope has such a temporal authority granted him by
Christ, then the former title did. Wherefore we willingly acknowledge, that it
belongs to the Popes office to defend Subjects from an heretical or perverse
Prince, but according to that limited authority which Christ has given him,
and by those lawful means, which by Christ his institution he may use; but
whether this authority to depose, to kill, to use all other temporal means,
which temporal Princes for the temporal good may use, be comprehended under
these words, Feed my sheep, whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. is the very
question which is now in controversy. And although Saint Thomas and other
approved Divines do hold, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and to
absolve Christian Subjects of their allegiance which they owe to infidel
Princes, yet this is not a sufficient ground, as I have showed before In this
disputation cap. 18. sec. 2.
to condemn of heresy or error those Catholic Divines, who hold the
contrary opinion. And therefore what Saint Thomas, Suarez, or other Divines who
be of the same opinion do by probable inferences gather out of these words,
feed, whatsoever, or such like places, is not much material to our present
controversy, unless their collections be so evident, as they are not, that
no probable answer can be made unto them.

2. To that place of Saint Paul 1. Cor. 6. If therefore you have secular
judgments, the contemptible that are in the Church, set them to judge. Doctor
Barclaye De potest. Papae cap. 21.
, and I In my Apology in 270. etc.
have sufficiently heretofore, and since that his son Master John Barclaye
Cap. 21. 2.
has in my opinion most learnedly answered to all the objections which
Cardinal Bellarmine has brought to impugn his Fathers Answer. And although
Suarez takes notice of Cardinal Bellarmines book which he highly commends,
yet of the Answer which Master John Barclay has made to Cardinal Bellarmine
he takes no notice of all, but urges the same text in such manner, as though
it had never been answered as yet. Wherefore seeing that Suarez in his
speeches to the Kings Majesty does profess sincerity, we desire him that
hereafter he will take notice of these books, and either impugn the answers,
or grant freely that they can not be convinced as improbable.

3. We answered therefore, that Saint Paul did not intend to command
Christians to appoint Ordinary Judges for the deciding of Secular causes, but
only Arbiters, which might peaceably take up all matters betwixt them, without
running to the tribunals of infidel Princes, by which the Christian Religion
was brought into contempt by the Infidels, seeing them to be at variance among
themselves. And so the strifes, and suites in law among Christians themselves,
who began then to publish to the world a new Religion, was a great occasion to
draw infidels from liking well of the Christian Religion. Wherefore because
these debates, and suites in law among Christians themselves, were scandalous
to the infidels, although not of themselves unlawful, Saint Paul counseled,
or at the most commanded the faithful Corinthians that they should compound
their suites among themselves, and appoint some Arbitrarie Judges, who should
take up all controversies, lest otherwise they should be compelled to go to
infidel Judges. And to persuade the Corinthians that Christians were men
worthy to be Arbiters in Secular causes, he uses an argument a maiori ad
minus, as as the Logicians call it, that is, from the greater to the less. For
if Christians shall judge the Angels, much more ought they to be esteemed
worthy to be Arbiters, and to take up in quiet and peaceable manner, not in
rigor of justice, secular contentions and strifes among men. And this is all,
that the words of Saint Gregory cited by Suarez do prove; for they that have
power to open and shut inridically the kingdom of heaven, ought not to be
accounted unworthy to judge earthly matters, and especially by way of
Arbitrament.

4. That these Judges, whom Saint Paul commanded the Corinthians to appoint
over Secular causes, were not Ordinary Judges, but only Arbitrarie (although
not such, who^ the parties themselves when they were at strife should elect,
but such that should be chosen and appointed by the whole co^munitie to take
vppeaceably al contentious quarrels which afterward should arise) we proved
from the authority of S. Thomas, and Lyranus upon that place, who write thus:
But that saying of the Apostle seems to be against that, which is written 1.
Peter 2. Be subject therefore to every humane creature for God, whether it be
to King, as excelling, or to rulers as sent by him. To which it is to be
answered, that the Apostle does not here forbid the faithful, who are under
infidel Princes, to appear before them, when they are called to their
tribunals, for this should be against the subiecto^ which is due to Princes,
but he forbids that they should not volu^tarily Note that word voluntarily.
have recourse to infidel Judges in those causes, which may be determined by
the faithful. And this exposition Card. Bellarmine Lib. 3 de Laicis cap. 12.
himself seems to approve, saying, that by these words the Apostle does
admonish the Corinthians, that in those causes, wherein they were not bound of
necessity Note those words of necessity: and also among themselves, for Saint
Paul speaks only of contentio^s among Christians themselves, and not betwixt
Christians, and infidels.
to go to the tribunals of the Gentiles, they should appoint among themselves a
Judge.

5. Seeing therefore that, according to this Doctrine of S. Thomas, and Lyranus,
the Apostle did not command the faithful Corinthians to appoint Judges among
themselves in such sort, that they should any way derogate to the obedience
which was due to Princes, and that when they were summoned to appear in
judgment, they were bound to appear, but only forbade them to have
voluntarily, and of their own accord recourse to Infidel Judges, but to take up
peaceably all contentions among themselves, it follows of necessity, that
these Judges were only Arbiters, although not to be appointed at the
arbitreme^t of ye parties who were at strife, but to be appointed by the whole
co^munitie as Ordinary Arbiters to decide al future controversies among
Christians themselves.

6 Wherefore, as I said in my Apology, S. Paul does in this place admonish the
faithful Corinthians, that they should not be at debate among themselves, but
yt rather they should take wrong, and suffer fraud. But if by reason of humane
infirmity there should chance at any time to arise any controversy among
themselves, they should appoint certain Arbitrarie Judges, who might peaceably
without going to law before Infidel Judges compound their quarrels, and that
they should not voluntarily and of their own accord go to the tribunals of
Infidel Judges, who seeing Christians at debate among themselves would easily
take occasion to contemn, revile, and oppress them, whom for their Religion
they did not love; and also the Infidels themselves would more greatly be
auerted from the Christian Religion: But if it chanced that they were conuented
before the tribunal of the Infidels, then they must appear, otherwise they
should do against the subjection which is due to Princes, which Saint Paul,
according to Saint Thomas and Lyranus, would in no wise have them to do.

7 Therefore this is not a good argument: The faithful Corinthians might, and
also ought, according to S. Paul's admonition, for ye avoiding of sca^dal,
appoint over themselves certain Arbitrarie Judges to decide those causes, for
which they were not bound to go to the tribunals of the Gentiles, therefore they
might in like manner appoint over themselves new Kings, and Princes. For the
first does not derogate any way from the authority of Princes, but the second
is against the subjection which is due to Princes, but the faithful
Corinthians ought not to do any thing which is contrary to the subjection wc
is due eue^ to infidel Princes, as S. Thomas and Lyranus have taught a little
before. All this and more both the Barclaies, and my self have in effect
answered heretofore, wc our answer either Suarez has not seen, or else he
concealeth it, and urges this text in such sort as though it made clearly for
him.

8 In like manner both I In my Apology in 288. and seq.
, and the two Barclaies Doctor Barclay ca. 23.
. John Barclay cap. 23.
have fully answered to the first part of that argument, which Suarez brings
in the last place, to wit, that a faithful wife may be separated from her
husband, who is an infidel, if she cannot dwell with him without injury to
the Creator; and children baptized are freed from the power, and company of
their parents who are infidels, lest that they should again be entangled with
their errors, therefore by the like, or with greater reason, a Christian King
may by reason of Baptism be deprived of his power, and Dominion over his
vassals. For we made very apparent the insufficiency of this consequence by
showing the great disparitie betwixt these two separations. And first the
marriage betwixt the infidel husband and the wife, who is become a Christian,
is not dissolved by the Popes authority, but by God himself, permitting, but
not commanding the same, as Saint Austine Li. 1. de adulter in coniugijs cap 19.
expressly affirms, and therefore this similitude proves nothing for the
Popes authority to depose, but rather that the faithful Subjects may depose
their Prince who is an infidel, if they can not live under his subjection
without injury to the Creator.

7 Secondly, if we speak of the deposing of Christian Princes, for whom
principally, or rather against whom he handles this question, this similitude
is flat against himself. For a wife baptized cannot depart from her husband
who also is baptized, and dissolve the bond of matrimony, although he should
become an heretic or infidel, and that she can not live with him without
injury to the Creator; therefore neither Subjects baptized can depart from
the obedience of their Prince who is baptized, and by deposing him dissolve the
bond of their allegiance, although he should become an heretic or infidel,
and that they cannot live with him without injury to the Creator.

8 Thirdly, there is a great disparitie in this similitude, for that a wife to
leave her husband argues no authority to be in the wife over her husband, but
for the people to depose their Prince argues a supreme authority and
Superiority to be in the people over their Soueraign Prince, which supreme
authority cannot be in the people, who are subject unto him. The most that
this comparison can prove is, that as a faithful wife, who cannot live with her
husband without offending her Creator, may leave his company, but not
dissolve the bond of matrimony, and marry an other husband, so a Christian
Subject, if he cannot without offending God live with the Prince in his
Kingdom, he may depart the Land, because this argues no authority to be in
the Subject over his Prince, but only a mere right to keep himself from
sin, but he cannot depose his Prince, and dissolve the natural bond of his
Allegiance for the cause aforesaid.

9 Lastly Master John Barclay. 20.
does well observe, that when Saint Paul gave this admonition to the
Christians, as Christian wives were by the bond of marriage subject to infidel
husbands, so also some Christian men were by the bond of allegiance, and
obedience subject to infidel Princes, and Lords, yea al Christians were at
that time subject to infidel Princes* and yet the Apostle in no place in no
case did grant the people leave to revolt from their Prince, or servants from
their Lord. And why should not the Apostle have admonished faithful Subjects of
their duty as well as faithful wives? for what cause should he have
entangled their consciences? He teaches that the bond of matrimony ought to
be firm, and yet that in infidels it may be dissolved, if one of them embrace
the faith of Christ: He teaches again that Subjects, and servants ought to
obey their Prince, and Lords or Masters for conscience sake, neither makes he
any exception of an infidel Prince or Lord (as he did of Matrimony) yea
manifestly excludes all exception, seeing that he then spoke expressly of
infidel Princes, and of infidel Lords or Masters: therefore according to this
doctrine it is not lawful for faithful people to cast off the subjection
which they owe to an infidel Prince.

10. To the second part of the argument I answer in like manner, that Children
baptized are freed from the power and company of their Parents who are Jews or
infidels, not by the authority of the Pope, but either by the authority of
Christ, as christian wives are from their husbands, who are infidels, or else
by the authority of the civil Magistrate, to whom those infidel Parents are
subject in civil matters. For we must observe two obligations, wherein
children are bound to their parents, the one natural and divine, which does
consist in this that children must honor and reverence their parents, as those
from whom next under God, they have received life and being, and this bond no
humane power can release, the other civil, which proceeds from the civil
law, and which bond, according to the customs and laws of diverse nations, is
more or less strict: as that children are bound to live in company of their
parents, and under their potection or guard, that they cannot marry or make any
contrict without the consent of their parents, and such like; and this bond as
it was made by the civil law, so it may, and oftentimes is by the same law in
diverse cases taken away. Wherefore if that fourth Council of Toledo, which
Suarez alleges, did only declare that the baptized children of Jews, were
by the law of God freed from the power and company of their parents, which
forbids all probable danger of falling into sin, this Council makes
nothing to prove the Popes authority to free either children or Subjects
baptized from the power of their parents, or Princes, who are infidels: but if
Suarez will affirm that the Council exempted baptized children of infidel
parents from all civil subjection due to parents by the civil law, we answer
that it makes also little to prove that Clergy men, as Clergy men, have
power to absolve children from civil subjection, for that this decree was made
by the consent of the temporal Prince, King Sisennand, as appears both by
the first words of the Council, and many other decrees, especially concerning
Jews, as in the 64. Canon begins, Our most excellent Lord and King
Sisennand commanding, the sacred Council ordains, etc. and the 65. By the
decree of the most glorious Prince, etc. and in the very next Canon before that
which Suarez cites, the Council speaking of the Jews decrees thus,
Concerning whom (to wit, the Jews) this Sacred Council, by the advice of our
most pious and most Religious Lord King Sisennand has decreed, etc.

11. Wherefore there is the same disparitie in this similitude which is in the
former, for that children baptized to be freed from the power of their
infidel parents, argues no authority to be in the children over their
parents, but only a right to keep themselves from sin, but for Subjects to
depose their Prince, argues a supreme authority and superiority to be in
the Subjects over their Prince. Therefore neither with far greater reason, nor
with the like reason, or scarce with any reason at all does Suarez convince by
the aforesaid similitudes, that the Pope has power to depose Princes. And
nevertheless we do freely acknowledge that the sword must be under the
sword, and that they must mutually help on the other to defend the Church; but
this subjection of the temporal sword to the spiritual, and of the civil
power to the Ecclesiastical, we do not understand in that manner, as Suarez
does, but as we before Cap. 3. sec. 1. nu. 13.
declared in this Disputation in answering to Suarez argument.

12. The other titles which Suarez says, he could bring but does not, as the
translation of the Empire, remitting the Reader to other Authors who have most
learnedly disputed thereof. I also have examined in my Apology, wherein I have
abundantly showed, that Cardinal Bellarmine, even according to his own
grounds, has not sufficiently proved, that the translation of the Roman
Empire from the Grecians to the Germans, was done by the sole authority of
the Pope, but that the authority, consent and suffrages of the Roman people
was concurring thereunto, and therefore that no sufficient argument can be
drawn from that translation to prove, that the Pope has by Christ his
institution authority to translate Empyres, and to dispose of kingdoms, as
Cardinal Bellarmine pretended to demonstrate, wherefore I also remit the
Reader to that place.

Sect. X.
1. THese be all the arguments (Courteous Reader) which Suarez brings to prove
that the Pope has authority to depose Princes, which is the sole foundation,
whereon all his chief exceptions against the Oath do depend: which his
arguments, if they be of force, do evidently prove, first, that if for the
necessity of saving of souls, which is the principal end of all
Ecclesiastical authority, this power to depose Princes is by Christ granted
to the Pope, he should also have had given him sufficient means to execute
this power, seeing that the actual deposing of them, and thrusting them out of
their kingdoms, is for the most part more necessary to correct and punish
wicked Princes, and to defend souls from danger to be drawn by their potencie
to perdition, then is the sole authority to deprive them by a mere inridical
sentence. And Christ, if it had pleased him, might have given to the Pope such
an effectual authority, that whenever he should excommunicate any wicked
Prince, he should either presently be miraculously slain, as Ananias was at
the voice of Saint Peter, or the Devil should incontinently torment him with
corporal afflictions, as the fornicatour was by Saint Paul.

2. Secondly, they do also convince, that the Pope has power not only to
deprive Princes of their kingdoms, but also of their lives: For according to
Suarez those words of our Savior, Whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. and Feed
my sheep, are general, nor limited to this or that kind of punishment, and
therefore they ought not, says Suarez, to be limited by us, but are to be
extended to all punishments, which the Pope in his judgment and discretion
shall think convenient. Nevertheless Doctor Schulckenius, or rather Cardinal
Bellarmine, as most men say, whom by force of argument I greatly urged to
declare his opinion in this point, does never in such plain and perspicuous
words confess the same, (although in some places, especially page 413. 488.
and 489. it may easily be gathered) but that he may alwaios have some sort of
evasion. And therefore whereas I in my Apology did oftentimes upon occasion of
Cardinal Bellarmines arguments urge this objection, and did apparently
convince, that those who defend the Popes authority to depose Princes, must of
necessity according to their grounds also maintain, that the Pope for the
spiritual good of souls has also authority to kill Kings by all those ways
secret or public, by which a temporal Prince for the te^porall good of the
Commonwealth has authority to kill any of his Subjects, for that, according
to this doctrine of deposing, the Pope has absolutely as ample authority over
Princes in order to spiritual good, as Princes have over their subjects for
the temporal good: yet for all this he does never answer directly to this
objection, or rather demonstration, but still runs to that saying of S. Leo,
Ecclesiastical leuitie does avoid cruel reuengings; Which either may be
understood that Clergy men (as Clergy) can not by the law of Christ
concur to the spilling of blood, or only by the law of the Church, wherein
the Pope has power to dispense. Moreover this Doctor does ever seek to
disgrace me, and to mis-interprete my sincere cogitations, affirming that by
urging this objection, I only intended to make the Sea Apostolic odious to
Princes, whereas, God is my witness, I never had or have any such intention,
but my only meaning is and ever was plainly and sincerely to find out the
truth, it is rather themselves, who endeavor to make the Sea Apostolic odious
and dreadful to Princes, by broching such a scandalous and desperate doctrine,
and we seek rather to take away such dreadful iealousies out of the minds
of Princes.

3. But Suarez perceiving the necessary consequence of this argument does deal
more sincerely, and does in express words affirm, that the Pope has power to
deprive Princes of their lives, and to give leave to others to kill them. For
thus he writes, speaking of the Popes authority to depose Lib. 6. cap. 4. nu.
18.
, after a condemnatorie sentence given by lawful authority, whereby a King is
deprived of his kingdom, or which is all one, after a declaratory sentence of
the crime, which has such a punishment imposed upon it by the law it self, he
who gave the sentence, or to whom he will give commission, may deprive the King
of his kingdom, also by killing him, if otherwise he cannot, or if the just
sentence does also extend to this punishment. And a little beneath he writes
thus: And in the same manner, if the Pope depose a King, he can be put out or
killed only by them, to whom he shall give commission. But if he command the
execution to no man, it shall belong to the lawful successor in the kingdom,
or if there be none to be found, Nu. 20.
to the kingdom it self: and a little after he says, that this doctrine is
true and certain.

4. Nevertheless this doctrine of Suarez is in my opinion not only
uncertain, but it is also a new and very scandalous doctrine. That it is
uncertain, it may appear by that which has been said before, for if the
doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, and to inflict temporal
punishments, by way of coercion, be uncertain, in so much that very many
Doctors do hold, as Gerson and Almaine do affirm, that the Pope by Christ
his institution has not authority so much as to imprison, much more it is
uncertain that he has power to kill, and punish by shedding of blood, which
Ecclesiastical lenity does so much abhor. That it is a new doctrine it is
manifest, for that before these latter years it was never taught in the Church
of God, and now there is scarce one or two who dare in express words avouch
the same; And whether it be a scandalous doctrine or no that if a Prince be
deposed by the Pope, the next successor has authority to kill him, if he
cannot depose him, and consequently that the next successor may give leave to
any private man to kill that Prince who is by the Pope deposed, I leave it to
the judgment of the discreet Reader. Besides if the Pope can give leave to any
man to kill a Prince after he be deposed, as Suarez affirms, I do not see
but that he may also according to his grounds give secret license to any man
secretly to kill him, before he be deposed, if he shall think his sentence of
deposition will little preuail with him, but rather be a cause to hinder his
killing for that such a Prince will be more careful thereby to prevent all
future trecheries; For it is not necessary that the Pope must unking him before
he has power to kill him, for that according to Suarez doctrine a Christian
King remaining a King is subject to the Popes power of correcting and
punishing, and it is left to his discretion what punishment he will inflict
upon him, for that Christ has not limited his coerciue power, and therefore
neither ought it to be limited by us or by any Christian Prince.

5 Moreover I cannot perceive but that this doctrine gives way to private men
to murder Kings, not only with the Popes express license, but also with his
vertuall leave, and with presumption, that either he will not or ought not to
be unwilling. Which consequence although Suarez does deny; for that, says he
Lib. 6. cap. 4. nu. 19.
, Lib. 6. ca. 4. nu. 19.
a Judge condemning a private heretic or malefactor does not presently give
leave to all men to kill him, therefore neither the Pope condemning an
heretical, or otherwise tyrannical King does vertually and covertly give such
a license. For there can be no just cause alleged why this license should be
presumed rather against a Prince then against others. For prudence, and a just
manner in the execution it self is always necessary, and there is greater
danger of disturbance, and excess in punishing a kings person then others.

6 But this reason of Suarez although it may stand, if we speak of the killing
of a King, as the killing of him is a punishment, yet it is not so sufficient,
if we speak of the killing of a King, as the killing of him is a defense of
many innocent souls from danger of damnation. For Suarez does hold, as we
have showed before, that the Pope has power to deprive Kings of their
kingdoms, and consequently of their lives by reason of two titles, the one is
in regard of the King himself to amend him, or punish him, the other in regard
of the Subjects to defend them from being oppressed, which also may be applied
to a Subject who is a common robber by the high ways, and condemned to death,
who although he cannot be killed by any man to whom the Magistrate has not
granted particular commission, as his killing is a punishment of his offense,
yet as his killing is a defense of so many innocent men, it may probably be
presumed that the Magistrate gives vertuall license to any man to kill him, if
he be condemned and cannot be apprehended, but continues still in robbing.
In like manner considering the killing of a King may probably be the safety of
so many souls, why may it not with great reason be presumed, according to
Suarez doctrine, that the Pope is willing thereunto, if without great
disturbance or other bloodshed it can privately be done? Nay why may it not
with great reason be presumed that the Pope is bound in conscience to be
willing, and to give express leave, yea and to command private men, if they
can commodiously kill such a King, whereby a whole kingdom may be free from
his Tyranny, seeing that every private man is bound to prefer the common good
and salvation of so many thousand souls, although it be with imminent danger
of his own life? Now whether these collections which are probably deduced from
the former doctrine of Suarez be scandalous, I think that there is no prudent
man but will acknowledge. And whether all Kings have not great reason to oppose
themselves against such a new, and desperate doctrine, whereby there lives are
subject to the indiscreet zeal of every private man, who may probably pretend
that the Popes Holiness either is or ought to be willing thereunto, I remit to
the judgment of any sensible man. This is the true, ancient and undoubted
doctrine, Kill him not, 1. Reg. 26.
for who shall stretch his hand against the Lord his anointed and be
guiltless?

The second part.
Sect. I.
1 Having declared the chief ground and foundation, to wit, the Popes power to
depose Princes, and to absolve subjects from their Allegiance, whereon all the
Principal objections which Suarez makes against the Oath do depend, let us
now consider what particular arguments he brings to prove, that this Oath is
unlawful, and does covertly at leastwise contain not only the profession of
temporal Allegiance, but also a flat denial Ecclesiastical and spiritual
obedience.

2 But first of all thou must observe (courteous Reader) that there are to be
found two only supreme powers Out of Pope Gelasius in his Epistle to Anast.
Imperat. Pope Nicholas the first in his Epistle to Michael Imperat. and
Innocent 3. in cap. solitae de Maiorit.
whereby this world is principally governed, which are distinguished by their
proper functions, offices, and dignities, to wit, the sacred Ecclesiastical
authority instituted by Christ our Lord, and the politic Sovereignty or civil
power ordained also by God himself by means of the law of nature; and as
there are formally two only commonwealths of mankind, the Ecclesiastical,
which is called the Church of Christ, which is governed by the Ecclesiastical
or spiritual authority of spiritual pastors or Bishops, especially the chief
Bishop who is the Pope, whose principal end is to bring souls to the kingdom
of Heaven, and therefore has for the formal object of her directive power
virtue and vice, for which men deserve either heaven, or hell; and the civil
common wealth which is governed by the civil authority of Kings, Princes and
supreme Potentates, and whose principal end is to conserve outwardly public
peace and quietness in humane society and living together, and therefore has
for the former object of her directive power public peace and dsquietnes, and
humane justice or injustice whereby humane society and conversation is
preserved or disturbed; So all the actions of mankind must be reduced and do
belong to one of these two powers and commonwealths to whom they are subjected,
and by whom they must be directed, punished or rewarded, and likewise al
obedience or subjection is reduced either to Ecclesiastical and spiritual
oobedience, or to politic, temporal, and civil obedience or Allegiance: in so
much yt if it cannot be proved yt such an obedience is civil, it must be
Ecclesiastical, and if it cannot be proved that it is an Ecclesiastical
obedience, it must needs be civil, for all obedience is either Ecclesiastical
or Civil, and if it be ye one, it cannot in the same respect be the other, for
that these two obediences are distinguished of their own natures.

3 Spiritual Obedience is that which is due only to the Popes spiritual
authority, Civil obedience is that, which is only due to the civil authority
of Kings and Princes, who in matters mere temporal acknowledge no superior in
earth: so that to know what obedience is spiritual and due to the Pope, and
what obedience is civil and due to temporal Princes, we must also know what
authority the Pope has, and what authority temporal Princes have. That
spiritual authority only be longs to the Pope which Christ has given to S.
Peter, and his Successors, as they are his Vicegerents, and Substitutes here
in earth, therefore all other authority, which Christ has not given to S.
Peter is civil, and must belong to temporal Princes: wherefore with the same
certainty that we believe Christ to have given or not have given to S. Peter
such an authority, with the same certainty we believe that authority to be
spiritual or temporal. So that if it be certain that Christ has given to S.
Peter and his Successors authority to inflict temporal punishments by way of
coercion, it is also certain that this authority is spiritual, if it be
only probable that Christ has given to S. Peter and his Successors such an
authority, it is also only probable that such an authority is spiritual, and
consequently it is also probable that the aforesaid authority is not spiritual
but temporal, for if any opinion or doctrine be only probable, the contrary
opinion must also be probable.

4 From this we may easily understand the true meaning of that equivocal
proposition which Suarez brings a little beneath; that to treat of the Popes
authority, Lib. 6. cap. 2. nu 4.
and to propound it to be sworn, or abiured, does not appertain to the civil
or temporal power of the King, or to civil obedience due unto him. For this
proposition may be understood two manner of ways; first that to treat of the
Popes authority in such sort as to define and determine certainly what
authority Christ has given or not given to the Pope, and to propound that
authority which does certainly appertain to the Pope to be either abiured or
sworn as only probable, does not belong to he Civil or temporal power of a
King, who has not authority to decide what power Christ has given to the
Pope; and in this sense the aforesaid proposition of Suarez is true. Secondly,
the meaning of that proposition may be, that to treat of that power of the
Pope, which is probably judged not to be a spiritual power of the Pope but a
temporal power of a King, and to propound it to be sworn as probable, so long
as it remains probable, does not appertain to the temporal power of a King;
and in this sense his proposition is untrue; for otherwise it should not
appertain to the civil power to treat of any authority which the Pope should
challenge over temporal Kings, or which some few Catholics against the common
opinion of others, should give and attribute to the Pope: and consequently a
temporal King could not cause his Subjects to acknowledge by Oath, that the
Pope is not King of ye whole Christian world, and that he has not a direct
power and dominion in temporals over his Kingdom, which power nevertheless Card.
Bellarmine himself does vehemently impugn as an invention of man, and a
usurpation of civil power.

5 Neither does a temporal King, when he treats of the Popes power, which is
probably thought not to belong to the Pope, but to temporal Princes, and
therefore does cause his Subjects to acknowledge by oath that it does belong to
him, and not to the Pope, (which considering that it is probable they may
lawfully acknowledge) treat of the Popes power as it is accounted a spiritual
power, and therefore belonging to the Pope, but as it is probably accounted a
temporal power, and therefore belonging to the King. For a temporal King may
by temporal right treat, dispute, and maintain that authority, which
probably is thought to be a temporal, and not a spiritual authority. In like
manner temporal Kings may forbid, and punish spiritual offenses, not as they
are spiritual but as they are temporal, wrongs, and disturbances of the
public peace in a civil Commonwealth: and so they may punish heresies, and
periuries, which are evidently known to be such not as they are spiritual,
but as they are temporal injuries, a I showed before Cap. 7. sec. 2. nu. 17.
out of Sotus, and Bannes. And for the same cause they may compel their
Subjects by temporal punishments to abjure heresies, which are clearly known
to be heresies, if such an abiuration upon prudent and probable motives be
thought necessary to the preserving of public peace and quietness in the
Civil Commonwealth. But to define what proposition is heretical, or to
determine what authority is spiritual, and belonging to the Pope when it is
called in question, does exceed the limits of temporal or civil authority. I
omit to examine at this present, whether the civil authority of Christian
Kings may forbid and punish with temporal punishments spiritual crimes as they
are spiritual, and hurtful to the Church whereof they are by God appointed to
be Protectours, considering that their office is to defend the Church, to root
out heretics and schismatikes, as Card. Bellarmine himself does acknowledge.
See above in this Disputation chap. 7. sec. 2. nu. 15.

6 Secondly, if thou will observe (courteous Reader) that protestation,
profession and acknowledgement, which those thirteen reverend, learned, and
virtuous Priests (of whom I made mention in this Disputation Cap. 3. sec. 3.
nu. 10.
) did make of their loyalty, and allegiance to our late Queen Elizabeth the
fifth day of November in the year of our Lord 1602, thou shall find great
coherence to be betwixt their profession and protestation, and this oath of
Allegiance, and that almost all the principal exceptions, which Suarez takes
against this oath, may in like manner be taken against their profession and
protestation. And yet those learned and virtuous Priests were fully persuaded,
that the profession of that civil obedience and allegiance, which they did
make to Queen Elizabeth being at that time both excommunicated and deposed by
the Pope, did no way derogate from that spiritual obedience, which they did
owe to the Popes Holiness, and which also in that their profession they did in
express words acknowledge. And because I would not have thee to rely upon my
bare word, I thought it expedient to set down their profession and
protestation word by word as it lies, which is as follows.

Whereas it has pleased our dread Sovereign Lady to take some notice of the
faith, and loyalty of us her natural borne subjects Secular Priests (as it
appears in the late Proclamation) and of her Princelike clemency has given
a sufficient earnest of some merciful favor toward us (being al subject by
the laws of the Realm to death by our return into the Country after our
taking the Order of Priesthood since the first year of her Majesty's reign)
and only demands of us a true profession of our Allegiance, thereby to be
assured of our fidelity to her Majesty's person, Crown, Estate, and Dignity,
We, whose names are vnderwrittten, in most humble wise prostrate at her
Majesty's feet do acknowledge our selves infinitely bound unto her Majesty
therefore, and are most willing to give such assurance and satisfaction in this
point, as any Catholic Priests can or ought to give unto their Sovereigns.

First, therefore we acknowledge, and confess the Queens Majesty to have as
full authority, power, and Soueraignetie over us, and over all the Subjects of
the Realm, as any her Highness Predecessors ever had; and further we
protest, that we are most willing and ready to obey her in all cases and
respects as far forth, as ever Christian Priests within that Realm, or in
any other Christian Country were bound by the law of God and Christian
Religion to obey their temporal Princes; as to pay tribute, and all other
Regal duties vnte her Highness, and to obey her laws and Magistrates in all
civil causes, to pray unto God for her prosperous and peaceable Reign in this
life according to his blessed will, and that she may hereafter attain
everlasting bliss in the life to come. And this our acknowledgeme^t we think
to be so grounded upon the word of God, as that no authority, no cause, or
pretense of cause can or ought upon any occasion be a sufficient warrant more
unto us then to any Protestant to disobey her Mtie in any civil or temporal
matter.

Secondly, whereas for these many years past diverse conspiracies against her
Majesty's Person and estate, and sundry forcible attempts for inuading and
conquering her Dominions have been made under we know not what pretenses and
intendments of restoring Catholic Religion by the sword (a course most strange
in the world, and under taken peculiarly and solely against her Majesty and
her Kingdoms among other Princes departed from the Religion and obedience of
the Sea Apostolic (no less then she) by reason of which violent enterprises
her Majesty otherwise of singular Clemency toward her Subjects has been
greatly moved to ordain, and execute seuerer laws against Catholics (which
by reason of their union with the Sea Apostolic in faith and Religion were
easily supposed to favor these conspiracies and invasions) then perhaps had
ever been enacted or thought upon, if such hostility and wars had never been
under taken, We, to assure her Majesty of our faithful loyalty also in this
particular cause do sincerely protest, and by this our public fact make
known to all the Christian world, that in these cases of Conspiracies, of
practicing her Majesty's death, of invasions, and of whatsoever forcible
attempts which hereafter may be made by any foreign Prelate, Prince or
Potentate whosoever either jointly or severally for the disturbance or
subversion of her Majesty's Person, Estate, Realms, or Dominions under color,
show, pretense or intendment of restoring the Catholic like Roman Religion in
England or Ireland, We will defend her Majesty's Person, Estate, Realms and
Dominions from all such forceable and violent assaults and injuries. And
moreover we will not only our selves detect and reveal any Conspiracy or
plot which we shall understand to be undertaken by any Prelate, Prince or
Potentate against her Majesty's Person or Dominions for any cause whatsoever as
is before expressed, and likewise to the uttermost of our power resist them,
but also will earnestly persuade, as much as in us lies, all Catholics to do
the same.

Thirdly, if upon any Excommunication denounced or to be denounced, against her
Majesty, or upon any such conspiracies, inuasio^s or forcible attempts to be
made as are before expressed, the Pope should also excommunicate every one
borne within her Majesty's Dominions that would not forsake the aforesaid
defense of her Majesty and her Realms, and take part with such conspirators
or inuaders in these and all other such like cases, We in these and all such
like cases do think our selves and all the Lay-Catholikes borne within her
Majesty's Dominions not bound in conscience to obey this or any such like
censure, but will defend our Prince and Country accounting it our duties so to
do, and that notwithstanding any authority, or any Excommunication whatsoever
either denounced or to be denounced as is aforesaid to yield unto her Majesty
all obedience in temporal causes.

And because nothing is more certain then that whilst we endeavor to assure
her Majesty of our dutiful affection and allegiance by this our Christian and
sincere protestation, there will not want who will condemn and misconstrue our
lawful fact, yea and by many sinister suggestions and calumnies discredit our
doings with the Christian world, but chiefly with the Popes Holiness to the
greatest prejudice, and harm of our good names and persons that may be unless
maturely we prevent their endeauours herein, We most humbly beseech her
Majesty, that in this our recognizing and yielding Caesar's due unto her, we
may also by her Gracious leave be permitted for avoiding obloquie and calumnies
to make known by like public Act, that by yielding her right unto her, we
depart from no bound of that Christian duty which we owe to our Supreme
spiritual Pastor.

And therefore we acknowledge and confess the Bishop of Rome to be the
Successor of Saint Peter in that See, and to have as ample and no more
authority or jurisdiction over us and other Christians then had that Apostle
by the gift and commission of Christ our Savior, and that we will obey him so
far forth as we are bound by the laws of God to do, which we doubt not but
will stand well with performance of our duty to our temporal Prince in such
sort as we have before professed. For as we are most ready to spend our
blood in the defense of her Majesty and our Country so will we rather loose
our lives then infringe the lawful authority of Christ's Catholic Church.

William Bishop. John Colleton. John Mush. Robert Charnock. John Bosseuile.
Antonie Hebborne. Roger Cadwallader. Robert Drury. Antonie Champney. John
Iackson. Francis Barneby. Oswald Needham. Richard Button.
Sect. II.
1. THese being observed, Suarez in his sixth, and last book examineth
particularly all the chief branches of the oath, and after that in the first
Chapter he has set down the true state of the controversy, wherein we do
agree with him as I said before (always understanding the question of the
modall and not of the absolute proposition as I also there declared) in the
second Chapter he deuideth the whole oath into four parts, or paragraphs. The
first is from the beginning of the oath to those words, Also I do swear etc.
The second to those words, And I do further swear. The third to those words,
And I do believe, The fouth contains all the other clauses unto the end.

2 First therefore Suarez, Cap. 2. nu. 2.
obiecteth against those words [our Sovereign Lord King Iames] that although
these words being sincerely propounded and understood do seem to contain
expressly no other thing then the profession of a temporal Dominion and
Kingdom, nevertheless according to the intention of the speaker in an other
oath never as yet recalled, and which is sufficiently known by the public
acknowledgement and writings of the King and according to the vulgar and
received meaning in that Kingdom, those words [our Sovereign Lord King Iames]
do signify that he is supreme or Sovereign simply, as well in spirituals, as
in temporals; supreme, I say, positiuely in his Kingdom, because he is above
all as well Ecclesiastical persons as Laymen both in temporals and also
spirituals, and negatiuely in respect of the whole world, or of the Church,
because he acknowledges therein no Superior: Seeing therefore that in this
form of the Oath the swearer is compelled to acknowledge in that manner the
King as Sovereign Lord, he is compelled covertly to confess his Soueraign
Primacie in great Britannie, and Ireland, and his exemptio^ from al Superior
power, and consequently he is compelled covertly to abjure the Popes Soueraign
spiritual power. So therefore in that only clause [our Soueraign Lord] is
contained something more then civil, and temporal obedience.

3 To this objection we have already Cap. 2. sec. 1.
sufficiently answered, it being the very same which Gretzer urged. For neither
the vulgar and received meaning of those words [our Sovereign Lord] is, that
he is supreme in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as temporal, neither does
his Majesty understand them in that sense; neither would Suarez, if he had
understood our English phrase, have urged this argument. For that according to
our manner of speech we make a distinction betwixt Sovereign, and Supreme,
although in Latin they are both expressed by the same word Supremus; and
Sovereign is an Epitheton, as the Grammarians term it, to every absolute
Prince, yea rather King, and Sovereign are a kind of Synonimies or words of
the self same signification, therefore we usually say [our Soueraigne] meaning
thereby [our King] without adding King or Lord. Whereupon in the Oath it self
of Supremacy it is not said, that the King is Sovereign Governor in all
causes as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, for those words do sound but
harshly, but Supreme Governor in all causes, making a manifest distinction
betwixt Supreme and Sovereign, Supremacy and Soueraignetie. And although I
do not deny, but that the King does persuade himself to be supreme Lord in
all causes, and has confirmed the law wherein his Subjects were bound by Oath
to acknowledge the same when it should be demanded at their hands, yet we deny
that his Majesty did intend that his Subjects shoula acknowledge the same in
this Oath, wherein he intended to demand nothing more then the profession of
natural and civil allegiance, as we oftentimes have declared heretofore.

Sect. III.
1 SEcondly, Suarez Cap. 2. nu. 4. and seq.
, excepteth mainly against those words [And that the Pope neither of himself,
nor by any authority of the Church etc. has any power or authority to de
pose the King and so forth] For who, I pray you, can say that by these words is
only demanded of the Subjects such civil obedience, which Subjects owe to
their Sovereign Princes? Truly other Kings of the Church are no less Supreme
Princes in temporals then is the King of England, and yet they do neither
exact such an obedience, neither do they believe that it is due to them from
their Subjects. Therefore the King of England does plainly show, that he
speaks and thinks of himself as of such a Soueraign or Supreme Prince who
has in earth no Superior at all, and that by this oath he demands of his
Subjects this profession.

2 Besides, by those words is not so much sworn obedience to the the King, as
Popes power is abiured, but to treat of the Popes power, and to propound it to
be sworn, or forsworn, does not belong to the civil power, therefore those
words do plainly exceed the bounds of civil odedience, both for that the
words themselves as it is manifest by them, do signify some thing else
besides civil obedience due to a King, and also for that the very exacting of
such an oath and the imposing of an obligation to profess this or that
concerning the Popes power is an Act of Jurisdiction more then civil, yea and
superior or not subject to the Popes authority; because it does not belong to
a civil power to prescribe limits to a spiritual, especially which is
supreme. Two manner of ways therefore (to declare the matter with Theological
terms) the King by those words does exact more then civil obedience, first in
actu signato, by propounding a matter not civil, secondly in actu exercito by
using a power more then civil, and by compelling the Subjects to submit
themselves unto it, and by their profession to acknowledge it.

3 Moreover Cap. 2. nu. 4.
, by those words is propounded a profession of a certain error against the
Doctrine approved by the universal Church; for that it does include this
proposition, and the faith thereof, that there is not power in the Pope nor in
the universal Church to depose a baptized King in any case, or for any cause,
or crime: But how false this proposition is, how disagreeable to the principles
of faith, to the practice of the Church, and also to all reason supposing the
Pastoral office which Christ has committed to his Vicar, it has been
sufficiently showed in the third book.

4 Lastly, of the same nature Nu. 5.
is another clause of this branch, wherein the King compels his Subjects to
swear, [that the Pope has not power to discharge any of his Subjects of their
obedience and allegiance to his Majesty, or to give leave to any of them to
bear Arms, to raise tumult, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesty's
Royal Person, State or government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within
his Majesty's Dominions.] Which clause is almost of the same nature with the
former, and does proceed from the same error, to wit, that the Pope has no
coerciue power over a King by temporal violence, or other temporal
punishments, which doctrine in the third book we have showed to be erroneous.
Wherefore also in this clause there is propounded to be sworn more then civil
obedience, and a spiritual power is usurped, and the Subjects are in the oath
compelled to profess, and acknowledge it to be in the King. And lastly the
power also of the Pope is abiured, and an error is sworn against the doctrine
of faith.

5 Yea here are Nu. 7.
included new errors: one is that the Pope has not power to release Oaths,
although a just and reasonable cause does concur, which is against the custom
of the Church, and against the practice and approbation of General Counsels,
cap. 2. de re iudicata in. 6o. and against the consent of Catholic Doctors,
and against the power to bind and loose given to S. Peter and so declared by
the practice and custom of all Christian people, and moreover it is also
against reason. For in like Oaths there is always included either a secret
condition, if the promise cannot be performed without notable hurt, and danger
to the swearer, but especially when that danger or hurt proceeds through the
wrong and violence of him, to whom the promise is made; or else the right and
power of the Superior it understood to be reserved, who can, notwithstanding
the promise made by the subject, forbid him to perform that thing which he
promised, if a just and reasonable cause do occur, and consequently can
release the Oath by forbidding the matter. Lastly this error supposes the
former. For if the Pope has power to depose the King, of necessity he has
power to take away the bond of obedience and of the Oath, because obedience is
not promised to James, as he is James, but as he is King, whereupon if he
cease to be King, forthwith no obedience is due unto him, and presently the
Oath does not bind; for the matter of the Oath, being taken away, consequently
the obligation of the Oath must of necessity be taken away.

6 An other new error is, Nu. 8.
for that not only the Popes power to depose an heretical King is denied, but
also to constrain his Subjects by such like punishments, as appears by those
words [or to any of his Majesty's Subiects] For the sense of these words is
not, that the Pope has power to authorize at his pleasure and without a
reasnable and just cause compelling him thereunto, any foreign Prince to
invade or annoy him or his Subjects, etc. But the meaning of those words is,
that the Pope has not power to offer any violence or hurt either to the King
or to his Subjects, nor to give license to any other to do any such like thing
against the Subjects of the King of England, although they be Apostataes and
Rebels to the Roman Church, and sowers or favorers of Schisms, and
Heresies, which is a great and new error, or doubtless the same of the Kings
Spuremacie explained. For what other thing is this then to profess the
Subjects of the King of England to have no other Superior in earth besides the
King himself, and that they can not be constrained or punished for their
crimes by any other, although they be pernicious to other Catholics, and to
the Church of Christ. Therefore by all these clauses either expressly enough, or
at the leastwise covertly is denied and abiured the supreme power of the Pope
and given to the King. Whereupon it is concluded that both it is false that
there is nothing in this Oath demanded besides the profession of civil and
temporal Obedience, and that contrariwise it is most true, that this Oath is
mixed, and does vertually contain whatsoever was propounded to be sworn in
the former clauses. Neither do I see what can be answered to these reasons with
any show of probability.

7 To this objection I have already sufficiently answered, by fully satisfying
all the arguments which Suarez has brought, to prove that the doctrine for the
Popes power to depose Princes is certain, whereon this whole objection of
Suarez does principally depend. For in this Oath is only demanded that
Obedience, which is probably thought to be civil, and consequently to be due to
all temporal Princes. And although at this time other Christian Princes do
not demand it, for that they have not the like cause which his Majesty has,
yet considering that it is a thing probably due unto them, it being not as yet
defined by the Church that it is a spiritual obedience and due to the Pope,
but probably defended by many Catholics that it is a temporal Obedience, and
consequently due to all temporal Princes, they may demand it of their
Subjects, and compel them to acknowledge the same as probable, whenever they
shall prudently judge such an acknowledgment, being in it self lawful, to be
necessary to the preservation of themselves and of their temporal State. What
other Kings do think concerning this point can hardly be known, but that
almost all absolute Princes have hitherto thought that he had no such power,
when he would put it in execution, by deposing them, by all Stories it is
evident.

8 Neither does his Majesty in this Oath prescribe limits to the Popes power,
but does only bind his Subjects to acknowledge that power to belong probably
unto him, which by Catholic Doctors is thought probably to be his own power,
and to appertain to him, and which his Subjects with a probable and safe
conscience may acknowledge, and consequently he does only compel his
Subjects to acknowledge not directly, but indirectly and secondarily what
limits are probably by Catholic Doctors prescribed to the Popes power; For his
Maiectie does not treat of the Popes power, as it is the Popes, without any
reference to his own power, but he does principally and directly treat of his
own and all Regal authority as it is thought probably to be his own, and to
belong to all temporal Princes, and secondarily, for that it cannot be both a
civil and a spiritual power, and belong both to the Pope and also to
temporal Princes, as I have showed in the first section, he treats also of
the Popes power not positiuely what power does belong to the Pope, but what
power does belong to temporal Princes, and so negatiuely what power does not
belong to the Pope. And truly to me it seems a paradox to affirm, that a
temporal Prince cannot treat what power does not belong to the Pope, for so a
King could not compel his Subjects to acknowledge that the Pope is not King of
his kingdom, nor direct Lord of his Dominions, and that he has not authority
to create Dukes, Earls or Barons in his kingdom, nor to give leave to any man
to hunt in his Parkes, and such like, for if he do treat of civil power he
must of necessity negatiuely treat of spiritual, seeing that it cannot be in
ye same respect civil and spiritual.

9 Wherefore his Majesty does no way in this Oath exact more then which is
probably thought to be civil Obedience, either in actu signato, by propounding
a matter, which is not probably thought to be civil, or in actu exercito, by
using a power more, then which is probably thought to be civil, or by
compelling his subiectss to acknowledge any other power then which is probably
thought to appertain to all temporal Princes. Neither can this doctrine of
deposing Princes by the Popes authority, or of releasing Subjects of their
obedience, or of punishing them with temporal punishments by way of coercion,
as due to the Pope by the institution of Christ, be proved to be certain, as
by answering all Suarez arguments, I have sufficiently showed; Neither in this
Oath does the swearer acknowledge, that the Pope cannot release Oaths in
general, but only this Oath of Allegiance, nor that he cannot punish at all
wicked Princes or Subjects, but only that he cannot punish them with
temporal punishments in that manner as I have declared, which profession and
acknowledgement is neither repugnant to Scriptures, Counsels, Canons, or
practice of the universal Church, as in the first part I have showed more at
large. Neither is the swearer compelled to acknowledge the faith of this
Doctrine, if Suarez mean a supernatural belief, but only to profess,
testify and declare his opinion, and what with a moral credulity he belieueth
concerning the aforesaid doctrine. Wherefore by none of these clauses either
expressly or covertly is denied the Popes supreme power and given to the King
which is certainly known to be the Popes power, but only that power which is
probably thought to belong to all Kings, and consequently not to the Pope is
acknowledged and professed in this Oath: And whether these answers be
probable or no, I remit to the judgment of any indifferent Reader.

Sect. IIII.
1 IN the second part of the Oath which begins from those words [also I do
sweare] Suarez Cap. 3. nu. 1.
affirms first, that there is almost nothing contained therein different from
the former, but all those things concerning the Popes power, which are abiured
in the former, are in this second part more expressly declared, and abiured. And
the sum of his discourse he concludes Nu. 3.
with this; that by these words of the Oath is clearly demanded of the
Subjects not only civil Obedience, but also the profession of this errors,
that the Pope has not power and Jurisdiction to give sentence of deposition
against the King for any cause whatsoever; and that therefore the Subjects do
sin most grievously in taking this oath. For he that takes this Oath does
either believe, or not believe that which he outwardly professes, if he does
believe, he is in heart and deed a schismaticke, and does err in doctrine of
faith, if he does not believe that which he professes, he sins against the
confession of his faith, and against the religion of the Oath, whether he
swears without intention or with intention to perform, that which he
swears to perform, for that by the former way he is forsworn, and by the
latter he makes the Oath to be a bond of iniquity, and purposes rather to
obey men then God by promising to obey the King against the Popes sentence and
command.

2 And the like discourse he makes Nu. 6.
concerning those words [notwithstanding any absolution of the said Subiects]
For these words do also exceed politic obedience, because that a Pope can or
cannot absolve from an Oath is not a matter of civil obedience, but it is an
Ecclesiastical matter belonging to the interpretation of the power to bind and
loose granted to S. Peter by Christ our Lord. And besides these words have
connection with the former, and do contain the same error. Because the
obligation of obedience in any degree or state whatsoever does so long endure
in the subject, as the dignity or power and jurisdiction does endure in the
superior, for these are correlatiues and the one depends on the other. So
therefore if the Pope can depose the King, he can also absolve his subjects
from their obedience, therefore at the least there is equal error in abiuring
every sentence of deposition given by the Popes authority. I add also that
there is a new error included in this later part, because the Pope without
deposing a King from his kingdom may command the subjects not to obey a King,
who is obstinate in any error or any public or scandalous crime, and to
absolve them for that time from the Oath of obedience by way of suspending the
obligation: Cap. 6. nu. 13
which Suarez more fully does declare beneath: For two manner of ways, a
perverse and a rebellious King against the Church and Religion, may be
deprived by the Pope of his Regal authority, and his Subjects absolved from
their Allegiance, one way of the use only and by a manner of suspension, an
other way of the propriety and dominion and by a manner of deposition. Suarez
cap. 6. nu. 14.


3 The first manner of deprivation is intrinsecally included in the bond it
self of Mayor excommunication, as Pope Gregory the seventh does teach in cap.
Nos sanctorum. 15. q. 6. Where he says: We keeping the decrees of our holy
Predecessors do by Apostolical authority absolve those who either by
Allegiance or Oath are obliged to excommunicated persons, and we altogether
forbid that they do them no loyalty until they come to make satisfaction. By
which words Pope Gregory does not so much make a new prohibition, as declare
that, which is made by virtue of such a Censure. For that censure does deprive
not only of sacred but also of Civil communication in all those things and
cases, which are not excepted by the Law, but in this there is not only made
any exception but also the prohibition is declared. And that it is not an
absolute depositio^, but as it were a suspe^sion it appears by the limitation
there adjoined, [vntill they come to make satisfaction] for by this it is
manifest that the aforesaid absolution is not perpetual, but during that
obligation. But because those last words are said not to be in a Manuscript
found in the Vaticane, the like decision with that express declaration is made
by Pope Paschalis the second in c. Iuratos. 15. q 6. quamdiu excommunicatus
est, as long as he is excommunicated, and the like limitation is found in cap.
vltimo de poenis.

4 Neither does the Kings objection make against this, (because excommunication
is a spiritual censure, and therefore depriving of Jurisdiction or of temporal
power even by taking away the use and by a kind of suspending does exceed the
limits thereof) For we deny his consequence. For although Excommunication be
called a spiritual censure either by reason of the principal matter and end
thereof, or because it proceeds from a spiritual power, yet as the power it
self although it be spiritual is indirectly exte^ded to temporalls, so also
the censure of Excommunication is in the same manner both spiritual, and is
indirectly extended to temporalls, for it does deprive not only of Sacred but
also of civil and humane communication, as it is manifest by the institution
thereof and by the practice of the Church approved by perpetual tradition and
founded in Scripture. For 2. Io. 1. it is said, Neque Aue ei dixeritis, Do not
say unto him, God save you, and Paul 1. Cor. 5. with such a one not so much as
to take meat. And the reason he insinuates in the same place, when he says,
I have judged, etc. To diliuer such an one to Satan for the destruction of the
flesh that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. So
therefore by excommmunication a man is vexed also in temporalls and corporalls,
that vexation may give understanding that he may leave off to disobey.

Suarez. cap. 6. nu. 16.
5 But the other manner of privation by way of deposition from the kingdom, or
from other temporal authority, and consequently with a perpetual absolution
of the Subjects from civil Allegiance and obedience, is net indeed a proper
and an intrinsecall effect of Mayor excommunication, if nothing else be added,
but it is adjoined unto censures by way of a particular punishment, when the
offenses of Princes do compel Popes to use that severity, which use has
been sufficiently proved by us in the third book, cap. 6. nu. 13.
Seeing therefore that the Catholic Church does teach both these kind of
deprivations by virtue of excommunication and by sentence of deposition, and it
is as certain that the Pope has authority to depose as he has authority to
excommunicate, although an express abiuring of the Popes power to
excommunicate is not contained in this Oath, yet a hidden and vertuall abiuring
thereof is contained.

6 Here Suarez as you see has made a long discourse to prove this second part
of the Oath to be unlawful, and yet he confesses that there is almost
nothing contained in this part which is different from the former, but that all
those things which are abiured in the former concerning the Popes power, are
more expressly declared and abiured in this part, and therefore the same answer
which we brought to the former objection will in like manner satisfy this.
For as it is no error inwardly to believe (speaking of a moral credulity and
a probable persuasion) that the Pope has no power to depose Princes, and
consequently neither to absolve Subjects of their Allegiance, so also it is no
error or offense outwardly to prosesse the same. Neither has Suarez in his
third book, to which he so often remitteth his Reader, sufficiently proved
(as by the answers which I have brought to his arguments does clearly appear)
that it is either a point of faith or an undoubted doctrine, that the Pope has
by Christ his institution authority to deprive Princes of their Regal power
and authority to reign, either for a time by virtue of excommunication, and by
a kind of suspension (call it as you will) or by sentence of deposition for
ever: and consequently neither is it certain, that he has authority to
discharge subjects of their Allegiance either wholly or for a time, seeing
that, according to Suarez doctrine before related, a power in a Prince to
command, and a duty in the Subjects to obey, or, which is all one, Regal
authority, and submissiue obedience are correlatiues, neither can one be
without the other: and therefore neither is he who holds this doctrine to be
probable, (seeing that it is maintained by many learned and virtuous
Catholics, as I have showed before) to be accounted a schismaticke, or
heretic, or to err in doctrine of faith, as Suarez too too rashly affirms,
and which with demonstratiue arguments he will never in my opinion be able to
convince.

7 And although it does not appertain to civil obedience, as I showed before,
to acknowledge positiuely what power belongs to the Pope, either concerning
his power to absolve from Oaths or otherwise, (for that his power is spiritual
and exceeds the limits of civil authority) yet it does appertain to civil
obedience, to acknowledge that temporal power which belongs to the King, and
consequently to acknowledge what power does not belong to the Pope, considering
that the same power which is civil, and therefore belonging to the King,
cannot be spiritual and belonging to the Pope. And so in this Oath the
Subjects are not compelled to acknowledge that the Pope has not power to
absolve from Oaths in general, but only from the Oath of Allegiance, for that
the acknowledging, denying and also the dissoluing of temporal Allegiance is
by Catholic Doctors thought it to be a temporal and not a spiritual cause.
In like manner Suarez might affirm, that a temporal Prince cannot compel his
Subjects to swear their temporal Allegiance, for that an Oath is an act of
Religion, and consequently a spiritual cause, and therefore not belonging to
temporal Obedience. But these and such like are narrow shifts: for no
Catholic will deny, that although an Oath being taken precisely by it self
be a spiritual act, yet as it is a confirmation of a civil contract, and of
civil Allegiance, it is a temporal cause and maybe exacted by civil
authority, and if it be broken, also punished by the civil Magistrate with
temporal punishments.

8 Now concerning that new error which Suarez affirms to be contained in the
later part of this branch, we affirm, that it is no error but a probable
doctrine of many Catholics, that the Pope has no authority by Christ his
institution to depose Princes, and consequently neither to absolve Subjects of
their Allegiance either for a certain time or for ever, either by virtue of
Excommunication, or by sentence of deprivation, neither is that true, which
Suarez does so confidently auerre, that in the bond of Mayor excommunication is
intrinsecally included the discharging of Subjects of their Allegiance, as is
manifest by the definition of excommunication, which he himself assigns,
Tom. 5. disp. 8. sec. 1.
which is this. Excommunication is an Ecclesiastical censure whereby one is
deprived of the Ecclesiastical Communion of the faithful; wherefore
Excommunication according to Suarez own definition does intrinsecally and of
it own nature only deprive one of Ecciesiastical participatio^, as of
Sacraments and other holy rites, and not of civil conversation and much less
of temporal Allegiance, which Subjects by the Law of God do owe to their
lawful Prince. And this is clearly signified by those words of holy
Scripture, Matthew. 18.
and if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen and
the Publicane, for we are not forbidden by the Law of God to converse ciuilly
with Heathens or Publicanes, unless some spiritual danger, which by the Law of
God and nature is forbidden, and which we are bound to avoid, should arise
thereby. Neither did S. Paul when he forbad to keep company and to eat with a
fornicator, a covetous person, a seruer of Idols, a railer, a drunkard or
extortioner, nor S. John when he commanded, that we should not salute an
heretic, as most Expositours do interpret, did excommunicate those persons,
but only forbad that we should not converse with them, if our conuersing with
them were a scandal to the weak, an encouragement to them to continue still
in their wickedness, or a danger to be our selves perverted by them, as S.
Thomas expounds that place: out of these three cases the holy Scripture does
not forbid us to converse ciuilly with notorious sinners, yea although they be
heretics.

9 But we must with all remember, that as the Apostles commanded, that we
should not converse with notorious sinners, lest that we should seem to
communicate in their wicked deeds, so also they commanded servants to obey
their Masters, children their parents, and subjects their temporal Princes,
although they were wicked, yea and infidells, (for then there were no Christian
Kings at all.) Now I would gladly know of Suarez, whether if a master, father,
or Prince be excommunicated, their servants, children and subjects are by the
Law of God forthwith discharged of that service, obedience, and Allegiance
which by the law of God they did owe to them: Certain it is that according to
his own doctrine, and according to that definition of Excommunication which
out of him we did relate, they are not freed of that duty wherein by the Law
of God they stand bound to them as to their superiors, and therefore he
speaks very improperly when he affirms, that discharging of Subjects of
their Allegiance is intrinsecally included in Mayor excommunication. It
remains therefore that the discharging of Subjects of their Allegiance can
only for that cause be said to be included any way in the sentence of
excommunication, for that the Church excommunicating a Prince does thereby take
away from that Prince his regal authority, and consequently release the
Subjects of their subjection, for as before Cap. 3. sec. 5. nu. 3.
we showed out of Cardinal Bellarmine, and Suarez also confesses the same,
obedience and subjection is by the Law of God due to every lawful Prince. So
that here is no new error as Suarez affirms, but the same principal
question remains which was before, whether the Church has authority to
chastise Princes with temporal punishments; for if she has no such authority,
she cannot by virtue of Excommunication inflict such a temporal punishment,
considering that by the Law of God no such punishment is annexed to
Excommunication, which being only a spiritual censure cannot of it own
nature according to Suarez definition deprive one of civil but only of
Ecclesiastical conversation: and this was the meaning of those words of his
Majesty, whom Suarez has not sufficiently confuted. For when his Majesty
affirmed, that excommunication is a spiritual censure, he did not only mean
that it proceeded from a spiritual power, and tended to a spiritual end, but
that it is by the Law of God and of it own nature, as Suarez himself defines
it, a mere spiritual censure or punishment only depriving one of the
Ecclesiastical communion of the faithful, and therefore does not extend to
temporal punishments as it is instituted by our Savior Christ.

10 And if Suarez reply, that although by Christ his institution
Excommunication has only this spiritual effect to deprive one of the
Ecclesiastical Communion of the faithful, yet Christ has left in the power
of the Church to annexe unto Excommunication other temporal effects and
punishments: We answer that this is very true, but with all that those effects
or punishments must be such, which the Church has authority to infict: but
whether the Church has power to depose Princes and to inflict temporal
punishments by way of coercion, is the maine question which is now in hand: I
say by the way of coercion, for no doubt the Church has power to command
certain temporal things and so annexe them to Excommunication, as not to
eat, drink, salute, nor to have any civil conversation with excommunicated
persons out of those cases wherein by the law of God they are not bound ciuilly
to converse; and so the Church may command one to fast, to give alms and such
like, when it is necessary for the salvation of souls, but if notwithstanding
the command of the Church we do converse with such persons, we do not fast, we
do not give alms and such like, what then can thy Church do? Many Catholic
Doctors, as I related before out of Gerson and Almainus, do probably think
that her power does not extend to inflict temporal punishments, no not so much
as to imprison, but that the last punishment which she by Christ his
institution can inflict is Excommunication or some such like spiritual
censure. I say, by Christ his institution, for seeing that temporal Princes
have given to the Church either expressly or vertually many temporal
privileges, all those punishments which depend on these, she may also annexe
to excommunication. But to command Subjects not so obey their temporal Prince,
and to absolve them from that obedience which is due to temporal Princes by
the law of God and Nature (for Regal authority in a Prince, and civil
obedience in the Subjects are correlatiues as Suarez before affirmed) the
Church has no authority, unless she has power to depose Kings and to make
them no Kings, which whether she has any power to do, is the principal
controversy which is now in hand. To those two Canons Nos Sanctorum, and
Iuratos, which Suarez brings for his maine ground to prove that the Pope may
for a time at least wise absolve Subjects of their allegiance, I have
sufficiently answered heretofore Cap. 6. sec. 3. nu. 12. and seq.
, which answer may also be applied to that last Chapter de poenis.

11 And whereas Suarez affirms, that Excommunication does deprive not only of
Sacred, but also of civil and humane communication, as is manifest by the
institution thereof and by the practice of the Church approved by perpetual
tradition, we grant that the Church by the way of command may as I said before
borbid one to communicate ciuily with an excommunicated person, out of those
cases wherein he is not otherwise bound by the law of God to communicate, and
this Doctrine is founded in holy Scripture; but, that this civil effect is
annexed to Excommunication by the institution of Christ or the Apostles, we
utterly deny, and the definition of Excommunication, which Suarez himself
brings, does manifestly show the contrary. Neither is it the practice of the
Church approved by perpetual tradition, that if a Prince be excommunicated he
is forthwith deprived of al humane Society, and his Subjects commanded to void
altogether his company, as appears when Pope Honorius excommunicated
Arcadius the Emperor and Saint Ambrose Theodosius. We grant that of late
years since some Popes have challenged to them power to depose Princes, and to
discharge Subjects of their Allegiance, they have annexed to Excommunication
the aforesaid effect, but neither this opinion nor practice has ever been
universally received, but always contradicted by Catholic Princes, Subjects
and many learned men, and therefore it can not justly be called the practice or
the perpetual tradition of the Church, as Suarez and others are pleased to
style it, to make this opinion for the Popes authority to depose Princes to be
more plausible among the vulgar sort.

12 To conclude therefore, we deny first that the Catholic Church does teach
as a certain Doctrine that she has authority to deprive Princes of their
Regal authority either by sentence of deposition or by virtue of
excommunication; and secondly, that it is as certain that the Pope has
authority to depose as it is certain that he has authority to
excommunicate; and I wonder that Suarez would adventure so rashly to affirm
the same: For many Catholics have ever and do to this day deny the Popes
power to depose Princes, who, nevertheless do willingly grant that he has
power to excommunicate them, neither are the grounds to prove the one and the
other a like, seeing that excommunication is a spiritual punishment, and
therefore agreeable to the nature of a spiritual Commonwealth, but deposition
is a mere temporal punishment and therefore not so beseeming the quality and
condition of a spiritual or Ecclesiastical community. And therefore in this
second part of this oath is neither expressly nor covertly abiured the Popes
power to excommunicate, nor any other his spiritual authority, which is
certainly known to belong to him, as I have before declared; and of this
opinion were those thirteen Reverend and learned Priests, who to Queen
Elizabeth did make the like profession in those express words against which
Suarez does so greatly except.

13 Secondly, Suarez against those words of this second part of the oath [And I
will do my best endeavor to disclose all Treasons which I shall know or hear
of] makes Nu. 7. 8.
two objections. The first is, that his Majesty by the name of [treason] does
understand not only that which truly and in very deed is treason, but also all
that which in his judgment and according to the errors of the former clauses
is judged treason. Therefore although the King should by the Pope be lawfully
deposed, and the Subjects absolved from the bond of their oath, and of their
Allegiance, yet the King will call every conspiracy of the Kingdom, or of the
Commonwealth or of the Subjects to thrust out the King of his Kingdom,
treason and a traitorous Conspiracy, whereas in very deed it is not so, but a
just defense, or a just war or punishment. Understanding therefore treason in
this sense, the exacting of such a promise is unjust, and it were dishonest and
sacriligious to swear it, both because it is not treason, as I have said, for
in that case is rather to be kept promise to the Commonwealth or to the
community of Subjects being oppressed by force, then to the Tyrant who does
unjustly oppress them, seeing that he is not now truly King; and also for that
natural secrecy, under which the knowledge of such a conspiracy is had, does
at that time bind, because it is of a just thing and necessary to the common
good of the community, who does justly defend her self, and therefore a
promise contrary to that secret does neither bind nor can be honest, and
therefore neither can it religiously be sworn, wherefore those words, being
taken by themselves and solitarily to say so, may be without all suspicion,
nevertheless as they are conioined with the former, they are to he avoided,
for that this later sense seems especially to be intended by the King.

Suarez nu. 9. and 13.
14. But to this objection no other answer is required then to the former: for
supposing that the Pope has no authority to depose the King, nor to absolve
his Subjects from their Allegiance, it necessarily follows that all such
conspiracies are true and proper treasons, and that therefore as I may lawfully
acknowledge by oath, that the Pope has no power to depose the King, so also I
may promise to reveal all treasons and conspiracies, which are grounded upon
that false supposall that the King may truly be deprived of his Kingdom by the
Pope. And in this sense also did those thirteen Reverend Priests understand
plots and conspiracies, when they protested to detect all such like
Conspiracies.

14 The second objection is, for that it seems that I do promise to reveal
all treasons although I shall hear of them only by Sacramental confession,
and that this is the intent of the King and of those who devised this form of
swearing, may be gathered by this, that there is not among them any
Sacramental confession, and they make no account of the secrecy of this
Sacrament, neither do they make any difference betwixt that knowledge which is
had by confession, and white is had other ways. And therefore seeing that the
King does exact of his Subjects a promise to reveal all treasons which they
shall know of, Catholics may justly fear, yea and believe, that it is
demanded of them without any distinction, whether they know it by confession or
otherwise, and whether the disclosing of the treason be joined with the
disclosing of the Traitor, or with moral danger thereof. In which sense that
form does exceed civil obedience, and does include something against
Catholic Religion. And therefore also for this cause the oath ought to be
greatly suspected, and therefore Catholics and prudent men may demand a
farther declaration thereof, although for other causes they are bound simply to
refuse it.

15 To this objection we answer, that this manner of arguing, which the
impugners of the oath do commonly use, is not to be approved: to wit, The King
believes that he is supreme Governor of this Kingdom in all causes as well
Ecclesiastical as temporal, therefore he will bind his Subjects by those
words [Soueraigne Lord] to swear the same: Likewise, The King believes that
the Pope has no power to excommunicate him, therefore he will bind his
subjects to acknowledge the same in this oath. Moreover, The King believes
that those laws are just, wherein it is enacted that the coming into this
Land of Priests made beyond the Seas by the Popes authority, as likewise
reconcilings to the Pope are treasons and to be punished as in cases of high
treason, therefore its this oath by the name of Treasons he will have his
subjects to acknowledge are same. We deny therefore that the King in this oath
will have his Subjects to acknowledge all that which he in his opinion thinks
to be true, or to do that which a good Catholic may not with a good
conscience do; but the King and Parliament, as both of them have publicly
declared, only demand the acknowledgement of that allegiance, which every
faithful Subject, although he be a Catholic, may by the law of God and nature
give to their lawful Prince.

14 Wherefore neither the Kings Majesty nor the Parliament does bind
Catholic Priests to reveal what they shall know by confessions, but so far
forth as by the law of Christ, and according to the undoubted grounds of
Catholic Religion, they are permitted: and therefore purposely perchance the
King and Parliament, to give as little occasion as may be to Catholics to
except against the oath, do exact of the swearer a promise to reveal all
treasons, and make no mention at all of the revealing of Traitors; for that
all Catholic Divines do acknowledge, as Suarez himself confesses In this
place.
, that Priests are bound to reveal those treasons which they shall hear of in
confessions, and this oath speaks nothing of revealing the traitors, but how
far Priests are tied to conceal the traitor, or not to reveal the treason
when there is danger that the traitor shall be revealed, is an other question,
of which the oath makes no particular mention, Let Priests who are compelled
to take the oath look to that, it is sufficient that this objection of Suarez
does nothing concern Lay-Catholikes, for whose cause principally I composed
this Disputation, and therefore they notwithstanding this objection may
lawfully take the oath; and doubtless those thirteen aforenamed Reverend
Priests, who protested to Queen Elizabeth to detect all plots, conspiracies,
invasions etc. knew right well in what account was the Sacrament and secrecy of
confession among Protestants, and nevertheless they little thought by their
protestation to derogate any jot from the Catholic faith which they professed.

Sect. V.
1 COncerning the third part of the oath, which begins from those words [And
I do further swear that I do from ray heart etc.] Suarez examineth Cap. 4.
nu. 1.
three things. First, the Doctrine it self. Secondly, by what authority this
part of the Oath is exacted of the Subjects. Thirdly, how much these words are
repugnant to those, wherein his Majesty promises to show, that there is
nothing contained in this Oath besides civil Obedience. Concerning the first,
(after that Suarez has made a long discourse about the doctrine of killing of
Tyrants, wherein he teaches a very perilous, scandalous, and desperate
Doctrine, which I have before Part. 1. sec. 10. nu. 3.
related, to wit, that both the Pope may give leave to any man to kill a King
after he be deposed, and that also the next lawful Successor may kill him, if
otherwise he be not able to depose him, which he auerreth to be a true and
certain Doctrine) he affirms Nu. 20.
that it is manifestly convinced, that this part of the oath by reason of
diverse heads does contain an excess of power, injustice against good manners,
and an error against the true and Catholic Doctrine. The first I prove: for by
what authority does the King compel his Subjects to swear that proposition
as heretical, which the Catholic Church has not yet condemned? And if the
King does say, that it is condemned in the Council of Constance, where does he
read in the Council of Constance that particle, [Princes excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope?] or that [by their Subjects or any other whatsoever?]
Seeing therefore that these particles added to that proposition do make it and
the sense thereof far different, that proposition by a fallacious and deceitful
inference is attributed to the Council. But if the King does condemn that
proposition not by the authority of the Council but by his own authority,
he exceeds doubtless and abuses the power which he has not. And besides it
is admirable, that he oftentimes contemns the Popes power to define matters
of faith, and yet he dare arrogate it unto himself; for although he does not
this in words, yet in deed he professes it. Wherein also he little agrees
with himself. For in an other place in his Apology he boasts that he does
not coin new articles of faith after the manner of Popes. Finally seeing that
he thinks nothing to be of faith unless it be contained in holy Scripture,
he ought to show us in what place of Scripture that proposition is condemned as
heretical, or the contrary revealed by God, that it may be accounted for
heretical. Truly although Paul did say, Let every soul be subject to higher
powers, he did near add, let all men be subject also to powers excommunicated
or deprived by the Pope, neither can one be gathered from the other, seeing
that they are far different, not to say, as opposite, for a King deprived is
not now a higher power. And from hence I farther conclude, that the profession
of that oath concerning this part is a certain confession of Kingly authority
and power both to condemn at his pleasure propositions as heretical, and also
to propound to the faithful authentically what they ought to believe as a
point of faith, or to detest as heretical, which in regard of the King is an
excess and a usurpation of a spiritual power, and in regard of them who take
the oath, is a certain vertuall profession of a false faith.

Suarez nu. 21.
2 Besides, by the words themselves it does most clearly appear, that the King
in this oath does not only exact civil Obedience or the swearing thereof. For
to detest by oath a proposition as heretical, does plainly exceed civil
obedience, which is of a far inferior degree then it Christian faith.
Especially when such a precept is new in the Church, in such sort that the King
doh not only compel a Christian Subject to detest a proposition otherwise
condemned by the Church (which a Catholic King observing due manner may
sometimes do) but also does compel to detest a proposition which he newly
again by his authority does condemn, as now the King does. Whereby it is also
sufficiently proved, that this oath is unjust in regard of the King, because
he does many ways exceed his authority, and so it is a violent compulsions
and a usurpation of an other man's Jurisdiction: And in regard of the faithful
it is unjust to accept thereof, both for this general reason, because they
should swear either an unlawful thing or an untruth; for if they believe that
proposition to he heretical only for the Kings authority, for this only it is
damnable, and much more because that proposition, which is so condemned, is
most true and certain according to the true principles of faith, as has been
proved in the third book; but if they outwardly abjure that proposition, which
inwardly they believe not to be heretical, they commit manifest perjury, as
of it self it is evident: And besides this that proposition does contain a
peculiar and proper injury against the Pope, whose power and obedience for
fear of man they do deny.

3 Lastly, by these it is easily understood, Suarez nu. 22.
that this part of the oath does also include an erroneous Doctrine. One error
is that the Pope has not autheritie to depose an heretical or schismatic
King, and who does pervert and draw his kingdom to the same schism or to the
same heresy. For the profession of this error is principally and more directly
made by those words then by others, as to every reader it will forthwith
appear, and has before been proved many ways: The other error which truly
in words is less expressed, yet in the sentence it self lies hidden and is
vertually contained, is, that its these things, which do appertain to the
doctrine of faith and detestation of heresies, a temporal King may exact of his
Subjects their faith also by oath. Yea also that in this the opinion of the
King is to be preferred before the opinion of the Pope. Which truly is a
certain vertuall profession of the Kings temporal Primacie in spiritual or
Ecclesiastical causes: for there is nothing greater in the Primacie of Saint
Peter nor more necessary to the conversation and union of the Church then is a
supreme authority, which the King of England does in those words arrogate to
himself, therefore the profession of such an Oath is a manifest profession of
schism and error, therefore true Catholics are bound in conscience to refuse
it.

4 To the first part of this objection I have before Cap. 5. sec. 2.
in this Disputation given two answers: The first was; that the position
contained in this branch is heretical, to wit, that it is in the free power of
Subjects, and of any one whatsoever to depose, or if they will, to murder
Princes, who be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope: And that this is the
true meaning of that position contained in this branch, That Princes which be
excommunicated, etc. according to the common understanding of our English
phrase I have declared in that place more at large. And to prove that position
so understood to be heretical, I alleged these two texts of holy Scripture,
Thou shall not kill. Exodus 20.
Kill him not, 1. Reg. 26.
for who shall stretch forth his hand against the Lord his anointed and be
guiltless? Neither do I think that Suarez (although he goes too too far
in this point of killing Princes) dare presume to auerre that the Popes
sentence of Excommunication or deprivation denounced against a King can be a
sufficient warrant for every man to kill that King; seeing that neither the
sentence of Excommunication nor of deprivation (although we should grant that
the Pope has authority to depose Princes) depriueth a King of corporal life,
but only of his right to reign. Neither is it necessary to make that
proposition to be heretical that the Scripture should have added, thou shall
not kill Princes who be excommunicated or deprived by Priests or Bishops: It is
sufficient that all killing either of private men or of Princes is unlawful,
and is by this precept forbidden, which is not warranted either in other places
of holy Scripture, or declared by the Church to be lawful, and to have
sufficient warrant; now I would gladly know of Suarez, if he will affirm, as
I think he will not, yt the aforesaid position, Princes which be excommunicated,
etc. is not heretical, where he finds that the Church does give sufficient
warrant to every man to kill a Prince who is excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope?

5 The scond answer was, that I do not swear the aforesaid position to be
heretical, but as heretical in that sense as I did there declare, which
answer does also sufficiently avoid the difficulty which Suarez here does
make. Wherefore his Majesty does not arrogate to himself authority to
condemn at his pleasure propositions as heretical, which are not heretical,
or to propound to the faithful authentically what they ought to believe as a
point of faith, as Suarez wrongfully imposes upon him, for this indeed were
an excess of civil authority to attribute to himself power to define and
determine any doctrine to be of faith, but he does only compel his Subjects by
temporal punishments, which are proper to the civil commonwealth, to abjure
as heretical that position which by all Catholics is accounted as heretical,
which a Christian Prince, as it is probably thought fit and necessary for the
preservation of himself, and of the temporal peace and outward quietness in
the commonwealth, may lawfully do, as before Cap. 6. sec. 2.
I have showed more at large. And so neither the King in this Oath does
transgress in exceeding his authority, neither the Subjects in making an
express or vertuall profession of a false faith.

6 And so the answer to the second point is also manifest, it being almost a
repetition of the former. For neither does his Majesty compel his subjects to
abjure as heretical that which is not so, neither do they believe that it is
so only for the Kings authority, but for that almighty God in holy Scriptures
has revealed so, and by the common acceptance of the Church it has ever bin
understood so: And that the Pope has not power to depose Princes they believe
with moral credulity, for that many learned Cotholikes do teach the same, and
for that the contrary has not as yet by any man, nor by Suarez himself in his
third book been sufficiently proved to be certain, as by my answers to his
arguments may sufficiently appear.

7 To the third point likewise wherein he scarce says any thing which he has
not repeated before, we have already answered, that in this branch of the Oath
is not abiured as heretical the Popes power to depose Princes but only to
murder them in that sense as we have before declared: Neither is it an error
to affirm that a Christian King may under pain of temporal punishments exact
of his subjects by Oath a profession of some points of their Christian faith,
when upon prudent motives it shall be thought necessary to the preservation of
the Kings person and of his State, for that spiritual things not as they are
spiritual but as they are temporal and necesssary to the keeping of outward
peace in the commonwealth, are subject to the te^porall power, especially of a
Christian King, by who^ they may be punished, and consequently commanded or
forbidden, for that the coerciue power in a Prince to punish supposes the
directive power to command. Neither do the Catholic Subjects prefer the
Kings opinion before the Popes, only because the King says so, but because in
a matter disputable they may follow a probable opinion against the Popes
opinion, although it be the more probable until the contrary be defined and
determined by the Church. Seeing therefore that there is no heresy, error or
any other unlawful thing contained in this oath every true Catholic may with
a safe conscience take it. And although the Popes Holiness has forbid the
taking of the same, yet his precept being merely declaratiue and either
grounded upon false information, or at the most upon a probable opinion, it is
neither schism, nor sin to contradict it, as before cap. 10. sec. 2.
I have more at large declared.

Sect. VI.
1 COncerning the fourth and last part of the Oath according to Suarez
division, which begins from those words [ And I do believe and in
conscience am resolved and so to the end] Suarez affirms Cap. 5. nu. 1.
, that therein are contained almost all the same errors which are in the
former, and that therefore scarce any thing remains to be added thereunto.
But because the same errors are partly declared and exaggerated, partly also
the unlawfulness of the Oath is more increased, all the particular points are
briefly to be noted, and so to be declared that they may easily be understood
by all men. First therefore the Popes power is again abiured in these words
[And I do believe, and in conscience am resolved that neither the Pope nor any
person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath or any part thereof.]
In these words is clearly affirmed this proposition, the Pope has not power
to absolve the Subjects of a temporal King from the Oath of Allegiance. For
that which is affirmed of this Oath is not for any peculiar reason thereof, nor
for the dignity which is greater in the King of England then in other temporal
Kings, as of it self it is evident and the King himself in his Preface does
plainly profess. And when it is said, The Pope has not power etc. It is
understood simply, that is, in no manner, for no cause, in no case, for this is
signified by those words according to the plain and common sense and
understanding of them, in which sense the King himself a little beneath will
have the words of this Oath to be taken. Besides that by the end of the Oath
and by the first part thereof it is manifest enough that this is the Kings
meaning.

2 But so that proposition is heretical, Nu. 2.
because it is against the power to bind and loose given to S. Peter as the
Catholic Church has always understood it and practiced the same. For so the
Subjects of every heretic whatsoever in that by a lawful sentence he is
publicly denounced an heretic is forthwith absolved from the Oath of
Allegiance by a decree of Pope Gregory the ninth in cap. vltimo de haereticis:
and both the power and a most just reason of that punishment S. Thomas does
declare 22. q. 12. ar. 2. In like manner by Vrbanus the second in cap. vltimo.
15. q. 6. one is absolved from the bond of the Oath of Allegiance made to a
Lord who is publicly excommunicated and denounced: and by Gregory the seventh
with the Roman Synod in cap. Nos sanctorum ibidem. Where the bond of the Oath
is not altogether and simply taken away, but as it were suspended for that
time, wherein he being excommunicated does remain obstinate in the censure.
Which is otherwise, when a King or Prince is for heresy or other crimes
deposed, and deprived of the dominion of his kingdom, for then the Oath is
altogether taken away, and as it were made void, the matter thereof being taken
away. And in this manner Innocentius the fourth with the Council of Lions did
absolve all the Vassals of the Emperor Fridericke from the Oath of their
Allegiance, and other examples have been before set down, whereby the ancient
and universal meaning of the Church, which is the best interpreter of
Scripture, is showed. For if all laws do affirm that humane custom is the
best interpreter of humane Laws, wherefore shall not the universal and most
ancient custom of the Church, and the practice of such a power be also the
best interpreter of Christ his Law, and of the power to bind and loose given to
S. Peter? Which power the same Popes who have used it have with great authority
and learning defended. Especially Gregory the seventh lib. 8. Registri epist.
21, and Innocentius the third in epist. ad. Ducem Caringiae in cap. Venerabilem
de electione, and Bonifacius the eight in the Extrauagant. Vnam Sanctam de
Maiorit. ^t Obedientia.

Suarez nu. 3.
3 But if the King does not believe this proposition which is founded in
Scripture, declared by authority of Popes and Councels, and hitherto received
by common consent, by what right or by what authority will he compel all his
subjects to believe the contrary falsehood, and by word to affirm and by Oath
to confirm the same? or how can they be resolved in conscience, as it is said
in the Oath, to believe it and swear without any other reason or motive,
unless they believe that the King with his Ministers has greater authority to
confirm his error and to exact the belief of the same, then has the Roman
and universal Church with the Roman Bishops, who by constant tradition and
consent have taught the same? But if the King does intend this, and does bind
his Subjects to this belief he must needs acknowledge, that he does not in
this Oath contend only for temporal Jurisdiction, but for spiritual primacie.

4 The which also I do evidently declare in another manner. Nu. 4.
For it is against natural reason to say, that any man cannot be absolved from
a promise confirmed by Oath, by changing the matter, and taking away and as it
were making void the promise. For although one has promised by oath to restore
a pawn which he has in keeping, if the other does yield his right, he shall
be freed from his oath. Whereupon if such a change should be made by a
superior power, the obligation of keeping his promise will equally be taken
away, which also Triphon the Lawyer did acknowledge in leg. bona fide ff.
Depositi saying, if one has received a pledge with a promise to restore it to
the owner, and the owner afterward be condemned by the Judge, and his goods
shall be confiscated, he that has the pledge is freed from his promise to
restore it to the owner, and it must be brought into the public treasury.
Because as he says beneath, the nature of justice does require, that
faithfulness, which is to be kept in a bargain, is not to be regarded only in
respect of them who made the bargain, but also in respect of other persons to
whom that which is done belongs, which especially is true when the authority
of a Superior and the public good do concur. Neither will the King, as I
think, make any doubt to exercise the like power in his kingdom, by
depriving, for example sake, a subject of his goods, who is found to have
committed treason, and consequently by transferring to himself or to his
treasure all the the actions and promises made unto him (that traitor) or
doubtless by making them wholly and simply void, or by pardoning or forgiving
the debtors, by which it does necessarily follow, that although they be
confirmed by Oath, the debtors are absolved from the Oath. Therefore it cannot
be denied, but that this manner of absoluing from an Oath may be just and of
validity, if in the absoluer there be power to dispose either of the matter of
the Oath, or of the right of the creditor, or owner, or to whom the promise was
made. Therefore either the power to absolve vassals from an Oath made to a
King, who is an heretic or pernicious to Christian Subjects, is most unjustly
and against all reason denied to the Pope, or else it is denied upon no other
ground, but for that it is not believed that he has power to chastise and
punish temporal Kings. And so this part is reduced to the former, and does
manifestly contain a profession of an error against the Popes Primacie, and
an heretical assertion concerning the Kings Primacie, and of his absolute
exemption from obedience to the Pope, especially for as much as concerns his
coactiue power by temporal punishments.

Nu. 5.
5 Lastly I will not omit to observe (because the King does not speak generally
of an Oath but of this Oath) that it may in a true and Catholic sense, but
contrary to the Kings meaning be said, that no man has power to absolve the
swearer from this Oath: because no man can properly be absolved who is not
bound; but that Oath does not bind the swearer, for that an Oath cannot be a
bond of iniquity as that should be, and therefore no man can be loosed from
it. Nevertheless he may be declared to be absolved or not bound, which the
Pope can do by special authority, and he has sufficiently done it, when he
declared the Oath to be unlawful and contrary to eternal salvation.
Whereupon also it comes to pass, that in an other sense the Pope has power
to absolve from this Oath now being taken, that is, from the sin committed by
taking thereof, so that sufficient repentance for the same, as a necessary
disposition, does go before. Nu. 6.


6 Secondly, in the same part is made a confession of a supreme kingly power
in spiritualls and of his exemption from the Pope in these words, [which I
acknowledge by good and full authority, etc.] and afterward in these words it
is confirmed by Oath, [And all these things I do plainly and sincerely
acknowledge and sweare] For that the aforesaid confession is contained in those
words, it is manifest first by those words [by full authority] for although the
word [supreame] be purposely omitted least that perchance it should terrify
the simpler sort, yet the word [full] according to the Kings meaning, which by
the whole discourse is sufficiently understood, is put for equivalent: for that
Oath is not for any other cause said to be ministered by full authority, but
for that there is no authority among men, which is of force to hinder it, to
forbid it or to take it away, but this is a supreme power. Moreover seeing that
the Oath it self is expressly against the Popes power, when it is added, that
it is by lawful authority fully ministered, it is clearly signified, that
Kingly power ministering an Oath is superior or equivalent to the Popes power.
Therefore that which the King in other places does expressly profess, here
covertly and in the use it self of the power he does include. Whereupon he
that consents to such an Oath, does plainly swear, that the act of an
usurped power is the act of a lawful power, which is manifest perjury, and
contrary to the confession of Catholic faith. And finally the king is
convinced also by these words, that he does not exact in this Oath only civil
obedience, seeing that he demands a recognition and confession of his
plenarie power to determine against the Popes power. Nu. 7.


7 Thirdly in the last words there is added a new Oath of this tenor; [And I
do make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and truly
upon the says of a true Christian: So help me God.] Which is a new
confirmation and repetition of the former errors, and not only of an outward,
but also of an inward confession of the same, that the swearer cannot be
excused either from mental infidelity, or from perjury. And furthermore I do
weigh that particle [willingly] which does include a manifest lie, which is
sufficient that it cannot be taken by Catholics without perjury. For it is
evident that they do not willingly, but constrained by threatenings and
terrors take the Oath. Because as the King himself did say a little before,
In Apolog. page 5.
that by refusing the Oath they are miserably thrown into danger of loosing
their lives and goods. How therefore can they truly swear that they take this
Oath willingly? For that word [willingly] does not signify there every will,
or willingness, but that which is not constrained by great fear and potent,
violence of man, and which the swearer would have, although he were not
constrained; But Catholics do know that they have not such a will or
willingness, and the King himself is not ignorant of this, therefore in
regard also of this head the Oath is wicked, which does in this include
perjury and exact it.

8. These be all the objections which Suarez makes against this last part of
the Oath, and so consequently which he makes against all the particular
clauses which are contained therein, which although I might have put down in
fewer words, seeing that they are for the most part a repetition of the same
things which he has so often inculcated, yet least that the Reader should
imagine, that by abridging or abreuiating his sentences, I should have
diminished any way the force of his arguments, which he brings to prove the
Oath to be unlawful, I thought good to set them down at large in the self
same manner, as he in express words relates them. His chief therefore and
only ground, whereon all his principal exceptions against the Oath do
depend, is, as the Reader by his whole discourse may easily perceive, that it
is heretical and against faith to deny, that the Pope has power to depose
Princes and to absolve Subjects from their allegiance, and this he oftentimes
repeateth that he has sufficiently proved it in his third book. But that
he has not proved it by evident demonstrations, to which no probable answer
can be given, I have also before by answering all his arguments sufficiently
showed, and therefore all the inferences which he deduceth from this ground to
prove any particular clause of the Oath to contain in it heresy or error,
can be of no greater force then is the maine ground it self whereon they do
depend. Wherefore, seeing that heresy is an error contrary to God his holy
word, either written or delivered by constant tradition, and so declared to be
by the Catholic Church, not probably only thinking so, but firmly and
certainly believing or defining it to be so, we earnestly request Suarez, as we
have already in this Disputation requested the Reader, that he will bring but
one only place of holy Scripture, or one only definition of the Church, or
one only Theological argument drawn from the holy Scripture: or any
definition or tradition of the Catholic Church, and that he will insist
thereupon and urge it as much as he can, that Catholics may clearly,
distinctly and particularly perceive the maine ground whereon in this difficult
controversy of the Popes spiritual power to punish with all kind of temporal
punishments by way of coercion, they are to build their faith upon: and if it
be so conuincing an argument, that I cannot give to it any probable answer, I
will presently yield and recall whatsoever I have said or written to the
contrary. I know that he is able to bring probable, plausible and colorable
reasons grounded upon Scriptures or Counsels, but this is not sufficient, as
he knows right well, to produce a divine and supernatural belief which is a
most certain and undoubted knowledge.

9 Wherefore to his first objection we answer as before, that as in the former
clauses of the Oath there is no heresy, error, or any unlawful thing
contained, so neither is there in this part of the Oath any error declared or
exaggerated, or the unlawfulness of the Oath more increased. For it is not
heretical to hold, as we have often said, that the Pope has no authority by
Christ his institution to depose Princes, and consequently to absolve subjects
of their Allegiance: Neither neither is this doctrine against that place of
Scripture, Whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. Wherein authority to bind and
loose with spiritual bonds, and loosings is given S. Peter, as I have before
declared. Also to those three Canons of Pope Gregory the ninth, Part. 1. sec.
4.
Vrbanus the second, and Gregory the ninth, and likewise to the decree of
Innocentius the fourth made against Friderike the Emperor in the presence of
the Council of Lions, not with the Council as Suarez affirms, I have also
heretofore Part. 1. sec. 5. nu. 6.
sufficiently answered.

10 Moreover we grant, that as humane custom is the best interpreter of humane
Laws, if it be a universal custom and not contradicted by many, for
otherwise it does not sufficiently interpret any humane Law, so also the
universal and most ancient custom of the Church concerning the practice of
any power is a good interpreter of Christ his Law, if this practice be not by
Catholics contradicted. But this power of the Pope to depose Princes, and the
practice thereof has not been so universally received, but that it has been
ever contradicted not only by the Princes themselves whom the Popes have
deposed, who always have mightily opposed against such sentences, as any man
may perceive by them who do write of such Histories, but also by many learned
Catholic Divines, who denied that authority. Was not the very first practice
thereof vehemently contradicted by Henry the fourth Emperor, who was the first
Emperor that was deposed by Pope Gregory the seventh, and by many learned
Catholics in those days, and so has continued even unto these times of Henry
the fourth King of France, who was the last King against whom the Pope
practiced this authority? Was it not contradicted by Albericus a very learned
Lawier, who therefore excepted against many such practices, and especially that
of Pope Innocentius the fourth in the presence of the Council of Lions. Was it
not also contradicted by John of Paris, and those very many Doctors, as Gerson
and Almaine do relate, who held that the Pope by Christ his institution had not
authority so much as to imprison? was it not contradicted by those Schoolmen
of whom Trithemius makes mention, who held that the Pope has not power to
depose an Emperor, and he himself affirms that the controversy is not yet
decided by the Judge? And has it not ever been contradicted by the Kingdom
of France if any credit may be given to Petrus Pitheus whom P^sseuine the
Jesuit does greatly commend?

11 And whereas Suarez affirms, that this has been a most ancient custom
and practice of the Church, verily he might very well have omitted that
superlatiue [most,] for as Otho Frisingensis, Godefridus Viterbiensis,
Trithemius, and Onuphrius, before Cap. 6. sec. 3. nu. 16.
related do affirm, this practice of the Pope to depose Kings and Emperors
began in Gregory the seventh his time Gregory the seventh the first of all
the Popes, did against the custom of his ancestors deprive Caesar of his
Empire, says Onuphrius lib. 4. de varia creatione Romans Pontificis.
about the year of our Lord 1077, and at that very time it was by Sigibert
noted of novelty, not to say, of heresy, for these are the express words of
Sigebert In his Chronicle in the year 1088.
: And although some very late writers, as Cardinal Baronius, Cardinal
Bellarmine, and Schulckenius are pleased upon weak grounds to distaine his good
name with that filthy crime of schism, thinking perhaps thereby to diminish
the credit of this ancient writer, who expressly does contradict their opinions
especially concerning the Popes authority to depose Princes; yet informer ages
he was not taxed of this crime, but was accounted a very venerable, learned,
and religious writer; and of what reputation he was among all sorts of people
both for his singular learning and virtue, Anselmus the Abbot of his Monastery
who does continue his Story, and the Author of the History of the Abbots of
that Monastery do give sufficient testimony.

12 To that which Suarez affirms, that this Doctrine has with great
authority and learning been defended by Popes, especially by Gregory the
seventh, Innocentius the third, and Bonifacius the eighth, we answer, that the
authority, whereby the Popes have defended this Doctrine, was indeed great, as
appears by the severe censures against the Emperors themselves, and those
also who should obey them after they were deposed by the Pope: we grant also,
that the learning of those Popes was great, but withal we must confess that
those Catholics, who contradicted that power, were also men of great learning,
and that the reasons which those Popes have brought are not so conuincing, but
that probable answers may be given unto them, as any man of learning who
reads there writings and decretall Epistles will easily perceive: And
concerning that Epistle of Pope Gregory the seventh, Sigebert, who in former
ages was accounted a man of great fame, learning and good estimation affirms,
that he himself by strong arguments drawn from the authority of the Fathers
did confute that Epistle of Pope Gregory the seventh which he wrote to the
Bishop of Mets in reproach of Kingly power. Also we will not deny that Pope
Innocent the third, and Pope Bonifacius the eighth, (of whose opinion, what
Ioannes Tilius Bishop of Meldune in his Chronicle affirms I have before Cap.
10. sec. 2. nu. 48.
related) did think, that they had authority to depose Princes, but
doubtless that reason which Pope Innocentius brings in that chapter
Venerabilem, affirming that the Roman Empire was translated by the Pope from
the Grecians to the Germans, is not forcible; because that translation was
done indeed partly by the Popes authority (as being the chief and principal
member of the Empire in the Western parts, who at that time had only in name
and not in deed any Emperor, as in my Apology Nu. 413. etc.
, I showed out of Lupoldus and Coccinius,) but it was not done only by his
authority, but also by the consent, suffrages, and authority of the people, as
out of Card. Bellarmines own grounds I proved in that place: And concerning
that which Pope Bonifacius in the aforesaid Extrauagant auerreth, we also do
acknowledge, that the sword is under the sword, and that the temporal power is
subject to the spiritual, and that all Christians are subject to the Pope,
which is all that he in that place affirms, but this subjection is to be
understood in that manner as I before Cap. 3. sec. 1. nu. 13.
declared in this disputation in answering an argument of Suarez, who does
there allege this authority of Pope Bonifacius.

13 Neither does his Majesty compel his Subjects to believe with a
supernatural belief, that the Pope has no such authority to depose Princes
and to absolve Subjects from their allegiance, but only to make an external
profession of their inward moral credulity and persuasion, that the Pope has
no such authority, which being a thing credible, may by them with a safe
conscience be acknowledged; and being with all probable, that this right,
liberty, and freedom of absolute Kings, to wit, not to be dependent of the
Pope in temporals, nor to be punished by him with temporal punishments is a
temporal right granted to all absolute Princes by the law of God and nature,
they have good and full authority to compel their Subjects to acknowledge the
same, as the acknowledging thereof is thought prudently to be necessary to the
preservation of themselves and of quietness in the Commonwealth. Neither do
the English Catholics therefore believe (speaking of moral credulity) that
the Pope has no such authority for that the King with his Ministers do hold
the same, but because it is in it self probable, and many learned Catholics
for probable reasons and motives, which with invincible arguments cannot be
convinced, are of that opinion.

14 Wherefore that declaration of Suarez concerning the absoluing of oaths by
way of irritation and taking away the matter is of no greater force, then what
he has said before, for that it is no error to hold, as often has been
said, that the Pope has no power to punish Princes temporally by way of
coercion. And so this part of the oath is reduced to the former, and does not
contain a profession of any error against the Popes spiritual Primacie, or
any acknowledgement of the Kings Primacie in spirituals, or of his absolute
exemption from all obedience to the Pope, but only in those causes and matters
which probably are thought to be temporal and not to belong to the Popes
spiritual power, as is power to depose Princes and to absolve Subjects from
their allegiance.

15 Finally, concerning that which Suarez in the end of this objection
affirms, that the Pope has power to absolve the swearer from this oath for
two respects, the one for that the oath is unlawful, and so binds not the
swearer, the other for that he can absolve from the sin committed, there
needs no other answer then has been already alleged, for that the first
supposes the oath to be unlawful, which has not been as yet sufficiently
proved, and the other is not the true meaning of this word [absolue] in this
oath, as in examining this clause we have in this Disputation before observed.

16 To the second objection we answer by denying that in this clause is
acknowledged the Kings supreme power in spirituals. For although that word [
supreme authoritie] (which whether it was purposely omitted in the oath not to
terrify the simpler sort is more then Suarez can know and prove) does signify
all one with [ full authoritie] yet full authority is in this oath taken only
for supreme authority in the degree of civil and temporal authority. And
although the King does believe that in his Kingdoms he has supreme authority
in all causes, yet Suarez will never be able to prove, that the King in this
oath, I say in this oath, did intend to comprehe^d under those words [full
authoritie] al authority, both in spiritual and te^porall causes although, he
thought and meant yt it was so full and supreme an authority, that it was not
subject temporally to any power under God, and that the Pope could not absolve
any man from the performing of those things which in this oath the swearer
promises to perform, as in the Disputation I have more at large declared.
Neither is this oath expressly or covertly against that power of the Pope, which
is certainly known to be given to him by Christ, but against that power which
learned Catholics do probably think not to belong to him: And so the Kings
temporal power ministering this oath, although it be not superior to the Popes
spiritual power, yet in temporal causes it is not subject to it and in that
respect may be said to be equal to it negatiuely, that it is not inferior to
it in subjection, speaking only of temporal causes, as is the ministering of an
oath of temporal allegiance, although in nobility it be far inferior to
the spiritual power, to which also all powers among Christians are subject in
spiritual causes. Neither does the King determine or define any thing in this
oath, which Suarez does so often inculcate, but only he compels his
Subjects, as also I have often repeated, to acknowledge and profess that which
they may lawfully profess, and which he may compel them to profess, it
being in it self lawful and probably thought necessary to his Majesty's
safety, and to the outward peace and quietness in the Commonwealth.

17 To Suarez third objection I have at large answered heretofore Cap. 9. sec.
1.
(it being the very argument which Father Parsons urges) and I have
sufficiently showed, that supposing the oath to be lawful and commanded by
good authority, which every man must suppose before he resolve to take the
same, there is no virtuous Catholic, and who is well affected to his Majesty,
but may and ought to take the oath willingly, taking [willingly] also in that
sense as Suarez will needs have it to be taken; and therefore it must first be
proved, that some other part of the oath is unlawful before any just exception
can be taken against this clause.

Sect. VII.
1 THese be all the objections which Suarez brings against any particular
clause of the Oath, but to prove in general that the oath contains more then
civil Obedience, he produces the self same argument, which Cardinal
Bellarmine and Lessius urged from the title of the Act of Parliament wherein
this oath is commanded, which is, for the discovering and repressing of Popish
Recusants, to which because I have already sufficiently answered Cap. 10. sec. 1
, I remit uhe Reader to that Answer. Of this only I must admonish Suarez,
that he was misinformed of that which he so boldly affirms, to wit, that in
the same Act of Parliament, wherein this form of Oath which is now in question
is contained, two oaths are distinguished by their proper titles, the one is
entitled of the Kings Primacie in spirituals etc. the other is entitled,
Against the Popes power over Christian Princes, which later oath is no other,
says Suarez, then that which the King now calls the oath of Allegiance,
therefore by the Inscription it self it is manifest, that this oath contains
rather an abiuring of the Popes power over Kings, then the loyalty of Subjects
toward their King. For that is directly intended as the Inscription does show,
and expressly declared by the words, and oftentimes repeated etc. Thus Suarez.
But it is clear that Suarez in this point has not been rightly informed: For
there is no such oath entitled in that manner Against the Popes power over
Christian Princes, either in this Act of Parliament or in any other that ever I
read or heard of, and therefore Suarez must be careful, how hereafter he
gives credit to every information in matters especially of so great moment.
Wherefore neither does his Majesty intend to deny in this oath, I say still in
this oath the Popes spiritual power which is certainly known to belong to
him, but only to affirm his own lawful right and power, neither does the
oath it self contain any such denial, as I have in my opinion sufficiently
made manifest: and therefore that distinction of Suarez Cap. 6. nu. 6.
of the intention of the King, who does affirm that he only intends civil
obedience, and of the intention or end of the oath it self which nevertheless
contains more then civil Obedience, cannot be rightly applied by him to this
present matter, for both the intention of the King, and also the election of
the means which he has chosen in propounding this oath to his Subjects are
civil, and do not exceed the bounds of temporal allegiance.

2 By this you may perceive (Dear Countrymen) upon what grounds both the
impugners and also the maintainers of the oath do chiefly rely, and
thereafter frame your conscience as God almighty with the grace of his holy
spirit shall inspire your minds. And for this cause I have first set forth
this my Answer to Suarez arguments in the English tongue, that you (my Dear
Countrymen) whom the taking or refusing of this oath does only concern, may
fully understand what reasons can be alleged to prove or disprove the
lawfulness thereof, not intending therefore but that in convenient time it
shall also come forth in Latin, that Suarez, if it please him, may give us
satisfaction in these difficulties, which we have here propounded. I was also
the more willing to put forth in English this my answer to Suarez, that by
this which I have said in this Appendix especially concerning the Popes
vnlimmited power to depose Princes, to dispose of all temporals, and to punish
with all kind of temporal punishments, as he in his discretion shall think
convenient, that you who either have not read my Apology for the Sovereignty
of Princes, or being ignorant of the Latin tongue cannot understand it, may in
some part judge, whether it deserves to be censured by Cardinal Bellarmine as
containing any heretical or erroneous doctrine (from which his censure, ere it
be long I will, God willing, most clearly free my self) for that in substance
I have written nothing in that Apology, which in this my Answer to Suarez is
not contained. The reverence wherewith I do honor the Sea Apostolic, the
duty which I do owe to my Prince and Country, the desire to find out the
truth in this difficult point which so nearly concerns our due obedience to
God and Caesar, and the utter temporal ruin of our selves and our whole
posterity, and not any hope of temporal gain or the least spleen (God is my
witness) against any person or Order, as some uncharitably, I beseech God
forgive them, have laid to my charge, has moved me to examine, with all
dutiful respect to those whom I am bound to honor, this hard and dangerous
question. And these reasons I hope will be sufficient to excuse me among
indifferent men (for those who are carried away with particular ends of humane
respects it is impossible to satisfy) from al imputation of rashness or
temeritie for opposing my self in these times against this new For although
this doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes be not new, yet that it is
a point of faith and the contrary heretical, and that the Pope may give leave
to murder wicked Princes, is a new and scandalous doctrine. See above part 1.
sec. 10.
and scandalous doctrine. For alas what time can be imagined to be more
convenient for us English Catholics to oppose our selves against such new
opinions, then at this time, when by reason of them our Sovereign otherwise
most gracious has taken high displeasure against us, our liberty, goods and
lives are through them greatly endangered, and which if there were no other
cause might only suffice, our Religion is thereby exceedingly graced. For what
is now more frequent in the mouths of all sorts of people, then that we English
Catholics cannot according to the doctrine of the chief pillars of our Church
be true and faithful Subjects, yea and that is lawful for us if the Pope do
give us leave to murder, I speak with horror, our dread Sovereign? And these
reasons I hope will suffice for those who have fear of Gods judgments not
rashly to mis-construe at leastwise my secret intentions, which I protest
before God as I hope to obtain mercy at his hands, are most pure and sincere;
And as for those who are not afraid daily to mis-interprete both my thoughts
and actions to the infinite prejudice of my good name, I beseech God of his
great mercy to pardon their rash judgments and speeches, and I request them to
call to mind that if at the day of judgment we are to render strict account
of every idle word, how much more of heinous detractions? and with all to
consider how dreadful it will be unto them at the hour of death to remember,
that the sin of detraction, according to Saint Austins In epist. 54. ad
Macedonium.
doctrine will not be forgiven, unless they do their best endeavor to make
restitution of his good name, which they through their ouerlashing speeches
have uncharitably taken away.

The same submission, which in the end of this Disputation I made of all my
writings to the censure of the Catholic Roman Church, I do here repeat
again.

ROGER WIDDRINGTON an English Catholic.

THE PREFACE OF THE APOLOGETICALL Answer of ROGER WIDDRINGTON an English
Catholic to a little pamphlet of a certain Doctor of Divinity.
IT is not long since (Christian Reader) that I did set forth an Apology for
the Sovereignty of Princes against the reasons of Cardinal Bellarmine, who
endeavors to demonstrate, that his opinion for the Popes power to depose
Princes is certain as a point of faith, and to impugn the contrary opinion of
certain Catholics as heretical. The which Apology (being made by me, God is
my witness, not upon desire either to contradict or to traduce Cardinal
Bellarmine, whom I do greatly honor, but only to find out the truth, and to
free from that foul imputation of heresy some virtuous and learned
Catholics, and who have very well deserved of the Catholic Church, who if
they were living would nothing need the patronage of other men to defend
themselves) is taken in very evil part by some, who both themselves do
wonderfully exclaim against it, and withal do set on children, women, and
also men especially who be unlearned and do scarcely understand a syllable
thereof, to use all manner of reproachful and execrable speeches against it
For they say, to omit slanders of less moment, that it is a temerarious,
scandalous, and erroneous book, yea, and (flat heretical,) or wholly
repugnant to the Catholic faith.

2 For what greater temeritie, say they, can be imagined, then that one or two
obscure Authors should oppose themselves against threescore and ten most famous
Doctors, whose names cardinal Bellarmine does relate, yea and as Cardinal
Bellarmine himself affirms, In praefat. contra Barcl.
against all Catholic writer, as well Divines as Lawyers, and like an other
Goliath dare aduent^re to provoke the whole camp of Catholics? Is it not also
an incredible arrogancy not only not to yield to the common received opinion
of so many most grave, most learned, and most holy men, but also to lay upon
them an imputation of treason, as it is clear say they, that Widdrington has
done, who oftentimes in his Apology seems to auerre, that all those who give
authority to the Pope to depose Princes, do very great wrong to Sovereign
Princes, and if there are Subjects do commit the detestable crime of treason?

3 And that this Apology of Widdrington is very scandalous, it is say they,
too too manifest, seeing that he gives license to Secular Princes to forbid
books, which seems only to belong to the Popes Holiness and other Bishops,
and to those who are put in authority by them for that purpose; and also be
gives scope to the said Princes to persecute the Church of God, and freely to
commit any wickedness whatsoever without being subject to any temporal
punishment for the same: yea also to reject at their own pleasure such
Preachers, who are sent by the Popes holiness to advance the Catholic says
in their Dominions, from which doubtless no man can deny but that very great
scandalls will arise. And moreover he seems to reprehend very saucily
Cardinal Bellarmine, the chief champion at this day of the Catholic Church
against Sectaries, both by giving such an ignominious title to his Apology,
and also bp pretending to confute him by his own grounds, as having handled
this so great a question with little sincerity, and also in many things
contradicted himself, which assuredly not without great scandal seems to
give too ample occasion both to Catholics, not to have his other books of
Controversy in that good estimation, wherewith hitherto they have been
respected by all men, and also to the adversaries of the Catholic Church not
to return so speedily to the unity thereof whiles they see Catholics to be at
variance among themselves, and to write and speak so bitterly one against an
other.

4 Lastly, that Widdringtons book is flat heretical and wholly repugnant to
the Catholic faith, or at leastwise erroneous, Cardinal Bellarmine does
evidently prove by nine Counsels approved by the Pope, whereof three of them
were General Counsels: Neither can he doubtless be excused from heresy, or
at leastwise from error, who contemns to hear the voice of the Church, and
wittingly and willing presumes to contradict so many Counsels, which do
manifestly declare what Catholic doctrine teaches in this point.

5 These be princpal objections which these severe censurers out of overmuch
heat of spirit do make against my Apology, which to confute and so to clear
my self of these there slanders I think it to be a very easy matter. And if
in clearing my self of these imputations I shall seem to be ouerlong, and to
exceed the due proportion beseeming a Preface of so small a book, I humbly
crave pardon of the Courteous Reader, for that having so fit an opportunity
offered me at this present to clear my self of such most wicked accusations,
I thought it not convenient to defer it any longer.

6 And to run over all the particular heads in the same order as they are
propounded, and with as much breuity as may be, I will first of all take the
definition of temerarious as it is now used by Divines (omitting diverse other
acceptions of temeritie which they do allege) from Dominicus Ban^es 2. 2. q.
11. ar 2.
a most learned Divine, and who very lately since Melchior Canus whom he
cites has written of this matter: If, says he, we do consider the definition
of this word temerarious, every proposition which is heretical or erroneus, is
too much temerarious, but yet more properly a temerarious proposition is said
to be that, when one in a matter of weight does without good authority affirm
any thing against the common opinion of the Church or of Divines. Now whether
this definition of temerarious, as it is taken properly, which Cardinal
Bellarmine, as I suppose, will admit, or at the least not reject as improbable,
may rightly be applied to Widdringtons Apology, it is to be examined.

7 The matter doubtless whereof we now do treat, I confess to be of very
great weight, as being a thing which concerns the supreme authorities of
the Ecclesiastical and civil power, neither of this is there any controversy
between us. Wherefore these two things remain only to be examined; the first,
whether any thing is contained in Widdringtons book, which is contrary to the
common opinion of the Church or of Divines; the second, whether if there be any
such thing contained therein it be affirmed without good authority. For if it
contains nothing which is contrary to the common opinion of the Church, or of
Divines, or if therein any such thing be affirmed, it is not affirmed without
good authority, he will doubtless avoid the aforesaid imputation of temerity,
and by the Law of Talio he will with greater reason return it back upon his
Adversaries.

8 But first of all thou must observe, Learned Reader, (for to thee especially
I do direct my speech) what is the mark at which Widdrington in his Apology
for the Sovereignty of Princes does aim, and what is the state of the
controversy betwixt him and Cardinal Bellarmine, for this once being known,
thou may more easily judge whether justly or wrongfully the aforesaid crimes
are laid to his charge. It is not therefore Widdringtons meaning, as some do
imagine, to impugn the more common opinion of Divines, which grants to the
Pope authority to depose Princes as apparently false, and with invincible
arguments to demonstrate the contrary to be true, but whereas some very few
later Divines, and especially Cardinal Bellarmine have so egerly, and with
such vehemency taken upon them to defend this authority of the Popes
Holiness to depose Princes, that they imagine to have most clearly convinced
the same, and fear not therefore to charge with heresy all those Catholics,
who in this point do not run with them, this only was my intent to give at the
least a probable answer to the arguments of Cardinal Bellarmine, and to free
virtuous and learned Catholics from that execrable crime of heresy, whereof
they are wrongfully taxed, and so to show out of his own grounds, not by
conuincing, but by probable reasons, that his arguments are not altogether so
certain and invincible, as that they do evidently demonstrate, that those who
deny such an authority, are not to be accounted of the company of the
faithful, or to be excluded from the participation of Sacraments.

9 Wherefore the present controversy which is between me and Cardinal
Bellarmine, is not concerning this absolute question or proposition, whether
the Pope can or cannot depose Princes for heresy or no, but concerning this
modall proposition, whether it be so certain, that the Pope by Christ his
institution has such an authority to depose Princes, as that those who defend
the contrary opinion, do expose themselves to manifest danger of heresy,
error, or of any other mortal sin. Whereupon although in my Apology I brought
certain arguments drawn from inconveniences, which the Logicians call ad
impossible, to prove that Christ our Lord did not grant such an authority to
the Pope, yet whosoever will diligently peruse my Apology, will presently
perceive that my intent was not to bring conuincing reasons, which do cause a
firm and undoubtful assent, but only probable and such as are grounded upon
credible principles, and which are able to cause a probable persuasion.

10 And from hence any man may plainly perceive, that Widdrington does not
oppose himself either against all Divines, or against the common opinion of
the Church or of Doctors, but only against very few writers; considering that
among those 70. Authors who are related by Cardinal Bellarmine, very few are
to be found who (although they are perchance of opinion that the Pope by Christ
his institution has authority to depose Princes for enormious crimes) yet
they do not so peremptorily adhere to that opinion, as to tax them with
heresy who do maintain the contrary. And if Cardinal Bellarmine in the
later Editions of his Books, yet bringing no new reason to confirm his former
opinion had no condemned the contrary opinion of Catholics as heretical, but
had suffered every man to persevere without danger of heresy in his own
opinion which he should think to be the truer, he had not truly had
Widdrington to be his Adversary, or to have attempted to overthrow his reasons
as insufficient to demonstrate an undoubted point of faith.

11 Moreover, neither also is the opinion of Doctor Barclay to be reputed
contrary to the common opinion of the Church or of Doctors: for a common
opinion as it is taken in the defi^i^ion of temerarious, is not that which is
opposite to a less common, but which is opposite to a singular opinion. But it
is evident that the opinion of Doctor Barclay is not a singular opinion of one
ot two Auors only, whatsoever Cardinal Bellarmine so often repeating, one
Barclay, only Barclay as an other Goliath against all Catholic writers does
affirm, seeing yt I have in my Apology related many Authors who are of that
opinion, and as very well writes Trithemius In Chronico monasterij Hirsang. ad
annum 1106.
, it is a controversy among Schoolmen, and it is not as yet decided by the
Judge whether the Pope has authority to depose the Emperor or no

12 The testimony of many Schoole-Diuines, says Canus Lib 8. de locis cap. 4.
, if other learned men dot stand against them, is of no greater force to make
men to believe them, then either their reason, or grauer authority shall
confirm. Whereupon in a School disputation a Divine ought not to be
ouerborne with the authority of many, but if he have a few grave men of his
opinion, he may doubtless stand against the opinion of very many. And passing
well says Navarre In Manuali cap. 27. nu. 289.
, It is not enough for an opinion to be called the common opinion (to this
effect to prejudice an other) for that cause only that many do follow it, as
in a company of birds one flying all the rest do follow. For I should think
that opinion to be the more common to this effect, which six or seven Classike
Authors who purposely handle the matter should approve, then that which is
allowed by fifty, who are carried away almost only with the authority of
those who have written before them. For an opinion is not made a common opinion
by the number of them who follow it, but by the weight of authority: Yea and I
do think that either of the opinions may to this purpose be called a common
opinion, when either of them has eight or ten grave Authors and who with
judgment do embrace it But this doctrine Navarre understands in the
exterior Court, for in the Court of Conscience he affirms in the same place
nu. 288. that to avoid sin it suffices to follow the opinion of one Docttor
whom we think to be a virtuous and learned man.
. Did not three or four Bishops in the General Council of Chalcedon in the
cause of the Popes Primacie oppose themselves against almost six hundred
Bishops and the whole Council, which three or four doubtless Cardinal
Bellarmine will constantly affirm are not therefore to be stained with any
spot of temeritie? Now if any man do diligently consider the first beginning
and process of this opinion, which grants to the Pope power to depose
Princes he will easily perceive, that the later maintainers of this opinion
were not so much moved to follow it by force of reason, as drawn thereunto by
the authority of those, who held it before them.

13 Neither can it also be sufficiently proved that this opinion for the Popes
power to depose Princes is so common, as Cardinal Bellarmine does suppose for
certain. For it is not so clear, that those 70. Authors, whom he brings as
so many armed soldiers in defense of his opinion (and does artificially place
them in the forefront of his book as it were in battle array, to cause a
terror in his Adversary discrying at the first to many troops of armed men)
do altogether favor his opinion. For to omit that most of them do vehemently
impugn Cardinal Bellarmines opinion for the Popes indirect dominion or power
in temporals, and with great applause do approve the Popes direct power in
te^porals, which Cardinal Bellarmine does greatly mislike: first, it is
apparent that Alexander of Hales called the irrefragable Doctor (affirming 3.
part q. 40. membr. 5. q. 4. ad primum, secundum et tertium argumentum, see
beneath in the Answer nu. 190.
that Kings if they offend are by God alone [and not by the Pope] to be
punished with temporal punishments) does in express words impugn both the
direct and indirect dominion or authority of the Pope in temporals, neither is
it as yet apparent, as I have showed heeretofre In my Apology nu. 122.
, what was Almaines own proper opinion. [And as for Ioannes Parisiensis it is
evident See above ca 3. sec. 3. nu. 7.
that he did limit the Popes chastising power to Ecclesiastical censures.

14 Besides, some of those 70. Authors do use such general words, to wit,
that the spiritual power does extend to temporals, that the temporal power is
subject to the spiritual, and that the sword is under the sword, etc. as that
they may very well be understood of subjection to be punished only spiritually
not temporally, and of a power to command temporals, but not to dispose of
temporals. Some others of the 70. Authors do not speak Universally of Kings,
but only and expressly of the Roman Emperor; Now whether there be altogether
the same reason of other Kings, as there is of him by reason of some pact or
covenant agreed upon betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, and by reason of a
certain Oath of Allegiance which he swears to the Pope, it may doubtless be
called in question. But what the Emperor does promise to the Pope by virtue of
that Oath, which the Council of Vienna does declare to be truly an Oath of
Allegiance, and in what that allegiance does properly consist, it is not to our
purpose to examine at this present.

15 Moreover, what hinders, that very many of those 70. Authors, who teach
that the Pope has power to depose Kings and Emperors, may not be understood
in that manner, as those Doctors related in my Apology A nu. 404.
together with the Gloss understood those plain words of Gregory the
seventh, when he said, that Pope Zachary did depose the King of France from
his Kingdom, that is, say they, did consent to them who did depose him, or did
declare him worthy to be deposed, or did counsel his deposition as lawful,
and did approve it by his authority? So that very few of those 70. Authors
except those who wrote of this matter in this present age do so expressly
follow Cardinal Bellarmines opinion, but that their words may very well be
applied to some one of the aforesaid senses.

16 But be it so, let us admit this opinion of Cardinal Bellarmine to be
commonly received by those 70. and also by other Doctors besides them, yet if
one moved with good authority does stand against the common opinion of the
Church or of Doctors, he is not according to the aforesaid definition to be
accounted temerarious. But whether Widdrington has brought sufficient reasons
to free those Catholics from temerity, who do not grant to the Pope power to
depose Princes, the prudent Reader will easily judge by his Apology, wherein
he does utterly overthrow those pretended demonstrations of Cardinal
Bellarmine, and also alleges many authorities of holy Fathers, Popes and
other Doctors, who do affirm, that the Ecclesiastical power has only the
spiritual and not the material sword, and that Sovereign Princes are to be
punished with temporal punishments by God alone, and moreover he produces
against the aforesaid opinion of Cardinal Bellarmine, which is vulgarly called
the common opinion, eight at the least grave Authors (yea and the whole
kingdom of France, if credit may be given to Petrus Pithaeus) who according
to the doctrine of Navarre, before Nu. 12.
related, are sufficient to make that opinion which they follow to be accounted
a common opinion to this purpose or effect, that we may lawfully and with a
secure conscience follow it: and lastly he assigns diverse reasons, why this
opinion which does favor the Popes power in temporalls, is so common, and has
so greatly increased from the first beginning thereof unto these times, which
reasons of his whosoever will duly consider, may doubtless have just cause to
wonder, how that in any books of Catholic writers there is left any memory at
all, whereby even obscurely it is signified, that this temporal power of the
Pope was ever by School Divines called in question.

17 But my adversaries do object, that Widdrington neither has euidenly
convinced by his reasons, that the Pope has not the aforesaid power to depose
Princes, neither has he faithfully related the authority of those Doctors
whom he cites for his opinion, for that some of them, and especially Gregorius
Tholosanus, and Antonius de Rosellis do in express words affirm, that the
Pope has power to deprive heretical Kings of their Kingdoms. Nevertheless
that these Objections are frivolous any learned man, who will attentively read
his Apology, will manifestly perceive. For it was not Widdringtons meaning to
bring demonstratiue arguments, which should evidently convince his own
opinion, but his principal intent was only to answer probably Cardinal
Bellarmines reasons. But because the answering to arguments can not of it self
produce a positive assent of the contrary opinion, although it does in some
sort prepare the understanding to yield assent, Widdrington thought it
convenient not only to confute Cardinal Bellarmines reasons, but also to
produce against the common opinion certain probable arguments drawn both from
extrinsecall, and also intrinsecall grounds, which although they do not
altogether convince the understanding, yet they do probab^y incline it to
yield assent.

18 And for this cause he alleged Gregorius Tholosanus, and Antonius de
Rosellis against Cardinal Bellarmines opinion, for that he intended to produce
not only such authors, who do expressly follow the contrary opinion, but also
who do favor it. Now it is manifest that the aforesaid Doctors are most
plainly against Cardinal Bellarmine in this, that they are of opinion, that
the Pope has not authority to depose Sovereign Princes for mere secular
crimes, which nevertheless are very prejudicial to the spiritual good of
souls. Besides that Antonius de Rosellis does doubtfully and under a
disjunction affirm, In sua monarchia. part. 1. ca. 63.
that the Pope can either deprive the Emperor of his Empire, or declare him to
be deprived, so that he seems to incline to the opinion of Ioannes
Parisiensis, who grants power to the Commonwealth, but not to the Pope to
depose Princes.

19 To conclude that second crime of temerity, which they object against
Widdrington, to wit, that he accuses those Doctors of treason, who maintain
the Popes power to depose Princes, is a mere slander, and imposture. For
Widdrington in his fifth reason, Nu. 63. of his Apology.
which these men do calumniate, does only affirm, that there cannot be
assigned any sufficient reason, for which any man can put the necks of
Sovereign Princes under the yoke of any other power without doing those
Princes very great wrong, and does confidently and freely auerre what seems
to him more probable, that such plots and attempts against the Scepters of
Princes are in themselves and of their own nature unlawful, and exceedingly
injurious to Sovereign Princes: and thereupon he affi^meth, Nu. 471. of his
Apology.
that he cannot as yet sufficiently understand, by what way those Subjects can
be freed from treason (what opinion soever they do speculatiuely maintain
concerning the Popes power in temporalls) who practically under color
perchance of Religion and devotion to the Sea Apostolic, not weighing with
equal balance their bound duty to Soueraign Princes, should notwithstanding
any sentence of Excommunication or deprivation denounced by the Pope attempt to
thrust their lawful Prince out of the possession of his kingdom, so long as
this question concerning the Popes power to depose Princes remains undecided.

20 And this very same opinion are bound to follow to make that fact of theirs
to be lawful, those thirteen English Priests, D. William Bishop. John
Colleton. John Mush. Robert Charnocke. D. John Bosseuile. Anthony Hebborn.
Roger Cadwallader. Robert Drury. D. Antony Champney. John Iackson. Francis
Barnebey. Oswald Needham. Richard Button Whereof three are Doctors of Sorbon,
the rest are accounted by Catholics to be grave, virtuous, and learned men.
and all of them, two only excepted, living at this present, (whose names in
very truth I would have concealed, if they had not been before published to
the world) who to give assurance of their loyalty to the late Queen Elizabeth,
did by a public instrument protest, and made it known to all the Christan
world, that she (being at that time excommunicated by name, and deprived by the
sentence of Pope Pius the fifth of her Regal authority) had nevertheless as
full authority power, and Sovereignty over them, and over all the Subjects of
this Realm, as any her highness Predecessors ever had. And that
notwithstanding any authority, or any Excommunication whatsoever either
denounced or to be denounced against her Majesty, or any borne within her
Majesty's Dominions, which would not forsake the defense of her, and her
Dominions, they think themselves not only bound in conscience not to obey
this, or any such like Censure, but also do promise to yield unto her Majesty
all obedience in temporal causes This profession of Allegiance is extant in
the end of Master George-Blackwells examination in the latin Edition.
.

21 Now that we have cleared our selves of this first imputation of temerity,
let us come to the second accusation which is of scandal. There be some now
adays who are so addicted to their own opinions, that whatsoever they have
once determined with themselves to be unlawful, they would presently have all
men even with their great temporal detriment also to condemn it as unlawful.
And if they be demanded a reason which moves them to condemn with such
confidence that action as unlawful, seeing that other men of the contrary
opinion do not think it to be forbidden by any Law natural or divine,
Ecclesiastical or civil, they presently, if they can give no other reason,
do fly to scandal, and do commonly cry out, it is a Scandal, it is a
Scandal.

22 Scandal is an evil word or deed which gives occasion to an other man to
fall, as the Divines S. Hieronym. in c 15. Matthew S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 43. ar. 1
etalij Theologi. ibid
do define it: yet in declaring the sense of this definition they labor much,
and in assigning all the conditions which are required to make an action to be
scandalous they do not as yet agree among themselves, But all do accord in
this, that no action at all which is commanded especially by the Law of nature
can give a true occasion of ruin or offending; and if one thereby do take
occasion to sin, it is a scandal not given, but taken, as all Divines do
confess. Whereupon to give to every man his right, to Caesar those things which
are Caesar's, and to God those things which are Gods, can give occasion to no
man of offending, but rather to take away from Princes their right, which the
Law of nature does give them is very scandalous, and greatly repugnant to the
Law of God and nature.

22 And upon this ground all the imputation of scandal, which these severe
Censures do lay to Widdringtons charge, may easily be retorted upon
themselves: For it is agreed upon by all Divines, that the civil Commonwealth
has sufficient authority to punish vices, to provide for the peace of the
citizens, to preserve her self, and by means of the temporal sword, which is
agreeable to a temporal power, to defend her self from all present wrongs,
and to revenge those wrongs which are already done her. From which principle,
even most evident by the light it self of nature, it does most clearly follow
that the civil commonwealth may, under pain of temporal punishments, forbid
all sorts of seditious books, Of this we have a late example in the King of
Spain that now is who under great temporal punishments did prohibit the
eleventh tome of Cardinal Baronius his Ecclesiastical Story until it were
corrected.
as they are seditious, and do wrongfully infringe the lawful rights of
Princes, (as also the Pope, under spiritual punishments, may prohibit the same
books as they are prejudicial to the spiritual health of souls) and also
that she is not bound to admit into her dominions turbulent preachers, and who
are truly enemies to her temporal State, and who do unlawfully disturb the
temporal quietness of the Common wealth by other unlawful practices, then by
the pure preaching of the Gospel, which being performed in due manner is
injurious to no man: neither can these in my judgment without very great
scandal be called in question.

23 Neither does Widdrington give more scope to princes to persecute the
Church, or to live more licentiously, then do those other Doctors whom he
cites in his Apology, and especially Alexander of Hales a man of singular
virtue and learning (whose doctrine was approved as not disagreeing in any
thing from the Catholic truth by Pope Alexander the fourth, and threescore and
ten Deuines Posseuine in the word Alexander Holensis. See beneath in the
answer nu. 190. in the margent.
) who in express words affirms, that Kings if they do offend, can with
temporal punishments be punished by God alone: From which doctrine if
perchance any Princes should take occasion to offend, that is not to be
imputed to any fault of the Doctors, but to the humane frailty of those
Princes. Lastly, to defend innocent persons, to uphold the truth, which is as
it were by maine force beaten down, and to free from that most wicked crime of
heresy, virtuous and learned Catholics, and those who being now dead cannot
defend their innocence, although their accusers do thereby suffer perchance
some detriment in their good name, can give no just occasion of offense.

24 As concerning the title, which Widdrington gave to his Apology for this
end, that it might be sought after more greedily, and read more attentively,
seeing that it is agreeable to the end, scope, and subject of the book, it
cannot be no more displeasing, then is the book it self. But if I have
offended the most Illustrious Cardinal Bellarmine in any thing, I am heartily
sorry for it: for truly I did not write any thing, God is my witness, with
purpose to wrong any man, but with desire to find out the truth, and to free
innocent men of all imputation of deadly sin. And although both Cardinal
Bellarmine, and many other Divines have by their writings meruailously
enlightened the Christian commonwealth (for which all Catholics are bound to
give them exceeding great thanks) yet I do not imagine that there can be
found any Catholic Doctor, of what learning or dignity soever he be, who,
considering that he is a man and subject to humane ignorance, would have all
other men without further examination to give undoubted credit to every one of
his opinions: but rather it would be very scandalous, and an occasion of no
small error to those persons, who should without farther search build their
faith, which is necessary to eternal salvation, upon the bare word of any
Doctor whatsoever as upon a most firm and sure foundation.

25 Neither can it be any scandal either to Catholics, or not Catholics, to
dispute probably of those things, which are in controversy among School men,
and as yet the Judge has not decided the question; but rather it is too too
scandalous, and greatly against Christian charity, to which scandal is flat
opposite, to condemn the probable opinions of Doctors as heretical. Our
School, says Canus, Lib. 8. de locis cap. 4.
gives us doubtless great liberty, that whatsoever seems to be most
probable we may by our right defend, but it is not lawful for us to condemn
rashly and lightly those, who do hold against us. And let this suffice to free
my Apology from all suspicion of scandal; neither will I at this present
retort upon the books of other men a deserved blame of scandal, returning
back the same measure to them wherewith they have measured me.

26 Lastly, to purge my self of those last, but of all the most heinous crimes
of heresy and error, it is a known and common principle among Divines, that
error is distinguished from heresy in this, that heresy is repugnant to
Divine faith, the certainty whereof does depend wholly upon Divine revelation,
but error is repugnant to a Theological conclusion, the certainty whereof is
partly grounded upon divine revelation, and partly upon the light of natural
reason; yet all Divines do with one consent agree in this, that as both a
Theological conclusion, and supernatural faith are certainly and evidently
true, so both error and heresy do contain an undoubted and manifest
falsehood: So that if this doctrine concerning the Popes power to depose Princes
cannot be convinced of manifest falsehood, it cannot justly be taxed with
heresy or error.

27 Now therefore let us examine what certainty can be gathered from the
Councels, to prove this authority of the Pope to depose Princes. All the
Councels as well provincial as General, which are confirmed by the Pope, I
do honor with all dutiful reverence, nevertheless I do not think that
equal honor and credit is to be given to them both. For all Catholics do
confess, that General Councels being assisted by the holy Ghost cannot err
in their definitions: but that provincial Counsels are as well in decrees of
faith as of manners subject to error, very grave Divines do constantly
auerre. And although some very learned men do affirm, that this opinion,
concerning the superiority of the council above the Pope, and of the Popes
fallible judgment if be define without a General Council, does sound ill in
the ears of Catholics, in so much that it is commonly accounted to be
erroneous and very near to heresy, and is only tolerated by the Church, yet
in my judgment their speeches are very equivocal, neither do they plainly
enough declare what by those words they do understand. For that this opinion
does both sound ill in the ears of some Catholics, to wit, the Romans, and
also that it does sound well in the ears of other Catholics, to wit, the
Divines of Paris, and that it is not accounted in all places, and by all men
erroneous or near to heresy, it is too too manifest.

28 For Navarre a writer of our time, and a famous Divine and most skillful in
the Canon Law Posseuine verbo Martinus ab Azpilcueta.
does most plainly teach, that this question is probably disputed by the
Divines of Rome and of Paris, neither does he more incline to the one side
then to the other. There is, says he, Iu. cap. Nouit de Iudicijs notab. 3. nu.
84.
a great contention betwixt the Romans and them of Paris, to whom the
Ecclesiastical power was more principally given by Christ, whether to the
whole Church, or else to S. Peter himself. For the Romans hold that this
power was given to S. Peter and to his Successors, and that therefore the Pope
is above a Council, but these whom Gerson follows, do affirm that it was
given to the whole Church, although to be exercised by one, and that therefore
at leastwise in some cases a Council is above the Pope. The opinion of the
Romans is approved by S. Thomas, Thomas a Vio, who more deeply and more
profoundly then any other, does endeavor to demonstrate the same: But the other
opinion is approved by Panormitane, who stands for them of Paris, That is,
the Canonists.
whom ours do more commonly follow, as Decius affirms. Which opinion Iacobus
Almainus a Divine of Sorbone does eagerly maintain, who has answered Thomas a
Vio in a book of a competent bigness, and John Mayor, who does the like,
affirming that it is not permitted at Rome for any man to hold the opinion of
those of Paris, and of Panormitane, and again that the University of Paris
does not suffer that the contrary opinion be maintained there.

29 And although he, who makes the additions to Navarre, does labor to draw
Navarre (who is wavering and very doubtful of this question whether the Pope be
above a Council) to be of the opinion of the Romans, yet he writes far
more temperately, and although he thinks the opinion of the Romans to be
the more probable, yet he leaves the opinion of them of Paris as probable.
But far more plainly and modestly writes most learned Victoria, There are
two opinions, says he, Relect. 4. de potest. pap^e et Conc. propositio. 3.
concerning the comparison of the Popes power, the one is of S. Thomas and many
his followers and of other learned Doctors both Divines and Canonists, that the
Pope is above a Council; the other is the common opinion of the Divines of
Paris, and also of many Doctors, both Divines and Canonists, as of Panormitane,
and others contrary to the former, that a Council is above the Pope. It is no
place at this present to dispute whether of them be the truer. I think that
both of them is a probable opinion: and because either of them has great
followers, we must not proceed in this question which is in hand only
according to one of these opinions, but we must determine what is to be said
what opinion soever of these two we do follow.

30 I could therefore wish, that these severe Censours would in plain and
express words declare their opinion, and that they would not with cunning
ambiguity of words keep the Reader in suspense, but sincerely and
perspicuously explain their minds, and answer directly, whether those that
defend the opinion of the Doctors of Paris as probable, are in that manner
tolerated by the Church as harlots, usurers, and such like notorious sinners
are sometimes for the avoiding of greater scandals tolerated or permited in the
commonwealth, who although oftentimes they are not punished with ordinary
punishments ordained by the laws, yet they are altogether excluded from the
participation of Sacraments so long as they persist in their wicked life; or
whether those who are resolved to follow the opinion of the Doctors of Paris
may enjoy the benefit of Sacramental absolution? For if they will admit this
last, they must of necessity confess, that the opinion of the Doctors of
Paris is not only tolerated by the Church, but also allowed by the Church as
probable, and which may be maintained without any danger of heresy, error or
any other deadly sin.

31 Now that those Doctors, who defend the opinion of the Divines of Paris, are
admitted to the Sacraments of the Church, the practice of the Church of France
(which practice no man without great temerity and scandal can condemn as
temerarious or scandalous) does give apparent testimony. Wherefore it seems
in my opinion to be far more agreeable to Christian charity, that virtuous
and learned Catholics should as much as may be, be freed from error and
heresy, and more beseeming the sincerity of Christ his Gospel, that Catholic
Doctors should plainly and perspicuously, without so many ambiguities of words,
declare to Christian people what every Christian is bound to believe concerning
those things which appertain to the Catholic faith, and that they should not
so easily thrust upon the faithful people doubtful and uncertain opinions,
and which may be defended without prejudice to faith, for a certain and
undoubted doctrine of the Catholic faith. And from hence it is evident, that
the authority of no Provincial Council, although it be confirmed by the
Pope, if it be taken soly by it self I said soly by it self, for if it be
approved by consent of the whole Church it binds in that manner as a General
Council does, as it is insinuated in the next number.
, can be such a sufficient argument to Catholics, to give undoubted credit to
her definitions, but that without note of heresy or error they may be
contradicted.

32 Neither is that objection of the adverse part of any great moment: if the
Pope, say they, defining without a General Council does not make that
doctrine, which he defines to be certain of faith, but that he may err,
there could no certainty have been had concerning many opinions which were
taught in the three first hundred years, wherein many heresies were put down
by the Pope, as it is evident in the errors of the Priscillianists, of
Vigilantius, of Iouinian, of the Maniches, and of many others. For according to
the doctrine of the Divines of Paris, the aforesaid opinions of the
Priscillianists, and of the rest before mentioned, are not to be accounted
heretical for that cause precisely, because they were condemned only by the
Pope or by Provincial Councels, but because the whole Church received and
approved their condemnation, which at this present for breuities sake may
suffice to have insinuated to the learned, being likely hereafter, if need
shall require, to declare it more at large.

33 Now let us briefly examine what certainty can be gathered from Councels
for the Popes authority to depose Princes. Six Provincial Councels and three
General are produced by Cardinal Bellarmine to confirm this his opinion. And
although Provincial Councels, according to the probable opinion of many, as
we now have seen, do not make the doctrine which they define to be certain
of faith, and therefore no conuincing argument can be drawn from them to
condemn any doctrine of heresy or error: yet that the truth may the better
appear, let us grant for disputation sake that they cannot err in their
definitions, and let us see how soundly Cardinal Bellarmine does by them
confirm his doctrine to be certain of faith.

34 The first Council which is alleged by Cardinal Bellarmine is a Roman
Council holden under Gregory the seventh, in the year 1080, wherein Gregory
with the consent and applause of all, as Cardinal Bellarmine says Contra
Barclai. page 29.
, did publicly and with a solemn rite and ceremony excommunicate and deprive
Henry the fourth Emperor of his Empire and Kingdom. I have read indeed that
Gregory did depose Henry the fourth in that Roman Synod, or rather Bertoldus
in anno 1080. et tom. 3. Council. part. 2.
in the end of the absolution of the Synod did annexe the deposition of Henry,
but that he was deposed by that Synod, or that all the Fathers gave their
consent and applause I have not read as yet. In the other five Councels, to
wit, at Beneuentum under Pope Victor, at Placentia under Vrbanus, an other at
Rome under Paschalis, at Collen under Gelasius, and at Rhemes under Calixtus I
find not so much as one word of the deposition of Henry, unless we will
confound deposition with Excommunication. And although the Emperor had been
deposed not only in, but also by those six aforesaid Councels, yet from hence
no certain doctrine of faith can be concluded, seeing that the aforesaid
deposition of Henry, was not a matter of faith but only of fact, wherein as
well those Popes, as those Fathers of the Councels following their own opinions
might err, as a little beneath Nu. 50.
in the like answer to the Council of Lateran I will declare more at large.

35 Three General Councels are alleged by Cardinal Bellarmine, of Claramont,
of Lateran, and of Lions. To the Council of Lions I have answered sufficiently
in my Apology See also above in the Appendix to Suarez etc. part. 1. sec. 4.
nu. 6.
, to wit, that it cannot be effectually proved, that the deposition of
Frederike was done by the Council, but only by the Pope in the Council,
neither the Council approving it, but only being present at the same.

36 From the Council of Claramont Cardinal Bellarmine argues in this manner:
Pope Vrbanus the second in a most frequent Council at Claramont did
excommunicate and deprive Philip the first King of France of the crown of his
Kingdom, for having put away his lawful wife and married an adultresse, and
being admonished thereof did refuse to obey, as Sigebert does testify in his
Chronicle in the year 1095, and more plainly Matthew Paris relates the same
in the life of William the second in the year 1095.

37 But neither out of this Council can be concluded any thing for certain
for the Popes power to depose Princes. For be it so, that Pope Vrbanus, as
Sigebert, and Matthew Paris do affirm, did in the Council of Claramont
excommunicate Philip for the aforesaid cause, or rather, as Papyrius Mass^nius
Lib. 3. in Philippo primo.
says, did debar him from coming to Church and Mass (although Andreas an
ancient Historiographer, as Paulus Aemilius Lib. 38. in Pnilippo primo.
relates, affirms that it was done before the Council and Aimonius Lib. 5.
de gestis Francorum partim cap. 48. in principio partim 49. in principio.
insinuates yt it was done after the Council of Claramont) yet by what
conuincing argument can it be proved, that Philip was in that Council deprived
by Vrbanus of the crown of his Kingdom?

38 But that together with Excommunication was joined the depriving also of his
Royal dignity, may be understood says Cardinal Bellarmine, by suo
Carnotensis who in his 46. Epist. to Pope Vrbanus the second speaks in this
manner. Those persons who will not come unto you in the evening of their wit,
and the smoothness of their tongue have promised the King to procure from the Sea Apostolic pardon for his offense, and will use partly this persuasion,
that the King with his Kingdom will depart from your obedience unless you
restore his crown, and absolve him from excommunication. The same also may be
gathered from Historiographers, who do testify, that Pope Vrbanus did
prohibit, the Kingly diadem to be set on Philips head being excommunicated.
See the Chronicle of Ioannes Nauclerus generat. 37. in Rege 38. Papyrius
Massonius Annal. lib. 3. Add also that which is written in the Summarie or
compendium of the French Histories of Nicholas Vignerius, that for all the time
that Philip lived in Excommunication they did not use in public writings as
the manner was, in the reign of Philip But Cardinal Bellarmine was greatly
ouerseene in citing these words of Vignerius, for Vignerius speaks of Philip
the second who lived in the time of Pope Innocent the third above a hundred
years after this Philip the first, who was excommunicated by Vrbanus.
, but in the reign of Christ, because the people held Philip being
excommunicated for no King. Thus Cardinal Bellarmine.

39 Nevertheless I cannot sufficiently understand, how Cardinal Bellarmine
does effectually prove from hence, that Philip was either by the Council or in
the Council deprived of his Kingdom. For first of all supposing, but not
granting, that Philip was deprived of his Crown by Vrbanus, yet it does not
therefore necessarily follow, that this sentence of deprivation was denounced
in the Council of Claramont, seeing that in the decrees of that Council there
is made no mention of this sentence, and the Pope might by some particular
decree either before or after the Council denounce this sentence of deposition.

40 Besides, to omit that almost all the Bishops of France did oppose
themselves against Iuo, those words of Iuo, [vnlesse you restore his Crowne]
may be understood in a commodious sense, to wit, that unless you restore his
Crown, which some perchance of the people, especially of the ruder sort did
imagine was either wholly taken away, or in great part diminished only by the
sentence of Excommunication: for the people, says Cardinal Bellarmine, held
the King excommunicated for no King: and moreover the excommunication of the
King might give no small occasion to the people who are prone to rebellions to
stir up in some sort the Kingdom against the King. And that the words of Iuo
may have this sense, Iuretus in his observations upon Iuo his epistles does
sufficiently insinuate. It is also probable says he Expounding the aforesaid
words of Iuo.
, that the Prince being excommunicated some of the Subjects did refuse to do
him honor and homage, others did honor him and obey him, and so the
diversity of opinions may be composed. And therefore no marvel that in
public Ecclesiastical For so be the words of the Author of the Chronicle of
S. Dennis apud Iuretum lo co iam citato.
writings it was not written, in the reign of Philip, least that
Ecclesiastical persons should seem that way to participate with the King
being excommunicated, but in the reign of Christ [both for the reason alleged
and also] for that the people held not the King being excommunicated for King,
to wit, altogether absolute, and with whom they might as before lawfully
converse in all affairs.

41 But that Iuo himself, and the greater part of the people were of that
opinion, that Philip by that excommunication was not deprived of his Regal
authority, it is manifest, both for that the people did willingly obey the
King France under a King not welliked of did keep his Majesty so entire that
she did not degenerate from the sanctity of her ancestors. So writes Paulus
Amelius lib. 3. in Rege 38. speaking of King Philip after he was excommunicated
by Vrbanus.
and also for that Bishop Iuo himself in his letters Epist. 22.28.
which he wrote to the King being excommunicated, he calls him most pious
and magnificent King of France and he calls himself, an humble Clearke of
his Highness; and to an other letter writtten in the year 1095, as Baronius
witnesses In that year.
, at that time when Philip was excommunicated, he makes this superscription
Epist. 56.
. To Philip by the grace of God the most Noble King of France Iuo his humble
Priest greeting, and as to his Lord and King faithful service: from which
kind of titles Juo would doubtless have altogether refrained, if he had
thought that Philip had by Vrbanus been deprived of his Regal honor and
dignity.

42 And whereas it is objected by Cardinal Bellarmine that the Bishops of
France were forbidden by Pope Vrbanus, or rather by his Legate only that they
should not set the Royal Crown upon the heads of the King and new Queen,
this objection does not prove that the King was deprived of his Royal right or
authority, but this crowning did appertain to the solemnity of the Kings
marriage, and to a certain Religious ceremony, which was used upon that day
when the Kings marriage was solemnized For the King was long before crowned
with great solemnity and was in peaceable possession of his Kingdom; and so
that ceremony was rather in honor of the Queen then of the King. See Paulus
Aemilius and others who write the French Histories.
, and which usually was done at the time of Mass; which religious ceremony,
because it did seem to confirm the marriage betwixt Philip and his new wife
Bertrada, might justly be prohibited by Pope Vrbanus or his Legate.

43 Now it remains only to answer to the Council of Laterane, which is the
principal ground, which my Adversaries do now urge to prove the Popes power
to depose Princes. For Cardinal Bellarmine In tract. contra. Barclai. page 30.
out of this Council frames this argument. Jn the most famous Council of
Laterane under Pope Innocentius the third there is made a Canon which is the
third in order containing these words: We do excommunicate and anathematize
all heresy which does extol it self against this holy Orthodoxal Catholic
faith which we before have declared etc. and beneath: But if the temporal Lord
having been admonished by the Church shall neglect to purge his territory of
heretical filth, let him be excommunicated by the Metropolitan and other
Bishops of that province. And if he shall contemn to give satisfaction within
a year, let this be signified unto the Pope, that from thence forth he may
declare all his Vassals to be absolved from their fidelity to him, and expose
his territory to be possessed by Catholics, who having thrust out the
heretics may possess it without contradiction, and conserve it in purity of
faith, saving the right of the principal Lord, so that he make no obstacle or
oppose any impediment unto this; the same law notwithstanding being observed
concerning those who have no principal Lords. What would Barclay say to this?
If this be not the voice of the Catholic Church, where I pray you shall we
find it? and if it be, as most truly it is, who shall contemn to hear it, as
Barclay has done, shall be not be accounted as a Heathen and a Publicane, and
in no sort a Christian and a pious man?

44. But this objection is easily answered: First therefore I do think that by
those words a Principal Lord, or who has no Principal Lord, are not
understood Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes. And that I gather from
this that the Emperor Frederike, whose Ambassadors were present at that
Council of Lateran, did, five years after the Council was ended, make the
very same constitution in the same express words, only changing spiritual
punishments into temporall^ but it is not likely that the Emperor did intend
to comprehend in that decree himself, who is not subject to the Law F. de
Legibus leg. Princeps.
, and much less other Kings who are not subject unto him. Moreover in penal
laws Secular Princes, according to the rules of the Lawiers, are not
comprehended under those general names of temporal Lords, Magistrates, and
Judges, as neither an Abbot under the name of a Monk, nor a Bishop under the
name of a Priest, nor a Pope under the name of a Bishop: seeing that according
to the rules of the Law in Sexto in penalties the more favorable part is to be
chosen, and it is meet that seuerities be made less and favors be enlarged.
And if the Council had intended to comprehend Sovereign Princes in that
Decree, it might as easily have named them by their proper names of Princes, as
by those general names of principal Lords, or who have no Principal Lords,
especially seeing that the same Council in other Decrees does use the proper
names of Princes.

45 But against this answer my Adversaries do first object: If the Council of
Lateran did not in that decree comprehend Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign
Princes, then what persons are those who there all called chief or principal
Lords, or who have no chief or principal Lords? And I demand of them again,
what persons are those, who in the Emperor Frederikes decree may justly be
called principal Lords, or who have no Principal Lords? For the answer, so
it be solid, which they shall make to my question, will fully satisfy their
own objection. Nevertheless my opinion is, that neither the Council nor the
Emperor did by principal Lords, or who have no principal Lords understand
Emperors, Kings, and absolute Princes who have no Sovereign above them in
temporals, but only those Lords who do hold of Sovereign Princes some
territories, provinces, or perchance also some kingdom in royal, or as it were
royal fee harm; As with power to hang and draw and with other such like
princely Royalties.
by reason of which tenure they are made vassals to such Sovereign Princes,
although them selves by virtue of the same tenure have also Vassals under them,
whose Lords they are, and by how the more or less these Lords are exempted
from the jurisdiction of Sovereign Princes, by so much the more or less they
may be called principal Lords. But let this suffice to have breefly touched
this for the present.

46 Secondly they object; Be it so, that Kings and Sovereign Princes are not
chiefly and principally included in that decree of the Council, yet that
secondarily and by consequence they are, or at leastwise might have been
therein comprehended it is very evident, for if the Pope has power to deprive
for the crime of heresy the subjects of other Princes of their temporal
dominions without the consent of their Princes, there can no sufficient reason
be assigned why he may not also for the same cause deprive Sovereign Princes
themselves of their dominions.

47 To this objection I did briefly in my Apology give many answers, which I
think it not amiss to repeat here again word by word. The first was, Nu. 454.
that as well the Popes as Counsels do oftentimes ordain many things (the
ordaining whereof does belong rather to the civil then to the Ecclesiastical
power) by express or tacit consent of Sovereign Princes, who are present
either in person or by their Ambassadors; or upon presumption or hope at
leastwise that Princes will ratify the same. And this the expositours of the
Canon law do affirm, says Ioannes Parisiensis, De potest. Regia et Papali
cap. 10.
For in cap. ad abolendam extra de Haereticis, wherein the Popes Holiness does
command the goods of heretics to be confiscated, Cardinal Hostiensis makes
this question; what is this to the Pope concerning temporalls? And he
answers with his Master Pope Innocentius: that in very truth it is nothing to
him; but he did this by the consent of the Emperor, who being then present
at Padua gave his consent: Thus Ioannes Parisiensis.

48. The second answer I made in these words: In the same place.
An other exposition the Gloss does give upon the canon, Adrianus did. 63.
where the Pope commands the goods of those persons who do infringe his decree
to be confiscated, and upon the Canon Delatori 5. q. 6. where he decrees the
tongues of false promotours to be pulled out, and the heads of convicted
persons to be stricken off: For the Gloss does answer, that the Church in
these places does teach what a Secular Judge ought to do. Which answer of his
may be applied to other such like decrees, wherein the holy Canons do impose
temporal punishments: And this answer those words of Syluester In summa verbo
paena nu. 9.
do favor, who writes thus: Ioannes Andreas following Hostiensis is of
opinion that a Bishop cannot impose a pecuniarie mulct upon a lay man who is
not subject to him temporally, but he must cause it to be imposed by the
Secular Judge.

49 To these answers may be added, that whenever the Pope does by a general
Decree ordain any temporal thing which does prejudice an other man's right,
who is not his Subject in temporalls, that decree, as some do probably
affirm, does only extend, unless the contrary be expressed, to the
territories of the Roman Church, or to the patrimony of Saint Peter, wherein
as Pope Innocentius says, Cap. per venerabilem qui filij sint legitimi.
he does exercise both the authority of the chief Bishop, and execute the
power of a Sovereign Prince; Whose opinion the Gloss upon that chapter
pervenerabilem does seem to favor, who says, that the Popes Holiness cannot
legitimate any man who is not subject to his temporal Jurisdiction in such
sort as that he may as a lawful heir by right succeed in an inheritance, for
this were to put his since into another man's harvest, and to usurp an other
man's Jurisdiction, and to deprive a man of his right to succeed, which he ought
not to do, and therefore in the Secular court he cannot legitimate unless
the Prince shall permit him. But if the Pope can not make one legitimate who is
not legitimate, or give one right or deprive one of right to succeed: I cannot
perceive by what authority he can make a lawful heir and a lawful Prince to
be unlawful, and to have no right, or to deprive one of that inheritance which
he does lawfully possess.

50 My third answer was, that the aforesaid decree of the Council of Laterane
did not contain a matter of Faith but only of fact; wherein as well the Pope
as those Fathers following their own opinions might err, and that the
Council did not determine that the aforesaid future sentence of depositio^
which the Pope should denounce against principal Lords, etc. did proceed
either from authority which without all doubt was in it self lawful, or from
the sole Ecclesiastical power without the consent of Sovereign Princes. And
therefore the opinion of those Fathers does make no more certainty for the
Popes authority to depose Princes, then if they had declared their opinion out
of the Council: seeing that this only can be gathered from the undoubted
doctrine of the Catholic Church, that the infallible assistance of the holy
Ghost is only promised by Christ our Savior to the definitions and not to the
facts and probable opinions of Popes or Councels.

51 I omit now that those words [that from thence forth he may declare his
subjects to be absolved from their Allegiance to him] do contain some
difficulty, for if we will strictly rely upon these words, they seem only
to signify, that it belongs only to the Pope to declare the subjects to be
already absolved, and not truly and in very deed to absolve them from their
Allegiance.

52 But against this third answer my adversaries do vehemently object: That
doctrine, say they, does appertain to faith, which the Popes, Counsels and
Doctors do either propose or suppose as a certain and undoubted ground and
foundation of their decrees and sentences: but this doctrine for the Popes
power to depose Princes and to absolve subjects of their Allegiance, is either
proposed or supposed by the Popes, Counsels and Doctors as a foundation of
many Canons and judicial sentences, therefore this doctrine does appertain to
faith.

53 Moreover, if a General Council should expressly define that the Church
has this authority, no Catholic could make any doubt but that this matter did
appertain to faith, but seeing that the Council does suppose it as a sure and
certain foundation of her decrees and sentences, she is thought no less to
affirm the same, therefore it ought to be accounted no less certain.

54 Lastly, it is a point of Faith, that the Church cannot err in doctrine and
precepts of manners, by teaching generally any thing to be lawful which is
unlawful, or to be unlawful which is lawful, or also by commanding any thing
which of it self is unlawful. For such an error is no less pernicious to the
faithful then is an error in faith; but if the Pope should not have that
authority to deprive temporal Princes of their dominions the Church should err
in doctrine of manners, and that in matters of very great moment. For she
teaches that after a Prince is deposed by the Popes authority all his subjects
are absolved from their obedience, and that his dominions may be possessed by
an other, as is manifest by the Counsels. Also that after a Prince is
publicly excommunicated all his subjects are absolved from their Oath of
Allegiance: in so much that they are not bound to obey him until he be
reconciled, yea and she does forbid them to obey him if the censure be
denounced. All which things should be false, and not only false, but also
pernicious; for that thereby the Subjects should be incited to rebellions and
periuries, yea and against their wills be compelled thereunto: therefore the
Church does err in doctrine of manners, and does command rebellions and
periuries, and by her censures does compel men thereunto; but to affirm this
is heretical, therefore that also from whence this follows is heretical, to
wit, that the Church has not power to absolve subjects from the bond of their
Oath, and from their obedience.

55. These be the principal objections against this third answer, wherein
our most learned adversaries do greatly triumph, think^ng that by them it is
most evidently convinced, that it is so certain, that the Pope by Christ his
institution has authority to depose Princes: that the contrary cannot be
defended without note of heresy, or at leastwise of manifest error. But let
these Doctors, who are otherwise doubtless most learned, take heed least that
they presume to impose upon the unlearned people their private and uncertain
collections for universal and undoubted conclusions of the Catholic faith;
for truly that these arguments are not so forcible, as they imagine it may by
the practice of the Church and the decrees of Popes very easily be proved.

56 And first of all, is not the due administering of Sacraments a matter of
great moment, and chiefly belonging to the Popes office, and is not an error
concerning it to be accounted most pernicious? But the Pope has oftentimes
given leave to a priest who was no Bishop to minister the Sacrament of
confirmation As it appears bp S. Gregory lib. 3. epist. 26. and it is
related in cap. peruenit did. 95. and many Abbots at this day have also this
faculty.
, whereas it is a great controversy among Divines, whether the Pope can give
leave to such a Priest to minister this Sacrament. Seeing therefore that to the
Sacraments of the new Law, as the Council of Florence About the end in the
decree of Pope Eugenius.
does teach, are required three things, the matter, the form, and the
Minister, of which if any one be wanting, it is not a true and perfect
Sacrament, and that it is a very great sacrilege, that the due and lawful
matter and form of a Sacrament should be seriously applied by an unlawful
minister; if the Pope, in whom only according to these Divines the whole
Ecclesiastical power and authority to define infallibly matters of faith does
principally remain, cannot grant authority to a Priest who is no Bishop to
minister this Sacrament, as very learned Divines Pope Adrian in 4. in q. de
conf. ar. 3. Durandus in 4. did. 7. q. 3. et 4. Bonauentura ibidem. Alphonsus
de Castro in lib. de haeresibus verbo confirmatio. Petrus Soto lect. 2. de
confirm. and others.
without any note of error or heresy do hold, is it not a very great error
to grant such licenses whereby there is danger that most heinous sacriledges,
to wit, the inualide administrations of Sacraments should be committed?

57 Moreover, Pope Sixtus the fourth did in honor of the immaculate conception
of the blessed Virgin Mary make a decreee It is to be seen in the fourth tome
of the Councels after the life of Pope Sixtus the fourth.
for celebrating the feast of her conception, to the end that all faithful
Christians should give thanks and praise to almighty God for the wonderful
conception, which also he calls immaculate, In the second decree.
of the immaculate Virgin, and notwithstanding it is uncertain and disputed by
Divines on both sides, without any note of heresy, error or deadly sin,
whether the Blessed Virgin was conceived in riginall sin, or by the special
providence of God preserved from the same. Is it not therefore from hence
manifest, that that doctrine which is either proposed or supposed by the Pope
as a foundation of an Apostolical constitution and decree, and which belongs
to the Religious service of God, is not of so certain and undoubted a truth,
but that without danger of deadly sin it may be impugned?

58 Lastly, some Popes have oftentimes dispensed with Princes to contract
matrimony who have made a solemn vow of Chastity in approved Religions, as it
is recorded by Historiographers of Constantia daughter to Roger King of
Sicilie, of Casimirus King of Poland, and of Ramirus King of Aragone, and of
Nicholas Justinian a noble Venetian See Azorius tom 1. lib. 12. cap. 7. q. 1
: but if the Pope has no authority to dispense in the solemn vow of chastity,
whereof there is a great controversy among Catholic Doctors For S. Thomas and
almost all the Thomists and many others whom Zanchez the Jesuit relates lib.
8. de matrimonio dis. 8. do deny that the Pope has such a power and Zanchez
also says that this opinion is probable.
, doubtless such dispensations would cause very many heinous sins, and do
great wrong also to other princes, who by such dispensations should be
unjustly deprived of their rightful inhericance, and just title to their
kingdoms.

59 May we not therefore according to our adversaries grounds argue in this
manner? That doctrine does appertain to faith, which the Pope, (in whom only
according to these Doctors For they grant that the Pope alone without a
Council has authority infallibly to define, and the Council without the Pope
has no authority at all infallibly to define, so that all such authority is
only in the Pope and depends only on the Pope.
all authority to define matters of faith does reside) does either propose or
suppose as a sure ground of his decrees and sentences, but this doctrine that
the blessed Virgin was not conceived in original sin, that the Pope can
dispense in the solemn vow of chastity, and give leave to a Priest who is no
Bishop to minister the Sacrament of confirmation, is proposed or supposed by
Popes as a ground and foundation of many their decrees, dispensations and
judicial sentences, therefore this doctrine does appertain to faith.

60 Moreover, if the Pope should expressly define, that the Church has such a
power To wit, to dispense in the solemn vow of chastity, and to give leave to a
Priest who is no Bishop to minister the Sacrament of confirmation.
, no Catholic (those especially who do hold that the Pope defining without a
General Council cannot err) could make any doubt but that this matter does
appertain to faith, but seeing that the Popes do suppose it as a sure ground
and foundation of their decrees and sentences they are thought no less to
affirm the same, therefore it ought to be accounted no less certain.

61 Lastly, it is a point of faith, as our adversaries do suppose, that the
Pope cannot err in doctrine and precepts of manners, by teaching generally any
thing to be lawful which is unlawful, or to be unlawful which is lawful, or
also by commanding any thing which of it self is unlawful. For such an error
is no less pernicious to the faithful then an error in faith, but if the Pope
should not have authority to dispense in the solemn vow of Chastity, or to
give leave to Priests who are no Bishops to minister the Sacrament of
confirmation, the Pope should err in doctrine and precepts of manners, and
that in matters of very great moment. For he does teach that the Sacrament of
confirmation ministered by a Priest who is no Bishop is a true Sacrament: Also,
that if a Prince by the Popes dispensation do marry a professed Nun, that
such a marriage is lawful and valide, and that their children are lawfully
begotten and ought to succed in the Kingdom. And notwithstanding that the next
of the blood Royal should for want of the lawful issue of this Prince pretend
right to the Crown, yet the Pope may without doubt, according to our
adversaries doctrine, command the Subjects, and by censures compel them to
acknowledge the issue begotten by that marriage wherein he did dispense to be
their true, undoubted, and lawful Prince; all which things would be false, and
not only false but also pernicious, for that thereby the Subjects should be
incited to do injuries and against their wills should be compelled thereunto,
and Princes should obtain free liberty to commit incests, and sacriledges. The
Church therefore does err in doctrine of manners, and does council
sacrilege, and command injustice, and does compel by censures thereunto; but
to affirm this it is heretical, therefore that also from which it follows
is heretical, to wit, that the Pope has not power to dispense in the solemn
vow of chastity, and to give leave to a priest who is no Bishop to minister the
Sacrament of confirmation; And nevertheless neither of these are heretical or
erroneous according to the doctrine of those Divines but a little before cited.
Let our adversaries therefore solue these difficulties, and I will forthwith by
their own solutions untie those former knots which they imagine cannot in any
wise be solued.

62 To conclude, are not the reasons, for which the Counsels are induced to
define any thing of faith, as it were certain grounds, which are by them
proposed or supposed as foundations of their definitions and decrees, and
nevertheless no Divine, as I suppose, will affirm, that those reasons are to
be believed by Catholics with the same certainty wherewith the definitions
themselves are to believed. In the Counsels, says Cardinal Bellarmine, Lib.
2. de Concl. cap. 12.
the greatest part of the Acts do not appertain to faith. For neither the
Disputations which go before, nor the reasons which are added, nor those
things which are brought to explicate and illustrate, are of faith, but only
the bare decrees, and those not all, but only those which are proposed as of
Faith.

63 Wherefore betwixt the voice, doctrine, and consent of the Church firmly
believing, or defining any thing to be of faith, and of the same Church
probably, only thinking there is doubtless to be made a great distinction.
For no Catholic makes any doubt but that whosoever contemns to hear the
voice of the Church firmly believing, does fall into heresy or error, but
Catholic Doctors, whose authority our most learned adversaries will not
easily reject, do in express words affirm, that he who being moved with
sufficient reason does not embrace the doctrine of the Church only probably
thinking, does not expose himself to any danger of heresy, error, or
temeritie. For Alphonsus Salmeron, and Franciscus Suarez who are doubtless
most learned Jesuits do allege the practice and consent almost of the whole
Catholic Church to prove the immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, and nevertheless they do expressly grant, and without a grievous sin
they cannot deny, but that the contrary opinion may be defended without any
danger of mortal sin. We, says Salmeron Ad Romans 5. dis. 51. 6. Deinde.
, do bring (for the aforesaid immaculate Conception) the consent almost of the
Universal Church, and the uniform opinion of all Universities. And Suarez
Tom. 2. dis. 3. sec. 5.
, The second ground says he; is to be taken from the authority of the Church,
and first the universal consent almost of the whole Church. And especially for
these two hundred years almost all Ecclesiastical writers, Bishops, all
almost Religions, and universities have subscribed.

64 But concerning these matters let this suffice. For by that which we have
already said, what little force the aforesaid objections of our Adversaries
have the learned Reader will very easily perceive. And these are the principal
things, which my Adversaries do object against my Apology out of those
Councels cited by Cardinal Bellarmine, whose book against Doctor Barclay I
have diligently read and read again, which nevertheless, to speak truly,
does so little satisfy my understanding, that it rather confirms me in my
old opinion, then any whit auerteth me from the same, to which also I was long
since determined to have made an answer Master John Barclay who has now very
learnedly answered that book.
if that, as I am credibly informed, an other man whom it did more concern had
not taken upon him to answer the same and therefore I am resolved to defer
my anwere, until his Reply to my Apology, which our Countrymen do daily expect
be printed and published For I have seen the copy of a letter of ^ardinall
Bellarmines, wherein he writes that he has finished and printed his Answer
to my Apology and that he deferreth to publish it for just causes: therefore
most men think that it is that Answer which now goes under D. Schulk^nius
his name.
.

65 Last of all our Adversaries do object a certain book which is entitled,
An Apologeticall Disputation for the Popes authority composed, as they say, by
Leonard Lessius doubtless a very learned man, wherein as they report, he has
clearly, perspicuously and evidently demonstrated out of holy Scriptures,
ancient Fathers, Councels and 13. invincible reasons, that the Pope has power
to depose Princes, and that this true Doctrine is not only a Theological
conclusion, which is contrary to error, but also expressly defined to be of
faith, in so much that the contrary opinion cannot be defended without
manifest heresy.

66 Truly I have often heard this book to be meruailously commended by some
men, and I cannot deny if it be true as they do say but that it is written by
a very learned man. Nevertheless if this book does so clearly demonstrate,
as these men do brag, why does it not come to light, but, as a business
walking in darkness Psalm. 90.
, is suffered to be seen by few, and those only who are thought will applaude
it? Whether these be tokens of a good work, or rather manifest signs that you
have a great diffidence in your cause, I appeal to the judgment of your
self, most learned man, who is the Author of this book. Your English fore
runner, who for this whole year ago did promise such great matters of this
your book, and did make a compendious abridgement thereof, but so
compendiously that no man can clearly perceive any one of those yours so
clear demonstrations, is suffered by you to be seen by all Catholics. And
yet the book it self, which your Forerunner promised would fully satisfy
wavering minds, can be neither gotten for love nor money, neither can it be
seen indifferently by all men, but only by very few, and that with a solemn
promise not to show it to others.

67 Are you perchance afraid to publish among Catholics, and those especially
whom you certainly believe to err in their belief, such a book, which does
most clearly demonstrate a doctrine which is to be believed of faith, and
which therefore is necessary to eternal salvation? You do suffer other
books which are as dangerous as this is, and which by the Laws of this Realm
are forbidden with capital punishments, to come indifferently into the hands
of all Catholics, and do you so greatly fear to publish this so necessary a
book, which does clearly demonstrate, as you pretend, a doctrine to be
necessarily believed of faith, and in such things which do concern the
authority of the Popes Holiness and of Sovereign Princes? But I fear me
that the matter goes otherwise then some among us here do brag. For if that
be true which I do hear (besides that you seem to confound to command
temporals with to dispose of temporals, and that Subjects are in your opinion
by virtue only of Excommunication freed from the bond of their allegiance, and
that the Popes Breues directed to some one province, which by Eud^mon-Ioannes
In Praefat. Parali Torti.
are called private letters, and wherein there is not one word concerning the
deposing of Princes, yet do define that doctrine to be certainly believed as
a point of faith) some of your examples, which you bring out of the ancient
Fathers, to show that this your doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes
was known to the ancient Church, do seem not so much to tend to the deposing
of Princes by the Popes authority, as that they may be deposed, yea also and by
private authority murdered by the people. But I will no longer exaggerate this
matter, it is now high time, that I turn my speech to my namelesse Doctor, who
charge my Apology w^^h heresy and Ethnicisme, to whom truly, if he had
brotherly admonished me of any error which he had thought have been therein
contained, I should have given him therefore most hearty thanks. But seeing
that he has not set any known name, which I should have respected unto his
letters, which by great chance came unto my hands, and has also not publicly
and openly, but secretly and treacherously accused me among Catholics of such
heinous crimes, and labored to take away my good name for ever, if I in
defending my innocence shall handle him somewhat roughly, and shall write
against him somewhat eagerly, let him thank himself for provoking me
wrongfully, and let him hereafter be more wary, how he condemn so easily of
heresy and Ethnicisme those Catholics, who do hate heresy and Ethnicisme not
one jot lesser then himself.

FINIS.
Faults Escaped.
In the Epistle nu. 2. line 33. read, as that. nu. 6. against line 81. put in
the margent c Cap. 10. sec. 2. nu. 13. nu. 7. l. 39 read, do think.

In the Admonition nu. 8. l. 44. read, shamefully. nu. 27 l. 15. eiectus. nu.
29. l. 36. was not thrust.

In the Disputation page 31. lin. 22. read, actually l. 23. actual. p. 60. l.
31. Realm. p. 78. l. 20. of [^r]. p. 103. l. 6. absolved. p 105. l 9 has
authority. p. 174. l. 19. this oath. p. 181. l. 35. 36. ^urtold. p. 186. l.
13. what action. p. 192 l. 19. in this. p. 207. l. 1. that as it. p. 209. l. 12
can err. p. 211 l. 11. no more. p. 214. l. 35. enormious. p. 229. l. 35. name
Monk. p. 232. l. 1. E^positors. p. 240. l. 35. utterly. p. 241. l. 30.
appearance. p. 243. l. 16. refrain. p. 255. l. 18. no just. p. 260. l. 15. 16.
infinite. p. 262. l. 27. day and day. p. 266. l. 33. Cassianus. p. 288. in the
last line of the margentread and 21. p. 293. l. 16. coercion p. 296. l. 25.
coercion. page 399. l. 4. in the margent grant. and lin. 31. dispose. p. 302.
l. 34. coerciue. p. 334. l. 19. contract. from the page 341. to 349. put above
in the first line Against the Oath of Allegiance. p. 345. l. 28. read the last
of January. p. 366. l. 11. forbid. p. 370. l. 28. this Disp. p. 371. l. 10. do
make. p. 374. l. 35. will not. p. 375. lin. 13. to himself.

In the preface. nu. 10. read had not. p. 404. l. 2. Censurers. p. 410. l. 3.
will come. p. 416. l. 39. original.

The other faults I beseech the courteous Reader to correct.


