A DISCOVRSE TOUCHING THE DOCTRINE OF DOVBTING.

In which not only the principal arguments, that our popish adversaries use,
for the establishing of that discomfortable opinion, are plainly and truly
answered: But also sundry suggestions of Satan tending to the maintenance of
that in the minds of the faithful fully satisfied, and that with singular
comfort also.

Written long since by T. W. and now published for the profit of the people of
God.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND HIS VERY GOOD LORD AND LADY THE LORD EDWARD
EARL OF BEDFORD, AND THE LADY LVCIE HIS WIFE. AND TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL
AND HIS VERY GOOD FRIENDS SIR JOHN HARRINGTON KNIGHT AND THE LADY HIS WIFE.
T. W. wishes the abundant riches of all Gods mercies in this life, and the
full fruition of the Lord himself, and all his favors in that which is to
come through Christ.
THe life of christian men and women here upon earth, is not without cause
(right honorable, and right worshipful) neither yet vnfitely compared by the
holy ghost in the canonical Scriptures, to a continual combat and warfaire.
Of which as the written word it self, in the sound doctrine, and approved
examples thereof, concerning this point, does bear faithful witness; so, if
god would give us grace, carefully to observe, either other men, or our
selves, in such sort as we ought, or could not but quickly find good
warrantise for it, in the world likewise. For confirmation whereof, if we had
no more, but on the other side, the dark doctrine of popery, every where
assaying to persuade, yea to drive men to doubting, and on the other side, the
diffidence and distrustfulnesse, that naturally we carry about with us in our
hearts, it were as a man might say more then sufficient. Touching the popish
opinion, it is certainly pitiful, that they can see no other way or mean
to prevent proud presumption, but to incur the danger of distrust and
doubting. And it is the more pitiful doubtless, by how much, both in Gods
religion, yea and in man's reason also they can not but know and confess, that
every singular virtue or good work, has two sins set against it, the one as
disagreeing from it, the other as contrary to it. The virtue or good work as
we now call it here is trust in God then what can be a more excellent work,
since our Savior says: This is the work of Christ that ye believe in him who^
he has sent? And what is more contrary to it then to doubt or distrust? and
what is more disagreeing from it, the^ Lucifer-like presu^ption. And yet even
again I say, it is the more pitiful by how much it crosses, even their
own opinion and practice. For how can that conceit of theirs touching merit
before Christ and specially of meriting eternal life, stand with the doctrine
of doubting, seeing that merit, or absolute obedience, specially if men deal
with one that is just, as Christ (who is justice it self) must needs shutt
out doubting touching that we are sure we have deserved, and he cannot choose
but of justice give and grant. But such vain fantesies must they fall into,
that fall away from the faith and truth of the word, and will lift up
themselves against Christ our Savior, that so refusing grace offered, and
feeling it where it is not to be found, they might vanish away, through the
disquietnes of their spirits, in the vain imaginations of their own minds.
Concerning the other: it is very lamentable, that in so large abundance of
Gods gracious promises, and in so faithful and continual performance of them,
specially to his own people (whereof not only the word, but the world,
does yield us an infinite cloud of vvitnesses) men's minds should yet be
replenished, with fearfulness and doubting. But such, and so great, is
Satan's malice against us, and so dull and slow of heart are we to believe,
specially when we regard our manifold unworthiness, our grievous
transgressions, or the severity and justice of the Lords judgments, that it
is more then marvelous, if any man be found in better estate, considering I
say, either what we are by nature, or regarding withal, what after our
inlighting and regeneration begun in us, a world there is of relics and
remainder of corruption in us: which though they do not utterly deface and put
out the good work of God in us, because it is to maiesticall and powerful,
to be battered and beaten down, by so weak an adversary, yet do they so
backward and hinder the same, that in this life we can not attain to that
fullness of faith, which we greatly hunger and thirst after: and though through
gods goodness, we have gained somewhat, yet many times we find those graces so
eclipsed and darkened in us, that they seem to be as if they were not. But
what mean we to travail in the strengthening of these points which in every
man's mind and mouth almost, are so clear and usual, as nothing more. The
thing rather that we should strive unto, is this, namely that since by corrupt
opinions, we are or may be daily assaulted outwardly, and by Satan's subtle
suggestions, and our own cursed corruptions, we are continually provoked
inwardly, as to every other evil generally, so particularly to this sore
sickness of our souls, distrust or doubting, we should in the holy wisdom
and clear light of Gods word, and also by the all sufficient strength and
power of the blessed spirit, so labor to look unto our selves, as that we
suffer not our selves, either to be infected with the pleasant poison of
false doctrine, or to be drawn to discomfort, through the doubtfullnesse of
our hearts. For as the former hazerdeth (what say I nay overthrows the
health of our souls, and that more dangerously by much then any bodily poison
does or can do, the state of our outward man, for in the midst of this, the
mind may be safe and sure, whereas in the other, specially persisted in there
insueth everlasting destruction both of body and soul: so the latter strongly
haleth down upon us, and violently brings unto us, all heaviness of heart
and fearful disquitnesse, and together with the same as a peculiar effect
thereof, all manner of unwillingness, unfitness, and disabilitie in and about
the service of Christ, whether publicly in the congregation or privately in
the family: as also for the careful accomplishment of our Christian duties
either at home or abroad. For what likelihood or probability is there that he
shall appear before god, or do good unto me^, whose spirit is disquieted
within him: seeing that a quiet spirit is a thing much set by before god, and
fitteth us also for natural duties? These great difcfiulties and dangers, are
not, nay cannot be discerned, but by the light of the word: neither indeed can
the evil of them, be prevented and beaten back, but by careful taking unto
us, and daily using of, all the armor that Christ himself, and not man has
provided for us, and prescribed unto us in the word of truth. For plain
proof whereof we may behold (if we can) the bad effects and bitter fruits,
that either the ignorance or neglect hereof brings forth in our age. And if
there were no more but this, the continual carnalitie and carnal security,
that every where reigns, til it be discovered and felt, and the distrust yea
desperation, that then rages, when the Lord is pleased to lay it open, and to
press it hard and home, as we say, to to the heart, these were sufficient
enough not only to prove the point, but also to cause us in time to leave our
great and grievous corruptions, and in in a good and acceptable season even
while it is called to day, as the scripture says, to look to better courses,
assuring our selves, that as for popery, it can never be repelled but by the
sound knowledge of Gods will revealed in his word, this truth being as
contrary to that error and falsehood as day is to darkness: and as for
assured comfort in distress or distrust, it is no where to be found, but
generally in the same word also, and particularly in the sweet promises
thereof, which as God alone, that is altogether faithful, has plentifullye
made, so will he, that is only almighty, and does whatsoever pleases him
both in heaven and earth, in an acceptable time graciously perform, for his
glory, and the good of his people. And that therefore we should endeavor, by
all the good means that possibly we can, that the word of Christ might dvvell
in us plenteously, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing our own selves,
in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songues, singing with a grace in our
hearts to the Lord, and doing what soever we shall do in word or in deed,
either toward God in the cause of his worship, or in the duties of charity
toward men, in the name of the Lord Jesus. Now what experience you (right
honorable, and right worshipful) have had in this behalf, I know not. This
I am sure of that belonging to the Lord (as upon good groun^^ I doubt not, I
persuade my self you do) you either have had heretofore, or hereafter, before
the day of your dissolution dravv nigh shall have your portion and part of
trial, both the one and the other way. And though it may be that you have
through gods mercy in Christ bestowed upon you the grace of a steadfast
persuasion, yet he that is now strong through Gods grace, may hereafter through
his own wickedness and wants become weak, God having not only ordained
that as a mean so to humble us, least in the excellent abundance of graces,
we might be exalted above measure, but provided one of us to support and help
an another, according to any measure of mercy that we have received from him.
Wherein, if I may either soundly comfort you for that which is past, and
duetifully provoke christian care, and minister strong consolation for that
which is to come, and may perceive either the one or the other or both, not
only to dwell in your selves, but as by and and from you to be communicated
to others, specially those whose case and state is distressed either way, I
shall right heartily rejoice, a^ one in this comfortablie feeling the
forgiveness of our sins that God has been pleased, to make his truth
effectual and powerful in us as well for the obedience of his holy
comma^dementes, as for the unfeigned belief of his blessed promises. And in
this respect principally I assure you is it, that having sometime since,
written a discourse against all manner of doubting, (whether it be from others,
as popish doctrine and Satan's suggestions, or from the diffidence and
distrustfulnesse of our own hearts) and being much and often requested, by
some dear friends of mine, (whom I could not well deny) to publish it, I
am bold under your patronages, to let it pass to the press, and to come forth
to behold the light, and from you, to cause it to come to the view of others,
for yours and their spiritual benefit especially. And in this dedication of
my poor travails unto you I could not but join you all together as one,
because that though as in respect of your several states, degrees and callings
in the common wealth, you do somewhat differ, yet God by many gracious means
of his mercy, and particularly by open and religious profession of his truth,
and holy band of christian marriage, has made you as it were to become one,
that so growing altogether in this life, by the power of the spirit, to the
unity of faith, and obedience of the goodwill of God, you might in that time,
that God has set with himself from before all tines, come all together
likewise, to that one everlasting life and blessedness which is the end of
that one faith and hope, wh rewith we are and shallbe both sealed and
sustained, even until and in the day of Jesus Christ. And so humbly
beseeching good acceptance of this that is done, in the singleness and
sinplicitie of my soul, which I trust you will not deny me, because I desire
nothing, but that is right and reasonable, and directly tending to your own
good, specially spiritual: and vvithall heartily praying the Lord to give it a
blessing in your several souls, for the glory of his name, and your
everlasting comfort, whereof also I conceive good hope, because God is large
in love, and bountiful in giving specially unto his people, (in which number
I trust you are not without cause accounted before me) I do end for this
present, and with that submission, that is fit for my self, and belongs to
persons of so great place and calling, take my leave. At Wooburne the 14. of
April. 1598.

Your Hon. and Worship. ever ready, and that in all things to be commanded in
Christ, Thomas Wilcocks the Lords unworthy servant.

Lord Jesus begin and make an end.
ALL popery generally is full of vanity and untruth and being dru^ke up and
received in infecteh and defiles both body and soul. Howbeit this cannot be
denied but that some points are more deadly and discomfortable by much then
other some. For as in the great variety of natural sickenesses and diseases,
all are not alike dangerous, but some are more pestilentiall and infectiue, as
more assaulting the heart and the head, and other vital parts, then other
some are, as we may see in the messels, pocks, hot burning agues, plauges or
pestilences, and such like: So is it in the huge heap and infectiue lump of
popish opinions and doctrines, some being more high and heinous then other
some, and as if it were not only taking the crown of glory and eternal life,
from the head or out of the hands of our Savior Christ, and setting it upon
the headless or handlesse body of man's corrupt nature, tainted with all
manner of ungraciousness and sin, but even laboring to take by the throat and
to stra^gle that little light of truth, and small strength of persuasion, that
God by his word outwardly, and by his spirit inwardly, has been pleased to
work in the hearts of them that belong unto him. And of this sort are their
imaginations of justification before God, by works, of the Popes absolute
supremacy and authority over all, of the sufficiency of the sacrifice of the
mass, of invocation of dead Saints and Angels, with a thousand such like
abominations and sins, all which do both derogate and deface, the excellency
and sufficiency of our Savior Christ's person, nature, offices, names and all,
and also snare and entangle men's minds for whose safety and good, they would
seem to provide, in this and such other conceits of their own forgery: for
though it be pleasant to flesh and blood to hear much of man's merits, man's
freewil and many such like that they hold, all tending to puff up man and
that against God, yet indeed to speak the truth what peace or comfort can
there be in these things, when man's own knowledge both before and after
regeneration shall within himself and in others directly stand up against the
same. To take one or two of the^, that so by the^ we may judge of the rest.
What man that knows or feels, not only his backwardnes to good things, but
his inclination and ready good will to all evil, and that not only before
inlightening, but after also, will so much as suppose that he can deserve any
thing before god, especially if he do well and diligently observe his own
ways and works, in thoughts, in desires, in word, in deed, he every day, yea
every hour of a day, yea I will say more every minute of an hour sinning
highly and heinously all these ways. Again what hope ca^ the heart have in
invocating any other the^ the true and everliving god. Where first men know
not whether they hear their prayers or no, and secondly they may doubt of
their good will toward them as of a thing very uncertain, and thirdly be past
al doubt of their ability to help? And what uncertainty is this? nay what a
dangerous and deadly rock is it? to fling men upon, not only as in regard of
things appertaining to this life which is much, but as in regard of their
souls and that that is to come which is more? And yet of all other most heavy
for a Christian man as in regard of his own particular to think upon, this is
one, that they teach all men in every place, to doubt of their justification
and salvation. As though forsooth man's heart were not ^o much inclined, to
diffidence and distrustfulnes, either by their own corruption, or Satan's malice
against them, but that these as the devils bellows and blowefiers, must make
it to burn and to flame out, even to the utter wasting what in the^ lies, of
all those, that are infected with this poison. And least they should seem to
be mad without reason, and to thrust an other into spiritual madness also,
they allege scriptures, lash out reasons, pretend authority of fathers and
doctors, and I cannot tell what, as though with a mighty voice of great
waters, they would carry all down hand smooth as we say before them. These
things when I considered, I did not only in holy zeal against the common
adversary, but in care of the peace for mine own soul, and in love toward
other men, think upon some thing, that might serve for the confutation of the
adversary, and for the confirmation and establishing of us in the present
truth. And though it be true, that the overthrow of error and falsehood be in
some sort the underpropping of truth and verity, yet have not I assaied for
the sta^e of my self and others, only to supplant corruption an untruth, but
also to defend that truth that God has propounded in his word, and we hear
sounded in our Churches, namely that every faithful man ought to be certainly
assured of his free justification, and everlasting salvation through Christ.
And herein I have purposed, and mind through Gods goodness to perform and
observe this order following, that is first to answer, whatsoever they say and
object against this truth. And then afterward to ratify and confirm it. And
this I take to be necessary, not only because our adversaries forces being
weakened yea utterly ouerthrown, our own may be found to be the more strong,
and better able to stand in the day of a new assault, if ever the adversary
should dare to attempt the giving thereof: but also because evil and
corruption being first removed out of the heads and hearts of men, the truth
tendered might find the better entertainment there. For even as a good
gardener or husbandman labors first to fit the ground for seed and herb,
by digging and tilling of it and in rooting out noisome and bad things,
assaieth to make it meet for the good seed, ^e purposes to sow or set there.
So must we do then, when we offer or mind to make fruitful in men's minds the
seed of the truth and word of God, not only doing what we can to remove and
take away the natural blindness and ignorance of God and good things, that
is in men, yea and that same seed of error and heresy, that Satan by
himself and his supposts in malice against God and mischief toward men, has
cast and spread abroad in the world, but also to plant and cause to thrive the
word of truth and life.

All our adversaries arguments are drawn either from divine authority, as the
holy scriptures and word of God foulie wrested and misunderstood, as when we
come to the handling of the places which they object, shall I doubt not through
Gods goodness plainly appear, or else from humane testimonies and reason, of
which sure we need make no great reckoning, not only because they are as
easily rejected as alleged, but also because we acknowledge no other object
or ground of our consciences to stay ourselves upon, but the holy scriptures or
written word of God. And therefore saving that we would have all to understand,
yea even the very adversaries themselves, that they are not able for the
defense of falsehood, through the malice of Satan, and their own corruption to
allege any thing which through the grace of God shed abroad into our hearts,
and the light of truth vouchsafed unto us, we are not able both plainly to
discrie and sufficiently to confute we might let all that pass without any
manner of touch at all. we will begin first with those things they allege out
of scriptures because they only indeed are material: and so afterward come
to humane authorities. Now because the scriptures of God, are not unrightly
divided into the old and new Testament, and they allege somewhat out of
both, for the maintenance of this corrupt point, we will first answer the
places of the old Testament, and after of the new.

Places out of the old Testament.

They commonly allege from thence, such places as speaking of heavenly
matters, and particularly of the forgiveness of sins, do use terms of
doubting, and seem doubtfully to promise favor to penitent persons. Amongst
whcih I remember not that they have alleged any more: then 2. Samuel. 16.12.
Amos 5.15. Joel 2.14. Ion. 3.9. Saving that they have produced a place out of
Daniel. 4. ver. 24. where indeed in the greek text, and in Ieroms latin
translation, there is used a article of doubting, as perhaps, or it may be,
there willbe a healing of thy sins. Whereas the word that the Prophet uses
does in the hebrewe signify rather a manifest asseueration or affirmation, as
though he should say, lo, there shall be an healing of thine error. This not
only agreeing better with the Prophets purpose, which as it was in the first
part of the verse to instruct the king by holy counsel, to break off his
sins through righteousness, his iniquities by showing favor to the afflicted:
so in this part, he performing that that was prescribed in the former, to
comfort him. This also being an usual thing in duties of obedience, and holy
precepts delivered, to adioyne sweet and comfortable promises, that so they
might see their labor and love in the Lord should not be lost. Neither may we
think the Prophet, either to be ignorant of this in himself, or unwilling to
propound it to others, that upon obedience of Gods will and sincere repentance,
men should certainly find favor with the Lord, which he might have called into
question, if he should have spoken so doubtfully. But les us grant that the
words were commonly, or for the most part used to express doubting or
distrust, will this follow thereupon that they would feign infer, namely that
therefore Gods children should doubt of the forgiveness of their sins and
eternal life. Nay, for first it is not clear and certain, whether
Nabuchadnezer, to whom these words were directed, were an elected chlid of God
yea or no: and we know that the question concerns them that are called and
justified and sanctified in some measure and so shall be eternally saved.
Besides whether can we tell that that which was in him of terror and fear,
were sound or hypocritical: or whether he continued, or whether Daniel, having
extraordinary and many personal things also revealed unto him, foresawe what
should become of him. In such cases we see, and to such persons many things may
be delivered as if it were doubtingly, whereas with persons of other qualities
and callings, other courses must be observed. But put the hardest, we have yet
another aunsweare unto this place namely that the Prophet uses this manner of
speech, both to note the difficulty and the excellency of the things he
required at the kings hands, men imagining, repentance converting to God,
taking away of sins, etc. to be a very easy and slight matter, which
indeed causes them not to esteem, the grace according to the worthiness
thereof, nor to strive thereunto as they should: and also to cause him, and in
him all others the more to indeauoure. the attaining thereof, and strengthening
of themselves therein, because things so hardly atcheiued and of such dignity
indeed, would not be sleightely or lightly let go. And let this suffice or
satisfy for this place. Let us come to the rest already quoted, and examine
them.

1 The first place is the 2. Sammuel 16.12. It may be that the Lord will look
on mine affliction: and do me good for his cursing this day. They are the
words of David to Abishai, who would very willingly have slain Shimei railing
upon the king his master, and now flying from the face of his son Abshalon
where unto over and besides that that has bin said before, touching the place
of Daniel, we may add this: it is hard upon all the words of good men, to
infer either the lawefulnesse of their speeches, or a doctrine either
contrary to the truth of the word in other places, or not warranted thereby.
For as that is true in Solomon, that where there are many words there is much
sin, so that is likewise true that the Apostle James says, he is a just man
that has not offended with his tongue. Many times fear, grief, hastines,
hatred, worldly love, and other passions carry them very far, as we may
perceive not only in David himself, but in sundry other of Gods children, as
Jeremy. Woe is me my mother, etc. chap. 15. 10. and Peter M. favor or be good
unto thy self. Math. 16. Lastly he speaks here but of an outward mercy, of
which many a good man considering his own unworthiness, and how they are but
promised upon condition may easily doubt, and yet offer no injury to Gods
grace, for he gives these things as pleases him indifferently to the good and
the badde, nor much discomfort to his own heart. And what is this to
spiritual and heavenly geaces? all which as they do proceed from the free
favor of god toward us in Jesus Christ, so are they promised unto us, and
propounded unto us absolutely and without condition, and therefore they now
assured in themselves and ministering the more hope unto the hearts of the
faithful. And if there be a condition annexed, as I deny not but sometimes
there is, it is but for the better strengthening of us therein, whilst that he
that promises us, gives us strength to perform the covenants and condition,
and so both we in his grace have the more certain assurance, and he might the
more plainly and fully crown his own graces in us.

2 The next place is Amos 5.15. Hate the evil and love the good, and establish
judgment in the gate: it may the Lord God of Hosts will be merciful to the
remnant of Joseph. which place though it may in some sort be answered by that
which is put down already if men will well view and mark that which has
been delivered, yet it shall not be amiss to add some particular thing for
the further declaration and explanation thereof. The Prophet had to deal, with
a strange kind of people, not only such as were given over to idolatry, and
other particular iniquities, hatred of the Prophets; oppressing of the poor,
etc. But such as yet notwithstanding justified themselves, and said that the
Lord of hosts was with them. No doubt but they that were thus exalted in
themselves and that without any cause had need by all good means to be
humbled. And they that were thus hypocritical not only to deceive others, but
to dally with their own hearts, and to think that God and iniquity could
stand well together, had need to be sent back, and to be instructed, to sound
their own souls well. And that causes the Prophet to deal with them as he
does in this place. But what is this to gods people, who through his grace are
restrained from these high and heinous iniquities? and who are so far of from
deceiving their own hearts, in a vain imagination that notwithstanding their
sin God is present with the^, that stoong with sin indeed and feeling the
wrath of God against them for the same, they fear he will be absent from them
for ever. Yea many times they do not only think it, which is very grievous
to their own hearts, but speak it also which is grievous to other of Gods
people to hear, as we may perceive by many of Gods Saints and particularly by
David, in sundry Psalms.

3 The other two places of Joel. 2.14. and of Jonah. 3.9. are for phrase and
manner of speech both one, and may be sufficiently both cleared and answered by
that which has bin said already. Howbeit it shall not be amiss in a word as
it were to give them their several answers also. Though the phrase and manner
of speech as has bin said before be all one, yet we shall perceive the persons
of or to whom these speeches are delivered, as also who have uttered the^ to
differ much. For that that is in Joel are the words of the Prophet pronounced
by the spirit of God and are not delivered, as to declare either that God
himself doubted of his own work, and did not foreknow and soreappoint what
should become of the^ for he is infinite, almighty, alknowing, etc. and no such
thing as doubting can fall into his nature, because he is every way absolutely
good: or as though the Prophet were not persuaded of this, that they turning
from their evil ways, God would return again unto them in love, and remove
the evil denounced for he knew and believed, that all the threats of God were
denounced under that condition: but having to deal with a people, as of a
hollow and hypocritical heart, yea of a hard heart, and such as were frosen
upon the lees and dregs of their own iniquity, and yet would make semblance
and show as though they would repent, he speaks this, not so much to work
doubting in the^ of the Lords love toward the^ upon their unfeigned submission,
and godly sorrow, as to let them understand that there is in this behalf no
halting or dalying with the Lord, and that it is no small measure of conversion
indeed, that in themselves must assure themselves, of the taking away of the
punishments that were upon them, and of the continuance of Gods favor for the
rest of the time to come, he rather by this form and phrase, showing them what
they should do, and moving them by the difficulty and excellency of the
thing, to rear up their hearts to the hope of Gods grace and promises, the^
stirring them up to any manner of doubting and distrust. The words in Jonah
are not Ionahs own words, which makes the case somewhat more weak, because
the words of a Prophet, specially when he speaks as God and from God are
more to be esteemed then other men's words: but the speeches of the king of
Niniuie his Nobles and Council: who whether they were truly touched yea or no
and so continued is not certain, or whether ceased for the time with the fear
of judgment, as many hypocrites are and may be, and we see it particularly in
Ahab (whose hypocritical repentance God was pleased to reward, with
withholding the judgments from him in his time, as well as he did from the
Ninivites then) did relent a little which is most likely. But from their
speeches, that were no better graced, delivered also in the fear and feeling
of Gods wrath against them for their heinous sins, to gather doubtfulnesse
and distrust in the servants of God, is not to gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles, which also is imposible, but even to fetch like from like,
yea and if it were possible, from good and sound trees, such as it may be, the
Ninivites were (but always understand that I mind not now to determine the
question one way or other) to gather briers, thorns, brambles, and such other
noisome and hurtful things. And this much both for all the places of
Scripture, that seem to contain in the^ doubtful phrases and manner of
speeches, and for these particulars, which in that respect they allege. Now we
come to more special and several places of the old testament. 4 They allege
a place out of the 9. of Job, and as I take it the 21. verse, and that after
this manner, out of their old latin translation as I suppose. Though I should
be simple: my soul shall be ignorant of this matter. Wherein first we blame
them for their badde translation. For it is thus in the original. I am upright
or perfect, I know not my soul, etc. Where we are to mark, that when Job
speaks of his uprightness or perfection, he means it not as in regard of
God, for he had said but in the next verse before this. If I would justify
my self, mine own mouth should condemn me, etc. but as in comparison of
them that pressed him so sore, and as in respect of his own defense, for he
was free from those sins and offenses, which they said he was afflicted for.
And when he says, he knovveth not his soul, he means thereby that
notwithstanding he were from fault and offense as in regard of the^, yet he was
well assured of this, that as in respect of God he was a very grievous
transgressour, yea that there lay lurking within him, as he knew full well by
the testimony of his own heart, many great iniquities, which the Prophet
David calls, psalm. 19. secret faults: not that they were hidden from God, for
his eyes see all things, with who^ we have to do: neither yet because they
were kept close from men. For so many times God provides for his glory, and
the good not only of the^ that offend, whilst they are not overwhelmed with
shame, but of others also who by that means do not so easily slip and
slide, as perhaps otherwise they would, but because also they were committed,
and yet either he knew them nor, or could not remember them. Surely Iobe meant
nothing else but to show, that our salvation, hope, confidence, etc. stood not
in our selves, but in the free mercy and favor of God toward us in Jesus
Christ, which as it may appear by sundry circumstances and words in that
chapter, and namely verse 20. before alleged, so it will more evidently
break forth by the scope and drift of the holy man's speech: which that we may
the better understand. we are to mark both what Bildad objected against him
chap 8. and what he answeareth thereto in this and the next chapter following.
Bildad assaied to prove, that the afflictions which were laid upon Job, were
inflicted upon him for his own sins, and the sins of his sons. This Job
willingly grants, as appears in the 2 verse of this 9 chapter. But yet
says he, what man is just before God? And this makes him to say verse 3. that
no man is able to answer him one for a thousand. And again verse 15. Though I
were just yet could I not answer, but I would make supplication to my judge.
And what is this else, but that others besides him have acknowledged every
where, David Psalm 143. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall none that lives be justified. And Paul. Though I know nothing by
my self, yet I am not for all that justified before God. And so he declares
that just and holy men, must altogether distrust their own righteousness, as
which can yield them no other comfort almost, but doubtfulnesse and distrust,
and rely upon Gods grace only, and by that even to lift up themselves against
the judgment of God, knoweing that even here that is true which Saint James
says, mercy rejoices against comdemnation. But suppose this were not the
meaning and that that translation of theirs were true and right, yet me
thinks that should make little or nothing for them in this behalf. For they
can conclude nothing upon it, but this at the uttermost, namely that Job
complained, that though he were innocent yet his soul felt not it, because it
was as it were rent in sunder, and overthrown with the scourges of God. And
though we should, grant, that the place were to be understood of Jobs
innocence in it self, without respect or comparison, and namely of this that
by reason of the hardness of his affliction and sore chastisment: he could not
feel it, yet will it not help them, for no man can certainly say, that he is
altogether innocent, since no flesh living is without sin, but every one
transgresses, and as it is said in the epistle of S. James, in many things we
offend all.

5 An other place they bring out of Pet. 28. verse 14. where it is said,
Blessed is the man that fears always. Where first we say that fear and
doubting differ, and that not only as in regard of name and title, but as in
respect of effect also: for doubting breeds distrustfulnesse, as one vice
ingendreth another: whereas fear works care, circumspection reverence, and
many other good things besides. And therefore it is il done thus to wrest the
scripture, and to labor to make it to speak that, which neither the words as
we have heard already, or the sense which we hear anon will bear. Now for
the meaning, I doubt not but Solomon in this place means the fear, that we
commonly call filial, childlike, or such as is or should be in children
toward their parents, which besides that it has adjoined with it a reverent
love, and loving reverence toward their fathers mothers etc. it works also
in them carfulness not so much to do the good things enjoined them for so it
may be they lack ability and power as to avoid indeed the evil things
their parents have forbidden them, and they know will displease them. And
because God is our heavenly father and far exceeds al earthly freindes and
parents whatsoever I doubt not, but even the same is meant here toward God,
yea there is as a man may say commanded to be in us, a fear acknowledging and
feeling Gods judgment and wrath against sin, and working desire, care and
watchfulness, to shun all corruption either in religion or in conversation,
because with such things God is highly displeased. And for as much as there are
two common faul^s amongst other, in the corrupted heart of all Adams
posterity, the first is carefulnes and security, by which men are drawn, to
make small account, if not to contemn, the wrath and displeasure of almighty
God against sin. And the second is pride and presumption, thrusting men
forward not only beyond the bonds of their places and callings, but even into
confidence of their own wisdom, power, righteousness, etc. both which sins
bring forth this bitter effect, that gods judgments, are little or no whit at
all regarded as we may see in Phatao, and his secure and proud people, I doubt
not but that the spirit also commending unto us in this holy sentence, the
reverence and fear of almighty God, went about therein even to express these
as other sins. By which we may see that this must needs be the meaning of
the place, namely that we should always carry about with us, a holy and
continual care, watchfulnes, yea and if we will fear, that we sin not or
offend against God, nor in any respect if we can fail in our duties, either
toward God or toward our neighbors, or toward our selves: as though
Solomon should say, Blessed is he that fears much continually. For so much I
think will the text itself bear, both in the words of it, and in the
conjugation that the verb is used in to wit that he sin not or offend
against God, and his holy commandments: and that least he should be forsaken,
and cast away from God. And me thinks I have two reasons, of this sense. The
one from the word it self turned here fear, which does not only signify
fear of evil, whether it be the evil of punishment or of sin, but also to
fear with reverence, and that not only of the thing or party feared, but
also as in regard of him that does fear: he being drawn thereinto, not only
by the duty he owes as in regard of his own base and weak estate, but even
as in respect of the reverence and excellency of him before whom he
trembles. And from hence is it that Genes. 31. ver. 42. God is called the
fear of Izhak. The second from things proceeding or going before in the text,
and also from the latter part of this verse it self. He had said in the verse
next and immediately going before this: he that covers his transgressions
shall not prosper, but he that confesses his sins, and forsakes them shall
find mercy: and thereunto he adioyneth this saying, blessed is the man that
fears much continually. As though he should say. He that by a godly fear is
drawn to the unfeigned confession of his sins, and to the loathing and
leaving of the same and by loathing of them to sincere repentance, is in a
happy and blessed estate, though perhaps his own heart for the time present,
or men of the world continually will never think so, yet blessed and happy
must he be, because God has so pronounced it. In the words following he says,
but he that hardens his heart shall fall into evil. We know this is usual in
these prouerbiall sentences, that one of them is opposite to another. When
therefore he had said, blessed is he that fears much continually, and by and
by adds, but he that hardens his heart etc. he plainly declares, that in
the first part of the verse he minds to commend and set out such a fear of
offending and displeasing god, as is opposite to hardness of heart, contemning
god, wherefore doubtless he minds to signify the secure and proud persons,
such I mean, as not being moved, neither by gods commandments, nor
threatenings, lay the raines in their own necks and follow their pleasures
shall surely fall into wrath and punishment: whereas on the other side they
shall have good success, that fear god, and are loath wittingly on willingly
as we say, to offend and displease him. And this I take to be not only the
meaning of this sentence here: but almost in every place of the word, where it
is said. Blessed is the man that fears that Lord. Where also we are to know
further, that such sentences are propounded unto us, not to strike doubtfulnes
or distrust into the hearts of believers, which being in them naturally, and
through the remainders of sin God labors by so many means to remove from
them, as the promises of the word, the participation of his Sacraments, the
pledge and powerful working of his spirit etc. For so god in his words and
deeds should be contrary to himself: and we must so expound his word as we
find no co^tradition in the places themselves, nor load him with any
opposition, who in his own nature and in his word also is always but one. But
in them that setting before their eyes, on the one side, their own weakness and
wants and on the other side the good that God requires of them, they might not
only depend wholly of his mercy, and no way swell with the confidence of any
gift that they have received, but also strive according to the measure of grace
vouchsafed unto them, to do that that the Lord requires at their hands. And
what will this serve to uphold doubtfullnes or distrust of heart in Gods
children?

6 The last place that they allege out of the old testament, which has any
marrow or strength in it, is in Ecclesiastes or the book of the preacher cha.
9. ver. 1. which they turn and expound after this manner. Man knovveth not,
whether he be worthy love or hatred, that is to say in the popish language,
and as they interpret it, whether he be in the grace or favor of God yea or
no. Where first we may not dissemble this, that as in other places so here,
they dissent from the original verity, both in their translation and in their
sense. For these words are in Hebrew thus. Eue^ or either, love, eue^ or either
hatred, knows not man: al which is before their faces. Whereas we may
perceive, in their translation they add the word worthy, which is not there
to be found: and in their interpretation or sense they add God and his favor
or hatred, there being not in this part of the text any of the names whereby
god is called in the old Testament. But before we come to deliver that which we
take to be the true meaning of the spirit here, me thinks that even the text
as they turn it, will not euince that, for which they aleadge it. For though
we should grant them, that love and hatred should in this place be understood
of gods love and hatred toward men, yet this me thinks we may say of it,
namely that we must needs understand it either of men that are ignorant of
Gods word and unbelievers or else of his love and hatred toward such, as of
whose faith we doubt not: for between these two there is no mean, neither are
there any other sorts of people in the world. To refer it to the incredulous,
and to understand it of them, there is no reason. Because he that cannot lie
has told us, he that believes not is condemned already, because he believes
not in the name of the only son of god: and since he has given the
judgment, we judge not according to our selves, but according to his truth
that cannot err. And besides he that believes not the gospel, as he knows
not god himself with effect and fruit: so he knows not neither for himself
nor for others, those whom God loves or hates, or of what force his love and
hatred is. We must therefore understand of the faithful and believers: who
though they cannot judge of other men, specially by their outward estate, of
which it seems Solomon speaks here, whether God love any man, or hate him,
yet concerning himself, or for Gods love or hatred toward him, he cannot
either be ignorant or doubtful of it, because he knows and feels the love
of god toward him, as an adopted child, and that by better proofs and
pledges, then outward mercies, as we may perceive not only by the 7. verse of
this chapter, where he says, go eat thy bread with joy etc. for god now
accepts thy works. but also by this of John, in his first epistle fourth
chapter. Heerin was the love of God made manifest amongst us, because God sent
that his only begotten son into this world that we might live through him,
and sundry such other places. And therefore this is a non sequitur, as we say
in the schools or an evil favored argument. By outward things men cannot
determine of Gods love or hatred, and therefore we cannot conclude of it out of
Gods word. What and if a man should reason thus? In the same books Solomon
says, we cannot by outward events see a sensible difference betwixt man's soul
and beasts life, because the end of either is alike, therefore we can by no
other means discern the difference; it were false, and indeed would not hold
or follow. By all these things then we may perceive that howesoeuer we
understand this place, of the love or hatred of God toward men, that yet it
will make nothing for the Papists, to establish their doctrine of doubting,
touching the grace of God and the free pardon and full forgiveness of our
sins. That we may take no advantage of this, that Papists affirming, that
such as offend against their consciences, do well enough know, that they are
under gods hatred, and God is angry with them do by this doctrine cross
their own sense and interpretation. And again it that be true in offending
parties, why should they enjoin such as are turned to God, and do unfeignedly
repent them of their sins, to doubt of the grace and love of God toward
them. But let us return, and deliver the true and natural meaning, and see
whether that will help any whit at all. I know that both Jews and Christian
expositors also do give diverse se^ses of this one place, but to me, this
following seems most right. In this chapter as I take it, he deals with
such a sort or kind of administration or ordering of things in this world, as
is beyond man's reach: and he sets it out by sundry particulars, the first
whereof is contained in this first verse, and some of the verses following, and
indeed respects men's persons, and the several events and successes that
follow them. And yet in this first verse he does not only declare, the
judgment of flesh and blood concerning the persons themselves but also
expresses what he himself conceived of it according to truth and godliness.
This is it then that he means, that having set his heart not only to search
into these things, so far forth as he could by any grace in himself from god
but also to speak of them as time and occasion served, he found by experience
that he was so far of to shutt God out, from ordering and disposing of all
these men and their matters, that he took it rather for fury and madness in
men to think otherwise, specially seeing both men and matters plainly say that
there is nothing be it never so small, but that all and every one of them are
governed according to the beck and good pleasure of almighty God. And as for
man himself he was so far of from guiding and governing these things that
either he knew not his own estate in the things themselves: or else if he had
them, whether they were things worthy either to be beloved, or to be hated, he
could not tell how to use them. Now what will this avail to prove doubting
for our good estate and forgiveness of our sins before God, whereas it
speaks that the unregenerate, whose beastly blindness and blockishnes is so
great, that neither can they discern of Gods administration and government of
their own estate and condition, nor of the things that God in mercy or
judgment has been pleased to lay upon them? Surely they are so wide, and
indeed unnatural and unreasonable, that from mere natural men, will judge,
of those that are enlightened and sanctified from God. But we will leave this,
and proceed to the sifting, examining, and answering of such places as they
produce and allege out of the new Testament, specially such as they make
most account of and press most, as they that must bear the stresse of this
cause.

Places out of the new Testament.

1 The first place which they object out of the new Testament, is Romans 3.
verse 28. which they turn thus, We think that a man is justified by faith
without works: and thereupon they infer and enforce that since the Apostle
uses the word of thinking, that therefore no man can certainly affirm
concerning his own justification. But we have many exceptions against this
interpretations as first that though it be so in the old latin translation,
yet the word that the Apostle uses in the original, is of a more sure and
certain signification. For the word signifies to reason or to gather
together, or out of the premises to put down, a collected or sure assertion,
and the same to deliver also in words or speech. And this almost all the
greek interpreters, the best expositors of their own words, have observed and
specially Theophilactus who turns the simple verb that the Apostle uses, by
a compound which signifies by reasoning to euince together, and out of such
things, as were not only probably but truly put down, necessarily to
effect and conclude. But suppose we had not this in just and sufficient answer:
yet we know and believe, that there is great difference, between doubting and
thinking: the one always containing in it and under it uncertainty, and the
other many times having certainty adjoined with it. For though we will not
deny but that sometimes in the latin tongue, the word to think is doubtingly
used, yet we shall find in good and approved authors, that very often it
signifies after the propounding of diverse opinions, and sentences to choose
out that which a man will affirm and maintain. And so we doubt of it in this
place, it implies not a doubtful and uncertain imagination, for in a matter of
so great importance, the Apostle would not deal so sleightely with the Chuch
and the members of it, but an assured and steadfast affirmation, which as yet
may appear by the nature of the greek word above mentioned: so me thinks it
is confirmed by the weight of the cause or matter the the Apostle has in hand,
which is free justification through faith in Christ: of which howsoever
sometimes some good men in the weakness of their faith, and beholding of their
own unworthiness may or do doubt, yet the doctrine of it, was, is, and ever
shall be most sure and stable. And therefore unless they would continually
confound the terms of doubting and thinking, this text or testimony will do
them no good. And if it should be of such a doubtful signification always,
then must it so likewise in all places, for that which is so at all times is
the same every where, and cannot be varied, as in respect of difference or
distance of place. But that cannot be so, for we shall see this word in other
places, and namely in some places of this epistle, cannot admit or receive this
doubtful sense, and therefore not hear neither: we will but take one in stead
of all, namely, Romans 8. verse 18. For I think that the afflictions of this
present time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us. What
shall we think that the Apostle doubted of this point: whether that our
sufferings here and the glory to be revealed in the life to come were unequal,
surely he knew and felt well enough the great odds and difference that is
betwixt them, and that makes him in another place to say, our light affliction
which is hut for a while, causes unto us a far more excellent and eternal
weight of glory. And I suppose verily the grossest papist in the world, and
greatest merite-monger amongst them, would not defend this, that there is a
party, between the sufferings of all or any of the Saints and the infinite
and incomprehensible joys of eternal life. Besides what Logitian is there
that sees not that there is in this argument, falacia homo nymias, that is as
we may say of the equivocatio^ or doubtful and diverse signification of the
word to think, which though sometimes and in some places, it may signify to
doubt and yet that has bin showed on this part, yet here for the reasons above
alleged, it must signify certenty and assurednes, though not of the feeling
of this truth always in the hearts and minds of the godly, who sometimes feel
it and sometimes not, yet of truth and certenty of the doctrine it self, which
can be no more uncertain, then God himself from whom it co^mteh, or the^ the
spirit it self, by which the Apostle preached and delivered the same. To
conclude, this is the plain meaning of the Apostle: that from the former
disputation, or points that before had bin handled, he did necessarily gather,
and finely conclude, that a christian or faithful man, was justified through
faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law. And good reason he should
conclude so out of the premises: for he had before euinced and proved this,
that all men whether they were Jews or Gentiles, the Gentiles without the
law, and the Jews by and under the law were sinners and transgressors of the
law, and therefore destitute and void of righteousness in and of themselves:
and righteous they must be if they would be saved: but that they could not be
without Christ's righteousness, and the same apprehended by faith only. And
therefore be might safely infer and conclude that he did.

2 The second place which they bring out of the new Testament, is out of the 9.
chap. of the Epistle to the Romans ver. 20. where it is said. Be not high
minded but fear. therefore say they, we are to doubt of Gods grace and favor
toward us. But we answer. First that this is such a falacie of homo nymie or
equivocation of words as the former. For fear does neither always, nor yet
for any thing that they have said for the most part implie doubting. What
difference there is betwixt these two terms has in part been showed already,
neither need we to insist thereupon now. The badnesse of this reason may
appear by this. We must fear always: therefore we must doubt continually. If
any should say so, it were a badde conclusion, unless a man would or could
prove fear and doubting to be terms co^uertible. Fear we know is urged and
pressed upon us in the word, not so much to work doubting in us either
concerning god or our selves supported by him, as to cause us unfeignedly to
reverence his majesty and carefully and circumspectly to walk as in regard of
ourselves, and by reason of our spiritual and bodily enemies also. And he that
either knows the nature and signification of the words, or observes his own
heart or ways well shall find this to be the thing that God aims at, when he
so much calls upon us for fear, rather then to entangle the hearts of his
people with doubtfulnesse or distrust. But concerning the place it self we are
to know that the drift and purpose of the spirit by the Apostle is, to humble
the Gentiles, whose election from before all times and vocation in time, God
has been pleased in those days and the age of the world, to manifest unto
themselves and others, which favor as they behold practiced to themselves so
with all the same a judgment of casting of from God exercised and executed
against the Jewish nation, who not long before, of all the nations of the world,
in the generality or body of it had been the only peculier people and
inheritance of God. Now knowing that the Gentiles, on the one side with their
own graces vouchsafed unto them, and on the other side, with the judgment of
the Lord exercised upon the Jews, might easily be puffed up above measure, he
assaieth to keep them under, and to prevent the extremity of presumption or
pride, which he does by these words saying, Be not high minded, but fear.
Using fear not for doubting for that had been to have drawn them from one
vice to another, but for reverent and humble carrying of themselves in the
midest and multitude of those mercies that God has vouchsafed them, for the
better effecting whereof he uses in that place and infers also many
arguments drawn both from the Jews and Gentiles: as if the fall of the Jews
were the riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall their fullness be it, and
their assuming again: and those legal and metaphorical speeches of the holy
first fruits attributed to the Jews of wild olive trees grafted in their stead
spoken of the Gentiles, and such like do plainly show the same. So that here
we may see we are not commanded or exhorted, to doubt of Gods grace and favor
toward us touching our election, salvation, forgiveness of sins, etc. For
they are all sure and certain in God even as he is in his own nature and in
the truth of his promises, as they are manifested unto us in his word, and
sealed up in Christ's death, though we sometimes come short by reason of our
weakness feebleness and wants in the apprehension and application of them to
our selves: but this rather we are admonished of, not proudly to be puffed or
stirred up, as in nature we are wont to be, neither yet to lean unto our own
wisdom, righteousness, holiness, etc. which is nothing that we take and
think it to be: neither yet to rejoice of it as before God, for all in his
sight is as a filthy and stained cloth, nor to be puffed up in it, as in
respect of other men, because we have nothing, but we have received it, and
having received it there is no reason why we should brag of it, and besides
that which we have is far short both of that it should be and that many other
have received above us. But rather that we should confess, as our own
weakness and unworthiness on the one side, so Gods grace and goodness
toward us one the other side. And this may we perceive by the words which the
Apostle had used a little before saying, Boast not thy self against the
branches: and if thou boast thy self, thou bear not the root, but the
root thee. And therefore this fear, that the Apostle commends and
commands here is not the same that doubting is, but is opposed to contempt
and pride, and in as much as if he should say, modestly, soberly, and carefully
fear and reverence god, least otherwise through carelesnes, contempt, pride or
otherwise, thou that art a Gentile provoke him to manifest judgment against
them, as he has done against the people and nation of the Jews, his first
beloved ones.

3 A third place objected is, 1. Corinthians. not the 12. as some of the^ say but
the 10. ver. 22. in these words. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands,
take heed least he fall. Therefore say they we may doubt of gods grace toward
us etc. But I beseech them to tell us from whence they will fetch this
conclusion: as whether from the particular words, or from the general drift
of the place. If from the words which are they that will prove this wodde^
conclusion: by these words, him that thinks he stands, he means
doubtless such a one as is wise in his own eyes, and having confidence in
himself, imagines he is strong and able to stand, when other men are weak,
and ready to fall. So that he signifies and sets out here by proud and
presumptious persons, who have no familiarity or acquaintance with doubting or
distrust, nay are so far removed from that, that they are tra^sported to
another extreme, namely to hautie and proud imaginations concerning themselves
and their own strength. And where he says, take heed ye fall, it would be
marked that he said not so much as fear, much less let him doubt, but let him
beware, or circumspectly look unto himself. And good reason there is he
should do so. For none are more nigh danger, then those that are wise in their
own eyes, and presume upon their own strength, because when they think best of
themselves, they think least of that which may betide them, and so be soonest
intrapped in sin through security and carelessness of their own estate, or
the malice and power of their enemies that rise up against them. Besides it is
not only probable but certain, that by falling he meameth not utter falling
from the grace of God, for that can they never come into that are his, for
those whom the Lord loves, he loves unto the end, but slipping or sliding
into sins and transgressions, and those neither not of the highest degree,
but of the meanest nature, which he calls afterward temptations appertaining
to man, which though in their own nature (as any other sin should) may
dismay us much, yet should they not work as in respect of God and his
goodness toward us doubtfulnesse in us, because those whom he loves he
loves, as we have heard already unto the end, notwithstanding the weaknesses
and wants that be in them. And the drift of the place will as little avail
them. For by that which goes before, as also by that which follows after, we
may see, that the spirit labors nothing more then this to draw the
Corinthians from security, to heed and carfulness which he does, as by
propunding unto the^, ancient examples of Gods wrath, against a people, that
had very great privileges, and tokens of Gods favor, so by this also, that
they having a more plain declaration of Gods will then the other, should
thereby learn to be more wary, least otherwise not the like, but greater
judgments should break forth against them, by how much Christ was more
plainly manifested amongst them. And yet least one side, they might flatter
themselves to much, and so not so carefully withstand Satan's subtilities as
they ought, (for men that imagine more of themselves then there is cause why,
are commonly careless: or on the other side think that this dealing of the
Apostle was somewhat rough and hard, (into which fault, when men are friendly
admonished by them, that love and care for them, they easily fall) he does so
with one hand by admonition labor to prevent security, that be does with the
other raise them up to comfort, least they might imagine or think that he made
them altogether like to those wicked people of Israel that perished in the
wilderness. Now what is there either in the one or in the other, that
favors of upholding doubting? For carfulness one the one side, and comfort
one the other (both which are the things he propounds here) are such as have
no familiarity or acquaintance with distrustfulnesse or doubting. In a word
the Apostle here deals against carnal confidence and security enioyning us
that we rely not to much upon the graces that God has bestowed upon us, or
flatter our selves in careless security, or stay our selves upon our present
estate, or foolish conceit and opinion that we have of our selves: but rather
that ackowledging our weakness faintness and unworthiness, and also Gods
grace and goodness toward us, we should labor to live in the fear of God,
and combating against our corruption and flesh, we should crave Gods aid and
asistance against sin and Satan If the Apostle here then had forbidden the
Corinthians to trust in the promises of God, it had been somewhat, but he is
so far from that, that here he blames them, for being so much puffed up in
the vain confidence of flesh and blood, and provokes them rather to modesty
and lowelinesse. And what is this to distrust or doubting which is that they
must prove or else nothing.

4 They allege a fourth place out of Phil. 2. verse 12. Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling, therefore say they men must doubt of
salvation. etc. But this has no more pith or marrowe in it then the former.
Why may we not as safely allege it for free will and power not only to do
good but to merit also as for maintenance and upholding of doubting ad
distrust. The commandment seems to be plain for the one: but the words of
fear and trembling are not so sufficient for the other. As therefore the
commandment implies not ability in parties commanded, to do the thing or
things enjoined, but rather shows what God requires: so the words of fear
and trembling, do rather tend to breed carefulnes and circumspection, then
doubtfulnes or distrust. And indeed if we should respect the words themselves,
specially the commandment: we shall see that the place rather yields
argument of confidencie and boldness then of doubting and distrust. For if the
commandment will infer power in our selves to do the thing commanded, and we
know that that which is in our own hands we easily trust unto, and make no
scruple or doubt of it, it will follow thereupon, that howsoever fear and
trembling may seem in their sense to implie doubting, yet power to work
salvation being in men themselves, will quickly expel that conceit unless
they mind to hold, that a man at one and the self same time, ocupied about one
and the self same object, and having but one truth or way to lead him
thereto, may yet doubt of himself and presume of himself. But the truth is,
that the self same spirit, that for taking away the conceit of man's freewill
and power, presently adds it is God that works in us both the will and the
deed according to his good pleasure, does in many places of other his
writings, and particularly in this epistle say, for the remoouing of doubting,
that he is assuredly persuaded that god that had begun this work in the^,
would make it perfect even until the day of Jesus Christ. Now what word is
there in this text, that will implie doubting. If it be any it is fear and
trembling: but they (as we have heard already) import no such matter, but
rather signify reverence of God, and a certain kind of childlike awe, and
loathsomnes to offend, or displease so gracious a father as our heavenly father
is. Me thinks we may well expound this place by a sentence of the Prophet
Psalm. 2. Where he says, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him in
trembling. what does he mean thereby, doubting? no surely, for the Apostle
James tells us, that he that wauereth or doubts receives nothing at all,
but as he is inconstant in all his ways, so he is sent away empty hearted and
handed from God: but he understands childlike fear, which is always
adjoined with faith, and is opposed not to doubting, as we have noted already,
but to carnal security and carelesnes, which vain confidence in and of our
selves works in us. These men belike suppose that faith and fear cannot
stand together: but they are deceived: for the faithful may both fear and
believe also, yea and enjoy comfort and consolation to, according as they
respect either themselves or God, or consider in God a supreme Majesty, which
may cause them to fear or tremble, or behold in him largenes in promise, and
faithfulness in performing, and so not only believe in him but rejoice also. In
a word the Apostle minds not to co^mau^d me^, to doubt of gods grace and
their own salvation: for that had bin directly contrary to the truth, that he
had in other places delivered, and all coming from one spirit, and the same
always constant and like unto it self, it could not be so repugnant: but
either he commands fear to offend and holy care and endeavor to avoid sin,
specially against our consciences, and a desire to live unto god, that is to
say, godlilie, righteouslie and soberly in this present evil world, we not
doubting and distrusting God and his promises, but being jealous over our
selves, and that not amiss, and suspecting our own strengths, he would have
us wholly and only to depend upon god: or else enioyneth such fear and
tre^bling, as respects not Gods grace and mercy, as though he would not for
Christ's sake, forgive us our sins believing in him, but our own weakness and
infirmity, willing us to keep a good watch thereof, least we offend and be
wanting in our duty: on the other side if any thing be forbidden, it is not
faith or trust in God, touching the forgiveness of our sins, but carnal
security, he telling us that so far forth as we respect our selves, or our
own strength or stay thereupon, we have good cause both to suspect our
selves, and to tremble and fear because by nature we are full of wavering and
inconstancy: and easily urne aside and fall away, unless God underprop us,
and bring us back again, when we have straied. And he that has but half an
eye as we say, and will well view and consider the text it self, shall see,
that no other thing the^ this can be gathered out of it, and much less that
gross conceit of doubting and distrust. But let us proceed.

5 Some other places they seem to make show of, as if it were to monster out
of the new testament, that so they might in appearance of multitude, make
strong that which in truth and goodness of cause can never be vpheld. To touch
them all would be tedious and indeed needless to, because nothing is or can
be said out of them, which is not of the same nature that the former: and yet
one or two more, which they make the greatest account of, we cannot or will not
omit. 1. Pet. 1. verse. 17. They find and urge these words. Pass the time of
your dwelling here in fear. Whereunto we say how often will they press this
crambe or colewort, more then ten times sodde? I call it so in the sense as
they allege it and not otherwise? how often shall we tell that fear and
doubting differ? or when will they themselves show that they are all one? He
that will look well into that which goes before, from the beginning of the
chapter, alleged hitherto, and to that which follows after shall perceive,
that Peter's purpose was, to comfort and instruct, and not to work doubting and
distrust. And for this cause he had showed, that we that are by nature sinners,
have yet through Gods free mercy obtained this favor, that we are from before
all times elected, and that by the strength of the eternal decree, as if it
were by a second creation, we are beco^e Gods sons through Christ, by whose
spirit also we are inwardly changed, and outwardly likewise renewed, and all
through the ministry of the word, and the blood of Jesus Christ that as he
rose from the dead, so both here in this life we shall rise to newenesse of
life, and in that which is to come to heavenly and everlasting glory. The way
whereunto, he shows to be such afflictions as we suffer in this life, for the
testimony of Christ. Which because they are not many times so taken to be, nor
so well and comfortably borne as they should be, he does not only show us
that God in the midst of our sufferings, replenisheth us with unspeakable
joy, but also gives us two proppes to uphold our hearts: true faith in the
promises of God: and assured hope and patient looking for the life and joy that
is to come: giving us also to understand, that even the fruits of obedience
which we yield in this life, are sure pledges unto us of the sou^dnesse of our
faith. And what is here that commands us to doubt, or rather that
propounds not assurance unto us: the grace of Gods eternal election, Jesus
Christ's shedding of his blood, the inward and outward sanctification of the
spirit and word, a lively faith, a certain hope, a sincere obedience, and what
not all testifying unto us, not only the vanity, but also the falsehood of this
popish assertion. So that we may see, he is so far off from ministering matter
of doubtfulnesse and distrust, that he rather yields strong consolation, and
by means thereof a peaceable and mighty persuasion, of Gods grace and assured
goodness toward us in Christ, dealing no otherwise here, then as Paul has
done in sundry places before expounded, namely opposing fear to fleshly
security (which as we have heard to much trust and confidence in our selves
brings forth) and not opposing it to doubtfulnesse and distrust, which is set
against the grace of god, and the assured trust and hope that we have
concerning our salvation. Which as we may perceive by that that goes before,
some thinks it will be euicted to that which follows after, for presently
he adds, knoweing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things as
silver and gold, from your vain conuersations by the traditions of the
fathers. Where we say, that with the fear he wished them to have, he coupleth
this excellent knowledge of our redemption in Christ: that as in the ministry
and matter it self, theris all assured certentie, so in our sound knowledge
thereof all doubtfulnesse and distrustfulnesse might be avoided, because they
seldom or never fall out, but in things which are not surely known,
steadfastly believed, or well and effectually felt.

6 To this they adioyne another place, out of the first chapter of his second
epistle, verse 10. where he says. Wherefore brethren give rather dil^gence, to
make your calling and election sure. Therefore say they, the faithful cannot
be assured of their salvation. But we say this is ill inferred, and as we
shall hear anon no such thing to be gathered from it, but the contrary
rather. All doctrines must be gathered either from the general scope of the
place, or from the particular words, wherewith that matter is delivered. Let
them take which they will and gather it if they can. The purpose of the Apostle,
in the verses which go before this is, alleged, to provoke the^ to steadfast
faith and the sound fruits thereof, for the better stirring of them whereunto
he uses two special reasons, the one from the fruit and profit, that they
themselves and others should reap thereby, and this is verse 8. the other from
the miserable estate of them that are void of this precious faith, and the
sincere fruits and effects thereof, and this is verse 9. upon which in this
tenth verse, he infers a conclusion, as though he should say, since through
faith and tha fruits thereof, not only much evil is avoided, but grace and
goodness communicated, and by those fruits our calling and election, is
approved to others, and sealed up in our selves, and since this is the only
way into Christ's eternal kingdom of which he speaks verse 11. surely it
will well beseem and become us to be wholly carried this way, unless we
willbe counted, either fearful contemners of grace and goodness, or else
desperate casters away of our selves. Now what is there here that may serve to
allow of doubting? or rather may not be turned the other way to uphold
assurance of heart and of hope. And the like may we say for the words: which of
them is it that will yield them any strength? The word brethren is a word of
love, and no doubt ministers much comfort and assurance to a godly mind (and
therefore no doubt) when they see themselves so reputed and taken of them that
are indeed godly, and in some measure very well able to discern, in both which
respects Peter no doubt of it was a rare man, and therefore that term could
not but consolate. If they will press the term, diligence: who sees not the
marvelous difference, between this, and that that they would have should be
meant thereby? who ever heard diligence used for distrust or doubting? it
implies laborious care and industry in and about the thing we would obtain,
which commonly also because it is of commendatio^, adds an edge unto men's
striuings: whereas distrustfulnes or doubt, makes them either utterly to
desist and leave of, or else to strive with such faintings as there are many
times easily overcome. For calling, election, and making sure, they are quite
and clean contrary: as all which indeed are from God, and therefore are of
the same nature that he is unchangeable, which causes the Apostle Paul in
another place to say, the gifts and calling of God are such as he can not or
will not repent him self of. Romans 11. The word of making sure is not as in
respect of God, for all things that he has determined from before all times
are certain and sure, and shallbe accomplished in time, but as in respect of
other men and of our selves, who may easily be drawn (but whether well yea or
no that is the question) to suspect our selves, and to pronounce hard sentence
against others in the sins we commit: the Apostle showing that this is one
good mean, either quite and clean to remove that temptation, or so to
mitigate it, as it shall never master us, studiously, carefully and diligently
to follow sanctification and holiness, without which no man shall see God.
Wherefore rather certainly then doubting, may be crawne and gathered out of
this place. For if faithful people should diligently and carefully labor, to
make their vocation and election sure and certain, which they are enjoined here,
they may then make it sure and certain yea no doubt they do in some measure
make it sure and certain, which they do indeed when they proceed in piety, and
grow up in godliness, and the sound knowledge, steadfast faith, and unfeigned
obedience to Gods holy will. For look how much the more thoroughly they enter
into the kingdom of Christ, or as the scripture says are ingrafted into
Christ, with so much the more earnest study, desire, and diligence, they grow
in grace, and prosper in the points of gods religion and christian life. Now
where we say they make it sure, we must understand still, as we have already
touched it, in respect of God whose purpose according to ellection is sure and
so remains, as the Apostle says, Romans 9.11. But as in respect of our selves
and our neighbors. For by the works that God commands in his law (of which
no doubt of it the Apostle Peter treats in this place) we may as upon outward
testimonies, fruits, and effects certainly conclude concerning faith: and by
faith determine touching the spirit of God that dwells in us, and so by
consequent also, concerning our calling and election. For which purpose see,
Romans 5.9.14. 1. John 3, 24. and contrariwise also as appears Mat. 7.16.17.
etc. Indeed I confess that this proof and confirmation of them is not the
first or principal, for that is the inward testimony of the holy Ghost,
bearing record unto our spirits, that we are the sons of God, but yet it is a
secondarie one as I may say, by which we may not only probably, but charitably
gather of others that believe, and certainly conclude and determine concerning
our selves, in as much as our own hearts and the sincerity thereof, and our
own fruits and the soundenes of the same, are or should be better known unto
us, the^ to all the world beside. We see then, that that which in the hands of
our adversaries, has not so much as the semblance of a sword to scarre us,
being turned upon them is of steel and very pearcing, to run through the
sides of that corrupted cause which they uphold: but such judgments must they
fall into, that labor to obscure Gods glory, and to dismaye and discourage
the minds of Gods people, that they in the soul should be in the same state
either that the Midianites were of whom we read in the book of Judges, that
the Lord set every man's sword upon his neighbor and upon all the host, or
else as Saul did, namely take a sword, and fall upon it, and kill themselves.

4 The last place is out of the first epistle of S. John chap. 3. verse 21. If
our heart condemn us not, the^ have we boldness toward God. Out of which
they reason by the contrary thus: then must it needs follow, that if our
hearts do condeme us, we have not bolnesse toward God: and if not boldness
then doubting and distrust. But we answer that the inferrence upon the
contrary is not right: for as boldness and not boldness are opposite: so we
cannot always safely infer, upon not having boldness, distrust, or
doubting, because there are many things besides, as reverence of the party
with whom we have to deal, fear and shamefastness in our selves and
loathsomeness that standers by, many times should be acquainted with our states
or suites, and sundry such like which may for a time dash us in our selves, and
yet not take a way from us for ever al hope to speed, which in deed is
doubting or distrust But to the place it self: The purpose of the Apostle is
as I take it, that the grace of adoption and newenesse of life which God
vouchsafes unto us, must be testified by good works and particularly by sound
charity and love toward our brethren, which as he commends for many
respects so specially for sundry good effects it has: as first, that thereby
we understand, that we are indeed God children, and his is in the first part
of verse 19. Secondly, thereby we may have a peaceable and quiet conscience,
and this is in the last part of verse 19. And this boldness and quietness of
conscience, which is the second effect of sound love he commends by the
contrary namely trembling of heart, with which they must needs be disquieted,
that are subject to it: for how can it be that he that knows he has God for
his judge, and not for his father (as the faithful people only have him so)
ca^ be quiet in mind, being in his own heart guilty of horrible sin, as
against God himself in heaven, so against men upon earth. And therefore we may
safely say, that a wicked person is either not at all quiet; or else the grace
that he would seem to have, is nothing else but security or senselesnes: and
this fear is amplified by comparison of the greater, namely God and his
judgment: into which amplification he enters, not so much for the^ to whom
he wrote, though it may be true they had some need and use of it, as for others
that would not easily be brought to feeling: that so stong either with the
testimony of their own heart, or with the greatness of Gods wrath and
judgment against them for sin, or with this terrible and heavy threatening,
or with some one thing or other, they might stoop and learn to be humbled.
Now what is this to doubting specialy in the faithful, whom John labors to
raise up to an assured hope, by their faith toward God, and love to the Saints
or brethren: or if you will to the wicked, what is it to them who for the most
part, are so far from doubting, that they almost fear no evil: either here
or else where, but as if it were being in a letargie or dead sleep or
senslesnes, pass three days without fear, yea without conscience? But if
this either do not please or satisfy, we may say further: that he speaks
here of a set purpose that men have to do evil, or to sin as we say against
conscience: he meaning that such manner of persons so long as they continue in
that persuasion and practice also that they can hardly or not at all determine
touching the certenty of our salvation, by the testimony of their own hearts,
because they have a sting within them that witnesses the contrary. For this we
must know that faith and a good conscience are inseparable companions, and go
as it were arm in arm together, as the Apostle shows. 1. Tim. 1.19. Yea
and that the fruits accompanying them are never utterly sundred from them, but
at some one time or another are to be found in their measure, where the things
themselves are: and that therefore they that have a good conscience have
boldness toward God and are well certified of his grace and their own
salvation thereby. And that this in his meaning indeed it may appear by sundry
words before going, as when he says, By this that is true and sincere love to
our brethren, we know that we are of the truth, that is belong unto God, whom
he signifies also in the words following, when be says, and shall before him
assure our hearts, which assurance bringing with it peace, and tranquillity,
cannot but shut out and kill as it were all doubting. And again in the words
following when he says hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the
spirit which he has given us. And therefore we may see that this place
weakeneth our adversaries doctrine, rather then that it does any manner of way
confirm and strengthen it. But if they will further urge it as some of them
do, and say there is no man, but he is accused in his heart, and conscience
and therefore no man can have confidence or boldness before God. We tell them,
first that the argument follows not, for though the antecedent be trve, that
every good man especially is stung more or less yet the consequent is not
good, because thouhh it be true that as in regard of himself and of his sin
and unworthiness thereby, he can have little or no assurance, yet as in respect
of God, his word, his spirit Christ's absolute obedience, etc. he may have hope
and boldness. Secondly we say that it is no good or sound reasoning to reason
from the facts of men, to or for the doctrine of God. For man's facts for the
most part are evil and unlawful, whereas all the doctrines of God, are true
and holy even as he himself: and though men either in practice or persuasion
would condemn him or the^, yet shall he be just when he speaks and pute when
he judges. Facts express or show things done: but never declare much less
prove the lawefulnes of the things practiced. Besides, though we deny not,
but that even the faithful, are not only convinced but condemned in their
heart and persuasion when they consider their unworthiness, yet fear we not
also to affirm, that even then they are absolved and cleared also: for so
often as they look unto themselves and sin, they must of necessity be
pricked and terrified, because sin seen and felt indeed, can bring forth as
in respect of it self, no better fruit. But on the other side when they
behold Christ crucified and run unto the sacrifice of his death, not only of
absolute but of infinite merit, they find in themselves an assured peace, as
the Apostle also declares. Romans 5. where he says. Then being justified
by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: and in
another place he affirms, that through Christ we have boldness and entrance
with confidence by faith in him.

And let this suffice for answer to the testimonies and texts of Scripture,
which our adversaries for the establishing of doubting and distrust in the
minds of the godly do usually bring out of the old and new Testament. With
which we have dealt first and answered them, because they make them the
principal bullwarks and butteresses of this tottering wall. And indeed had
they been truly alleged, such as we might have rested and relied our
selves upon: but being produced as they are, we see there is nothing in them
but vanity, and they that will accept them being so offered, are like to be
bound up in the wings of the wind, and carried away through the fcircenes of
the judgment of God against them, to eternal destruction. Now we come to
their arguments drawn from humane authority; which are of two sorts that is
to say, either reasons and arguments, or authority and testimonies of
ecclesiastical writers: The reasons are many as man's heart is cunning to
devise, and his brain busily beating upon vanity, and lies, even to uphold
the same what he can. For our own parts we will deal no otherwise here; then
as we have done in the texts they have alleged, namely amongst many take
those that are most material, and confute the^, which being once fully and
sufficiently answered, all the rest being weaker then water, will fall to the
ground, and even be spilt as it were of their own accord.

1 Their first argument is couched or framed thus. He that cannot know all his
sins, he cannot know whether he please God: and of this proposition they
render this reason, for it may so fall out, that he has some hidden or
unknown sin, through which he has displeased God. But no man knows or
understands all his sins, and this assumption they prove by a place of the
Prophet. Psalm. 19. where he says, who can understand hi^ faults? therefore no
man can tell whether he be in the grace and favor of god, and please him yea
or no. To this we answer, that the proposition or mayor as we call it, should
be true, if either god did for Christ's sake forgive the believers their known
transgressions only, and not their unknown and hidden sins also: or else if
the work of our reconciliation with God, did depend either upon our dignity
or worthiness, or the suffiencie of our contrition and sorrowefulnes for sin.
But God we know, and the Scripture in plain terms teaches us, that God
forgiueth in Christ to his children, al their sins known and unknown, in
which respect even in the place by them alleged, the Prophet presently says,
Cleanse me from my secret faults: of which if there had not been remission, he
would not have prayed for it, for prayer made according to faith for a thing,
implies that the same thing is to be obtained, or else were christian prayer
not only lipp labor, but lost labor: and Saint John says, the blood of
Christ cleanses us from all sin, and again, that he is the reconciliation
not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world. And as
for our reconciliation to God, it hangs not upon any worthiness that we have
as of our selves, or upon the suffiency of any thing we do or can do, for we
confess as the faithful have done before us, that all our righteousnesses
before God are as filthy and stained clouts, and say unfeignedly as our Savior
himself has taught us, when we have done all that we can do, we are
unprofitable servants. So that we may say and say safely, the proposition or
mayor is false, and that not only for that which has been alleged already:
but also because that the Scripture in many places, for the comfort of the
children of God, in the multitude of their sins, known or not known, felt or
not felt in themselves, confessed or not confessed before God, has put down
many worthy and general comforts, as Isaiah the 1. Though your sins were as
crimosin, they shallbe white as snow, though they were redd as scarlet, they
shallbe as wool: and in the new Testament, Paul says, where sin abounds
there grace abou^deth much more. And though they add a reason or confirmation
of it, yet that helps it not neither. For we know that all sins in their
own nature do displease God, and not only hidden sins. And if God
vouchsafe mercy in the forgiveness of all sins and hidden sins in all our
judgments be sins, why should the conscience more doubt of the forgiveness
of those that it knows not or cannot remember, then it does of those that are
ever before us, since this is usual in all men, to have their most high and
heinous tra^sgression, in the sting of their hearts presented before them, which
being assured of that they are remitted before God, the less and the secret
much more. As for the minor or assumption we will grant it them: and yet they
never a whitt nearer their purpose, because remission of sins, and the
comfort following thereupon, against the doubtfulnes of our hearts, stands
not in knowing or feeling all and every particular or special sin that men
have committed, but in the lively apprehension of the free favor of god
declared in the heavenly promises of his word not imputing unto us our
transgression, nay which is more, imputing unto us through faith, that take
hold thereof, the innocence, holiness, and obedience of Christ, with which being
clothed as with a garment, we stand free from the force of his wrath, against
all sins known or not known, and have hope assured for reconciliation and
atonement. And as for the proof of this assumption by the place of Psalm. 19.
it was more then needs: and brought to confirm that which never was
controuerted (for who ever called this into question, that good men may and do
commit infinite more sins, then they do or can remember.) But this rather
whether this effect of doubting will follow thereupon, in which they are more
mute then fishes, and speaking where or what they should not might well have
spared this labor.

2 A second argument they frame thus. He that only knows the heart, he only
knows the certety and assurednes of our salvation. But God only knows the
heart and searches the reins: therefore he only knows the certenty and
assuredness of our salvation All the fear and strength of this reason rests
in the mayor or proposition as we call it, and in the large or narrow
signification of this word knower of the heart. Wherefore having answered or
satisfied that, all the rest will be found weaker then water, I mean for the
strength and maintenance of this matter. God is so the only searcher and
knower of the heart, that yet notwista^ding he has in some measure even
communicated that grace unto diverse of his children, though happily not as in
respect of others so much, yet as in regard of every particular faithful man's
own estate. For as this that God is only wise, only just etc. does not
euacuate or overthrow the wisdom, justice, etc. that from that infinite
fountain that is in him: is conveied over unto men specially his children, so
that he alone knows man's heart, hinders not this, but that other men may
know, though not other men's, yet their own hearts, reasonable well: for this
of searching the heart, is, as also the former above named, are of that sort of
attributes in or to God, which though they be in him in all absolute fullness,
and without measure, yet are they communicated to the godly especially, and
that in such measure as he sees to be fit for them, and yet he having never a
whit the less in himself. And this is, that in some sort and sense which
Solomon says in the Proverbs. The thoughts of man's heart, are as deep
fountains, but a man of understanding will draw them dry. But more plainly
and particularly the Apostle says, No man knows the things of a man but the
spirit of a man which is within himself: but Gods spirit makes the spiritual
man able, to judge and discern all things, yet he himself to be judged of no
man. So that we may see that the mayor proposition is not simple here, but must
of necessity be understood with a condition or exception thus. He that alone
is the knower of the hearts, yea of all things, he only is assured or certainly
knows our salvation, unless it have pleased him in his word, to reveal
something concerning that unto us, and would have us thereby to be assured
thereof. For then having communicated that knowledge which in himself is
absolute and infinite, in some measure unto us, our knowledge coming from him
and infused into us, does entitle us in our measure thereunto, and yet
notwistanding he in sense before the only knower of the heart. But as it is
Gods good pleasure in his word to acquaint us with this matter, and by many
means to labor not only our knowledge therein, but also our assurance
thereof, as we may perceive by these notable sentences. 2. Cor. 13. Prove your
selves whether ye are in that faith: examine your selves etc. He doubling this
exhortation or commandment rather, that so he might express the necessity and
excellency of this point. And the 1. John 3. he says, that by the sound love
in our hearts. we know that we are of the truth and shall before him that is
truth even God himself, assure our hearts. And therefore as in natural things
we do from the effects gather of the causes, and that not only probably but
certainly, for such as the cause is such are the effects: so in spiritual
things we may yea we ought to do the like, wherein though as in regard of
others that are hypocrites we may be sometimes deceived, yet as in respect of
our selves, if we have wise judgment, and be able to put a difference between
things that differ, we cannot lightly err. For the minor or assumption of this
syllogism, we confess it also to be true, but yet in sense before, the very
self same serving to clear and answer this proposition, that has been
delivered for answer to the mayor. But because they suppose this argument to
be weak, they adioine unto it another, as like it both for form of reasoning
and pith or strength to prove as possible may be, so that an egg is not so
like to an egg, as we have in the proverb, then one of them is like another,
saying, He that knows not the heart, he cannot know touching his salvation,
for that were to search the heart and the reins of men, which belongs only
unto God. But no man knows the heart, for that is proper unto God only, and
therefore no man can know or be assured touching salvation. Whereunto though
that which has bin delivered to the former may suffice for full answer, yet
a word or two more to this, that so it may appear they can say nothing, but
that which is or may be easily answered. The mayor if they understand it of
absolute and exact knowledge is utterly false, not only because men in this
life cannot attain to such a knowledge, but also because that the measure and
manner, that God has in his word revealed unto his people, is sufficient
enough to strengthen their own conscience, and to make them by sound effects
and fruits charitably to judge of others, though it do not or cannot entitle
the^, to that fullness thereof that is only in the Lord himself. And as for
the proof adjoined to this proposition, it is of no force neither, as in
respect of this cause, for God as we have heard has given in some measure that
grace unto men and specially to his children and yet has never a whit the
less thereof in himself, or equalled them thereby unto his majesty. The minor
likewise is false, for there are that know their own hearts, and in some
measure are enabled by the graces of the spirit, to sound other men's, and that
not only extraordinarily, as Peter did the heart of Ananias and Sapphira his
wife, Act. 5. but ordinarily as appears by the place of the proof before
alleged, and yet not rush into Gods office, or be induced with absolute and
infinite knowledge as he, and therefore they are utterly deceived that object
this. But for final answer, in a word we say further. Though he that in some
measure knows the heart, cannot absolutely know it as God, because that
which is in him in all fullness, is is him according to the measure that God
which distributeth his graces sees good: and therefore he cannot absolutely
know either himself or others, to be of the number of them that shall be
saved as God, or cannot be precedent or immediate matters judge or determine
thereof: for indeed that were to be God and not man. Yet by subsequent things
or means men may know, as if it were by effects from causes, or by
consequents of or from antecedents, and not only probably but truly and
certainly gather concerning the matter. And me thinks this argument may well
be retorted and cast back again thus against the adversaries themselves. He
that knows in some measure his own and other men's heart, may from thence
charitably gather for others, and certainly conclude for himself touching the
favor of God and eternal life: or else if this were not true, the light
raised in us, were darkness and of no use. But the faithful do in some good
measure as has bin showed before, receive from God and feel in themselves
this grace: therefore they may know and be assured of it, and by consequent
need not to doubt though not as in regard of themselves (for so who will not be
overwhelmed therewith) yet as in respect of God, who is faithful and fast in
all his promises and graces whatsoever, and therefore in this also.

3 A third argument they enforce thus. He that knows not Gods will, he cannot
know Gods grace concerning himself, and his salvation. But no man knows the
will of God, according to that which is said, who has not known the mind of
the Lord? or who was his counselor, which words are repeated. Isaiah 48.13.
and Romans. 11.34. Therefore no man can know or be assured of his salvation.
But we will answer first unto the mayor or proposition by distinguishing:
secondly unto the minor or assumption, by explaning or expounding rightly the
places alleged. God though he be but one, and therefore as in regard of his
own nature can have but one will yet in respect of himself, and men to whom
he has revealed himself by his word, who are by many means and ways
distinguished from himself, he has indeed and is truly said to have a double
will, that is one secret in himself, and the other revealed to men specially to
his people in his word. And least we should seem to speak any thing herein
without warrant: let us mark what God himself says in his law. Deuter. 29.
The secret things belong to the Lord our God: but the things revealed belong
unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this
law. In this behalf or matter respecting gods will, men are commonly sick of
two sins, that is curiosity to search further then god has bin pleased to
manifest, and negligence or contempt of that which is revealed: in these words
and by this distinction, God goes about to repress and redress both,
teaching men so to abstain, from being wise above measure and searching into
his ways, councels and judgments, that are beyond their reach, that yet they
should content themselves with and stay upon his manifested will, laboring in
sincerity and simplicity of mind, to know and obey that only which he has
revealed unto us by his law. Now then if they understand their mayor
proposition, of any part of the will of God, not revealed unto us, they say
right, but since they speak it and mean it of that that is disclosed unto us
in his word, they speak falsely. For as he that knows not the will of God,
either manifested in the law and Gospel, and that also concerning such things
as appertain to our salvation: or his not revealed will, that is his secret
and unknown will to us, in such matters as belong not to our salvation; as in
the wonderful government of his Church, translation of Empires etc. can not
be assured of eternal life, and this indeed is the state of all the heathen of
the world outwardly, and of many other besides. So one the other side, he that
knows, believes and obeys, in some acceptable measure the revealed will of
God (for by knowing God we do according to god and his word understand, belief
and obedience) can not choose but in those fruits of his faith, know and be
well assured, that he is one put a part to be a plentiful partaker of all
Gods graces, concerning this life and that which is to come. And this is that
Christ means, when he says John. 17. This is life eternal: to know thee to
be the only true God and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. But the
faithful though they know not or be ignorant of, the hidden and secret will
of God as it is meet indeed they be so, yet are very well acquainted with his
revealed and manifested, whether it be in the law for obedience, or in the
gospel for faith, and therefore cannot be ignorant of the grace of God toward
them and their salvation, but do certainly know it. For to that end was the
law manifested at our first creation and afterward repeated again, that we
might know both that there is a God, and also what manner of god he is, and
that he will have us to be like unto himself, or else that we shall find him
a sharp and sore punisher of iniquity and sin: and afterward the Gospel
concerning the Messiah to come was published, that so we might both know and be
assured of forgiveness of sins and reconciliation before God. And let this
suffice for answer to the mayor. Now touching the minor proposition or
assumption, confirmed by the places before alleged, if we answer or truly
expound the places, we shall then sufficiently perceive, how weak it is, for
the confirmation of that whereunto they are alleged. For the place of Isaiah,
whether we consider the general drift of the Prophet in that chapter which is
to comfort the Church, by propounding unto them many sweet promises,
specially in the 11. first verses of the chapter, or respect the particular
words that they press, yet shall we see that no such thing as the discomfort
of doubting or distrust, can be inferred thereupon, but rather strong and sound
consolation: for over and besides the scope of the Prophet already touched, the
holy Ghost minds to show in ver. 12.13. in an excellent and lofty form of
words, that the promises before made shall certainly be performed. And this
confirmation of gods promises is drawn from two special places. First from a
comparison of all creatures, with the creator himself, whose nature strength
labor etc. do approach nothing near unto God, and good reason it should so be,
not only because that that they have, they have from him, and he is greater
then all yea without them able to do what he will and this, is contained in the
12.13.14.15.16.17. verses, and the other is from a declaration of Gods singular
grace and works, vouchsafed particularly to Abraham, and to his seed not
only after the flesh, but after the spirit, that is to say the Church, in
the rest of the verses. Now in the particular verses before rehearsed, there
are three arguments of the comparison, the first is drawn from the Almighty
power of God, which is manifested by his creating and sustaining of all things:
in the 12. verse, the second from his infinite and incomprehensible wisdom,
in the 13. and 14. ver., and the third from his infinite majesty and might. in
the 15.16.17. ver. Now what is there here that may maintain doubting? or rather
may not minister comfort, specially to his own people, for whom it is
provided, and to whom it is pronounced, as may appear by the first verse of
the chapter it self? Or how does it confirm that for which it is alleged,
that no man knows the will of God, concerning grace and eternal salvation:
whereas we see it prooneth rather that God has no need of man in any respect,
either to way and search out his spirit, or else as a man of his counsels, or
as his counselor to instruct and teach him. And we may almost say the same
touching the place of Romans 11. For the Apostle having before that 11.
chapter. spoken of the reiectio^ of the Jews, and the election of the
Gentiles, affirming yet notwithstanding, that when the fulness of the Gentiles
was come in, the Jews should for all their present casting of in their
posteritiy or successors be called, he ceased with that same wonderful wisdom
of God in that heavenly work or ministry which he would have men rather
religiously to reverence, then curiously and profanely to search after,
specialy beyond the bonds that God has revealed, cries out in the verse
going before this, and in this and those that follow, labors hy a threfold
bridle as I may say, to repres the sacrilegious boldness of sundry men. First
because God is most wise, which he expresses in this verse, and that therefore
it should be most absurd, yea utterly and altogether wicked, to measure him
after our own folly. Secondly that he is debtor to no man and that he
declares verse 35. but rather surmounteth their wickedness with his goodness,
and that therefore no man can justly complain of any injury that he does him.
Thirdly that for his glory sake all things were made, verse 36. and that
therefore we should refer them all to his glory, and at no hand to think it
safe or lawful for us, to dispute or reason the matter with him. Now what is
here for doubting, which is the maine matter? or what sentence or syllable to
prove this, that no man knows, or can know Gods mind touching his grace
and eternal salvation? because God is most wise, yea only wise, as the
Apostle speaks. 1. Tim. 1, 17. shall no man therefore feel his favor or
assure his own heart, that the grace of forgiveness of sins, and the blessing
of eternal life belong unto him. Surely it is a lewse and bad consequent, and
we should be so far from embracing of it, that we should say unto it, as unto
a menstruous and polluted thing depart hence and get away.

4 In the fourth place they reason thus. S. Paul says 1. Corinthians. 4. I know
nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified, for he that judges me is
the Lord. Therefore Paul was not assured concerning his own justification. But
hereunto we answer, first that this argument, even as the former also, would
rather have been placed with the reasons drawn from holy scripture, because
as we see they are taken therefrom, then placed amongst the arguments that men
make to establish that error, but we will easily omit that escape, and not
insist upon that point, as not much material. Secondly we say that the reason
is but from example: which though here it may be good, and in some other
particular cases, yet is not always good: no not in good men, because now we
may say even as the Apostle says in an other place, and another case also, we
know no more now after the flesh, no not Christ Jesus. And when they are at
the best and highest they are rather arguments of persuasion to lead men to do
the like, then sound and sufficient reasons to prove the lawfulness of the
thing, for which they are alleged. But we will let this also go, and follow
that which is of more weight, and importance. As for this argument, if we know
or understand rightly what the Apostle means by these words, it is or will
be easily absolved: for the knot is not so hard tvvisted or tied as they
imagine. It seems unto men that as verse 1. of the 4. chap. he had put the
people in mind of their duties toward their ministers, namely that though
they might not account them Lords and rulers, yet they should esteem them as
such whom Christ had sent, even by their hands to deliver unto them, the
treasures and hidden secrets of Gods kingdom and salvation. So in the next
verse he had told the ministers and preachers of the word what was their duty,
namely that in the execution of their charge they should carry themselves, not
as Lords but as servants, yea as faithful servants who must one day render an
account for the discharge of their duty to God. And because he had set forth
himself as an example, and yet many of the Corinthians regarded him not, but
esteemed him as a base person, he does verse 3. use a prevention, that he little
or nothing at all stays upon the contrary judgment that they had of him.
And least he might be thought to have spoken this without reason, he shows
diverse reasons, why he esteems not their perverse and corrupted judgments
concerning himself. The first is, that when men judge in these matters
according to their own brain and understanding, it ought to be accounted of no
greater weight, then if ignorant men should take upon them to judge of learning
and wisdom, or of wise and learned men: and this is contained in the latter
part of verse. 3. The second is taken from his own person, and theirs
together, as if he should say: How are ye able to judge what manner of man I
am in the execution of my ministry, since I my self, who by all probability
should in that behalf better know my self then ye can, yea in a good
conscience can testify before God and men, that in that charge, I have in some
good measure uprightly behaved my self, dare not yet therefore arrogate any
thing to my self? For I know that yet I am not for all that unblameable
specially before God, or that I should please and flatter my self as ye do,
and this is the argument that the Apostle uses in this 4. verse. What is here
against the certainetie of Paul justification before God: or the assurednes of
his heart as in that respect. He shows they could not judge him, because he,
himself was not able throwly and exactly to discern himself: must he
therefore doubt of his righteousness and salvation before God? Surely it will
not follow, for first besides that god and man differ, it is not safe to infer
upon a godly man's debasing of himself for some respect before men, his
doubting in the sight of God, or his distrustfulnesse of his mercies toward
him. Many a man debaseth himself before God, and yet has hope in his heart,
yea the more for that, because God resists the proud and presumptuous, and
gives grace to the lowly and meek as the scripture says. And though we
should understand it of justification before God yet other places of scripture
and some thing in this (for the spirit is not contrary to it self) should
declare it. For surely the Apostle here doubts not, whether the newenes of
life and good works which he being renewed had done, were seals and pledges
unto him of this, that he was justified before God, but plainly and simply
denies that by the^ he was justified, which as we may confirm by an other
place of the Apostle Phil. 3. when he says that he has no confidence in the
flesh, and that if any other man thinks he has ought whereof he might trust
in the flesh, much more he who touching the righteousness which was in the law
was unrebukable, some thinks it stands upon religious reason, because all
our righteousness, are as filthy and stained clothes, and when we have done
all that we can do we are unprofitable servants, so many defects, yea
corruptions cleave unto our best, and most religious duties as we perform
the^, yea it should seem that he in this very place renders a reason of it,
because that though he were unblameable before men, yet he could not by his
works stand before Gods judgments, or God himself, who requires such
perfect obedience, that if a man perform not all things commanded in his law,
he subiecteth him to the curse thereof, or as Saint Ieames says chap. 2. He
that offe^deth in one, is guilty of them al And so if you will needs
understand it of this justification the Apostle shows, that he had need of
another righteousness then his own, namely the absolute and perfect
righteousness of Christ the mediator, which he may safely oppose against gods
wrath and judgment, and be thereby justified and accepted even unto eternal
life. And of this justification, because it is absolute and infinite, he never
speaks doubtfully, but always resolutely, as Romans 5. Being justified by
faith we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And again
Romans 8 It is god that justifies, who shall condemn. So that we see and may
say, that take it which way they will or can, it can not or will not, in the
truth of the spirit, speak that they would have it, or prove that for which
they produce it.

5 A fifth argument they frame thus, we are uncertain say they concerning
predestination or election, that is as they themselves expound it or must
expound it, we cannot out of Gods word show, whom God has chosen unto
himself, unless besides and without the word we have some special or
particular revelation: therefore we are uncertain, and by consequent doubt also
concerning Gods grace of forgiveness of sins, salvation, etc. Hereunto we
answer, that we deny the antecedent of this Enthymenie, or maimed syllogism:
and we have good reason so to do, yea many good reasons indeed. For first this
is false, which they say, that we cannot by Gods word be assured of
predestination or election. For God has as plainly and ple^tifully propounded
that point, as possibly may be, and that not only by affirming it here and
there, in some short sentences, but by large deductions, and as it were
discourses and treatises made of purpose concerning it, as may appear from the
middle of the eight chapter of the epistle unto the Romans, to the end of 11.
chapter of the same epistle, and also Ephesians. 1. and sundry other places. But if
they will say they mean it of persons elected, and not of the doctrine, and
indeed so their exposition seems to lead that way, yet then we tell them also
that is false and faulty as the former. For by the word of God we are able not
only rightly to judge of that which is past concerning the reiection of the
Jews, the election of the Gentiles, etc. but also both probably together and
charitably to judge of others, as we see the Apostle Peter does of the
strangers that dwelt here and there. 1. Pet. 1. verse 2, Yea and of some
natural persons also as John does in his second Epistle to the elected Lady:
and certainly also to determine concerning our own estates that way, whether we
consider our selves by our selves singularly, or as we are joined with the rest
of Gods elect, we saying of our selves and of them in our measure touching the
forgiveness of our sins, as Saint John says for himself and the faithful
in that behalf. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus
Christ the righteouse, and he is the reconciliation for our sins, etc. And
concerning gods love toward us in Jesus Christ for eternal life, as Saint
Paul speaks of himself, and the sound members of the Church, saying, I am
persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present nor things to come nor height nor depth, nor any
other creature shallbe able to separate us, from the love of god which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, And in another place: We know that if our earthly house
of this tabernacle be destroyed we have a building given of God, that is an
house not made with hands but eternal in the heavens. And this we judge not
so much by Gods eternal election it self, though we know, believe, and
persuade our own hearts, that such a thing there is in God, because that is
always hidd in himself, even as we may say in the bosom and breast of his
everlasting free knowledge, though by many good means, as we shall hear
anon he discovers the same unto us, but by certain and assured infallible
notes that he has given us in his word, by which we may know and be assured
for our selves, and according to truth and charity may judge of others, and
that without any special revelation, as these men fantasy, that we are of the
number of gods elect, as if god give us an effectual calling through the
ministry of the word, and working of the spirit, and make us comfortably to
feel the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and a steadfast hope of eternal
glorification, we may assure our selves of our election, as we may perceive by
that the Apostle says. Romans 8. Whom he has predestinate the^ also he has
called, and whom he has called them also he has justified, and them whom he
has justified, them he has also glorified: and 2. Timoth. 1. God has saved
us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us through Ieses
Christ before the world was as also if he give us care and conscience of
well-doing, it pleadgeth the same grace unto us, according to which Saint Peter
says, give diligence to make your calling and election sure. And therefore we
see that gods election, even as it is manifested unto us in gods word, is far
of from overthrowing, our certainety and hope of salvation, that looking upon
it, and into it, as he would have us judge of it, it does indeed confirm and
establish the same, both as in respect of it self because so it is always
sure and certain, and also as in regard of our fainting hearts and feeble
hope, which by this means are vpheld, as the Churches. Canticl. 2. was stayed
with flagons, and comforted with appells. As for that which they speak of
particular and special revelation, it is against the truth of holy Scriptures
and grounds of christian religion, for God having in these latter days spoken
unto us in the person of his son and absolutely and fully revealed his will
in his word, with this threatening that whosoever adds thereunto, upon him
shall be powered forth all the plagues written therein, he has taught us thereby,
to cast away and reject as devilish and abominable all such conceits, besides
that it strongly sauoureth of Anabaptistrie, which for many fond fantasies of
their own have nothing to say, but only pretend odd revelations or visions.
But yet our adversaries urge this point further and say: that men must beware
of rash entering into, ha^dling or hearing, of that same reverend and hidd
mystery of gods predestination. And who will not say so, as well as they. But
let us see whether this be a good argument: Gods predestination must not be
rashly rushed into, either for hearing or handling, therefore men must doubt
of Gods favor that way, and every other way besides: it follows not. No more
then this. The sacred authority of princes and magistrates, must not be
esteemed or violated as a light thing: therefore subjects must doubt whether
their princes favor, or affect them, me thinks it would rather follow.
There is in god such high and heavenly things, therefore we should be better
persuaded of his might, goodwill, favor etc. as in princes their majesty,
authority, etc. should assure their subjects of love, care and all for their
defense. But we will come to the point, we take that to be rash presumption in
the matter of this mystery, when either we look into this same hidden, and
secret counsel of god, as it is in it self or in him alone, separated from
those testimonies and tokens that he has given us to discern it by: or when
we willbe more curious in it, then he has bin pleased to manifest in his word.
Now that this is to be avoided, and to be taken heed of, as a high sin and the
infectio^ of our souls, every man will confess, because it is to be wise
above measure, and in the things that God would not have us acquainted withal.
And we know that we must not judge of this matter, a priori, as the school me^
say, that is by things going before, for we know them not, but by things
following, which may be discerned, because they are described and set down
unto us in the word: nor yet besides or without the word, for then we shall
wa^der in darkness more gross then that of Egypt, and be ouertake^ with many
odd and swimming conceits. But we must out of the word and by consequents
according to the word determine of the matter, otherwise we shall not only
speak at adventure but fail, because there and not else where, God has for
this, and al other matters and mysteries, plainly and plentifully revealed his
will. And though it be true that even the writings before the law was given
and after it was delivered do describe this matter unto us, yet we must
principally fetch it from the gospel, because therein God does especially
discover, the decrees that he has made with himself from before all times,
concerning our salvation, in which Gospel we shall see, more testimonies and
tokens given unto us, for the assurance of our hearts in it, then as yet we
have heard of, as Christ's death yea the death of the cross for the redemption
of mankind: the mystery of the calling both of Jews and Gentiles by the
ministry of the word: says and repentance given unto men, through the
hearing of the word preached: the justifying and saving of them which through
faith believe in Christ, and by means thereof take hold of him to eternal
life: and lastly the testimony and pleadge of the spirit, bearing record unto
our spirits that we are Gods sons, yea heirs, yea fellow heirs with our
Savior Christ, in which respect it is also else where called the earnest of
our inheritance. Ephesians the first ver. 14. And this I think may suffice for
this point.

6 Their sixth argument or reason is thus framed. He that has not in himself
the perfect obedience of gods law, cannot certainly conclude that he pleases
god, but must of necessity still doubt: because we know that nothing can
please god but perfect obedience: and again this condition is added to the
law, do this and thou shall live: also keep the co^mau^dements etc. But no
man has in him that perfect obedience: therefore no man can certainly
conclude that he pleases God. To all which we answer that we have many things
justly to except against it: As first that the mayor or proposition is not
only frail but false, in the sense that they set it down in, yea though that
it have adjoined unto it a double reason to strengthen it withal. For a man
may have a good thing, yea that good thing they speak of, namely perfect
obedience in himself, though not of himself and yet be sure that by reason of
that which from another is imputed unto him, he pleases God. If they would
have dealt plainly and have said thus, he that has neither in himself, nor
of himself perfect obedience, cannot be sure that he pleases God: and so have
adjoined unto it such a minor as follows, namely that no man has either in
himself, or of himself, that perfect obedience, therefore etc. it had been
somewhat to the purpose I confess: but then their falsehood, would more easily
have been espied, and that made them to halt or at the least to dissemble in
using this term only, in himself, and leaving at that other of himself, of
which also no doubt they mean it, and in other places enforce it very far,
and that in plain terms and audible voice, though here they me^tio^ it not.
For we, the faithful I mean, having the righteousness of Christ communicated
and imputed unto us, have it in our selves, though indeed not of our selves,
and from the same reap singular consolation and assurance, yea much more then
from any righteousness, we have or can have of our own. For our own could
be no better when it were at the best, then that which our first parents had
by creation, and yet we see that notwithstanding the excellency and
integrity thereof, they were subject to falling as the event declared: but we
ingrafted into Christ, are free from that fear, that so having in that and
many other respects more then we lost in Adam, our comfort might be the more
large and certain. By all which we may perceive that the Mayor, both in the
words of it, and in their meaning is untrue or at the least comes short of
that it should, in that it excludes or mentions not, the absolute and
perfect obedience of our Savior, with which being clothed, as if it were with
the unspotted garment of our elder brother, we cannot choose but stand as pure
and clean in the sight and presence of Almighty God: As for the proofs
adjoined to the proposition, we confess the truth of them in themselus:
though we cannot but acknowledge, that they are impertinently and to no purpose
alleged or brought in here, for though we have none of our own, yet we have
Christ's absolute obedience imputed unto us, which is as our own, in as much as
he is our head, and we his members, and he and we make but one body, in as
much therefore as he is the person, with whom only God is well pleased, and
in whom alone he has reconciled us unto himself, accepting of his offering of
himself once for all, as a full and sufficient price not only to pay our
debts, and to redeem us out of prison, but to bring us into the glorious
liberty of the sons of god we should no more doubt of this, then if one
having paid our debtes, we were sure to be acquitted and discharged thereof: no
not so much of this, as of that, because men that have satisfied for us may
demand it again, and molest us if we pay it not: whereas our Savior Christ
will not or cannot do, in the exceeding pity and compassion of his love
toward us, any such thing. And as for the places alleged we answer, that
though in our faylings and fallinges we having not performed the things that
are commanded us, they may and do make us to doubt as in respect of our
unworthiness, yet never were they propounded by God to make us doubt of, or
distrust his power, good will, etc. toward us, but rather as to set out the
absolute righteousness that is in him and our manifold and continual breaches
of his law, so it may cause us to go out of our selves, and to fly from him as
a severe judge, and to run unto Jesus Christ, who is placed between him and
us, not only to remove and take away all his wrath, but to purchase all his
favor, and so the law by that means, both in the light of it and in the
threts of it, and our breaking of it, and every way indeed become as the
Apostle says our scholmaster to lead us unto Christ. And though that this may
suffice for full answer unto all, yet it likes us a little further to enlarge
our selves herein. If our justification before God and reconciliation with God,
did depend either of the law it self, or of the dignity and worthiness of
our works, then the mayor proposition should of necessity be true, but that
cannot be because the law is not given to justify but to condemn rather, and
we know that all our righteousness, is as a defiled cloth, and so indeed we
should never surely conclude with our selves touching our salvation, or find
peace of conscience at home in our hearts. So that neither of those being true
the mayor or proposition cannot be sound or right. But since our justification
before God, and reconciliation with God is not of the law, or of the dignity
of our works: but is from Christ's absolute obedience: and the holy gospel
which every where teaches, that Christ was therefore sent and came into the
world, that he might save sinners, and redeeming us from the curse of the law
might make us righteouse through faith in him. The mayor or proposition,
separated as we see it is from Christ, and understood as it must be, and may
appear by the minor, not of Christ's but of our obedience, can not be true.
Besides since the word generally, and more particularly the Gospel, a special
part of it, every where instructs us, not to respect our own dignity or
worthiness (which indeed is none, but all manner of unworthiness) nor yet to
behold our own unworthiness otherwise then to humble us before God and in
our selves, and to make us to run unto Christ and to his righteousness, more
earnestly and speedily then we do, but sends us unto Christ and to his merit
and worthiness, that so for his sake we may be reconciled unto God that is to
say, both justified and sanctified before him and received unto eternal life,
there is no reason to receive, but much and great reason to refuse this minor,
as unsound insufficient, either utterly excluding or else no whit at all
mentioning Christ, who of god is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and salvation, and in whom being justified through faith we
have peace toward god, etc. Yea we say further, that since by the law
righteousness cannot come unto men, as the Apostle shows in many places of his
writings, and namely in his epistles to the Romans and Galathians, the
doctrine of the Gospel was therefore made manifest, that both it might
discover unto us, a mean, a manner, yea and matter of justification, that in
the law could not be found out, and also teach us how to appropriate and
apply the same unto our own hearts. Lastly concerning the minor we answer,
and say that no man has in himself, as of himself that perfect and obedience
of the law that they speak of. Howebeit we are assured that all that have
Christ have it, because they do by faith lay hold of Christ, and his perfect
obedience: the want or lack of then own in themselves, being so far of from
hindering Christ's righteousness to them and in them, that it rather furthereth
them thereto. For he that is filled with his own can have no part of Christ's,
the reason is because he that is full, though it be but of airy and windy
matter, or as we say bad repletions, can hardly or not at all till he be purged
of that admit any more: but also because there is such a flat opposition,
between Christ's righteousness and man's, that they cannot both be, at one and
the self same time, in one and the self same subject: but the having of the
one is the privation of the other: as the Apostle shows in many places of his
writings, and namely Romans 10. verse 3. and also Romans 11. verse 5.6. Psalm. 3.6.
And this me thinks might satisfy any reasonable man, yea stop his mouth,
from barking or bellowing against the truth of God. Howebeit our adversaries,
yet press this point further and object saying: Christ says in the Gospel,
If any man love me he will keep my commandments or sayings or words. But no
man keeps his word, therefore say they no man knows whether God love him
yea or no. First for the form of the syllogysmo: and then for the matter. In
the conclusion there is more, then is in the promises. For whereas the mayor
teaches us, that obedience to Christ's word, is a sign unto other and a pledge
unto our selves of some loves that God has wrought in our hearts toward him:
the conclusion turns it up side down and says, no man can know whether God
love him yea or no, as though our love and Gods love were all one; or as though
God loved not many, I will not say unto eternal life (for that love only
belongs to the elect) but in many outward respects, from which also as it
should seem Christ himself Math. 5. infers this doctrine, love the^ that
hate you etc. And makes this comfortable use of it, that you may be the
children of your heavenly father: who can set his sun to shine, and his rain
to rain upon the just and unjust. Now to the matter. All the doubt rests in
the true and natural meaning of this phrase keep my words and sayings. That
our savior should mean thereby absolute obedience and performance thereof,
there is no likelihood: for he that knew the hearts of al knew also that even
in the best, there were great defects and wants: and to have delivered such a
speech, I mean in that sense and meaning had been by his own words, to have
crossed and thuarted his own knowledge, and to have spoken more indeed then
truth was. Why the^ what is it that he would signify and set out unto us
thereby, surely this much that the care and conscience that the faithful had to
obey his will, and these good beginnings and proceedings that they had made
therein by his spirit, he would accept them as absolute and covered with the
fulness of righteousness and obedience that was and is in himself, and so
present them in the sight of his heavenly father. Neither does that dislike me,
that one answer hereto, namely that this being a sentence or saying of the
Gospel, must not be understood of the perfect fulfilling of the law of God,
for that is a manner of speech belonging rather to the law then to the Gospel,
but of faith and a good conscience, or as we haur heard already the beginning
and grooth in goodness, that god by his word and spirit has wrought in the
heart. of the regenerate. For in this sentence as it is a part and piece of the
voice of the gospel, these terms to keep Christ's saying or word, signify
nothing else but by faith to embrace and to hold fast, the truth and purity of
that doctrine, that in the Gospel is commended unto us, concerning Christ: and
as sound members of the Church to profess it openly, and as faithful
ministers to publish it and spread it abroad, and all as men mindeful of and
careful for the glory of our God, to addorne and beutifie it, and to do what
we can in holy life to make it honorable. And so is it that Christ says and
means also, Ioh. 17. where speaking of his Apostles he affirms. That they
kept the word of his heavenly father. And therefore also to such, as after this
manner embrace the doctrine of the Gospel and profess it, believe it and obey
it in some measure, are very large and excellent graces promised, as
justification, sanctification, and glorification, etc. not because imperfect
works can merit or deserve any more at Gods hands, then gross corruptions,
for as in regard of his absolute justice no imperfect thing can please him, but
because that God, through his mercy and Christ's obedience, is pleased as to
forgive and forget our defects, so to crown his own graces in us, and by
these large promises and performances also to whett us unto perfection in this
life, though indeed we can never here attain thereto. Now the mayor being
thus expounded: and these words to keep Christ's sayings being taken in this
sense in the minor or assumption, we do not deny the minor as untrue: because
Christ says of his Apostles John 17. They have kept thy word and all that
they have and do, in sort as before is expressed embrace and hold fast the
doctrine of the gospel, keeping faith and a good conscience, as the Scripture
says may rightly be termed in their measure to keep Christ's sayings, though
he will not or dare not affirm they do it so well and in such a large measure
as the Apostle did.

7 Another argument they frame as follows He that by the Gospel cannot know
whether we have sufficient repentance for his sins, he cannot be assured
touching justification or the grace of God toward him, or concerning
salvation, for God in the gospel requires repentance of us. But no man by the
gospel can tell whether he have sufficient repentance yea or no: therefore no
man, no not by the Gospel knows or can know, concerning Gods grace toward
him and his own salvation. There are many things in the mayor proposition,
that had need of explanation. First, that word of sufficient repentance, is not
only ambiguous and doubtful, but full of unsoundness, as though forsooth our
justification before god, or reconciliation with him, stood upon the dignity,
sufficie^cie and merit of our repentance, that is of our contrition, faith and
new obedience, whereas we know it depends not upon all or any of these
things: but upon the absolute obedience of our Savior Christ, which as it is
sufficient indeed to take away all sin: so it is much more powerful to
supply the defect of the fruits of our faith. Or as though again, we could
sufficiently and enough sorrow for our sins, whereas if we weigh not only
all our sins, but any of them, in it own nature, and according to the
grievous effects it brings forth, or the heavy judgment of god against us
for the same: we shall find in our consciences, and in truth before god, that
though we would or could do nothing else all the days of our lives, but
repent us of that one, yet we could not sufficiently perform it therefore. Or
as though we had some sufficie^cie in our selves to all or any good thing,
whereas the Apostle tells us, in plain and evident terms, that we are not
sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, to think any thing, much less
sufficiently to repent, but that all our sufficiency is of god, who works in
us both the will and the deed according to his good pleasure: Secondly whereas
the mayor affirms, that unless a man have sufficient repentance for his
sins, he cannot be assured of justification etc. We answer that is false.
For though as in regard of that which is wanting in himself he cannot be
assured, yet as in regard of that which for him is supplied by another, and
accepted of him; to whom that supply was due, he may conceive comfort and
certainty also: for even as when the debt that a man owes, is satisfied by his
brother, and the party to whom it was due acknowledges himself contented
and paid, he that ought the debt, need not doubt much less distrust, so is
the case between god and us, through the death and obedience of Christ his
son and our elder brother. For God confesses co^tentment and acknowledges
satisfaction when he says: This is my wellbe loved son in whom I am well
pleased etc And Christ has paid the debt, because he has put out the hand
vvriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, he
even took it out of the way and fastened it upon the cross, and has spoiled
principalities and powers, and has made a show of them openly and has
triumphed over them in the same cross. And why then should we distrust or
doubt unless we would suspect the suffiencie of Christ's obedience, or the
absolutenes of gods work in giving him to the death for us all. Thirdly this
is faulty in the mayor, that it makes it a principal part of the office of
the Gospel, to certify men's hearts of repentance, whereas the chief duty
of the gospel, is to publish forgiveness of sins, and by consequent
eternal life also, (for where the first is, the latter cannot choose but
follow in the name and obedience of Jesus Christ. And though we will not or
cannot deny, but that repentance is a part of the gospel, and joined with the
remission of sins, yet is not therefore annexed thereunto, that in the
worthiness or suffiencie of it, we might merit assurance, but that in the
having of it it might pledge up in our hearts, the forgiveness of all our
transgressions: and yet not as though it were of our selves, though it be in
our selves, but as it is Gods work in us, he giving this glory to his own
work, to testify this favor unto our hearts of reconciliation and peace.
Indeed if repentance were of and from man it were somewhat that they say: but
being simply and only from God, (who if he do not effectually batter men's
stony and hard hearts, they cannot return unto him) they cannot think or
speak thus but with great sin against God, and their own souls. Lastly
concerning the confirmation of the proposition in these words. For God in the
gospel requires repentance of us, we confess the truth of the sentence but
not in their sense, for that God demands it no man I think will deny,
because every where almost it is said, repent and believe the Gospel But he
that requires it, for these ends and purposes that these men imagine, as
namely that it should puff us up in pride and presumption of merit, that we
should think we have it of our selves, and so therein assure our hearts, that
is most false, but rather because it comes from God, and is the work of his
own grace in us, and appointed indeed amongst other fruits of our faith,
notwithstanding the weakness and wants of it, which are from our selves and not
from god or his work in us, and therefore may indeed comfort us: for as this is
a sure rule, that whatsoever is of or from our selves, may justly discourage
us, and cause us to hang down our heads for shame, and to cast down our
hearts for fear: So this is as certain that whatsoever is from God, may, and
ought as in and of it self, specially when it is reverently received and
rightly used (notwithstanding there be imperfections in them that take and use
the same) yield unto us singular consolation. Hitherto concerning the mayor.
Now for the minor. Whereunto we answer that in the gospel, the measure of
repentance that is of contrition, faith and new obedience, is not prescribed,
my meaning is, that there is not showed how great or how much our repentance
should be, but rather the thing it self, in it self and the soundness of it
exacted or required. So that we may safely say not the quantity of it, as
whether it be little or great, suffiseth: but the soundness and truth of it,
suffiseth, though not before God neither, for there is want in us and our good
works that way, yet as in regard of our selves, and our own assurance: for
though it be not sufficient, for our purpose or before God, yet it may suffice
for another, and as in regard of our selves. For even as not the quantity so
much as the quality of faith, in the truth and steadfastness of it is it that
in some sort commends us to God, but specially ministers much comfort to
our own consciences: And as not long and many prayers: but short and sweet as
we may say, yea so do we say and believe also, touching all other fruits of
our faith and namely our repentance. And let this suffice for this point.

8 Their eight argument they make thus: Pride is a vice displeasing God, on the
other side humility and modesty, is a virtue that he takes delight in. But
for a man to say, that he is in Gods favor, and is assured of eternal
salvation, is a point of arrogancy, as again to doubt whether he be in Gods
favor, a token of modesty and humility. Therefore for a man to say that he
is sure he is in Gods favor, is a soul fault, and to doubt of it, is a
goodly virtue. The mayor of this proposition is as clear as possible can be,
and to be proved by many places of the Scripture, and particularly by this,
God resists the prouds and gives grace to the humble. And therefore we say
nothing to it, but willingly yield and submit our selves to the truth thereof.
But the minor is corrupt and false and therefore we deny it, in both the
parts or propositions of it. For it is not arrogancy to be assured generally
of Gods favor for all mercies, and particularly of his grace concerning
eternal salvation, since god himself for the better upholding of our hearts
and hopes that way, has been pleased to give unto us many gracious both
proppes and promises in his word, which also in good time he will perform
unto us: as he has done to many of his faithful servants, who have gone
before us in the flesh and in the faith. For this and not that is arrogancy
indeed to take that which does not belong unto us, or to presume of this or
that which we have not, and yet deceived in our own hearts imagine we have it:
or else having it, to be puffed up with a conceit of having more then we enjoy:
or else inioying it to be proud of it, either as though we had not received it,
or as though God had given it us to that end to make us swell over others But
to assure our selves of Gods grace and of eternal life, is a doctrine that God
has delivered in his word, for the good and stay of his own people, as we
have already heard heretofore, and should again hereafter hear it proved
more at large, and therefore we can not arrogate or take any more unto our
selves, then that that in regard of the free favor of God belongs unto us:
and presume here we cannot, or be proud, whether we have it or have not: for it
were madness to be lifted up with that we have not: and since we have it not of
our selves but from another: we may say as the Apostle says, what have thou
that ihou have not received, and if thou have received it, why reioycest thou,
as though thou hadest not received it. And again we know God gives no graces
to any evil end, howesoeuer man in his own corruption, and Satan in his
malice against him, abuse them many times thereto, but as the graces themselves
are good, so both he in his purpose does, and we in our practice ought to aim
at good ends and effects, that so the one answering the other he might have
glory other me^ good, and our selves comfort. On the other side it is not
humility to doubt of Gods favor, but distrustfulnes or doubting rather, for
humility, respecting not God, or not reaching unto him, though it be
acceptable in his eyes as other good things are, but concerning men, who when
he considers either himself, his sin and misery thereby or else God in his
majesty, might, justice, etc. as a sharp reue^ger of the same has just
occasion to be thrown down is a holy and blessed virgin, whereas
distrustfulnesse or doubting arising from the corruption of our hearts and an
imagination touching the height or heinousnes of our iniquities, or ignorance
of gods divine nature and holy word, as though he could not or would not
forgive us, is a foul vice because it dishonors God in the riches of his
mercy, and adds affliction unto a fearful and distressed soul. And both
these points me thinks we may see plain by and earthly comparison. For as
when a great prince or person, that both has largeness of power and
soundness of good will, shall promise us much, and will us in the word of a
prince to assure our selves and be bold, then to doubt were folly in our
selves, and discredit to the person that offers and would perform such
singular favor, so is it in this behalf between us and God, whose power we
cannot doubt of, not only because it is absolute and infinite, but also
because he has effectually in all ages and to every person performed,
whatsoever he has faithfully promised: and whose good will we may not call
into question, he having given us so many assurances thereof, as his sweet
promises the death of his son, the pledge of his spirit and many particular
graces both outward and inward: as he has been pleased to bestow upon us. So
that we may see, it is not pride, but Christian humility not only to think
or speak lowely of, but as it were to distrust yea condemn our own deeds
and works and renouncing them utterly to rest and stay our selves upon the
mercy of God promised unto us for Christ our Savior his sake, and always both
in mind and mouth to have that worthy saying of the prophet rise with us:
Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for then no flesh shallbe
righteouse in thy sight: and that of the Apostle 1. Cor. 4. I know nothing by
my self and yet I am not just or justified for all that. One the other side it
is not humility as they suppose, but arrogancy, and indeed contempt of God,
and heavenly promises not to give credit to or not to believe these sweet
promises. And therefore Saint John says: he that believes not God has made
him a lier. 1. John 5.10. and we may see a memorable example of it in Ahaz.
Isaiah 7. who refused a sign given unto him from god. But they press this
further and say, it is a token of humility to acknowledge our infirmities and
sins. And who will deny that that has any fault or savor in him of godliness?
But on the other side who knows not that humility and doubting differ, as
much as vice and virtue: or what man unless he were mad, not only without
reason but against godliness, would suppose that our true humility, should
destroy confidence, boldness, or faith, concerning Gods grace, forgiveness of
our sins, and eternal salvation: since our humility is as other good things
in us, the fruit of the faith: If man did soundly understand what humility
were they would doubtless be of another mind, the^ conclude so. This is
humility not only truly to fear God as a judge, and so to acknowledge in his
sight our sins, and infirmities, but also to fly unto Jesus Christ, and to
stay in his al sufficient satisfaction. Does this overthrow a poor man's
poverty, that he beggeth an alms for Gods sake as we say? or does this
destroy a weak man's weakness, that he seeks for shelter and defense at the
hands of the strong? or does this take away a sick man's sickness, that he
lays it open to the Physician, and requires medicine? no verily but rather
argues, poverty, weakness, sickness, etc. And so does our humility. But let
us go forward.

9 The ninth argument is this. Where there is unworthiness, there cannot be
assurance of Gods grace, of forgiveness of sins, and of salvation, but still
there must be doubting. But in the^ that are turned to God there is great
unworthiness, whilst they know not whether they have sufficiently and
worthily prepared themselves, and performed all the covenants and conditions
that God has prescribed therefore, etc. The proposition or mayor of this
argument is very false, because the beholding or feeling of our own
unworthiness, does no more work doubting, much less distrustfulnesse in the
hearts of Gods people, then feeling of outward wants, makes natural men
careless of a supply. It is a grace of God to be well acquainted with our own
unworthiness, yea such a grace as God only bestows upon his own children,
that so in the beholding and sight thereof, they may more earnestly seek after,
and be more fruitfully made partakers of the exceeding riches of his mercy,
whereas the wicked of the world, are either ceased with benu^mednesse and
senslesnesses of their own unworthiness: and good reason thereof because they
feel not sin, or else see it in judgment and condemnation: and good reason
of it also, because rather they have made no account to profit by Gods mercies,
but to abuse them rather to licentiousness and sin. And that we might be the
better assured of the truth of this point, namely that the feeling of the
indignity of gods people has neither wrought doubting in themselves, nor
caused god the less, but more rather to esteem them: we have many memorable
examples, but for the present we will content our selves with one out of the
old testament and another out of the new, that so seeing the consent of
scriptures and the confirmitie of this truth in all ages, we may the better
believe it, both for the comfort of our consciences: and stopping the mouths
of the adversaries. In the 18. of Genesis, the spirit presses this in the
prayer of Abraham that he made for Sodom, Gomorrah, etc. that he said he was
but dust and ashes, and how could he more debase and humble himself? and yet
he continues afterward his prayer again and again, which had his heart
been possessed with doubting, and vpheld with hope he could not have
performed. And in the 8. of the gospel after Matthew, the Centurio^ that came
to entreat Christ for his servant sick of the palsy and grievously pained,
feeling and confessing his own unworthiness, that he was not worthy that
Christ should come under his roof, does not only make Christ him self as he
was man to marvel at it, but according to truth for the better comforting of
all that have the like sense, to commend him and to say verily I have not found
so great faith no not in Israel: and what means that general sentence of the
word, god resists the proud and gives grace to the humble, confirmed by the
example of the Pharise and Publican Luke eighteen. But to teach us this point?
Can a man be truly humbled in himself, without sight and sense of his own
unworthiness? or can he taste or tell how sweet the Lord is in his mercies,
that is not well acquainted with his own miseries? If any man think so he is
fowly deceived. Nay we will say more, that where unworthiness is most felt,
there is offered unto godly men the best means of certainetie and assurance,
not only because the Scripture says: where sin has abou^ded there grace
has abounded much more: but because God in his purpose, and indeed assured
goodwill calls us out of our selves, who are altogether weaker then water,
that so we might wholly repose our woeful souls upon him, that is the god of
our comfort, and the immovable rock of our strength. Wherefore we see that the
mayor is utterly untrue. As for the first part of the assumption or minor we
will not deny it, namely that even in the faithful there is not only is
great unworthiness, but a very good taste and feeling thereof. And good reason
there is it should be so, they best observe their own ways, they best examine
their own hearts etc. Neither will we much stick with them to yield them the
second part of it, namely that these are good means to make even god feel
their unworthiness, that they do not rightly, and reverently prepare themselus
to the service of god, that they fulfill not al, nay not any in sort as they
should, of the covenants, conditions, or commandments of god etc. but that
they should work doubting in them of gods goodness and grace toward them, that
is the point we deny, and they ca^ never prove: for doubting is not the proper
and peculiar effect of the sight and sense of unworthiness in the Saints of God,
but hastening rather unto the Lord, that so in him that accounts them worthy
of every thing, and from him alone they may be replenished with his abundant
mercy. Only that word sufficiently and worthily which here and else where they
urge so much, in the sense that they use it and to the purpose that they apply
it, we utterly mislike, for the grace of God in our justification, salvation
etc. does not depend upon our sufficiency and worthiness (which indeed is none
if we respect our selus, as we have heard sundry times already) but upon the
free and gracious promise of god, and upon the absolut and infinite merit of
Christ's obedience. For therefore indeed, are the promises published, and
therefore also is the son of God become and made our mediator and
intercessour, because we are utterly unworthy of al or any favor, (whereas if
we had worthiness in and of our selves these things had bin needles) and that
for his sake, and through his obedience the father might declare himself to be
gracious and merciful unto us: according unto which it is said. Romans the
8. There is no condemnation, to them that are in Christ Jesus. etc. So that we
may see, that a godly heart, will easily confess yea ought indeed to
acknowledge, both that he is unworthy (which he cannot choose but do; if he
consider well Gods justice, his own daily and hourly transgressions every
manner of way etc.) and that yet notwithstanding he ought steadfastly to believe
the promises of the Gospel, and namely this, that being truly penitent, we
are for Christ's sake received into favor: whereof if he respect gods
faithfulness, Christ's obedience, his own comfort and good thereby, he cannot
but be rightly and assuredly persuaded of the same.

10 Their tenth argument they frame thus: where there is infirmity and
weakness of faith, there cannot be an assured persuasion, hope and boldness.
But in them that are turned to God, there is great infirmity and weakness of
faith: therefore men cannot be assuredly certified, of Gods favor, the
forgiveness of their sins, eternal salvation etc. We cannot but deny the
mayor proposition of this sillogisme. And least we should seem to do it,
without good cause why, I beseech you mark that that follows. Weakness of
faith and certainety of faith are not opposite or contrary, for weakness and
certainty, of one and the self same thing may be in one and the self same
subject, at one and the self same time, because they are diverse and not
contrary, but the opposite or contrary to infirmity and weakness is
strength. The father of the child that has a dumb spirit, whom the
disciples could not cast out, and Christ told him that if he could believe al
things were possible, upon the speech of Christ cried out with tears and as he
confessed the weakness of his faith, so he earnestly prayed for underpropping
and upholding of it said, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. Mark the ninth.
And of the same nature is the prayer that the Apostles make, when they pray
and say, Lord increase our faith etc. For though faith in it self be always
one: as there is but one god one faith; one Baptism etc. Ephesians the fourth.
And that it has but one object, to wit, God, as he has reue^led himself in
his word, and in the face of his Son Jesus Christ, yet as in regard, either
of the daily increases of it, through the powerful working of Gods holy
spirit, or the cooling or weakening of it, by the remainder of our own
sins, or Satan's malice against us, we may be said sometimes to be strong,
and sometimes to be weak in it: and sometimes to grow in it, and sometimes to
be at a stand as it were. And this is that that the Apostle says, The just
proceeds from faith to faith: and again the spirit of and withstanding
Satan says, Whom resist strong in faith. As also this that the Apostle Saint
Paul says of Abraham, the father of the faithful and friend of God, that he
not weak in faith etc. Romans the fourth. Yea one and the self same godly
man, as in respect of sundry times, and diverse occasions may be said to be
strong in this holy virtue, and weak also. What a faith was this in Peter, by
Christ's comfortable words not only to expel fear but in the strength and
power of Christ's speech unto him and saying, Come, to walk upon the water?
And yet what weakness was this in seeing of a wind to be afraied etc. God
making us in him to beehold this truth, that while we look upon him through
Christ, we are strong and bold as a lion, but when we leave upon our selves, or
the arm of flesh and blood, or regard calamities, we are as weak as water
and ready to sink. Therefore in the mayor proposition, we may well and
easily perceive, that they neither deal plainly with the cause. For as in
that behalf they should not have used infirmity or weakness of faith but
doubting, because the question is not of weakness and wants in Gods Saints,
which they carry about with them not only in their faith, but in all other
good graces besides, but of doubting and distrustfulnesse, which indeed is
wickedness and evil: these two differing as much as good and badd, light and
darkness and that not only in their manner and natures, but in their effects
also. Weakness working in us running unto God for strength, and doubting
driving us for the time, and in some measure from him, to others that indeed
can not steed us, though it may be we may deem otherwise. I say, they
neither deal plainly with the cause it self, nor with the truth of religion
and the word For faith or confidence in God through Jesus Christ, whether it be
firm or vnfirme strong or weak, may be assured and certainly determine,
concerning Gods grace forgiveness of sins and eternal salvation: though not
as in regard of the strength or certainetie of it self, yet as in respect of
the strength, power and assurance of the object, whereabout it is occupied, to
wit, gods mercy manifested in his Son Jesus Christ, and declared by the
sweet and comfortable promises of the word: the reason is because faith though
weak, does lay hold of as much and appropriate or apply as much, as a firm
or strong faith, that is Jesus Christ wholly, with all his benefits and merits,
though it do not so strongly, or as we may say somewhat more weakly
apprehend and apply him. So that the difference is not in the certainetie and
assurance of faith for he that is weak therein, may for (...) measure be as
well and certainly assured, as he that is strong, but for the manner or
measure of apprehending or applying Jesus Christ. Therefore as he that lays
fast hold of a thing, though it be but weak or feeble, is yet for himself as
well assured of the thing, as he that in strength apprehends the like or
another of the same kind: so may a christian man, though he have but infirm
and weak faith be as well assured, that god in Christ will show him mercy
and forgive him all his sins through his obedience, as he that has more
strength of it, and even in that infirmity reap and receive singular comfort,
though not in the weakness it self, yet as in regard of the object that that
weak instrument, lays assured hold of, and applies to it self.

11 They have an other argument, which they do not only frame and fashion,
but press and urge again and again in manner and form following. Natural
things say they are unchangeable. But to doubt concerning Gods grace and our
reconciliation with him is natural, specially as we are now borne and brought
forth into the world: therefore to doubt is unchangeable: first for the mayor
or proposition of this sillogisgisme, we say that in diverse respects, it is
and may be true, and in diverse respects again it is not true but false.
Natural things are unchangeable, to wit so long as they continue so, and be
not altered or changed by his hand that is the Lord of nature, or by so^e
extraordinary course that he is pleased to permit and appoint: for then when he
that is Lord over all will have an alteration: the creatures must of necessity
by right of creation, and by the authority of the Creator yield thereunto. And
this is it that the Prophet teaches. Psalm. 104. saying, All things wait upon
thee, that thou may give them food in due season: thou give it them and
they gather it, thou openest thy hand and they are filled with good things. But
if thou hide thy face they are trovbled; if thou take away their breath they
die, and return to their dust. And we see it confirmed also by sundry
examples, as in the book of Iehoshua chapter 12. where he says. Sun stay
thou in Gibleon, and thou move in the valley of A^alon. And Isaiah 38. Where
for the confirmation of Hezekias faith, in the promise of his recovery to
health it is said, that in the deall of Aha^, the sun return a backward
ten degrees by which degrees it was gone down. Besides it is true in such
natural things as God has created and preserved, yea and does preserve in
their estates wherein ^e created them: and not in those which by some occasion
since, have an addition unto their created nature, of which sort as we shall
hear hereafter, doubting and distrustfulnes is and not of the former. And good
reason it should be so, for the additame^t unto nature as it was created, in an
alteration and changing of the first nature, as we may see even by this
particular if we had no more that for the sins of man, the creatures and
particularly the earth is liable to the curse of barrenness, etc. which
without that it could not have been, and yet notwitstanding this addition,
these things by reason of propagation- are eue^ in this life ^ightly named
natural. And this we might enlarge and prove by many other particulars, that
howesoeuer at their first producing or bringing forth they seemed to be against
nature and monstrous indeed, yet by propagation and continuance of time, are
reckoned amongst natural things. So that we may now see how the mayor is
true, and how it is untrue. For the minor it is true, sin bringing that many
other fearful things into the world, and the same thorugh the taint of
original unrighteousness being spread over all flesh: howebeit that will not
follow thereupon, nor out of the mayor that is concluded that therefore
doubting cannot be altered. For though as in respect of nature vitiated, and
man himself tainted therewith, there can be no alteration or change made, but
rather still an increase of corruption, by reason of that strength and power of
original sin, and the relics of it in us, yet as in regard, of God, who only
works wonderful things both in heaven and earth according to his good
pleasure and to whom alone it belongs as to search the hearts and reins, so
to make of f^^tie, fleshie hearts it is not so but as he can and that with ease
also change the natural course of all his creatures generally, so can he as he
will and by such powerful instruments as he has appointed thereto, alter and
change the vitia^e and corrupt heart of man, purging it so by faith that it
shall be free from the power of iniquity, and sanctified also unto many good
works. And so by all this we see the weakness and infirmity of this
argument, which they themselves feeling and fearing also; press it yet a
little further thus. Even those natural things which are added to nature
created are immutable or unchangeable. But doubting even after this sort is
natural therefore after this manner or sort this doubting also is
unchangeable. But that we know Gods judgments to be such that the wicked
shall proceed from evil to worse, that so heaping up their own sins: they
might heap up against them more just and swift condemnation we should wonder
at this, that men turn the truth of God into a lie, to their own and other
men's hurt also. For first the mayor or proposition is not true in one sense, as
has been showed before, for though it be true, that in this deprauation and
corruption of our nature, natural things indeed by the strength and power of
nature are unchangeable: the reason is because nature so deformed, cannot set a
foot forward to reformation or alteration of it self, but rather will proceed
in the power of the corruption of it, and specially also when it is egged
forward with Satan's malice, from evil to worse yet that hinders not, but by
the doctrine of the Gospel, which is the power of god to salvation to every one
that believes, and by many other means and helps, as particularly the
gracious working of his blessed spirit: this work of changing and altering our
nature, not only may but as we see by former and daily experience is brought
to pass: for as nothing could hinder him, but further him rather, when he
commanded light to shine out of darkness, so nothing now can stop his work,
but shall further it rather, in changing that cursed and corrupted nature of
ours. So that though this be true that by force and power of nature they cannot
be removed or changed, yet that lets not but that this also may be true,
that by Gods word outwardly and by his holy spirit inwardly accompanying and
making the same fruitful they may in them that believe by little and little,
not only be altered and changed, but at the last be utterly changed which is
more. And as for the minor or assumption we say that in this sense and after
this sort, namely that not as nature was first created of God, for so it could
not choose but be as he is exceedingly good, but as after the fall of our first
parents it was derived and coueied over unto us, that so to doubt of the grace
and favor of God for the forgiveness of sins, for the saving of our souls
etc. is very natural indeed, that is to say, that in and through this
deprauation and corruption of that excellent nature, which by creation was
infused into our first parents, and in them to all their posterity, had they
continued therein because we are all in their loins to have been partaker of
their excellent graces by creation as well as we are of their sin by
transgression men do doubt of God, his goodness, etc. And though as in regard
of men natural, or faculty or power that they have in them as of the^ we
acknowledge it imposible to alter or change this doubting and distrustfulnesse,
yet by God to whom all things ar possible, and by his singular help aid, and
grace,, it is not only in his own people much altered in this life, though
the work be wrought by little and little, and as it were by certain steps and
degrees, but in them shall be utterly abolished and taken away, in the life
that is for to come, God working it here but in measure, and there in
absolutenes and perfection not because he is not able here to do it, for what
is he not able to perform to show what hindra^ce we have in our selves
against his gracious works, partly from our selves and partly from Satan's
malice, and also that he might instruct us with holy desires to hunger and
thirst after the life to be revealed, where is indeed the absolute perfection
and fullness of our felicity. But they say further concerning this point. The
Saints and people of God do sometimes fall into doubting concerning gods
grace and their own salvation, and to that end they allege Psalm. 33. and
Habac. 1. We grant it neither need they indeed to prove it, for the
experience that God has given us of others and of our selves does plainly show
the same. But what would they infer? that therefore it is good and laweful?
Surely there will no such thing follow. To reason from some facts or
affections of the godly is not right, for so in Noah we might dru^ke^nes, from
David's adultery, we might approve of other men's filthiness, from Peter's fall, we
might justify other men's fear, etc. The reason whereof is plain and evident.
Our regeneration as other spiritual graces that God vouchsafes us in this
life as knowledge, faith, obedience etc. is but in part. And by reason of the
remainders of sin the flesh also lusting yea rising up against the spirit, it
falls out that many times we do not only leave undone the good we should
perform, but accomplish also the evil that god has forbidden us to do. And
that not only in the affections and thoughts of our hearts, to which we must
refer doubting and distrustfulnes, but even in the words of our mouths and
works of our hands also: and therefore not safe to follow the example of Gods
Saints either in inward or outward things, further then as they themselves are
sanctified and walk in the obedience of the word, and tread in the holy
steps of God. And this the Apostle means when he says. Ephesians. 5. Be ye
followers of God as dear children, and walk in love even as Christ has loved
us: and in anolher place. Be ye followers of me even as I am of Christ. first
to the Corinthia^s eleven. By which we see that though the faithful fall into
doubting, yet they do it not as in respect of the graces of God, which they
have received, but as in regard of the remainders of flesh and corruption in
them unreformed. And yet so as they do oppose and set themselves what they can
and higge and wrestle with their doubting by setting against the same, holy
and heavenly thoughts, of gods free grace and gracious promises, as also the
strength and power of the holy spirit of God, provoking them as they are
regenerate to many good works and particularly to prayer, by means whereof
that which is faint and weak in and of themselves may be strengthened, as we
may see in the father of the possessed child. Mark. 9. Lord I believe, help
mine unbelief. and by the Apostles beseeching God to increase their faith:
this assurance of their hearts concerning favor from God and salvation, being
a fruit of their faith and a work of Gods spirit in them, without which
indeed they can never attain thereunto, and that doubting that they find and
feel, flowing from the remainders of their corruption, as yet unregenerated.
But as men that are in a labyrinth, and cannot tell which way to get out do
more and more inwrappe themselves, so fares it with these persons, opposing
themselves against the truth of God, and assaying to defend the errors and
corruptions of their own hearts. For as though that which they have said
already had not been mirie and filthy enough, they yet urge more claye and
dongue drawn out of the beastly puddle of their own hearts. Thus therefore
they yet press and urge this point. Natural things, that is such things, as
we have naturally in our minds are not sin: but doubting is natural:
therefore it is not sin? we answer to the proposition or mayor by
distinguishing. Natural things are of two sorts, that is either such, as we
had first from God by creation and remain some of them in us as yet untainted,
are not sin, as for example, our fear, our love etc. simply and in
themselves considered, as it is not sin in it self to have that passion of
fear, or that affection of fear, as to our children etc. so that they be
freed from extremities, and such things in the considerations before expressed,
are not to be accounted simply sin or evil. But there are some things now
counted natural, which have both come upon and prevailed upon, the purity of
our nature, as it was in creation, as for example ignor^nce in steed of our
knowledge, doubting or distrustfulnes in stead of our hope etc. and these
cannot choose but be evil: for even as our creation, and all the things we had
therein coming from God, made us to be denominated good, because nothing could
come from him but that which was good. So these proceeding from a contrary
fountain, that is Satan and his malice, cannot choose but be of the same
nature, that he is of, that is evil and sinful. And therefore concerning
doubting say, that it is natural indeed, but not as from our first creation,
for then it should have been good, but came unto our nature after the fall,
and so being depraved is evil, specially when it is referred to God as in all
this question it is: for though when we have to deal with men, specially
such, as whom for their waywardnes, inconstancy, and other corruptions, that
we our selves have had experience of, we have just cause, by reason of their
badd dealing, to suspect, fear, and doubt, and doubting there or the^, can not
be said to be sin or evil: yet as in respect of God, who not only in his
own nature is always like unto himself, free from the least shadow or show
of turning that may be, but as in regard of his action and practice toward all
his people in all ages, has manifested himself powerful and faithful; as
their is no reason to doubt, so we cannot do it, but with dishonor to his
majesty, and so by consequent also with sin to our own souls. But let us
proceed.

12 Their 12. argument is this. No man can certainly conclude, that the holy
ghost has kindled or wrought in him faith and other virtues: the reason is,
because they may likewise spring from humane reason. Therefore no man can
certainly determine, that he is in Gods favor or that he pleases God. The
antecedent of this Enthymeme, or imperfect syllogism as also the confirmation
or proof of the same adjoined thereto, are as false as possible may be and as
directly thwarting the light and truth of the word as can be, for out of the
word we may reason thus first concerning faith. It is either the gift of God,
or it is of nature, because between there is no mean: but it is not of nature
for then all men should have it (though not happily all alike, because there
is now and then some defect in nature) but that is false as the Apostle
shows. 2 Thessalonians. 3. saying, all men have not faith: therefore it is natural,
or of nature and then by consequent it must needs be of God: which yet also is
warranted unto us by plain texts of Scripture, as Philipp. 1. Unto you it is
given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for
his sake. And again, Romans 10. where he says, how they call on him in whom
they have not believed: how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher etc. And if faith from
whence all good works flow, be the gift of god, then must also good works
themselves come from him also, because if the first be from him, the second
likewise. And yet least we should think, that this were not Gods own, and
according to his truth, but a humane invention, the Scripture that attributes
the work of faith unto God ascribes also al other virtues in us unto him. For
that must ever be true the Apostle speaks Philip. 2. It is God who works in
us both the will and the deed according to his good pleasure. and Ephesians. 2. We
are his workemanshippe created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which god has
ordained that we should walk in the^. For otherwise if we respect our selves,
in this behalf. I mean of doing good works as from nature, we must say as
the Psalmist says, there is none that does good no not one, they are become
all corrupt and abominable, or as the Apostle says else where, not that we
are sufficient of our selves to think a good thought (which is the beginning
of a good work) but all our sufficie^cy is from god. Nay which is more, when
God has begunn good things in us, we do what we can through the remainders
of our corruption either utterly to deface them, or so by imperfectio^s
cleaving unto them to taint them, that were they not ouershadowed, with the
absolute righteousness of Christ, we and they both might justly be rejected from
god. And there fore he that knows either nature or grace, God or man, his
word or the world, cannot but certainly conclude, that faith and all other
virtues are from God, by his spirit, and not from man in his nature, even as
Saint James chap. 1. in a general sentence affirms it, Every good giving,
and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from the father of
lights. And the proof or confirmation adjoined to this proposition it self,
for never was it heard in the school of god, or among sound christians, that
faith and good works, might spring from humane reason. For which purpose
notable is that speech of our Savior Christ unto Peter, after the worthy
confession that he had made, saying, thou art that Christ, that son of the
living God, unto whom Christ says again. Blessed art thou Simon the son
of Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my father
which is in heaven. Matthew. 16. To the same end also tends that that the
Apostle says. 1. Corinthians. 2. But the natural man perceives not the things of
the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. And what should Saint Paul mean
else when Romans 8. he says, the wisdom of the flesh is death: and again, the
wisdom of the flesh is emnitie against god, for it is not subject to the law
of God, neither indeed can be, but that it is not in the understanding, will,
or power of man, to know love or obey the good things of god, till he be
enlightened, strengthened and enabled from above? And if it were so that these
good things do spring from humane reason, why do we not refuse or forsake
the word: and resist the working of gods holy spirit, as things needless and
unnecessary? or why do we say the Heathen and Gentiles are void of faith,
and good works, seeing they have as much of nature and humane reason as we or
any other. And besides the observation of our own hearts will show us the
vanity and falsehood both of the proposition and co^firmatio^ of it: for in our
co^uersio^ to god or repe^ta^ce, we sensibly feel both the one and the other,
namely faith: without which we could not convert, it sealing up in our hearts
the forgiveness of our sins for Christ's sake: and the holy ghost quickening
and stirring us up, as to that so to other good works besides: according to
which S. Paul. faith Romans 5, that being justified through faith, we have peace
toward God. And Romans 8. The spirit that is the holyghost witnesses unto our
spirits, that we are the children of god. And therefore Augustine (though
indeed I do not greatly delight in allegation of humane authorities) in a
certain place says well, he that beleeueeth knows that he believes, to
wit, whilst that in the fears and terrors of his heart and conscience, God
is pleased to make him feel consolation and comfort: for they that acknowledge
and consent unto the truth of Gods word, and by serious thinking upon, and
comfortable feeling of the promises of the Gospel uphold their hearts and hope,
they in whatsoever estate or disteesse they be, yea though they walk in the
valley of the shadow of death, or as we say in the midst of death it self,
they have experience of, and sensibly feel consolation. Whereby we may see,
that when a man has an assured persuasion, or a sound and steadfast faith,
there follows a certain sense and feeling of comfort and joy, according to
which it is said, 2. Chro. 20. Put your trust in the Lord your god, and ye
shall be assured. And these motions, senses or feelings, are not certainly of
humane reason, or of flesh and blood as we say, for then they should be in all
men alike, or else nature should be an unequal distributer of her favors, and
they should be propped also up with some outward experience: but that is not
so, for they are stayed upon the word and promise of God, and that not only
without respect of outward and natural things, but even contrary to the reason
of nature and flesh: which as we may see in the sufferings of the Saints and
Martyrdom of Gods people, who ru^ne through fire and water being supported
with the power of a mighty persuasion from God, of which the wise me^ of this
world know nothing or understand: so we may behold it likewise in Abraham the
friend of God, and the father of the faithful, who not once and away as we say
in the matter of his own withered body, and his wife Sarahs barren womb,
conceived hope of having a son according to promise, Romans 4.19.8. but also in
the offering of Isaac his son, he believing that God was able to raise him up
from the dead, from whence after a sort he received him as the Apostle notes
in the 11. chap. of his epistle to the Hebrews. verse 19.

13 There remains the thirteenth or last argument, which they usually make
for the maintenance of their corrupt doctrine touching doubting, which though
it come in the last place has as little force, as any of the former, if not
less. And they frame it after this manner. The doctrine that begets or
brinforth carnal carelessness and fleshly security, is not to be commonly
propounded and delivered to the people. The doctrine that teaches certainty
and assurance of salvation and Gods grace concerning the same, and manifold
favors besides, in very many begets and brings forth carnal security,
therefore though it were true in it self, yet it is not to delivered unto the
people. We answer first unto the mayor, that look what doctrine in and of it
self, breeds or brings forth such badde effects, it should at no hand be
delivered, because men through their corruption and Satan's malice prone and
ready enough to sin and condemnation, should not by false and erroneous
opinions in themselves, or by dangerous consequences from them, be thrust
headlongly into eternal judgment. As for example, the doctrine of men's merits
amongst Papists, and the satisfying of sin and delivery of souls, specially
out of purgatory by masses, diriges, trentalles, etc. because in their own
nature, they make men presumteous and careless also, whilst by other me^,
their sins may be answered and Gods judgment satisfied, should not be either
publicly or privately propounded: and the same may we affirm of all other
doctrines of the like nature. But if there be any true and holy doctrine, upon
which this blame lights or is said through the malice and transgression of
men; or by occasion as we say, or through the fault, negligence, or ignorance
of them that abuse it, or are offended at it or by it, there is no reason it
should be silent or dumme as we may say, then that the sun should be taken
from us, because it annoyeth sore eyes, yea sometime increases th infectio^ of
the plague, by reason of the badde bodies that be tainted therewith: or that
meat and drink should be with held from all, because some eat to surffetting
and drink to drunkenness. To make this plain by some examples out of the
word. What is more sweet then the doctrine of Gods grace? And yet because some
turn it into wantonness, as in the Apostles time and our days, shall it not
therefore be heard sound in the Churches of God? what is more comfortable then
the doctrine of forgiunesse of sins through Christ's obedience? And yet
because some then and now adays also hearing this that where sin has
abou^ded, there grace has abounded much more, did and do shamelesly and
gracelesly utter these words: let us continue in sin that grace may abound,
shall not therefore this be propounded unto the people. The like may we say of
this point controuerted It were to much indignity and dishonor offered unto
God to make his truth subject unto men's corruption. And it were to much injury
and injustice to men specially to the Godly, and amongst them to those, that
mourn in Sion, to have with held from their eyes, ears and hearts: the very
life of their souls, and the better half as we may say of the gospel, the
doctrine I mean of the forgiveness of sins. For as this is true, that the
abusing of true doctrine, does not abolish the doctrine it self, because it is
sure and permanent even as God the author thereof is, and cannot be bettered or
made worse be humane corruption, specially as in regard of it own nature: so
this is certain also, that in all godly wisdom and understanding, rather the
abuse of it should be taken away, then the doctrine it self with held: or if
that cannot be, yet the same delivered with such holy cautions: as in respect
of the ungodly, that they be charged in the name of the Lord Jesus, but to lay
unclean or violent hands upon the sacred truth of God not belonging unto
them, and such comfort to the godly, that it should rather speak in a clear
and loud voice, then be mute and dumb as we say in the Church. And this
besides that it is gods own ordinance, and therefore should prevail, it is
more equal in all upright judgment, and therefore also to be embraced. To the
minor affirming that the doctrine teaching certenty of salvation etc. makes
men secure and careless, we answer that it is not so, if they consider the
doctrine either as it comes from God, or in it self or own nature, for so
it gives great glory unto God to whom alone belongs mercy and forgiveness
of sins, and ministers much comfort unto us, whilst the assurance of these
things (as we see by the truth of the doctrine) depends not upon our selves,
but upon God alone: otherwise if they regard it, in the fault of men abusing
the same, as we will not deny, but that some there are that so abuse it, so yet
we cannot consent unto this, that for this their foul fault and sin, other
men that have better grace should be punished, with the want or lack of this
truth of God, no more then we would approve of this, that because in some
great persons house, one is given to drunkenness, and another to gourmandise
therefore they that soberly and temperatly use the plenty of the family should
not have meat or drink, or that daiely alloweance which they were wont to
enjoy. But indeed it were much more safe and equal either to expel them that
do so sin in superfluity, least their evil example might infect others, or
else, to have some when they eat and drink, to put them in mind to put a
knife unto their throats, or to allow them less, that so they might not by
abusing of Gods creatures, increase their own sin, and hale judgment upon
the whole house. And the like may we affirm of the doctrine of God, which is
or at the least should be the spiritual food, and drink of our souls.

And thus hitherto, we have not only largely but truly I am sure
answered, whatsoever they have objected, at the least wise, the most material
and forcible arguments that they make, either to uphold their own vanity or
error, or to assault the inviolable, and invincible truth of God. Now there
remains an answer to such places, as they cite or quoate out of the ancient
Fathers or Doctors of the Church: which labor specially as in regard of the
ignorant, who are not well acquainted with their writings, we might very
well spare were it not that we would glady stop the mouths of their
adversaries, in all that they do or can bring for themselves, whether it be in
substance or show. How be it herein to put down every particular place and
doctor, that they use or abuse rather I mind not: for besides that it would
be infinitely tedious, it would be also unnecessary or superfluous: for the
aunswering of one or two, all the rest saying nothing at the leastwise for
matter, though now and then they vary in the manner, but what others have
said, shallbe the answering of them all. And therefore it shallbe best herein,
to be as short as we may conveniently, yet as plain as possibly we can, that
so the truth of the Lord may break forth, and be embraced in her glory.

1 The first father that they do allege is Augustine, and out of him a place
in his 23. tractat. upon John, where he says. The mind is tossed between hope
and despair: It is to be feared least hope hurt or kill thee, that whilst
thou hopest much concerning gods mercy, thou should fall into his judgment.
And again it is to be feared, least desperation should destroy thee, that
whilst thou think the great and grievous sins which thou have committed,
are not pardoned, thou should not repent and so incur his judgment. We may
frame diverse aunswers to this place. As for example when he says, it is to be
feared least hope hurt thee etc. He uses the name of hope, not in his good and
natural meaning, as it is both used and pressed upon us in the holy Scripturs
but by abusion, as S. James does the word of faith in his second chapter, or
else according to that conceit or imagination that these secure men had of that
which in themselves they took to be hope. And though this be true and may
sufficiently answer the place, yet further I say that Augustine in these words
does not speak simply against christian hope, for that had been to have
condemned that, which the holy ghost has commended, and to have disprooued
that which he approoueth in many places of the word, but against such a
conceited hope (if I may give it the name of hope) or idle conceit rather and
swimming imagination, as makes men secure, careless and negligent in the
obedience or keeping of gods commandments. For first this is Augustins drift
and purpose, namely to admonish men of boldness or licenciousnes in sinning
which arises in men, either from a false hope of easily obtaining pardon or
else from the contrary, that is distrust of salvation, or from imagination that
sin is but some light and trifling thing. And that this is his meaning
indeed, it may appear by some speeches, that go not much before these that
our adversaries allege, as when he says: wherefore from either of them, that
is to say both hoping and despairing (which are contrary affections men are in
danger.) By hoping a man is deceived when he says God is good, God is
merciful, I will do whatsoever pleases me or likes me, I will give my lusts
the reins, and lay the bridle in their neck. Why so? because God is merciful
gracious etc. These men are in danger of hope. As they on the other side of
desperation, who when they have fallen into grievous sins etc. as it
follows in the father. By which we may see what manner of hope it is that he
condemns not the certainetie, which we according to the Scriptures teach, is
to be fixed in Christ alone, and his merits, or Gods mercy through him, and
which for the certainetie and assuredness of it, is said in the word, to be
as it were the anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast: but such a one, as
al they that abuse Gods grace unto wantonness, and sin, do wickedly forge and
frame unto themselves. To be short he shuts up in this place or matter,
with the words of Christ unto the adulterous woman: Neither do I condemn
thee. But being made sure for that which is past, be heedy for things to come;
neither will I co^de^ne thee, for some small good that thou have omitted: keep
that which I have commanded thee, that so thou may have performed that which
I have promised thee. By which words appears, that he minds not here to
establish doubting or distrustfulnesse touching salvation, neither yet to
deliver any thing against the assured hope of our souls (for if he had done so
he had spoken against the truth of God and his word) but that he labors to
remove the one, and indeed to establish and confirm the other, whilst he
assaieth as to humble the hard and stony hearted, so to instruct the tender and
afflicted conscience, which he would not or could not have done, if he had
meant to have approved of distrust or doubting: for how can the conscience
buffeted and beaten with fear, receive consolation thereby.

2 Secondly they allege another saying, which the same Augustine has in his
second book of the city of god, chap. 12. Where he says, speaking even of
good and holy men as it should seem: who though they be assured of the reward
of their perseverance, yet are become uncertain concerning perseverance it
self. For what man is he, that knows he shall continue in the action of
vvelldoing, and proceeding in righteousness unto the end, unless by some
special or particular revelation, he be thereof certified from him, who in his
just judgment does not instruct all men concerning this matter, and yet for
all that fails or deceives none. Here say our adversaries. Augustine
plainly denies, that the Saints are sure of their perseverance and
continuance even unto the end. But none shallbe saved, but he that continues
unto the end. Augustine therefore denies, that men are or can be assured
concerning their salvation. To all this we answer, that Augustine speaks
here, of such an uncertainty and ignorance, as is opposite not unto faith, but
unto knowledge, that is to say, he speaks not here of the assuredness of
faith, concerning which alone we reason in this place or question: but of the
certainty of knowledge, which is another matter then the certainty of faith,
and differing from it, because only the elect have this, and many besides
them have that other. Signifying that we are not sure of perseverance, and
therefore not of salvation neither, to wit by the certainty of our knowledge,
and yet not denying our assurance of it by the certainetie of faith. And this
we may perceive even out of Augustine himself, and so make him his own best
expositour. For first going about to prove that which he said, namely that
Saints and holy men are not allwaies assured of their perseverance, he adds
and says, who knows (and not who believes) unless by some special
revelation he be assured thereof etc. Since therefore he means that men are
sometimes found uncertain concerning their own perseverance, because no man
knows that he shall perseueare in his proceeding in righteousness, it is
evident that he meant this his speech, of that uncertainty and of that
ignorance, which is opposite to knowledge, and not of that which is opposite to
faith (and differ as much one of them from another as knowledge and faith do)
that is to say, that he affirms of the Saints, that they know not, that they
shall persevere in the very action and going forward of justice: and not that
they believe it not or ought not to believe it, that by Gods grace through
Christ they shallbe saved and vpheld, both to continue unto the end, and so
perseuering to depart out of this life, yea he will rather have men to believe
this, for he adds. But he will make us continue even unto the end of our
lives in himself, to whom we daily say, lead us not into temptation. Secondly
when he says: who knows whether he shall continue in the action and
proceeding of righteousness, he presently adioyneth, unless he be by some
revelation certified from him etc. therefore we may plainly perceive that he
means such a manner of knowledge concerning some special matter or thing to
come yea such a knowledge also as is manifested by revelation, which in our
days is ceased and we having now no other way whereby god has revealed his
will then by his word: which though it speak not so particularly and severally
unto every one as former visions and revelations did, yet does it deliver
matter of no less certainety and as much to be believed then those revelations
did, as may perceive by that of Luke 16. They have Moses and the Prophets if
they will not hear them, neither will they believe though a man should rise
again from the dead. Thirdly the same Augustine in his book of the good of
perseverance, does from the second chapter to the seventh, and at large even
according to Cyprians judgment if I be not deceived, show, that the Saints of
God do in every petition of the Lords prayer pray for the gift and grace of
perseverance. How rightly this is gathered or done I mind not now to determine,
only from hence it appears, that all the true and right believing fathers,
and particularly Augustine does teach, that since such a grace is prayed for and
prayer cannot proceed but from faith: for how shall they call upon him in
whom they believe not, and from prayer there must be abandoned al doubting,
that therefore howesoeuer they did not certainly know yet they did assuredly
believe, that they should be vphelde to persevere even unto the end. Therefore
we may safely say that Augustine at no hand would attribute to the Saints any
uncertainty of faith touching their peiseuerance, o^ did think that they
should doubt, of the grace of perseverance, for which they were to pray, or
would have them as uncertain or doubtful persons, to be tossed two and fro
like waves of the sea, specially as in respect of God and his promises, and
other assured pledges that God has given to seal up that great mercy in the^
Otherwise we know that neither he nor any other man, measuring men in their
corruptions or if you will in their own strength, did or do hold that they
could be stable, and steadfast in the Lords ways: and that therefore indeed
they had good cause to be ielous or suspicious, and that not amiss, or to
fear if you will as in respect of their own weakness. And this is that which
the same Augustine openly confesses, in the same book of the good of
perseverance, chap. 8. By all which it is plain and evident, that when
Augustine speaks of the uncertainty of the perseruerance of the Saints, he
understands it of that uncertainty which arises from our selves, as when we
consider our weakness to good works, and pronenes to sin, who is he that
begins not to stagger and doubt; and not of that which springs from
distrust or doubting of the strength, preservation, and upholding of god: for
concerning that he teaches us to pray continually. But they yet urge this
further and say, that there is an antithesis or opposition, between the reward
of perseverance and the gift or grace of perseverance it self, and that
therefore we must understand, as in the former assurance of faith, so in the
latter uncertainty of faith. We answer neither will we deny, but that there is
an antithesis or opposition, yea and that it is of certainty and vncertenly,
but not of the measure of certainty and uncertainty. For still we stand upon
that that he means it of such uncertainty, as is opposed against knowledge
and not against faith, which point also has been proved a little before, and
that out of Augustine, himself. And therefore the uncertainty, he speaks of
must be understood diversely, and specially concerning the reward of
perseuera^ce, which that it depends of God only, and not of any endeavor of
ours, is without all question: for that God should render unto them that
persevere the reward of perseuera^ce, he requires nothing of our endeavor,
study, care, etc. but that as God himself has promised unto them, so he does
assuredly perform that reward And yet because to their good perseuera^ce,
their is required also their endeavor and care (which as it is in and of
themselves very infirm and doubtful) they cannot but sometimes stand in fear
of the perseverance and holding out of this their study and care. So then he
that in this question can put a difference betwixt God and man, and betwixt
that which is from the one or from the other: nay I will say more he that can
discern in himself, betwixt that which is in and of himself, and that which
is from God (and by that mean also in some measure found in other men) shall be
able to determine this doubt, and not otherwise.

3 Thirdly they allege that which Jerome has, upon the ninth chapter of
Ecclesiastes saying, I have found that the works of righteous men indeed are
in the hand of God, and yet that they cannot now know, whether they be beloved
of God or no: and that they are tossed to and fro, whether the things which
they endure, they do endure, for trial or for punishment. And a little after:
whosoever they are that suffer adversity, it is now uncertain whether they
suffer them through the love of God as did Job, or through his hatred as very
many sinners do. But to this place of Jerome we answer, that be speaks here
not of that judgment, which is to be given or gathered, out of Gods word
generally: and more particularly out of the promises thereof, upon which
indeed both for the removing of doubting, and the better assurance of their
own hearts Gods children do comfortably rely and stay themselves, but of
that judgment which is or may be taken, from the present distressed estate or
afflictions of men, specially of the Godly, from which because God afflicts
or strikes them: for diverse and sundry causes best known unto his wisdom: as
to try their faith, to prove their patience, to make his strength to appear
and be made perfect in their weakness, etc. there can be no certain conclusion
made, or judgment given. And it seems to me that he means no other thing,
but that which Ecclesiastes or the preacher himself does; namely that by the
outward event and success of things, we cannot certainly conclude or know
touching the love or hatred of God toward us. This is my meaning: that he
speaks not here of every knowledge or ignorance of the love or hatred of God:
or of all the means, whereby these things may be manifested or discerned, but of
that only and simply, which is to be felt or drawn from the present eue^t or
success of affliction or punishments: which may appear not only by the
reasons before alleged, because God has so many ends which he aims at in
the striking of his people, but even by Ieromes own words if they be well
weighed, or else why does he so much mention, enduring and suffering for trial
or punishment: and alleges to that end the love of God, Jobs example etc. To
which we may add this, that no doubt but Jerome knew this truth also that
though there were in men even in the best men matter sufficient to move God to
strike or punish sin, that yet he did not always do it to that end, but
that sometime as it is said of the blind man in John 9. that neither he nor
his parents had sinned, but that it was done that God might be glorified, so he
deals now a days. If this will not satisfy, we say we may answer further
thus, namely that he speaks not of or against the assurance of faith: but of
the trouble, that many times the more simple sort have in themselves: by that
same equal state as in regard of outward things specially that is between the
good and the bad. And this may sufficiently enough appear even by such words
as Jerome himself afterward adds, saying, such things as of themselves are
neither good nor evil, but are called by the wise me^ of this world mean or
indifferent, which fall out alike to the just and unjust, do much trouble all
simple persons: why they should so fall out. By which words it appears, that
Jerome did neither attribute to all the believers, that ignorance of Gods love
toward them, neither that he did attribute it simply unto them, to whom he
does attribute but as in respect though not of the persons yet of the things:
nor mea^t that it was in them at all times and seasons, but only in the time
of trial and great affliction for those indeed that do truly believe in
Christ, and that are not ceased with that grievous temptation that fell upon
Job and upon David. Psalm. 37. and upon Jeremy, Iere. 12. and is discribed in
these places, concerning the outward felicity of the wicked, and the miseries
of the godly, they both may and are wont to rejoice in afflictions, as we may
perceive both by the doctrine of the word, Romans 5. and by the examples of it
also Act. 14. and 16. yea even those before named David, Job, and Jeremy: and
they that are or may be troubled as they were, though in and for the time of
their temptation they do it not, yet afterward they believe as the rest of
Gods people, and rejoice as the rest of the Saints, in their faith and hope.

4 Fourthly they bring out of Hierome, certain words that he has upon the
fourth chap. of Daniels prophecy, saying, when Daniell that foreknew of things
to come, doubts concerning the judgment of god saying. It may be god will
pardon thy sins, surely they must commit a very rash action, that dare
boldly promise pardon to sinners. Whereunto we say first that Jerome, does not
here doubt whether God will grant pardon of sin, to such sinners as do
truly repent. For he knew it to be the doctrine of the word, and a free promise
of god in the gospel, that repentance and forgiveness of sins should be
preached in the name of Christ his son: but he justly disliketh their
boldness that to unrepentant sinners did boldly and freely promise pardon, not
sufficiently considering, whether they did truly repent yea or no: which fact
or doctrine of theirs was then and is now, if it should be used, justly to be
disliked, because it is against the doctrine and practis of God in his word,
which will not have remission of sins to be delivered or propounded but to the
penitent and believing sinners. And this is Hieroms meaning, as appears by
this, where he says, they dare boldly promise pardon to sinner^ Besides what
if we should grant, that Jerome says as much as they would have him to say,
must we because he speaks unseasonably or vnsauourely, and indeed so as does
not well agree with the Scriptures, therefore embrace it. No, no, we must in
all things, but specially in the matters of our faith and persuasion, stand
unto the sentence and judgment of the holy Scriptures, and not the words of
Hierom or any other of the fathers whatsoever. And how rightly (if it should
be understood as they would have it) this is gathered from Daniels words,
either in the bare letter or in the meaning thereof, may appear by that which
has been spoken concerning the true and natural meaning of the place of the
Prophet, that we may say nothing of the weakness of the words in them selves,
and of the collection that is made thervpo^: for how hangs this together? or
what strength is there in it? Daniell was acquainted with and foreknew things
that were to come, therefore he must also be assured, either of the general
repentance of whole people, or of the sound conversion of some particular
persons. Indeed if we were assured, that he that had received one grace, were
indewed withal: or if that could be proved as true and sound, or that god may
not distribute his graces as he will, to some more, to some less, to none all,
it were somewhat. But these things being as they are. Hieroms collection cannot
be very good. But let it be as may be, we say nothing to deface him, or to
puff up our selves, but to show that the adversaries have not, nor cannot any
manner of way have such hold of him or from him as they suppose. And the like
may we say of all the rest: whose authorities we cease further to answer as we
because that which has been said to these, will suffice to satisfy the
other, as also because we would avoid tediousness, not only in matter
unnecessary, but even also in that which is necessary, and so make have to
more material points and matter of more weight and importance.

Hitherto we have bin busied and I hope not unprofitably, in aunswering
whatsoever our adversaries have been able to allege, either out of
Scripture, or from reason or fathers against the certainetie of faith in the
favor of God, touching our salvation etc. or for the maintenance and upholding
of that doubtfulnesse and distrust, which they hold in themselves, and would
obtrude or thrust unto others. By all which it plainly and evidently
appears, that that doctrine of theirs concerning doubting, is not contained
in the word of God, or the writings of the fathers rightly understood, or is
grounded upon any sound or religious reason, and that therefore indeed, it is
not to be accounted a Scripture doctrine, or a doctrine contained in the books
and writings of holy men endued with sound and upright judgment, but is
taken rather, as a dream and fantasy of their own which together with with
them will vanish away, they being so far of their preiudising the truth
which they have seemed to oppugn and impugn, that they have rather
established and confirmed the same, so true here and else where, even in all
respects must that be that the Apostle Saint Paul speaks in the second to
the Corinthia^s the thirteen, where he says. We cannot do any thing against
the truth but for the truth. Now we are in as few words as possibly we can
to declare, that this their doctrine of doubting, directly strives against
gods holy word, and the writings of the founder fathers religions reason and
whatsoever else we can reckon up: that so when we see, it has not only
nothing for it, but all against it, we may cast it away with bissing and so
more soundly cleave and stick to the truth of God and his word.

1 This doctrine of the papists concerning doubting of Gods grace, our own
salvation etc. is first directly contrary to two sorts of testimonies,
contained in the holy Scriptures or writings of God. The first sort is of
them, that do manifestly and and plainly instruct us concerning the
assuredness of faith, and the certainetie confidencie and boldness of
believers, showing also withal, that by faith and the sound fruits thereof we
may safely judge and determine, concerning election, specially our own. The
second sort is of them in which God himself by his word and spirit, has
sharply reproved and justly condemned doubting concerning himself, his
goodness, power, word and promises therein contained. To put down all the
particular places of both kinds in the very words of the text would be
tedious and indeed unnecessary, because the truth of the doctrine of the word
stands not in the multitude and conformity of places, but upon God, and that
sufficient credit in it self; that God has given to it. Notwithstanding we
will touch some, and by quotation only refer the godly and studious reader,
to the the rest that we think meet for this purpose and to his continual
reading of the word, by which we may doubtless add many more of the like
nature. In the epistle to the Hebreues, there are two worthy places. The 1. is
chap. 4. v. 16. where he says. Let us boldly go therefore unto the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need. We
may perceive that it is an exhortation inferred upon the premises, containing
in them a reason of this our christian boldness, namely this that howsoever
Christ's priesthood was far more excellent and glorious then that of Aaron,
because he is the son of God placed in heaven etc. Yet that glory of his
should not hinder us from approaching unto him, but rather further us indeed,
not only because he has the fulness of all power in his hand, as v. 14. but
also because he is our eldest brother, and is not only sensibly touched with
the feeling of out infirmities and miseries but accounts them all even as his
own, and therefore we may come with confidence and boldness unto him. The 2.
place is chap. 10. ver. 22. where he says: Let us draw near with a true
heart, in assurance of faith our hearts being pure from an evil conscience. It
is an exhortation as the former, and drawn indeed from the majesty and
dignity of Christ's priesthood, set out and described verse ^^. in which the
Apostle shows not only how that all sufficient sacrifice; which Christ has
offered once for all upon the altar of the cross, may be applied unto us, to
wit, by a lively and steadfast faith, which he c^leth here assurance of faith,
but also how we may be persuaded we have that faith, namely through the
sanctification of the spirit, which he means by having our hearts purged from
an evil conscience etc. all which causes us also assuredly to hope and trust
in god, and to be assured of his grace, because we see we have not received
his grace in vain. To which we may add a place out of the first epistle of
Peter, chap. 1. ver. 15. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober
and trust perfectly on that gra^^ that is brought unto you, in the revelation
of Jesus Christ. In which words we may not only see, a transition from one
virtue to another that is from faith, which he had spoken of before, to hope
which he now deals with, they being indeed inseparable companions and such
as go arm in arm as we may (...)* but also he does very briefly declare,
what manner of hope that is, that we should have, namely that it should be
sound, sincere, continual, and to our uttermost, perfect: yea he teaches us,
whereon that hope staieth it self, or what it respects: grace, says he:
either the grace of the favor of God in Christ or else free salvation revealed
unto us in the Gospel, which also is called grace, because it proceeds from
the free favor and grace of God which is wrought unto us in this life, through
Christ manifested in his word, and shall be fully accomplished, when he that is
our head shall appear, for to either of these, or both of these may these words
of the revelation of Christ be referred, though I think principally to the
latter meaning. But the place is alleged to show that we should perfectly
hope: and is strong indeed against popish doubting. He that lusts to see
more places let him look upon Romans 4. v. 16.17.18.19.20.21. also Romans 5. v. 2.
and chap. 8. v. 38. Ephe. 3. v. 22. 2. Tim. 1. v. 12. Heb. 11. throughout. Ioh.
^ v. 14. and 1. Ioh. 5. v. 13. with sundry such like not only in the new
Testament, but the old also, where we shall see the doctrine it self propounded
and confirmed by many memorable and worthy examples. The other sort of
Testimonies standing upon reproof for weakness of faith or want of faith, and
doubting come now to be alleged and considered of, whereof we have store. In
the first chapter of the Epistle of Saint James, he says, let him ask in
faith and waver not, for he that wauereth is like a wave of the sea, tossed of
the wind and carried away, neither let him think that he shall receive any
thing of the lord: by which we may perceive that he condemns as particularly
prayers proceeding from, or conceived with a doubting mind: whether is a
certain promise of God going before: so all other manner of doubting, whether
is the like proppes of faith: namely promises from God, whereabout soever it
be, as Gods favor our own salvation etc. and good reason it should be so, for
of like things there is the like consideration. And in the twelfth of Luke,
when he will perswad men to depend upon Gods providence, for meat, drink,
cloth etc and all other favors and blessings whatsoever, he thinks it not
enough to say, ask not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink, but he
adds more neither hang ye in suspense: the word by which he expresses this
matter is very significant, for it is as much as if he should say, be not of a
suspended or doubtful heart. For it is metaphorical, and taken or borrowed
from things that hang in the air, which are so uncertain that no man knows
whether they will fall or hang there still. Even so they that are careful for
this wordly life and hang upon the arm of man have always wavering and doubt
full minds, swaying some times this way and sometimes that way, neither they
themselves nor other men knowing what will become of them, or which way they
will fall. In the 14. of Matthew though Peter had done well and in strength of
faith had walked a while upon the water, and Christ had stretched forth his
hand and caught him, and saved him from sinking, yet he says unto him, O thou
of little faith wherefore did thou doubt? which if doubting had not been
evil he would not have done: or had it been a virtue he could not have done,
for so he should either have justified that which is corrupt, or condemned that
which is good, and Christ was as free from all other sin, so particularly
from that. He that will see more let him read Math. 6.30. Romans 14.23. Hebr. 12.
verse 12.13. and specially of Romans 14. where he says, what soever is not of
faith (that is to say a grounded persuasion out of the word; but is done the
conscience doubting of it, or repugning against it ( is sin. And good reason
there is it should be so: for faith and trust in God, his word and promises is
contrary to doubting and distrustfulnesse: and if faith be a virtue, then
doubting is a vice: and therefore faith and trust being once established,
doubting which is contrary or opposite unto it is removed. But though this
truth be as clear as the Sun, yet our adversaries put some exception
against it, as first thus the faithful or Godly have always doubting in them,
or cleaving unto them. What and if we grant that they have the seed of this
sin as of others dwelling within them, is it therefore good? or must it be
fostered and fooded. So a man might say they have the relics and remainders
of other transgressions in them, therefore they are good, or they must not be
striuen against. This were indeed to let men live as they list, and when they
have done soddenly to go down into the grave. For the objection it self it
self it is not true, that the faithful have always doubting in them, as we
may perceive by the hope of their hearts, their prayers to God, and other
duties of obedience to God and sanctification which they could not form at any
time if they had at al times doubting in them. That the faithful do sometimes
doubt, I doubt not Howbeit if they could tell from whence it came, the question
would be cleared. It springs from the corruption of nature, and from a heart
that without respect of Gods mercy and promises is ceased with the sense of
sin and apprehension of Gods judgment against them for the same, which
though it may be many times in the wicked but without fruit: yet is it more
rife even in the godly, who are this way more lively and powerfully affected.
This doubting is not faith, neither indeed does it flow from faith, neither is
it of the notice or nature of faith, but comes from our weakness as before
has been said, and fights against faith, though it be true in that co^bat
and conflict faith does overcome and get the victory at the last: as we may
perceive Mark. 9. where it is said by the father of the possessed child I
believe Lord help my unbelief. For in this question we speak not of such an
imagination or conceit of faith as during the infirmity or weakness of our
flesh, has by reason of the remainders of ma^s corruption, no doubting at al
adjoined with it in the person that has received that precious gift of faith:
but we mean it of such a faith as stestdfastly though weakly lays hold
assuredly of the object of it. For we know and confess that faith as it is
Gods work, is exquisite and absolute: and yet as it is in us, to be imperfect,
and to have as we may say his degrees and increasings. And yet we feel and
perceive that this faith though never so imperfect, then, when it lays hold,
of the true and only object of it, namely Christ our mediator and his
merits: is true and sound, and from the object; which our faith though it be
weak lays hold of, we have much firm and assured comfort. And if this were
not true, we could not comfort our selves, neither in our knowledge, patience,
prayer, or any othergood work beside, because we know in part, we prophecy
in part etc. Secondly some except further and say, that Paul and the Apostles
in the places above mentioned speak of that certainty of their own salvation,
which they had by special revelation and not that they affirm, that all the
faithful have the like assurance. But the answer is easy. The Apostles do
or did not speak only of themselves, but of all the faithful: and not of
their own faith and salvation only, but of the common faith and salvation of
all believers. Which as it may appear by this, be cause faith and salvation
are common graces, so by this because they use the words of the plural
number, and such as do indifferently comprehend all the faithful, yea by the
manner of speeches also which they use concerning the matter it self, namely
speaking indefinitly of faith. And in all of them they make this the foundation
of our assurance and certainty, that Christ is our Mediator, that he died for
us etc. Besides Romans 4. he speaks concerning Abraham's faith, and shows that
it was written before for our sakes, and equally belonged unto all the
faithful. So that we may see, they speak of no propper matter concerning
themselves: nor in these places alleged and quoted, if any special
revelation concerning their own salvation, but of a grace common to all the
elect of God: and there fore this exception is but a mere cavil.

2 Secondly this their doctrine of doubting, stands up against the word and
commandment of God, calling upon us yea inioyning us for the glory of Gods
name and our own good to repent and believe the gospel. As Mark 11. verse.
15. Repent and believe the Gospel: as also against those sweet exhortations
that are given us in the same word: to provoke to confidence and religious
boldness as that of Hebrews 4.16. Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne
of grace that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need:
and that of Hebr. 10.22. Let us draw near, with a true heart in assurance of
faith etc. And sundry such like as as these. For first look whatsoever god
enioyneth or commands, it is neither doubtfully to be embraced, as in regard
of our persuasion because that will breed neglect at the least if not contempt
of him and his authority that commands, yea indeed also of the thing it
self commanded: nor to be sluggishlie or slouthfully performed, as in regard
of our practice, because as god in every thing loves cheerfulness, so
likewise in the obedience of his law: much less may it be deferred and put of,
both because time is not our own, and we have no charter or warrant of our
lives, no not for one minute of an hour. Besides who knows not that these
things are opposite one of them to another, namely for God to command us, and
for us either to doubt of himself or the thing or things that he prescribes.
For if he be God, he must be believed, as well in the things he enioyneth for
his worship and our obedience, as in the promises he propounds, for the
expressing of the manifold riches of his grace, and offering strong consolation
to our distressed consciecnes, otherwise if we doubt him or distrust him
therein, we rob him of his glory. Again we may reason for the better
confirmation of this point, from the true meaning of these words, believe the
gospel. To believe the gospel, I take to be nothing else, but to be rightly
persuaded of and particularly to apply unto our own hearts, those promises
which are made unto us in the Gospel, specially those that concern the
forgiveness of sins here in this life, and our everlasting salvation in the
life to come. But this is not to doubt, but certainly to be assured and
persuaded rather that the whole gospel is true, and particularly this part of
it, that Christ indeed is the Savior of all them that believe in him, for
faith and repentance must be preached in his name: and there is no other name
given under heaven wherein men must be saved but his: and therefore they that
hold or teach otherwise, do not only not know what it is to believe, but
euacuat and destroy faith, the gospel Christ Jesus and al. Since therefore they
that do truly believe, do not doubt concerning that which they do believe, (I
mean for the time, manner and measure of their faith: for I am not ignorant of
this that that which is strong at one time, as in regard of gods grace and
spirit supporting us, may be infirm and weak at another, as in regard of the
remainders of our sins, and the dullness and slownesse of our hearts to
believe) it will well, yea and must of necessity follow that all they that do
truly believe the Gospel of Christ, ought not at any hand to doubt or distrust
concerning gods goodness, the infinite merit of Christ's obedience, the
forgiveness of their sins, or the saving of their souls: the reason is
because doubting here and that faith that God has wrought in them, cannot
stand together. And as for the exhortation used in the word we may say as much,
namely that God means thereby to stir us up steadfastly and without wavering
to rely upon him: or else he would never have so earnestly called upon us
therefore or provoked us thereto, unless he had meant as much indeed as he
urges or stirs us up in words. It is for men that are corrupted to dally
and to dissemble so, and to make show in words of more then they mean indeed,
a fault common as heretofore so now adays in all states and degrees, yea even
in them that for their places and callings approach most near unto God, but no
such thing has been or ever shall be found in the holy one of Israel: for as
he is not man but God, and therefore judges not according unto man, or has
respect of person, so he cannot lie or dissemble, but being altogether good
and holy himself, and delivering as we may, the testimonies and tokens of his
love toward us, means as he speaks so shall all flesh find it: whether it
be in the faithful promises concerning peace and life, or the execution of his
judgments in this world or that which is to come.

Thirdly this doctrine of doubting fights against certe^ty and assurance of
al such promises as god has graciously given us specially those that he has
made unto us for the forgiveness of our sins, and our eternal salvation through
Christ. Of which sort is that of Isay 1.17. Though your sins were as crimsin
they shall be made white as snow, though they were red as scarlet, they shall be
as wool: and that of Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world that he has given hit
only begotten son, that who soever believes in him should not perish but
have eternal life. 1. Cor. 130. Christ is made of God unto us, vvisdome,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, and sundry others. Now the
promises of God and man's, doubting, concerning the truth and certenty thereof:
Whether we respect the things promised, or Gods good will and power that has
promised, they are not only opposite or contrary one of them to another: but
indeed overthrow or destroy one an other. For every promise yea though it be
but a promise of the law, requires faith in it or to it, much more a promise
of the Gospel, calls for faith, whether the promise be made concerning the
forgiveness of our sins, or the saving of our souls, or concerning any
other grace whatsoever, and approoueth not of doubting at any hand: the reason
whereof is plain, because Gods promise manifested unto us in his word, and the
faith that he has wrought in our hearts by his word and spirit, and not our
natural doubting and distrust, they are relatiues that is to say, such things
as one presupposes another, namely that a promise, implies faith, or else the
promise is of no force as in regard of men, and faith implia promise, as the
proper and peculier object of it, or else it cannot be counted faith. And since
the promise indeed cannot otherwise be either seen, but by the eye of faith,
or apprehended and laid hold of, but by the hand of faith, which point the
Apostle shows, To. 4. when he says therefore it is by faith, that it might
come by grace and the promise might be sure to all the seed etc. it must
needs follow: that faith as Gods work in his children, and Gods promises as
from himself and not doubting or distrust are relatiues as we call them. And
good reason both for the affirmation and negation for such as the promises are,
such must the instrument be apprehending the same: but the promises are
spiritual and from God, and so is faith in us: and not doubting for that is
from the corruption of our own nature which has no acquaintance with God or
goodness, till it be altered and changed from above. And therefore we may
safely conclud and say, establish gods promise, or faith is established: and
put doubting on, Gods promise is euacuated: for therefore is it of faith, as was
said before out of Romans 4. that the promise might be sure. then if it be not of
faith but of doubting, the promise is not firm or sure, to wit, to us, though
as in regard of it self, and God the giver of it, it is always certain. And
this is that also which I think Saint John means when he says, he that
believes not God as he has revealed him self in his word, and specially in
his promises: has made him a lier: because he believes not the record, that
God witnessed of that his son. But against this our popish adversaries put
many exceptions: as first they say, that men must doubt not as in respect of
Gods promises, but as in regard of their own indignity or unworthiness,
because we are worthy to obtain or have that which God has promised. For it
may so fall out, that because a man has failed in the conditions annexed to
Gods promises, he may rightly doubt whether he shall have that which god has
promised: that is to say men should not doubt whether God will fail in
accomplishing of his graces and promises made unto us, but lest we perform not
the conditions adjoined thereto, because god has not promised eternal life,
nor any thing else but under condition: or else they mean that doubting is not
to be referred to gods promises but to our defects and the impediments of our
infirmities, least happily we want the accomplishment of the conditions joined
with Gods promises. This is their exception, but we answer that both their
affirmation, in their exception, and their explanation of it also, (for of
these two parts does it consist) are stark naught, for whatsoever they say,
or howsoever they interpret their own speeches, yet if they enjoin and teach
men to doubt whether God for Christ's sake, will be merciful to such as believe
in him, they appointe or instruct them to doubt of the grace of God, because
Gods grace, Christ's merits, man's faith, being gods work in us, are not nor
cannot be disioyned, which they are if men doubt or do teach others to doubt of
all or of any of them, specially if that doctrine of doubting be received. But
we will more particularly look into the words and matter of this exception.
They tell us that we should not doubt as in respect of Gods promises: and who
would doubt of that or think or say so, unless he were some notable Atheist
or blasphemer, who for his thoughts but words especially should rather have
his tongue pulled out of his head, and be justly executed by death, then be
suffered to live amongst men. But that we should doubt of our own
unworthiness, because we are unworthy to obtain or to have accomplished Gods
promises unto us, that we are indeed utterly and altogether unworthy of all or
any good thing from god no godly man I think will deny: nay and if it will
pleasure our aduersasaries, we will grant them more then that, namely that we
are worthy of all punishment both temporal and eternal, in body and soul.
Howebeit this will not follow, that because we are unworthy of the graces, god
should not bestow his mercies and graces where as pleases him, or this that
therefore we should not doubt or distrust God and his mercies. For this is no
use of our own unworthiness either in the sight or sense of it, to make us to
call into question or to controuert the truth of gods promises nay rather if
there be any use of it that way, over and besides the unfeigned humiliation of
us at the feet of god, it serves rather to instruct and teach us that which
the Apostle does deliver in his epistle to the Romans, that where sine has
abounded there grace has abounded much more. Yea we say further concerning
this point of our unworthiness, that we should not therefore doubt of gods
favor or the forgiunesse of sins: the reason is because the truth and
cerenty of gods promise depends not upon our own worthiness ot
unworthiness for that were to subject unto man, but on the power, fidelity,
and free favor of god toward us: neither is it confirmed unto us because we
are worthy of it, or made void and of no effect because we are unworthy, for
that shall never be found true both in mercy and judgment that the Apostle
says, If we believe not: yet abides he faithful, he cannot deny himself:
but therefore was the promise both given and published, and therefore is Christ
also become our Mediator, because we are unworthy, and that the father for his
sake, might become merciful and gracious unto us, according to which it is
said, Romans 8. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus etc. Whereas had not our unworthiness been neither had gods grace so
plainly and plentifully appeared, neither indeed could Christ have become our
intercessor or Mediator. And therefore our unworthiness should be so far
off to work in us any doubting of gods goodness, Christ's merits, howsoever as
in regard of our selves it may justly humble us and hold us from presumption,
opinion of desert etc. that it should rather make us make speed thereto, and to
labor the steedfast apprehension thereof: and indeed we are to set against the
greatness of our unworthiness, the infinite bounty of god in his promises:
which god would have us, as we may perceive by by his commanding of us to
believe, to give free and full consent unto. As for the conditions they speak
of we tell the^, that are adjoined to the promises, not as to make the promises
more strong in themselus or as in respect of God, for so they are always sure
and certain, but the better to seal up the faithful performance of them in
our hearts, while we are enabled by God in some measure to accomplish and
perform the same, we assuring our own hearts that since we cannot perfectly
fulfill the^ our selves, and yet being fulfilled by another for us, we shall in
his absolute accomplishment thereof and righteousness, have a plentiful supply
for all our defects whatsoever, we knowing further, that if many a
compassionate man in the world, do not take all advantages of breach of
covenants or conditions, that another has made with him, God who is compassion
it self, will not deal so with his servants, whom he has singled out unto
himself, and separated to eternal life, notwithstanding their weakness and
wants. And conditions in this case God propounds none unto us by the Gospel,
but to repent and believe the gospel, both which are wrought in us in some
measure, by his own hand and grace, and therefore we comfort our selves, that
being his own work, he will not reject it, but accept it rather notwithstanding
our weaknesses and wants by reason of the remainders of our corruption
adjoined thereto. As for the explanation or exposition following, it has
received a full answer before, and therefore we let it pass, and come to a
second exception, that they make against this truth thus. We are not sure say
they, whether we perform these conditions, that is whether we sufficiently
repent us of our sins, or do sufficiently believe the promises of God, and
therefore that we are not assured concerning Gods promises. But this we
answer is the same poison, that has been propounded in some of their
arguments before put down and answered, whether we might remit the reader. How
be it in a word or two, we will say somewhat. And first we give them to
understand, that their consequent were good and and forcible if they had
proved or could prove, that the truth and cert^inetie of gods holy and
heavenly promises did depend upon the sufficiency of our faith and repentance,
but that being not proved is of no importance. Nay we say further that it
cannot be proved because God in his word has not prescribed a limited and
determined measure of faith and repentance: which whosoever has not attained
unto, he cannot be certified or assured of gods grace and his own salvation,
but therein only requires at our hands faith and repentance, both which graces
as all other fruits of the spirit, are in some more, and in some less
according to the measure thereof given unto men from God. And this may appear
because Christ simply and plainly says: He that believes in me has
everlasting life, not expressing how much or how little faith is requisite to
that work, so it be sound and true. And we are taught in the Scriptures to
pray for augmentation and increase of faith, and to use all good means,
whereby we may be builded up therein, and so proceed from faith to faith etc.
So may we; yea so ought we to pray for increase of repentance and other fruits
and of graces of the spirit, and yet when we have attained through Gods
goodness toward us, a good measure, yet we shall have our lacks. And what
can be more plain, then that Christ says to the woman Luke 7. thy says has
saved thee, although we doubt not the place and circumstances of it considered
to affirm, that she had not sufficient either faith or repentance. And
therefore we may safely conclude, that though we believe weakelie yet so it be
truly and rightly al our sins are forgiven us for Jesus Christ sake, and we
made partakers of all the fruits and merits of his death, and passion. Besides
what an absurdity will follow this conceit of sufficiency of faith and
repentance, for since no man living, can either sufficiently be sorrowful for
his sins, or make any answer or satisfaction unto god for them, or surely
determine concerning the sufficiency of his faith and repentance, because God
has revealed no such thing in his word, and to fetch it from his own head or
heart, will not be fit, for that is deep and deceitful above all things, it
will follow: that no man should hope for salvation, but rather despair of it:
which besides that it is absurd, is both ungodly and uncomfortable also. But
if they will yet further object and say, that no man knows whether he does
truly repent and believe, or else whether he ascribe unto himself the things he
has not. We answer that it is an untrue assertion to say, that no man can tell
whether he do truly repent, believe, etc. For though the scripture have not
taught us, to know whether our faith is sufficient, or our repentance weighty
ennough, yet has it given us certain infallible notes, by which we may
discern and judge of the sincerity and truth both of our faith and
repentance. For as alll the fruits of our faith generally, are sure seals and
pledges of the truth that is in us, and more particularly our holy prayers to
God, according to that which is said, Romans 10. How shall they call upon him in
whom they believe not: so in the fruits and effects following our repentance
seals up also the sincerity and soundness thereof, in our several souls.
Now what these are we may see largely recited. 2. Cor. 7. as great care
clearing of our selves, indignation fear, desire, zeal, revenge, etc. And why
should we not or may we not say, that if in the little light of nature, that
remains in us untainted, we may be able to discern of some sins, we may by
the light of the word and spirit, beginning and aduauncing our regeneration, be
able in some measure, to judge of our own faith repentance etc. That a
believing man may know that he does believe, the Apostle me thinks does
plainly show it in his own example, when he says. 2. Tim. 1.2. I know whom I
have believed. And when Philip Act. 8. said unto the Eunuch, if thou do
believe with all thy heart etc. and he answered: I believe that that Jesus
Christ, is that son of God: did not the Eunuch both know and feel faith. The
Apostle tells us. Romans 10. that with the heart we believe to justification,
and with the mouth make confession to salvation. And 2. Cor. 13. why does the
Apostle command or exhort, to try our selves whether we be in the faith.
Surely he would not have enjoined or provoked men to this duty, unless they
might through the power and grace of the holy ghost, in some measure and
manner certainly know it. And 1. Cor. 2. he says: we have received not the
spirit of the world, but the spirit of God. For which purpose also see.
Ephesians. 1.17.18. and Ephesians. 3.16. etc. and 1. Ioh. 4.15. and sundry other, from
all which we may conclude, that true faith knows it self, and doubts not
of everlasting salvation, which it apprehends or lays hold of. Although we
deny not nether, but that the flesh many times intermingleth that which is in
and of it self, that is to say doubting, concerning the word and promises of
God. Yea our faith in Christ, though it be never so small, yet if it be true,
both holds fast this certainetie concerning Gods grace, and our own eternal
salvation, and also knows and feels that according to the measure of mercy
from God, it holds the same fast. And yet we are not ignorant of this
neither, that many times it is very infirm and weak, then especially when
many sore doubtings, do toss and turmoile, yea make weary our faint minds;
which doubtings indeed are not from faith, neither of the nature of faith, but
flow from the flesh, of our old Adam in us, which point if we know well, we
shallbe made able, the better and more easily to clear and void this point.
But yet they persist and say, that Epicures and profane men, even in the midst
of their iniquities may suppose that they have such a persuasion of certainetie
and assurance. But we tell them first, that our question of true faith, and of
them that do indeed believe, and not of epicures and profane persons, or of a
dead faith, which many hypocrites; yea devils may have, as S. James plainly
shows: and that therefore they do evil and miss the mark, when they compare
not only diverse, but contrary both men and matters together. Secondly that
we are hartilye sorry for their blindness and ignorance, that cannot as yet
make a difference, between the imaginations and conceits of the wicked, which
commonly breed and bring forth in them senseless and carelessness, and the
persuasions of the godly, which as they work comfort for the sins already
past: so do they breed care of conversation for that which is to come. Thirdly
we say, that howsoever the world may fantasy and imagine some such matter, yet
they cannot feel it, or be indeed thoroughly persuaded of it, not only
because God says by the Prophet, There is no peace to the wicked, who are like
the raging sea that can not rest: whose waters cast up mire and dirt, but also
because wanting faith, without which also it is impossible to please god, they
must lack this effect of it, even the quiet fruit of righteousness, and a
good conscience before God and men. But let us proceed to some further
exceptions they make against this truth. Some of them say, that is not
presently performed which is promised, therefore from this that God has
promised us salvation, it will not follow, that we presently lay hold
thereon: and therefore we cannot from the promise that is made unto us
concerning our salvation, conclude that we ought to be sure concerning it, as
if it were already accomplished and performed. There are many things to be said
to this exception or objection. We deny not this, that God does not always
presently perform the things he has promised, but that this should be
inferred, that therefore we should doubt of the accomplishment of them, in that
time that god has set with him self from before all times, is neither
sauourie in it self, nor will follow from the antecede^t. I will put one case
that shall make it as plain as possibly can be. Our Savior Christ was
promised to our first parents presently after the fall, to be the person by
who^e God would reconcile the world unto himself. And yet he was not manifested
in the flesh many thousands of years after. What should they then, or those
that did succeed them after have doubted of the accomplishment of this most
sweet and comfortable promise, because it was not presently performed. Away
with such wickedness I would feign see a reason for this, why we should not as
well doubt of that which is past, so many hundred or thousand of years if you
will, because it is not presently performed, or we behold it not with our eyes
or have the rest of our senses satisfied therein: as doubt of that which in the
strength and power of gods promise, is to be performed in time because it is
not presently done: and why may not a man as safely infer, even by the contrary
and that also as in respect of the godly, that if they will have them to doubt
of the acco^plishment of gods promises, because they are differred, they must
not fear but tremble, with the devil and damned, as in regard of the judgment
and vengeance that is for to come. Nay I will say more, if this be right that
they propound as in regard of the faithful, that they should doubt because it
is not by and by performed, that is promised, that the^ the wicked need not
fear or doubt, as in respect of the wrath that is threatened, because it is
delaied: for of contrary things, there is the contrary reason or consideration,
and we know that to be true, which the holy ghost speaks in the book of the
preacher: Though a sinner do evil a hundredth times, and God prolong his
days, yet I know it shallbe well with them that fear the Lord, and do
reverence before him: but it shall not be well to the wicked, neither shall he
prolong his days but shallbe like a shaddowe, because he fears not before
God. Me thinks rather this would follow: God many times for causes and
reasons best known unto himself, differreth the performance of his promises
and the execution of his wrath, therefore they will certainly come, because
he is no changling. Can we say in reason that which is differred is not taken
away? and can we not much more say in christian religion (wherein this is
taught us to be the nature of faith and hope, not so much to regard things
present, as those that are to come, for faith that is seen is no faith, and
therefore is here commended Hebre. 11. that being warned of God concerning
things which were as yet not seen, and moved with the reverence he prepared
the arc to the saving of his household) affirm the same? we have a by word
amongst us that were it not for hope the heart would break: Let us labor
herein according to truth and godliness, able with patience and comfort to
support us, even unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, to end all our
miseries, and to make perfect our felicity and joy. Whatsoever it be this is
certain, that whatsoever god promises unto his people, he does assuredly and
without failing accomplish and perform the same unto them, though happily not
so soon as the word has passed him, for so it might be they would make no
great account of the favor promised and performed: how be it in that time that
he had appointed with himself from before all times, and which he sees to be
most fit for his glory, and the good of them that belong unto him. For we know
and believe him to be both willing and true in his word that he will, and
almigtie in his power that he can perform the good things promised, for the
Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that
it cannot hear. Isay. 59. And is there not reason, we should depend upon his
good pleasure power and providence, for the time to perform his promise, in as
for the grace and goodness promised? Surely there is, for as all things are
free in God, and nothing drawn from him by constraint: so since he sees and
knows, what and when and where, is better for us then we our selves unless
we will be over saucie and malepert with the Almighty, we must needs in this
respect also depend upon him. To make this plain by one particular, the
forgiveness of sins is promised and in some measure performed in this life,
but the full fruition of that grace in all the parts and pieces of it, and the
fruits following of it, is reserved for the world or life to come. Howbeit he
performs it here eue^ so soon as we begin to believe as appears Romans 1.
But he will give us perfect righteosnesse, and eternal salvation: when the
time fit for it shall be, for now we are saved by hope. Romans 8. and 1. John
3. Now are we the sons of god but yet it is not manifested what we shall be.
and we know that when he is manifested we shallbe like him, for we shall see
him as he is, But enough against these exceptions, let us come to and proceed
in the recital of other absurdities that ensue upon this doctrine of doubting,
which our adversaries would so stiffely defend.

4 Fourthly this doctrine of doubting generally concerning al Gods favor, and
more particularly concerning the forgiveness of our sins does directly
thwart and cross those prayers that Gods people make and power forth before
God, and that according to his will for the comfortable feeling and assured
attainment of that singular grace. First Christ's commandment saying, After
this manner pray ye, and amongst us the rest teaches us to say, forgive us our
debts, trespasses, or sins, shows us what we should do to which if we
adioyne the practice of Gods people, we shall yet more and more see our selves
led thereto. David a man approved of God, Psalm. 32. says. Therefore or for this
thing that is to say because thou show thy self every manner of way to be
such a one to me and specially in the forgiveness of my sins: shall every
one that is godly make his prayer unto thee, that is perform prayer and other
obedience. And the words of the Publicane Luke 18. show the same O God be
merciful to me a sinner. Now as in all things that God has promised us, and
at all times, confidence, and assured hope, is most necessary so in prayer
especially, and the rather because therein we do not only deal with God
aloof or a far of as we say, but in many particularities. And God we know
has commanded not only that we should pray unto him: but also has forbidden
us, in out prayers, or while we are calling upon him to doubt either of him
that has the fullness of power and good will in him, for his own glory and
for our good, or else receiving the things that we shall ask according to his
word. Therefore James 1. it is said, If any lack wisdom, let him ask of God,
which gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man: but let him ask in
faith and waver not, for he that wauereth, is like a wave of the sea, tossed of
the wind, and carried away, neither let him think that he shall receive any
thing of the Lord. And to the same intends 1. Ioh. where he says, and this
is that assurance which we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to
his will he hears us. And if we know that he hears us whatsoever we ask,
we know that we have the petitions that we have desired of him, the faithful
and godly people therefore ought to believe and not doubt, both that their
sins are forgiven them before God for Christ's sake in whom they believe, and
that they may safely pray for the same in assured confidence that faith they
ask nothing, but in the faith of Gods word and promise, they shall not be sent
away empty handed.

5 This doctrine also thwarteth the doctrine of the word, which propou^deth
Christ unto us as our Mediator and intercessour, as 1. Tim. verse 15. This is
a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came
into the word to save sinners. And again in the second chapter of the same
epistle. There is but one God and one Mediator between God and man: which is
the man Jesus Christ. And Romans 8. It is Christ which is dead or rather which
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of god, and makes request for
us. And if any man list to behold any more places let him see Heb. 7. specially
verse 24.25.26. etc. as also Heb. 9. verse 24.25. And sundry such other places.
For wherefore was he borne in to the world, wherefore did he live upon the
earth? wherefore did he preach amongst men, and work maruailes and miracles
infinite and incomprehensible? why did he die and rise again the third day
according to the scriptures? wherefore is he ascended up into heaven? and why
sitteh he at the right hand of God to make continual intercession for us? but
by remoouing of the doubtfulnesse and distrustfulnesse, that we have in our
selves, by reason of the remainders of our sins: and the high and heinous
iniquities that we do commit, he might minister unto us strong hope and
assured comfort. For this we must make reckoning of, that either, we believe
and so are under hope of grace and salvation: or else we believe not, and so are
under condemnation, because as our savior Christ, says he that believes not
is condemned already: for there is no mean betwixt these two. Now if we would
believe our adversaries doctrine, then all these things in and by Christ must
be done in vain, or causlesly, for surely he that remains in doubting cannot
assure his heart that the son of God is become his Mediator, and therefore
also cannot yield him his due honor. For as the Apostle says, how shall
they call upon him in whom they believe not? So may we say, how shall they
trust him when their hearts are full of unbelief, distrust or doubting.

6 Again the scripture every where delivers unto us doctrine, concerning the
comfort of the godly and the peace of conscience that the faithful find in
them, after they have felt the remission and forgiveness of sins. And
therefore Isaie 4. the ministers of God are charged, to comfort yea to comfort
again and again the people of God, and to speak to the heart of Jerusalem
and to cry unto her that her warfare is accomplished, and that her iniquity
is pardoned etc i And therefore also Christ himself most comfortably says to
him that was sick of the palsy, Son be of good comfort thy sins are
forgiven thee. Math. 9. See further for this purpose also, Luk 7.50. Romans 8.15.
2. Tim. 1.7. 1. Ioh. 4.18. and many other places besides. But this doctrine of
our adversaries concerning doubting does if it be received quite and clean
supplant the consolation that God has provided for us there: as we may gather
by the effects, for where there is doubting concerning Gods grace, the
forgiveness of our sins, the hope of everlasting life etc. There cannot be
peace and quietness of conscience, or any sure sound and firm comfort, but
terrors and distrustfulnesse, not only touching their own present estate,
but specially also for that which it comes, yea at the length desperation, for
that doubtfulnesse of heart dwelt and continued entering forth at the last,
because as there is in the godly, through the favor and love of God toward
the in Jesus Christ, an increase and proceeding from faith to faith: so is
there in the wicked by reason of their own sin and Satan's malice against
them, a proceeding from one iniquity to another, they growing in naughtiness
as they do in years. On the other side where there is hope and confidence
concerning Gods free favor and the forgiveness of our sins, and eternal
life etc. there cannot be but joy and gladness; in the mind in the mouth, yea
the whole man is and shall be affected therewith: for it is impossible that these
graces felt, should lie long hid under the ashes of our corruption, because
that being from God who is stronger then all, they will prevail: and being as
the Apostle shows Gal. 5. fruits of the spirit, they will break forth, as
through the power of him that works them in us, so to the glory of him that
vouchsafed them unto us: not only to the praise of his own name, but so the
benefit specially spiritual of the sound members of his body. So that we may
safely conclude, that such as teach men to doubt, they both hinder the mind
from true comfort, both of the word and spirit especially, who has the name of
comfort given him in the scripture for this end chiefly, and lay open not a
little gappe, but a great broad way to desparation.

7 In the word of God, and especially in the writings of the new testament, we
have many things propounded unto us, concerning the infallible testimony or
pledge of the spirit, as 2. Cor. 1. he says, that God has also sealed us, and
has given the earnest of the spirit into our hearts, meaning thereby such a
pawn and pledge of it, as does not only serve to confirm the promise of Gods
goodness in us, but is after a sort powerful in god if a man may so say, to
make it irrevocable, or such as cannot be called back. and Ephesians. 1.13.14. he
says, they were sealed up with the holy spirit of promise which is the
earnest of our inheritance: under which borrowed kind of speeches as of
sealing first, he means to make a notable difference, between those that are
authentical and those that are not: and after of earnest, he would give us to
understand, that as he or they that have given or taken earnest of a bargain,
bind themselves so is it betwixt God and us, See also Ephe. 4.30. and other
places. But this doctrine of our adversaries is flatly against it, which
persuades doubting of all and every grace from God. But surely if we mark it,
by these and such like kind of speeches as we may not only see the great care
that God has to root it out of ms hearts, but also that it is not an esie
thing to be performed or conceived: sealing or a seal we know is wont to be
put to such things as we would have others to take, for undoubted assured, and
that not so much in respect of him whose seal it is, as to him to whom the
seal is given: as we may see in letters pattents of princes, in commission of
great personages, in granting of annuities pensions etc. And the like may we
say of the earnest penny as we call it, both the one and the other being used to
this end, that all what soever doubting or distrust which might any manner of
way arise or fall out, might by every good mean be removed and taken away. And
even so the seal of the spirit is stamped and imprinted in and upon the
believers, and the holy spirit is given unto the^ as a pledge or earnest penny,
that so every one of them might be certified and assured in their hearts, that
the promises of God made unto them, concerning his favor, the forgiveness of
their sins, eternal life, are immovable and most certain, and they the
better sensed and armed thereby against doubting and distrust, which naturally
cleaves as fast unto them, as the skin to the flesh or the flesh to the
bones. And that this is so, namely that the spirit is given unto them to these
holy ends and purposes, you shall see it plainly propounded and proved. Romans
8.16. Call. 4.6. besides those places which have been put down before out of
2. Cor. 1. and Ephesians. 1.4. And therefore as it is sin and shame even against the
spirit of the grace, to cast away that testimony which he yields unto our
spirits, that we are the sons of God, and is directly against the
commandment of the Apostle. 1 Thessalonians. Quench not the spirit. So this doctrine
that leadeah the way and brings forth such beastly and bad effects ought to
be odious and abominable to every man that regards his own comfort, or
esteems gods glory, or would not indeed despise the spirit of grace.

8 Besides we know that both in the old testament before Christ, gave the
fathers sacraments as particularly circrmcision and the passover: and since in
the new testament God has given us the same for substance and effect, I mean
the sacrament of baptism, and that of the Lords supper. In all which no doubt,
god then labors and now assaieth, not only to remove the doubting and
distrust of our hearts, but also to confirm us in this faith. But this
doctrine of our popish adversaries, concerning doubting does infringe both the
doctrine of the sacraments themselves, and the use of them also, and yet both
of them are according. For it is certain that the sacraments themselves,
whether we consider the outward signs thereof, or the invisible grace adjoined
thereto, offered by the faith, offered to the faithful and wrought in them by
the religious use of them according to Christ's institution, were both ordained
and annexed, unto the promises that god has given unto us, concernig his grace
and favor, that we might not only have the same generally propounded unto us
therein, as we see it to be done in the public ministry of the word
especially, but that by the use of the same, every one rigthly using them for
the taking away of doubt and distrust out of his heart, might have sealed up
in him an infallible testimony of Gods mercy every way, specially of the
forgiveness of his sins, and the saving of his soul through the obedience
of Christ, unto whom and his merits the Sacraments do indeed directly us, and
to have by them as it were by certain aides and propps his faith more and more
vpheld and continued. And therefore Romans 4. the Apostle speaking of
circumcision says, that it was the seal of righteousness which is by faith.
And Gal 5. speaking of our holy baptism, he affirms that so many of us as
have been baptized according to Christ's institution, and have had with all the
grace of the Sacrament bestowed upon us, by the effectual working of the holy
spirit of God have put on Christ. Yea the Evangelists and Paul himself
showing what Christ did and said in the administration of his holy Supper,
observe amongst other things this that he said, take ye, eat ye, this is my
body which is given for you: and likewise of the cup, drink ye all of this,
for this is my blood of the new testament, which was shed for you for the
forgiveness of sins. What means this particular sumption or taking of the
elements in the one or in the other Sacrament, but to teach and instruct us
that as verily as those outward things are become ours, we having taken them
upon our flesh, in our hands, conveyed them into our stomach, and have had as
it were al our senses satisfied therewith, that so for our better assurance we
have by the eye of faith beheld, and by the hand of faith lay sure hold of
those spiritual graces, that God in the Sacraments meant to offer, and by those
outward and visible signs and elements, and actions used in and about them, he
meant more and more to confirm our hearts. But this certainty and comfort that
is aforesaid in sort and sense is contained in the Sacraments, this doctrine of
doubting that is delivered in the romish synagogue, does not only weaken it,
but labors if not by violence, yet by fraud and subtlety to pull out of
men's minds and consciences. For these two things, to wit that in the Sacraments
of God ordained by god, to remove our doubting and to confirm our faith,
every one of us have the promise of God sealed up in our hearts, and by the
Sacraments, and in their lawful and sanctified use are every one of us
underpropped and confirmed that we should not doubt, but should be assured of
the grace and favor of God touching the forgiveness of our sins and
eternal salvation, and this that the papists teach, that we are to doubt
concerning the promise of gods grace and favor, pardoning of our sins,
saving of our souls etc. These two things I say are so opposite one of them to
another, that they cannot stand together, nor no more agree then fire and
water, light and blindness etc. And therefore also we are to cast away from us
this doctrine or dotage rather.

9. As in the articles of our faith we say we believe and confess, the
forgiveness of sins, so is that sweet and comfortable doctrine also commended
unto us in the holy Scriptures, and propounded in many places of the Gospel:
take one for all namely Luke 44. where it is said that repentance and remission
of sins should be preached in Christ's name among all nations. But this
doctrine of our adversaries fighteh directly against it, for shall we say we
believe it: and yet shall we doubt of it? Or minds God to have it propounded
as principal part of the gospel, and we shall stand in mannering of it,
specially as in respect of our selves. For other men's hearts this way we are
not able to sound: with our own we ought to be best acquainted. This is to
make God to deal worse with the faithful, then earthly princes do with their
rebellious and undutiful subjects: who if they proclaim once a pardon, must
be believed in the word of a prince: and God publishing such a doctrine, and
requiring belief of it, yea laboring the feeling of it in our hearts must not
be credited. What is it to believe the forgiunes of sins? namely to be well
assured of this that that grace is not only imputed unto others, but unto them
also, and that is the reason also why we say I believe, and why the spirit
tells us the just shall live by his own faith. For though I may yea ought to
be well persuaded, as of the whole body of the Church, so of every several
sound member thereof, that all the graces that God has promised to all or any
of them shall be effectually accomplished, because he that cannot lie, and is
both willing and able to perform whatsoever pleases him has promised the
same: yet can I not particularly feel these graces in others, as in mine own
soul, because I have received the gift and grace of faith particularly to
apply them unto myself and to assure mine own heart therein. And therefore in
vain if our adversaries doctrine be true, has God both appointed the
preaching of it, and called for the belief of it at our hands, since to doubt
of this maine point, is amongst the^ a matter both lawful and necessary.

10 Lastly there are many places of scripture which exact and demand at the
hands of the faithful perseverance in well doing, yea which do exercise and
stir them up thereunto. To put down the particular places entreating
thereof, and demanding it at our hands, would make half a volume. That we
must avoid to the end we must shun tediousnes and not to show some, were to
leave scruple that we could not perform it, or that there were no such places
in the Scripture: we must therefore of necessity repeat one or two, which I
would pray the godly reader might suffice for all. How sweet is that saying of
Psalm. 37. ver 24. 25 Though he fall, speaking of the righteous and godly yet
shall he not be cast off And why so? the spirit renders the reason, for the
Lord puts under his hand: as if he would say, men may be sure it shall so
be, because God that is greater then all, can and will establish him. And yet
there is not all, but for our better warrantile and upholding of our heart, he
puts down his own particular observation and experience not only in his
own person but in others, saying in the next verse, I have been young and am
old, yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. In
the 22 of the Gospel after Luke, Christ says thus to Peter, Simon, Simon,
Satan has desired you (he speaks of all the faithful under one man's person,
or under the person of his disciples) to win now you a wheat: a hard and a
heavy sentence. But yet it most comfortablye follows in the next words. But
I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Which thing he has done also
even for the rest of the faithful as well as for him, as we may perceive by
that worthy prayer of our Savior Christ, mentioned in the 17. of John and
made to that end also. In the Romans how many comfortable places are there.
In the 8. chap. he says: I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor
angels nor principalities, nor powers nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shallbe able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And in the 11. the gifts and
calling of God, are without repentance, or such as he can never repent of. And
in the 14. who art thou that condemnest an other man's servant? he stands or
falls to his own master: yea he shallbee established for God is able to
make him stand. Now if that popish point either of doubting or faling away were
true, then these places proouing plainly that great point of final
perseverance should be false, and so ought not only themselves to be blotted
out of the Bible, but the credit of the whole Scriptures to be cracked, for if
it be not found true in all and every part of it, it is not to be received. But
I say let God be true, and every man else a lier: and let all flesh give glory
to God, and stay the heart of it from thinking, and restrain the mouth from
speaking, where God has given us such a plain and peremptory conclusion.

Hitherto we have showed, specially in this last part of the tractate, that
this popish opinion concerning doubting is directly and flatly contrary to the
Scriptures, that it does abolish faith in Christ, for what need we regard
faith if doubting be allowable? that it does frustrate the commandments and
promises of God, for to what end else has he propounded, but that he might
believe and obey: that it does reprove God of a lie, who in his revealed will
by his word has told and taught us the contrary: that it abuses Christ's
merit who therefore appeared that he might destroy the works of the devil, and
amongst the rest distrust and doubting that it does tread under foot, the
office of the holy Ghost which is appointed to seal up Gods promises in our
hearts: that it does weaken the sacraments themselves, which are therefore
appointed, for the confirming and strengthening of us in faith: yea it
abolisheth and takes away al comfort: for how can we be cleared so long as
our hearts be possessed with fear and doubting. And therefore being directly
against the scripture and bringing forth such badde effect, it cannot be true
or good, and not being true, it is to be rejected. And so we might end for this
point our treatise, were it not that so^e good men desire to see the judgment
of the sonder divines, specially of former ages. Whereunto for their sakes, and
not otherwise I have thought it not much amise to yield.

1 Cyprian in his fourth sermon touching mortality has these words. What place
(says he) is therefore for doubting or distrust? who umongst these things can
be fearful or sorry? unless it be such a one as is void of hope and faith:
for to him it apprertaineth to fear death, that would not go to Christ. And
it belongs to him not to be vvilling to go to Christ, that does not believe
that he begins here even in this world to reign with Christ, For it is
written, the just does live by faith. If thou art just or righteous then thou
live by faith. If thou do stedfastlye and rightlye believe in God, why
shall thou not be with Christ? and being assured concerning the Lords
promise, that thou shall be called, why do thou not embrace it etc. And a
little while after in the same sermon. Now dearly beloved brethren this
falls out because you are void of faith, because no man believes that those
things shall come to pass, which God promises, who is him self true and
whose word is sure and certain. And a little after. Now God speaks with thee:
and thou being whole in an unbelieving mind fleetest to and fro and wauerest.
God unto thee that art going out of this world promises, immortality, and
euerlastingnesse. And do thou doubt? This is not to know God etc.

2 Chrysostom upon these words of the Apostle to the Romans. By whom we
have access into this grace etc. He spoke well (says he) saying in which we
stand. For such grace has no end, neither is it acquainted with bounds or
borders. And somewhat after. For we must be assured not only of the things that
are given us, or which we have received already, but even of the things to
come, and that as well and certainly as of those that are given. For men are
wont to glory of and rejoice in those things, which they possess already.
Wherefore since the hope that we have of things to come, is as firm and
certain, as of the things that are given, or we have received already,
therefore he says, we rejoice or glory in them.

3 Augustine in his book of meditation The assurance of all our faith (says
he) is in the precious blood of Christ. And again writing upon Psalm. 88
Christ shall reign for ever in his saints god has, promised this if thou
think it a small matter, know that God has confirmed it with an oath.
Wherefore because the promise is sure and certain not according unto our
deserts, but according to his own mercy, no man ought with fear to be afraid
or else to douht. And again in his 28. sermon, concerning the sayings or words
of the Lord etc. All thy sins are forgiven thee therefore he says presume
not upon thy own work, but upon Christ's favor, for by grace are ye saved,
says the Apostle. It is therefore a point of pride but of says to set abroad
the things that thou have received: it is not I say pride but devotion.

4 Hilarie upon the fifth chapter of Mat. The kingdom of heaven which the Lord
did then openly profess to be set in himself, he will have us without any
doubting of uncertain will to hope for, because that otherwise there is no
justification by faith, if our faith be doubtful and uncertain.

5 Mazianzen in his consalotorie oration which he made for the calamity or
punishment of hail, who knows (says he) whether he will return and
repent, and leave a blessing behind him? But I plainly know it: and dare
undertake it if need were, to be a surety as a man may say for the divine
mercy.

6 Bernard in his 6. sermon, upon the song of songs. And of a truth where
is there to be found for the weak safe and assured security and the rest,
unless it be in the wounds of our savior? I do so much the more safely
remain and dwell there, by how much he is the more mighty to save and
deliver. And in his sermon concerning the fragments of the seven mercies in his
third sermon I consider or behold says he, three things in which all my hope
consists: gods grace or love of addoption: the truth of his promise: and his
power to yield and perform it Now let my foolish thought and immagination
murmr as much as it can or will, saying who art thou? or how great is that
glory? or by what merit hopest thou to obtain these things? But I for my part
will confidently answer I know who^e I have believed and again I answer
that in exceeding charity or love he has adopted me: that he is true and
faithful in all his promises, and most mighty in performance of what soever
pleases him.

If we would stand upon testimonies out of the fathers touching this point, we
might make a volume. By these men may judge of the rest, and plainly conclude
against our adversaries, that their doctrine of doubting is as well directly
against the writings of the fathers, as the holy Scriptures: and that
therefore it is not a doctrine, of the true and ancient Church, but a new
invention and devise growing in, and prevailing upon, as other corruptions,
when the master of iniquity began to work, or was grown to his height. And
so by all this treaty or discourse framed and written against this popish
opinion or doctrine of doub^ing, we may plainly perceive, what we are to
think or judge concerning the same, namely as of a point directly opposite
and contrary, both to the truth of the word of God written, and also to the
judgment of the sounder sort of divines, and therefore utterly to be refused
and rejected, as a loathsome and poysonfull thing against our souls and
bodies. For that which is not only not contained in the holy Scriptures of
God, and the sound writings of the fathers (in what respect I join them
together, I have declared before, and therefore desire men not to be offended
therewith) but also does openly and manifestly contradict the same, it may
not nor ought not to be accounted, for the doctrine of the Scriptures, or
sounder sort of fathers (of the Scripture I say expressly, because I am sure
that proceeding from one god, and written by one blessed and holy spirit, even
the spirit of truth, it cannot deliver contradictorie things, howsoever
other writers and men may) but false and not only unsavory, but unsound, and
therefore not only not to be received in the Church, but to be driven and
banished as far from it as possibly may be.

Hithereto we have dealte against our popish adversaries blindelye and
wickedlye maintaining doubting of Gods grace, of the forgiveness of our own
sins, and of eternal salvation: wherein surely it is greatly to be
lamented, that through their waye-wardnesse we have been constrained, to
spend so many words in a matter which is not only plainly testified and
set out unto us in the holy Scriptures, but a sort as it were assuredly
written and engraven in the hearts of men. And were it not indeed, that we
know the weak had need to be strengthened, and the ignorant in^tructed, rather
for any good we hope will come of the confutation and answering of our
adversaries, we might well enough have spared this labor and pain. And yet
because in this point of doctrine there is contained a principal foundation of
christian consolation we trust it is not labor misspent, as well these that are
not so well exercised in it, as they ought to be, may be the better instructed,
as also that those that are weak may the more be comforted and strengthened.
And yet we cannot but say that this for the most part, stands in speculation
and contemplation rather then in practice appoint that in this dissolute and
senseless age of the world, would be more regarded and pressed upon men,
though withal we deny not, but that there is a profitable use both of the one
and the other, according to the diversities of states and times, wherein God is
pleased to place his children. For as speculatio^ or contemplation is good, for
the changing of the state of our darkness and ignorance into light and
knowledge: so practice is good for the altring of our senseless or careless
condition into christian care and feeling. That to wit speculation belongs
wholly to the mind and understanding and it aims as at his general bu^^ or
(...), at general knowledge and comprehensions. And this is the reasoning or
disceptation of the heart, and prepared principally for consolation and
comfort, that is to say yields to such consciences as are terrified and
afflicted, in temptations, and in the combat against sin, and the sense and
feeling of Gods wrath against them for the same, some spiritual joy and
consolation. Both are necessary in this Church, and yet ^^^s latter of
special use for comfort. Whereof though so many stand not in need as of
instruction, because there are more ignorant and careless in the congregation
then humbled and afflicted, yet because their case is more hard and heavy for
a wounded spirit who can be are it, somewhat also would be said as in that
behalf. Wherein s^^h we our selves are not ignorant of the sleights and
suggestions of Satan: and since God has furnished us with spiritual armor
and weapons to beat back the fiery darts of Satan, and has reueiled himself
in knowledge and comfort unto us not for our selves only, but for others,
that they with us might be made partakers of the manifold graces of God, let us
assaye from our own feelings to do good unto others, and what we can comfort
and succor all those, that are afflicted.

Satan's suggestions are as a man may say innumerable: and therefore let no man
think we will or can deal with them all. Such as we take to be principal,
and have our selves been most buffered and beaten withal we will touch and
answer as we can. Again Satan is the prince of darkness and confusion:
and therefore we can hardly follow any method in aunswering his temptations.
The course therefore that we will keep in this behalf shall be this take them
as they come one after another, and consider what he obiecteth: and so
accordinglye as God shallbe pleased to assist and direct, frame out of the
word of God several and particular aunswers.

1 In the first place Satan commonly sets before us two strong temptations,
or if you will does on both sides assault us. For one while he obiecteth
against us our sins, and another while the exceeding great and fearful
justice of God; reasoning or concluding thus against us ^o He that is a sinner
he is unworthy to be saved, yea most worthy eternally to perish, for the
wages or hire of sin is death, as the Apostle Saint Paul shows in the
sixth to the Romans verse. 23. But thou art a sinner: yea even covered as if it
were with thy sin, and that thine own conscience does testify against
thee. Therefore thou art worthy of eternal death, yea thou can look for
nothing but death and everlasting punishment. A sore reason, and it will no
doubt much shake the mind, unless it be well answered and therefore good
reason that we should look well and thoroughly into it, and the rather because
Satan; that otherwise of himself, is the father of lies and liars, and
therefore can speak nothing, does at the least in outward show speak the
truth here. Wherein first for this and all other his suggestions let us mark,
that whenever he speaks the truth, yet he does it not with a true mind:
neither in the same aymeth at a true or right end. The truth of these things
are propounded in the word, and indeed from thence also to be proved if need
be. Howbeit, they are there delivered by God with one affection, and to one
end, and hereby Satan pressed and urged, with another mind and to another end.
God reuealeth the with a mind to humble men in themselus, in their own
corruption, that so they might be exalted through his goodness. But Satan
sets out their sin, with a heart and purpose to swallow them up with
distrust and co^de^natio^. This if we know not being deceived through the
outward show and appearance of truth we shall easily be ouerthrown: but if we
understand and believe it, it shallbe so far off from hurting us, that it shall
rather te^d to our furthera^ce in the faith of gods mercies, and to the feeling
of our unworthiness, that so we may have just occasion to say of our selves,
that where sin has abounded there grace has over abounded also. But more
particularly to answer, the several parts of this subtle sillogisme of Satan.
For the proposition we answer by distinction, or respect as we may say. He that
is a sinner is unworthy to be saved, yea most worthy everlastingly to perish.
This is true we confess it, if we consider man in himself, or in his own
nature, or as he persisteth and remains, or unless he have through the
satisfaction and obedience of Christ, his sins pardoned: because in the 1. we
know our sins withhold good things from us, and make a separation betwixt god
and us, and we are by nature the children of wrath as other men. And in the
second we are sure, that the righteousness, satisfaction and obedience of
Christ being of infinite merit is able powerful and sufficient enough to
alter the state and condition, because Christ's satisfaction, and the
worthiness of his sufferings, is in such sort imputed to every one that
believes, that it is accounted and indeed be come his own. Concerning the
assumption or minor, I say for my self in particular that I am not such a
one, as thou Satan say I am: for my nature is changed, and I have in some
measure put of the old man, and am renewed into knowledge, acccording to the
image of him that has created me: and so also have my sins through Christ's
obedience bin defaced blotted out, and stand even before god in the
communication of righteousness, as though I had never transgressed. Therefore
though I will not deny but in respect of my self I am unworthy to be saved, and
indeed most worthy to perish, and therefore may truly say as the prophet does
Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant for in thy sight shall
none that lives be justified. Yet in Christ and for Christ's sake, who is the
only beloved of God, and in whom alone the father is well pleased, who also
has absolutely satisfied the wrath of God and answered for me, whatsoever was
against me, sure I am, I am worthy to be saved, and utterly unworthy to perish
or to be cast away. The reason is because Christ's worthynes, which is most
perfect and pure is imputed unto me, and is indeed become mine as effectually,
(yea I am persuaded more effectually, by how much he is more excellent and
effectual then my self, though I were never so innocent and righteous) as if
I my self fulfilled all righteousness. For this I am sure of, look what Christ
did he did it not for himself, for he stood in no need of any such obedience,
because he never transgcessed, but accomplished it for me, and for my
salvation, and therefore I may in my measure safely say as the Apostle does
Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ, but I live, yet not I any more but
Christ lives in me, and in that that I now live in the flesh. I live by the
faith in that son of God: who has loved me and has given himself for me.
Which indeed is the everlasting and immovable voice of the Gospel, that
being converted to God I might assuredly resolve this with my self, that I
shall for Christ Jesus sake my Mediator and redeemer be certainly received
into favor, and for his worthiness (though not for any of mine own, for
indeed I have none, but all unworthiness) and accepted before him. In
confidence whereof also, I can in some sort and sense say for my self and
others, as the holy prophet of God Daniel does, chapter 9. we do not present
our supplicatio^s before thee for our righteousness: but for thy great and
tender mercies: yea hear us for the Lords sake.

It may be that notwithstanding this full and fit answer Satan (who goes
about continually like a roaring Lion, seeking always to devour us) will not
give over to press us further saying, he that is exceedinly just, cannot or
will not leave thing vnpunishmed, but will have his justice fully and wholly
satisfied. But God is exceedingly just, and a most grievous revenger and
punisher of all sins, yea his justice is altogether unchangeable. Therefore
God will leave nothing unpunished, but will have his justice absolutely
satisfied, and will cast thee away, not comformable to his justice.

To this we may answer in some sort before, to the objection touching the
greatness and grieuousnes of our transgressions. He presses upon us Gods
justice, not with a mind that he has to commend it, for he rather condemns
it, and all other good things in God, even as he does the dietie it self, but
of a purpose to ouerwhelme us and swallow us up therewithal, if it may be. But
why may not we in some sort, speak to Satan in this behalf eue^ as God shall
speak to the wicked his imps: What have thou to do to declare my ordinances,
that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth? or why may we not say unto
him, assaulting our selves, or tempting others and laboring thereby to let the
good work of the Lord in us. The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that
has chosen Jerusalem reprove thee. Is not this a brand taken out of the fire?
But we say more particularly. He that is exceedingly just will have his justice
satisfied, either by them themselus that should do it, and happily are not
able, or else by some other that are fit for the purpose or work. That God is
exceedingly just no man will deny it. His nature proves it unto us, and his
word propounds the same. He looks also that his justice should be
absolutely satisfied why it is done: and that not by such a one as I have
appointed for the purpose: for it might be he might be misliked, as well by
reason of my blindness to make choice, as by reason of my partiality to
prefer one in mine own cause: but by such a one as he himself has
sanctified and set apart for that purpose, that is the imaculate and unspotted
lamb of God Christ Jesus: who is become not only my bail and surety, and is
made a fit Mediator betwixt me and God but has fully paid my debt also in so
much that there is not a mite behind, but al is satisfied and the debt book or
obligation cancelled. He having in my name, and as it were for my sake offered
and presented himself before God the father, to be punished for my
tra^sgressions, yea he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisment of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. And the Apostle says
Romans 3. That God has set him forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness by forgiveness of sins that are passed And
in another place he has made him that knew no sin, to wit our Savior Jesus
Christ, to be sin for us that we through him might be made the righteousness of
God. Besides all this I say Satan, that since God is exceedingly just, it cannot
stand with his justice (which neither wills or can will any thing that is
unjust) that one and the self same debt should be twice paid. Men in the
world, that carry any account or conscience of their dealings, will not do or
deal so grossly. And therefore doubtless it is far off from the just judge
of all the world: yea it should be quite and clean contrary, yea manifestly
repugning with his most absolute and upright justice, which Christ indeed by
an infinite obedience unto his majesty, has answered unto God, for all my
sins, of which if any man should doubt, let him but for his better
satisfaction and stay therein, consider these places of scripture Romans 5. the
Apostle says, As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by that
obedience of that one shall many also be made righteouse. And again Romans 8.
verse 1. These is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus and verse
34. of that chapter: who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea or
rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes
request likewise for us. and Gal. 3. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law, being made a curse for us. And 1. Pet. 3. Christ has once suffered
for sinners, the just for the unjust. And therefore it cannot be that my sins
should again come into reckoning before God, since that by the blood of Christ
they are quite done away and blotted out as the Apostle shows in the 2.
chapter of his Epistle to the Coloss. And since I know this service and honor
is to be performed unto God namely to believe the promises of his Gospel. I
may neither accuse god of a lie, for that were blasphemy, be being the only
truth indeed, nor contemn my Mediator and his obedience, which I know to
be even as himself absolute and perfect. And one of these two I must needs
do, if I should yield to this suggestion of Satan.

But it Satan will proceed and say (for such a wrangling and cruel
adversary will hardly be answered) Thou notwithstanding all this, art subject
to many afflictions in this life, and in the end to death also, therefore god
has not pardoned thy sins: but is still angry with thee, for afflictions and
death entered into the world by means of sin, and are indeed tokens of the
wrath and displeasure of god, as the Apostle shows Romans 5.12. and Ephesians. 5.16.

I answer and reply again, that though afflictions and death did at the
first through sin enter into the world, for indeed had not sin been none
of them had ever fallen out: and though in their own nature still, they cannot
but bring forth the like sour fruits and bitter effects, that yet now through
the power of God, that brings light out of darkness, and through the spirit
of sanctification in his servants, whom he exercises with such afflictions
and calamities they do not always sort to this effect. For first concerning
afflictions, god in the^ does not always regard this, either to punish us as a
severe judge or to condemn us for our sins, no more then a father minds
when he chastises his child to cast him away, but as a most merciful God and
loving father he does it, either to try us, that so by that means our faith,
patience, constancy, and other good fruits in it might be made known in the
world, as it is manifested in the history of Job and other holy men's examples,
and appears by sundry places of scripture, and namely James 1. where the
spirit says, brethren count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse
temptations, knowing that the trying of your faith brings forth patience etc:
or else corrects us to this end, that we should not perish with the wicked
world, but rather that by this means we might learn more and more to hate
sin, seeing we are punished for it: or to contemn the world whereunto
otherwise happily we might be to fast glued: or else that we should the better
learn to know our selves, we growing quickly into forgetfullnesse and
security, and might so much the more earnestly call upon God, the days of our
trouble, being a meet season, yea our troubles themselus good means to fit us
thereto. And of every one of these does the Scripture speak in diverse places,
as 1. Corinthians 11. we are chastened of the Lord that we should not be
condemned with the world: and David in the Psalm 119. It is good for me, O
Lord, that I have been afflicted, for before I was afflicted I went astraye:
but now I have learned to keep thy law. See further for this purpose and
point in the Psalm 32. verses 4.5.6. and 2. Corinthians 6. ver. 9. but
specially 2. Sam. 7 where it is said, If he sin I will chasten him with the
rod of men: and with the plagues of the children of men, but my mercy shall
not depart away from him etc. or else that making us an example unto others, he
may bring the^ to some goodness, and frame and fashion us unto the image of
his own son, as the Apostle shows in plain terms. Romans 8.29. That
so being like unto him in his sufferings, we may be comfortable also unto him
in glory: or else that we if it seem so good unto him, being made as a man
may say gasing-stocks to men and angels and all the world, he might declate in
us, what is the wonderful power and efficacy of the holy ghost in frail and
weak vessels, which as it is many ways made manifest, so does it appear in
the crown of martyrdom suffering for truth, and in the strength of
temptations, we being more then conquerouts through him that loved us, and
washed us in his blood. See 2. Cor. 4. ver. 7. and 12. ver. 9. and also Col.
1.24. And the like may we say touching death, which through the death of
Christ is so sanctified unto me, that I do not only triumph over it saying,
death where is thy sting: hell, where it thy victory: but find it to be a
speedy passage and ready way for me unto eternal life. Therefore so far of am
I from being hindered by afflictions and death, that I know these things as all
other shall work unto my good, and shall serve for the furthering yea for the
perfecting of my salvation. Romans 8.28. I also assuring my heart, that Christ
has delivered me from the power of death and that I shall in and through
Christ escape from death and pass unto everlasting life, even as he himself
plainly affirms. Ioh. 5.14.

2 Secondly he obiecteth thus. It is not sufficient that thy sins are
satisfied and answered for by another, or that thine iniquities are pardoned:
but besides it is of necessity required, that thou be righteous, and do
perfectly observe the law of God, that is, that thou do perfectly love god
and thy neighbor. For unless thou have this righteousness indeed, thou can
not escap the wrath and curse of God: but this righteousness thou have not,
nether can have indeed in this life: and therefore thou must of necessity be
under conde^natio^.

We cannot answer to this temptation, but even as to the former, yea and
indeed almost to all other also, that is having respect unto Christ, who has
not only endured the punishment due unto me for my sins, but also performed
perfect righteousness, yea and the same such as the very law does require, and
that not for himself because he needed none, but for me has he done all that
he did, and fullfilled even the whole law. Which if any man doubt of or call
into question, let him but consider Christ's own words. Mat. 3. and no doubt but
he will give glory to God and confess it, Christ there saying, let be now for
thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness or else that saying in To 8.
That that was impossible to the law, in as much as it was weak because of the
flesh, God sending his own son in the similitude of sinful flesh and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh, that that righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. And tell
me Satan. Shall the power of Christ's death be effectual to take away
transgression? deny this if thou can or dare. And shall not the absolute
might and infiniteness of his obedience, be strong to make me stand as
righteous in the sight of God. What was there in all the ^^we that he has not
absolutely accomplished? Eue^ his very enemies he has so heartily and perfectly
loved, that he has not only prayed for the^, as appears in the history of
his death, but also for numbers of them has sustained the wrath and
indignation of God, that so he might reconcile the^ to his heavenly father. Oh
how sweet not only for the proof of this point, but for the heart and
conscience of all faithful is that of the Apostle To. 5. God sets out his
love toward us, that whilst we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much
more the^ being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the
death of his son, much more being reconciled, we shallbe saved through his
life. And this absolut righteousness of Christ, is through Gods goodness
imputed unto me, and by faith laid hold of and applied to my self, with which
being clothed as with the precious and sweet garments of my elder brother, I
cannot but please God, and stand righteousse in his light, as the brother of
Christ, yea as one of gods heirs, yea and which is more an heir annexed with
Christ himself. And therefore may truly and comfortably say as the Apostle
does in the same place of To. 8. Has not God spared his own son, but given
him for us al to death? how shall he not with him give us all things also? If
all things, why not then also absolute righteousness? who shall lay any thing
to the charge of gods chosen? It is god that justifies who shall condemn
etc. as follows most comfortably.

Yea but it may be, that Satan will yet further urge this point: what can
another man's righteousness avail or profit thee? seeing that the law presses
this upon thee, thou shall love thy neighbor etc. Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house etc. And the Scripture tells us, the soul that sins that
shall die the death. Ezec. 18. And again: there shall be wrath and indignation
upon every soul of every man that does evil and breaks the law. To. 2.
verse. 9.

To this we answer though that which has been said before, concerning the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, and gods acceptance of it may serve for
an answer, yet we further adioyne and say. It is true that law does require of
every man his own righteousness, or having failed his satisfaction. Herein
Satan is not a liar: but this is it that he fails in the end of urging this,
not of ignorance in himself for surely he knows it, but of malice against
us, to bring us if it could be to death and damnation. What is the end why
the law requires it, or God in his law does demand the same. It is to
intimate, that there is or can be in us any such thing? no verily: but to
cause us to go out of our selves, and to seek it else where, where it may be
found. And in this respect particularly amongst many other is it, that the law
is and may be said, to be schoolemaister to bring us and to guide us to Christ.
And indeed this is a mystery, which being either many ages together much
hidden, or else not so plainly discovered, as now it is, is laid open and
reueiled unto us by the gospel: to wit, that where mankind was not able to
satisfy in his own person the law of God, and yet the law might not be
destroyed or overthrown. God has made a translation of the law into another
person, which might do that for mankind that it could never perform for it
self, that is absolutely observe yea and fulfill the whole law. Which person
because it consists of two natures, the godhead and the manhood, therefore is
his obedience an absolute and full satisfaction for the sins of all the
world, even as it is plainly said. 1. Ioh. 2. He is the reconciliation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world,
meaning it of the efficacy of Christ's death in the excellency and
absoluteness of it, as in regard of it self, and as in respect of men of al
sorts and of all ages, and all places, so that this benefit belongs not to
the Jews only as many might imagine but also to other nations. And for this
cause is it indeed, that Christ is said Romans 10. to be the end and fulfilling
of the law for righteousness and salvation to every one that believes. Even
as he says in another place, to the Jew first and also to the grecian, for
there is no respect of persons with God. Romans the second. And this Christ
indeed, has God set out to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood,
that so we might he justified freely by his grace through the redemption that
is in him. To be short he was by the very decre and counsel of all the persons
of the diety, sent into the world, and made subject for a while, unto the law
that he might redeem us from the law and the curse due unto us contained
therein, according to which the Apostle says Gal. 4. when the fulness of time
was come God sent his son made of a woman and made under the law, that he
might redeem the^ that were under it: and so we receive the adoption of sonns.
Him therefore and his obedience and satisfaction, when by the eye of a true and
a lively faith I look upon, and by the strong hand of the same faith, I apply
unto my self, then there is nothing in the world or out of the world, be it
from mine own diffidence and distrustfulnesse, or Satan's malice, that can
either accuse me or condemn me. For I have always in readiness by me, yea
within me, by the suggestion of the spirit, out of the rich treasure of the
word, which I may oppose against all the accusations of the law whatsoever,
and by means whereof I may stand even in the very face and presence of the
judgment of God, as comfortably and boldly as if I my self had in all
respects satisfied the law of God, nay I will say more co^fortably and boldly
by much, by how much God and man joined together in one person, has for me
wrought a more absolute obedience, and righteousness, then I or al flesh could
have done, had we continued in our first estate of innocence and holiness. Of
which if any doubt, and would be satisfied for it, let him read the whole
seventh chapter of the epistle to the Romans and there he shall find this
point confirmed, and many other singular matters of sound and strong
consolation propounded.

3 But all this notwithstanding, Satan will object against thee, the
imperfections and deserts that cleave unto thee, and thy best works saying.
Though thou have in Christ, a through satisfaction made for the punishment of
thy sins, and perfect righteousness: yet sin rest and remain in thee, as
for example, both thy original and many actual transgressions for which God
will set himself against thee. And then how can thou appear or stand
before God the just judge of the world, yea such a one as hates all manner of
filthiness though never so small.

This is a strong temptation I confess, howbeit not such, but that it may be
fully satisfied and answered, by truth out of the word. And first I say
mark this still, that Satan speaks true things, but not to a true and right
end. For that we have yet sin within us, both original and actual, it is
as clear and certain as the Suune shines at noone day. But why has god left
them within us? is it to depresse our consciences above measure? or in the
memory and sight of them to throw us down to damnation? No verily: Satan
indeed sets them before us to that purpose But God does it to humble us in
our selves before him and to add an edge unto our supplications and prayers,
that so they may be more piercing then otherwise. And this we may see in Paul,
who says of himsefe, that lest he should be puffed up through abundance or
excellency of revelations, there was given unto him a prick in the flesh, and
Satan as an Angel to buffet him: and for the removing of the^ he prayed the
Lord thrice and yet received no other answer but this gods grace was
sufficient for him, and the Lords strength should be perfected through man's
weakness. Yea this is that that the Apostle speaks in his own name and of
himself, as also in the names of the regenerate and of them Romans 7. saying, I
alone not that which I do, for what I would that do I not, but what I hate
that do I If I do then that I would not: I consent to the law that it is
good. Howebeit it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. For
this I am sure of, that in me, that is in my flesh dwells no good thing, for
though to will be present with me, yet I find no means in my self to perform
that which is good. And in this notable discourse he holds on even unto the
end of the chap. which I would entreat the godly reader, carefully to to view
and think upon, for surely he shall find there much tending to the answering
of this temptation. And to the same end he says Gal. 5. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are one
contrary one to another, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would.
To all which we may add for the further satisfaction of this dout in our
hearts, and the stopping of Satan's mouth if it may be, that these our sins
whether they be original or actual, past or present, many or few, come not
into account or reckoning before God, neither are they neither shall be laid
unto our charge, the reason is because they are omitted through the death and
obedience of Christ, I am now through Gods goodness and faith in Christ
incorporated as it were into his body and be come flesh of his flesh and bones
of his bones, yea as I may say made one with him, so that now this great grace
being bestowed upon me, and I having that precious gift of faith wrought in me
to apply it to my self, the Lord can or will no more refuse or condeme then
Jesus Christ himself, which I think the Apostle means by these notable and
comfortable speeches, namely Eph^sia^s the fourth By Christ all the wholle body
being coupled and knit together, by every joint for the furniture thereof,
according to the effectual power which is in the measure of every part)
receives increase of of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. And
Cor. 2. We are rooted and built in him, and stablished in faith whereof all the
body furnished and knit together by ioints and bands increases with the
increasing of God. Lastly in as these sins do not reign in me, or over rule
by that but that they are mastered and beaten down by the grace of the spirit,
plentifully shed abroad in into my heart, and powerfully prevailing against my
corruption, one while, whilst it does in a notable measure subdue iniquity
present in me, and another while, whilst after sin committed, it raises me
up: to repentance and amendment, so that I lie not sleeping and snorting in
sin as the wicked, but these sins are through the mighty operation and
working of the holy Chost, daily by little and little more and more purged in
me and scoured from me in this life, by beginning if I may so say, here, and by
consummation and perfection in the life that is to be revealed.

4 And therefore the assault that he makes against us, is by an argument
framed thus. Innumerable men and women perish and are condemned, as whom Christ
and righteousness does no whit at all profit: but thou art of that number as
appears by this, because thou art no whit better then they, that worsest
rather, therefore thou art damned.

Hereunto I answer, that the truth of this proposition I willingly consent
unto, namely that innumerable persons perish and are condemned, but yet with
this exception, that the cause thereof is not in any impotencie or weakness of
Christ's death and righteousness, for that is of most large, yea of infinite
merit, as has bin showed already: but by reason that they themselves do not
believe. Fos as that is true in the faithful which our Savior utters, in a
most vehement affirmation, saying, Ioh. 5. Verily, verily I say unto you he
that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life,
and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death unto life. So
that again must be verified in the unbelievers, which he says else where. Ioh.
3.18. He that believes not is condemned already because he has not believed
in the name of the only begotten son of God. And for the minor, I charge it
with two faults: first that it is false, as when he says, thou art one of that
number, and very uncertain in the other words: or if thou will reason of the
assertion, because thou art no whit better then they, but worse rather. For
first when he says, I am one of them, he does not only evil as in regard of
himself, taking Gods office upon him, to whom alone as vengeance, so all true
and sound judgment appertains: but affirms falsely that which he can never
prove, nay the contrary whereof I am able to show, and that not only by
mine own judgment, which happily might be suspected in mine own cause, (and
yet speaking the truth I see no reason why I should not as well be believed for
my self as Satan against me) but even from the testimony and witness of Gods
holy word. I know I am faithful, and I am confirmed in the truth and certentie
of the persuasion, because I do not in an evil or idle opinion, but in true
and certain faith lay hold of Christ, and stay and settle my self wholly and
only upon him. This no heathen Idolater can do, because he is not only
without Christ, but without God in the world. This no Mahometist or Jew can
perform, because they deny him and defy him from their hearts. This no
counterfeited or corrupt christian can accomplish. For the false christian as
papists join their works at the least with him: and the carnal professor
in the corrupt course of his conversation denies his power to mortification and
sanctification. Therefore I separated from all and every one of them, in
strength of persuasion, in particular application, and the fruits of faith and
blessed obedience, cannot perish. But may truly and effectuallye say, that
Christ Jesus dwelling in my heart and making me fruitful to good works, and
I again being thereby in him, there is no condemnation to me nor any such:
yea I am thoroughly and certainelye persuaded, That neither life nor death,
height nor breadth, things present nor things to come, are able to separate
me from the love of God toward me which is in Christ Jesus. As for the
uncertainty of the confirmation it is apparent by this, that though Satan
know us all to be tainted in Ada^: yet he knows not in whom the power of
corruption prevails most or more. The wicked cannot discern of them of
another, no not one of them well of their hearts as we see even particularly by
this, that many times they are not only blind but senseless also: and yet a
man would think, that they should be as well able, either to know the height
and heinousness of one another corruption, or their own, as Satan should
be acquainted with theirs. And if Satan cannot tell, whether I be worse then
they, he less knows, whether I be in any measure of mercy better then
they: for by reason of the fullness of his own corruption, he can much better
discern of evil, then any whit at all of good, by reason of his aduersnesse
and wayewardnesse and unto wardnesse thereto. But be it as it may be, we will
yield him the hardest: that I am such a one to wit by nature, yet am I another
man by grace and adoption, which varieth the state. And though I were in my
self and of my self no whit better then others, nay I will say more, worse
then others, if god be pleased to account otherwise of me, what is that to
Satan, since God will have mercy upon whomsoever he will have mercy, and will
cause me and others to feel and find that true in our selves, that the
Apostle says in the general doctrine of the word, where sin has abounded
there grace has over abounded, and freelye confesses of himself that God had
mercy on him the chief of all sinners. And therefore I am so far of from
desp^ire in my self, though it be true, that in that respect I may cover my
face with shame, that I may rather greatly comfort my self, because in this
life Gods favor and good will, does not in any thing so plainly appear, as
in the forgiveness of my sins.

But Satan will yet again press and urge this further thus. The faithf^^
verily are not damned but saved by Christ. But thou art not faithful, or have
not faith, therefore thou can not be saved by Christ, but must
notwithstanding, for the want of thy faith remain still under condemnation.

For answer whereto I say still, notwithstanding all thy oppositio^s Satan,
that I have faith and do believe. And if thou will ask how I know it, or can
be assured of it. I will show thee. Christ our Savior tells us that we shall
know the tree by the fruit: from the effects therefore or fruits of my faith,
will I gather this truth against thee, to the staying and upholding of mine
own heart. And first because the holy spirit of God, and the infallible
testimony that it yields unto my heart, is a principally propp and stay unto
me, I tell thee Satan, that even that shall testify unto my spirit, that I
am Gods child, and dare thereupon without fear or trembling, call upon him,
and say, Abba, O father, by which I perceive I do believe, for otherwise how
could I call upon him in whom I believe not, and assuredly know that I have
faith, because I stay my self wholly and only upon him saying unto him in some
sort and sense, as the Prophet David says, Lord, whom have I in heaven but
thee? and in earth I desire none with thee. And least Satan should think, I
do this without warrant or reason, I will not fear or be ashamed to set
down my grounds out of the word. How comfortable is this saying of the Apostle
Romans 8. We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but
the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, as with boldness, so with
earnestness, father, father, The same spirit witnesses, with our spirit,
that we are the children of God, if children then heirs also etc. To the
same end tends that of 1. Cor. 2. Where he says. We have received not the
spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that by it we may
know the things that are given unto us of God. And though this be sufficient
and indeed greater then all exception, yet have we besides, the powerful
working of the same spirit framing us and fashioning us to sound conversion
before god, and to the yielding orbringing out of the sincere fruits of faith,
that is to say good works, which cannot but assure me of my salvation, and of
Gods grace, and confirm me in the certain hope of the one and the other. And
this is that which Saint Peter provoke unto when he says, Brethren g ue
diligence by good works to make your calling and election sure, for if ye do
these things ye shall never fall, because by this means an entry shall be
ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. And of this truth we have further this double reason. If
that which is from our selves, as for example our sins may iustlye move and
make doubting, why should not that which is from God, as for example, the
fruits of our unfeigned faith and obedience ministet hope and assurance. God I
am sure is greater then man, and his graces much more excellent, then man's
infirmities are base and vile. And if this were not true, how should we that
carry gods heavenly treasures in earthen vessels, conceive hope of profiting
by them in our selves, or of doing good with them unto others. But we are
assured of the one and the other, notwithstanding our weakness and wants,
therefore we must also conceive hope of the former and indeed assure our hearts
therein. Again, why does Christ dwell in our hearts by faith as the Apostle
says in his Epistle to the Ephesians? it is to this end that he might be
idle in us? no verily. Satan when he possesses men will not suffer them to be
idle, much less Jesus Christ, but provoke them still to honest labors and
good works. For by his spiritual power, he manifests his own strength in
the midst of our manifold weaknesses. Now if that be true then this
ensues thereupon, that I am Christ's, and Christ is mine (as the Church and
faithful soul sings in the book of the Canticles) yea he himself with all
his graces and merits whatsoever. So that he which feels and finds these
effects in himself can not but must of necessity infer thereupon, that he
has faith, and that therefore he has Christ in him, in this life, making him
fruitful unto all good works, and sealing up unto him and in him salvation
and everlasting life in that which is to come. Unless that he would imagine,
that Christ could be idlye or without fruit in the hearts of his people, which
were blasphemy. And yet we may be the better assured hereof, because true faith
indeed, can no more be sundred from good works, which are the sound fruits
thereof, then light from the sun or heat from the fire: or if you will the
shadow from a natural body.

But yet Satan will except against this, This faith of thine which thou
speak of, and these fruits of it that thou mentionest, they are imperfect,
they are faint and few, yea they seeldome or very rarely appear or are seen.

What then Satan? Grant that my faith and good works are faint and few in me:
will thou infer that therefore I have none? that is against all reason and
religion. In reason he that has but a sick, pining or languishing life, lives
still, and in hope of the bettering of his estate, either as in regard of this
world, if god will, or as in respect of the life to come especially. And why
should not this in measure and manner be true, as in respect of our spiritual
life here. In religion, we know that God accepts both the whole Church, and
the several members of it, according to that they have and not according to
that they have not, provided always: that that which they have they have it
from him: or else how could the Church and members of it rejoice or comfort
the^selus in the thing that they do. And from hence is it indeed, that we
learn notwithstanding weakness and wants either in whole congregations or
several members not to break the unity of the spirit in the band of peace,
nor to forsake the fellowship of the brethren, and the exercises of the Church,
as the manner of sin is, but n holy wisdom and power from above: to put a
difference betwixt good and evil, and that not only in our persuasion, but in
our practice, not forsaking the good of our God for some evils or corruption
of man adioined therewithal, nor yet for the goods sake, justifying or
approouing the evil. And if this were not sufficient yet we have further props
to our faith here, namely first that though our faith be weak and faint, yet
is it true and sound. For even that faith which is infirm and weak, may yet
notwitstanding be true and right, the reason is because that not weak faith
and true faith are opposite, but weak faith and no faith. And this we may see
also, by the worthy speech of the father of the sick child in the Gospel:
Lord I believe: but help thou mine unbelief. This weakness and imperfection
our faith not coming from it self, nor being in it self as of it self, for
so it is an excellent and an absolute work of God, but as it is intermingled
with the remainders of our unbelieving heart which yet notwithstanding the
faintness and weakness of it, may no less effectually, as in regard of the
particular person having it apply Christ with all his benefits unto himself,
then a faith that happily is more firm and steadfast, though in regard of it
own particularly, it may be it does less firmly apprehend the same, and yet
the party having no less good or comfort thereby: as in respect of his own
particular, th^^ he that seems to have a more firm faith. For even as in the
food of the body, a poor man's bread and water as we say, makes him have as
strong a body, as the best dainties in the world do the rich, so is it herein:
or to speak more plainly. As a man or woman that is sick of a fainting or
languishing disease, does receive sometimes more comfort, by many mean meats
then those that have the cordial and restoratiue things: even so may a man's
weak faith in the soundness of it, yield him as strong consolation as he that
has most strength and might that way. And no doubt but God will have it to be
so, to the end that as we know that in the body to be which the Scripture
says, Man lives not by bread only but by every good word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God: so we might much more effectually know our spiritual
life to be vpheld by him, who in the days of our distresses as in regard of
famine weakness etc. makes his might manifest in the midest of our
infirmities. Secondly I answer further, that that which is languishing in my
self, is yet notwithstanding in Christ my Savior firm and altogether
perfect and absolute, for the further assurance of my heart wherein Christ
gives and imputes unto me, whatsoever he as my Mediator has accomplished
before God, or has in himself: which is not or cannot be weak, and therefore
I also cannot miscarry. And since by the using of all good and holy means, I
daily endeavor that my faith may be stronger and stronger, and particularly
daily offer up my supplications to God, that he would increase it in me, and
kindly in me also a more earnest flame of the holy love, I am sure that I shall
find these favors, because he that cannot lie and gives abundantly to every
one that asks, and yet up brayeth none therewith has promised me in his
Gospel that to him that asks shall be given, and to him that has shall be given
more, and he shall have abundance. Mat. 13. And for my better encouragement
herein, I set before me the examples of Gods Saints, who though they did fall
most foully and grievously, did not for all that cease to call upon God of whom
also they were graciously heard: and why? not because of their sins for sin
it self seperateth betwixt god and man, but because they were of his own free
grace, reckoned in the number of his sonns and servants. And therefore I may
conclude as of the^ so of my self: that though our faith be weak and frail
as it is in all flesh, yet I may be assured of theirs, and mine own salvation
especially. And the reason is because the certenty of life everlasting stands
not so much upon the quantity greatness, and excellency of my faith, as upon the
power, good will, and fidelity of God, that in Christ was pleased to elect me to
it, and to bestow it upon me. And yet further for faith, I may truly say thus,
that if I have but one only spark or crumme of faith, by a manner of speeech,
so that it be right and true: it is sufficient to assure me of the forgiveness
of my sins and of eternal salvation: and whatsoever is in or from God; for
Christ's sake to be communicated unto me. And this I say not only for my
present feeling, but also for that which is past: though presently it may be I
perceive it not. For even for the graces past we may and we ought to be assured
of salvation and all other favors from God, the reason whereof is rendered in
the scriptures as namely Romans 9. where the Apostle affirms that the gifts and
callings of God are such as cannot be repented of, and again the first of John
and the third verse the seed of the anointing of God remains in us: by which
we see all firmly, concerning this matter all is attributed to God and his
graces and nothing at all to our selves: which if we should not believe it were
not only disco^fortable to our selves, but blasphemous against God Lastly
again we say that in this suggestion Satan reasons: against us as if in
worldly things a man should frame an argument thus there appears no flame:
therefore there is no fire. In winter trees bear neither leaves nor fruit:
therefore they have no life in them: but of reasoning this kind we would be so
far of from liking, that we would rather hiss at it. For we know fire may
be where no flame breaks forth, as in a flint for example, or under the ashes
etc. And the like may we say of trees, which we are sure have life in them,
though they seem to be dead in the winter season. And why may we not affirm
the same of Gods graces in us, which howsoever they be ouershadowed with the
ashes of our corruption, or nipped somewhat or driven back to the root,
through the frost and cold of infirmities that we carry about with us, shall
yet notwithstanding break forth, budde, and bear better then ever before,
that so that may be true in us, that is said in the Psalm. 92. Such as be
planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God. They
shall bring forth fruit in their age, they shall be fat and flourishing to
declare that the Lord our rock is righteouse, and that there is none iniquity
in him.

But yet concerning this matter he will press further upon us saying. Thou have
been called very late to be made partaker of such graces as thou speak of.
Therefore thou can not from these effects infer the certenty of Gods favor
toward thee here, and of the everlasting saving of thine own soul.

Suppo^e Satan the antecedent to be true. And yet I must tell thee by the way,
that the very time of my calling is so^etimes unknown and unfelt in my self,
and therefore no marvel though thou art unacquainted with it. But suppose
that were true, yet that would not follow, that thou would infer. For it
is not a late calling, that may hinder me, but gathering by sound effects that
certenty of mine own salvation, but either no calling at all which is the
state of infinite numbers of people in the world, I mean by the public
ministry of the word, or else an vneffectual calling, that being vneffectual,
not only because God is not pleased to make it powerful, but also because men
either in their carnal carelessness, or prophan contempt, make it vnpowerfull
and unprofitable to themselves also. Shall we say in common speech, and that by
the light of nature, the way to good manners is never to late. And shall we
prescribe, time, mean, matter, or any thing else to the almighty: God is able
and will also at what time and how it pleases himself, to call his own, and
my self amongst the rest. He calls some sooner: and yet their state not much
the better for that: and some later and yet their condition not much the worse
for that; which our Savior himself declares in the parable of them, that
were called at diverse time; to work in his vyneyard. Mat. 20. where those that
were called at the dawning of the day, and at the third, sixth, and ninth hour,
they murmured at this, that they came at the eleventh hour, received as much
as themselves; which had borne the burden and heat of the day. But what says
the Master of the vineyard, Friends I have done you no wrong, take that which
is your own, go your ways, I will give unto this last, as much as unto you.
And why does he so? but that we might see that to be true in himself, which he
says of himself, he will have mercy on whom soever he will have mercy, and
that in such a measure of mercy to, as he and not they shall think best: yea
he does it to this end, that we might find that fulfilled in the world amongst
his own, that he promises in his word, that whensoever it pleases him to
show mercy he will. Yea and that that might be verified, which follows in
the end of the parable, the 1. shall be last and the last first. Nay we will
say more then this. Even in the^ that are called late as we say, there are or do
appear many times more evident testimonies of faith and salvation, then in
those that are called somewhat sooner. For over and besides that we may say
nothing of this, that many forward at the first do not only hold slowly on, but
sometimes slip back, the very work it self, and the plenty of grace that is
shed abroad into their hearts does plainly show, that God alone, and not
man or mean has wrought the thing, and therefore all the glory thereof, as
likewise thanks for it to be returned unto him, whereas if it were a work of
great continuance, we would or might seem to ascribe it partly to length of
time, and partly to some other instruments or means used in the effecting
thereof. If any man doubt of this, let him look upon the example of one of the
thieves, that was crucified with Christ. Oh what a heavenly and holy end made
he, and that not only in rebuking evil in his lewd and wicked companion:
neither yet in justifying the innocence and clearenesse of our Savior, but in
calling upon him and that from the bottom of his heart for mercy. All which
and specially this last, are full of singular grace in regard of god, and
marvelous co^sorte in respect of us. From whence also me think we may infer,
that whosoever he be that does but in the very pinch of death, feel these
holy and heavenly motions he may certainly assure himself, of infallible
testimonies of faith, and by consequent also of eternal salvation; because
faith and everlasting life, are never sundred in gods children for the feeling
of it in this life, and the fruition of it, in that which is to come. And if in
my death the feeling of these motions may yield me spiritual and heavenly
comfort, why should they not also minister unto me strong consolation, at what
time soever in my life, god of his own bountiful liberality, makes me a
plentiful partaker thereof. Besides all this, Satan, that has been said, I
must and will tell thee one thing further, not only for the full confutation
of that which thou obiectest, but even for the throwinge of thine own dongue
and filthiness into thine own face. For howsoever in other things thou
show thy self to be a most subtle adversary, yet therein I will from thy
self take that, that shall hinder me from yielding, if there were nothing
else. Is there any thing more gross in the world then popery which thou have
hatched and brought forth to behold this light? Amongst popery, is there any
point more detestable then that of man's merits? Does not this thy temptation
openly under proppe and shore up the ruinous bulwark or butteresse? If for the
length of my calling I should be accepted, should not God be moved with
worldly respects? For my very calling it self though neuet so effectual, I am
not respected but for gods free favor and last cast upon me in Christ: and
therefore not for the length of time wherein I am called. For I may reason of
my calling, as I do of other graces of god. The faith that God has wrought in
me, is an excellent grace, and indeed the hand as it were to lay hold of
eternal life, and yet I am not saved for my faiths, but for Gods mercy sake
in Christ Jesus. These graces of faith and feeling of vocation, sanctification
etc. are bestowed upon me and wrought in me, not so much, nay indeed no whit at
all for the working of my salvation: for that belongs unto Gods mercy and
Christ's merit, as to pledge up unto me, the certainty and assurance of that
and all other graces, that God is pleased freely and of his own accord to
bestow upon me, and other wretched that have the gift to believe.

But Satan presses again this point, and frames a new argument thus. Thou
thy self need not hear thy self so bold: others that thought themselves
as strong as thou do thy self have fallen away. Thou art but infirm and
weak, and may not only slide and slipp, but fall away from the grace of
god and loose the faith that thou have. Thou can not therefore at any hand
be sure of everlasting life, and the saving of thy soul.

But I tell thee, Satan, though I can be content, thou should humble me my
self, and of my self as law as thou can, and I know it also sometimes to
be needful by reason of the high conceits that flesh and blood carries of it
self yet thou shall never take away the righteousness from me that the Lord
has given me, nether will I suffer him to be blasphemed that has dealt so
bountifully with me, no though thou should either in malice against me, or in
blasphemye against God, write a book, much less shall these few and weak
things overthrow my hope. I tell thee therefore Satan, that though I be infirm
and weak in my self, and ready every minute of an hour to slip and
slide, yea to fall, yet I am strong in him that is the root and fortress, yea
the very God of my strength and power: of whom I may say as David says, by
the Lord I shallbe enabled to leap over a wall, and he shall strengthen my
hand and mine arm to break a bow of brass and concerning whose goodness
toward me. I have that sounding in my heart, that was answered to the
Apostle. my grace is sufficient for thee, and my strength shallbe persected
through weakness. And why should I make any doubt of this, since Gods election
(which is grounded upon the mutable purpose and decree of God) is always firm
and sure. And since the word not of man but of god assures me that those whom
the Lord loves, even unto the end he loves them? and since that he that is
for us, and with us and within us is stronger and greater then al. And since
eue^ the very articles of our faith, teach us to believe as the Father to be
Almighty, whose power no creature is able to withstand: so Jesus Christ to be
our Lord, into whose hands since the father has eiuen us, we are sure no
adversary power shall pull us out of the same: for he also is not only
constant and firm as the father, but almighty also. And that salvation, which
he has wrought for me through his blood, and enabled me in the power of the
spirit to apply unto mine own heart he will preserve and uphold in me,
together with the gift and grace of perseueraunce, so that not fall even unto
the end and in the end. Wherein I am the more settled and confirmed not only by
this, that he deals not with his servants as men do, who begin and leave of
in the turning of a hand, or the twinkling of an eye, but look what work he
begins in his he perfecteth the same. Neither yet by this, that he has
given me and the rest of his servants gracious promises: as that he will be
with us unto the end of the world, that his spirit shall bring unto our
remembrance, the sweet and comfortable words of truth and life, but also by
this that he has graciouslye performed it unto his servants, not only
upholding them that they have not been carried away, either with the swaye of
sin in the world, or strength of corruption in them selves, but even then
when they have been fallen in raising them up again, as we see particularly
in David, who confesses of himself, and in himself that to be true through
gods goodness, thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling. Psalm 116. And likewise in Peter, whom though our
Savior Christ foretold of Satan's malice against him, and the rest of the
faithful under this metaphorical or borrowed term of desiring to winnowe
them as men do winnowe wheat: yet does withal most comfortably tell him, and
the rest of the faithful in him, I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail
not, wherefore when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. And what though
others in outward show far better and more strong then my self have fallen
away. Does it therefore follow that I shall do so likewise? I tell thee no
Satan. God is above all law, and therefore beyond all example. And what if
God, to let proud flesh and blood understand, that they stand not by
themselves, would make some fearful examples of human inconstancy,
weakness and waueringe, to the end that the parties themselves might be
humbled and other learn to fear? will thou then from thence gather an
universal course? Or on the other side, if God for the comfort of al them
that are feeble and weak hearted and handed in Sion, would make the meanest of
his servants most worthy instruments to manifest his strength in their own
weakness, will thou cross his purpose, whose power no creature is able to
resist? and dare thou discomfort where God goes about to give all
consolations, yea such comforts as no man can give but he, and none can have
but those that belong unto him? Over and besides all this, god in his word has
given me other strong consolations, against this temptation or assault of
thine, for in the second epistle of Timothy and the second chapter. against the
back sliding and falling away of others, he gives me these two special
comforts, namely that the elect, of which number I am one, are out of all
danger of any such falling away: and again that such hypocritical backsliders
are known to god, and not to us when he says. The strong foundation of god
remains sure, having this seal, the Lord knows who are his. And in the
second chapter of Saint John's first epistle the holy ghost labors the same
point (that so in the mouth of two or three witnesses this as all other truth
might be established and made sure) and gives sundry consolations against it,
as first that none should be terrified or offended with their faults, because
though such had or might have a place in the Church, yet were they never of the
Church, because the Church is the company of the elect, which cannot perish and
therefore also cannot fall from the grace of God in Christ. Secondly because
they are anointed of the holy Ghost not only with true knowledge of salvation
and eternal life, but with all other graces from the same, and namely with the
gift of perseverance, but his own words are most excellent, and therefore let
us mark them. They went out from us says he, but they were not of us, for if
they had been of us, they should have continued with us. But this comes to
pass, that it might appear that they are not all of us but ye have an
ointment from the holy one, and know all things. And now with what reason or
face ca^ Irefuse this truth of God, so plainly and plentifully propounded, and
embrace the lies of Satan. I tell thee I cannot fall away from the grace of
god nor fall away from the faith that he has planted in me, unless I would make
God a changeling and uncertain: and that cannot be for the scripture tells
me, there is not so much as a shadow of turning in his majesty: which yet that
I might be the better persuaded thereof he has always by performance showed
him self, at all times and to all his people, to be such a one. Show thou the
contrary if thou can.

But Satan further presses this temptation, of man's weakness and ability to
fall away, from the acts indeed thereof and the effects following from the
same saying after this sort. Thou have fallen diverse ways and at sundry times
also, and therefore have lost the faith and grace that God gave thee, and so
art beco^e gods enemy. And how can thou then be assured of favor at his
hand?

Hereunto I answer, that I cannot or will not deny, but that I have fallen,
and fallen foully, yea diverse ways and sundry times: and of this I have better
witness then thy word Satan. For first that observation of mine own ways,
that God of his grace has wrought in me does testify unto me every day when I
rise up and every night when I lie down, that I have and do heinously offend:
and secondly the texts of holy scripture does witness the same, as for example.
1. king. 8. there is not a man but he sins. and James 3. in many things we
sin all. Howebeit we see a maruelouse difference between their setting my
sins before me and Gods word propounding it unto me. Thou do it of a
deadly malice to draw me into desperation, and by means thereof into
condemnation, and therefore no reason, that I should listen unto thee, so deadly
hating me as thou do, attempting such moral dangers against me, as the
death and destruction of my soul and body, But the Lord sets them before
me, to humble me at the feet of his goodness, that so in forgiving me also so
great a debt, I might learn both to love him that has dealt so bountifully
with me, and beware of falling into the like mischiefs again by means of my
sins. Besides I answer further for my self, that I am not so much to regard
my slips and falls, as how or with what affection I have offended God has kept
me from sinning presu^pteously, and with a high mind, howsoever to make me see
my self, and to be more circumspect against transgression: I have fallen of
humane infirmity and weakness. And if this and such like considerations
mittigat sins amongst men, why should it not also in some sort do so before
God, who is better able to discern and judge both of actions and affections
then all the people of the world that either have been, be, or shallbe.
Moreover that is false that thou do infer that falling into sin, does
utterly spoil Gods people of faith in themselves, and of all grace and favor
from God, for if that were so, how could any of gods children, that have gone
before us, or live presently with us, or which shall succeed us even to the
end of the world (al and every one whereof, some one way some another, have
been fearfully overtaken) be raised up again to repentance and amendment of
life. And this we may see as by many examples of holy men in the word: and in
the world, so by the doctrine of the holy scriptures, and amongst the rest.
Ioh. 3. who soever is borne of god sins not, that is to say either the sin
that is unto death, or lies not wallowing swinelike as the ungodly of the
world do in the filth and puddle of their transgressions. And of this
assertion he renders a reason very strong and forcible saying for his seed
remains in him, that is the holy ghost with his graces shed abroad into his
heart, will not let him lie still but labors his raising up again. And as
though this had not been sufficient, he adds neither can he sin to wit in
sort as before is expressed and why? because he is borne of God, who besides
that he is stronger then all, and therefore can and will perform his own
will, does not begin in his people any good work, but brings it one daily
more and more according to the measure that he sees to be good for all and
every one of the^, to perfection. And this grace I find from God, that as I see
my sin for my humiliation, so I behold the precious gift of faith, and many
great graces of God for my exaltation, and therefore have not lost as thou
would have me believe (Satan) all sense and feeling of God and godliness,
but have that seed and the anointing, by which I shall be enabled to stand,
and if I do fall shall yet notwithstanding be raised up again and set upon my
feet, more stayed and confirmed then ever before, and that not only by reason
of the circu^spectio^ and means, that is wrought in me thereby, but also by
the strength that is communicated unto me from above, which in succeeding time
breaks forth: and therefore I am not utterly fallen from grace, as thou
forgest and fainest Satan: neither have made frustrate Gods election concerning
my self: because that as a strong foundation remains immovable and
unchangeable, for he abides always faithful and cannot deny himself,
whether it be executing of his wrath upon the wicked, or in the displaying and
exercising of his mercies upon the godly. Besides eue^ from this I gather
infallible comfort that having in a true and diligent search of mine own
soul, but once in my life found faith in self, I cannot utterly lose faith
and the favor of God. And why so? it is because I have it? no, but because the
gift and callings of God are such as God will never repent him of, To. 9. And
upon this and nothing else do I assure my heart. Wherefore I fear not to
affirm and say, that though my faith may be sore shaken, and even as in regard
of the fruits of it as if it were broken of for a time, or rather lie hid a
little while, until I be enabled by the power of Gods blessed spirit to gather
my spirits unto my self: yet I am sure the seed thereof remains in me, and
shall again being raised up by the spirit of God break out in as full force
as before. As we may see first in David, notwithstanding his fearful falls of
adultery, murder etc. and then in Peter, notwithstanding his carnal
counsel, given to his Master, and his shameful denying, yea abiuring and
forswearing of him, in whom it lay hidden, as it were fire in or under the
ashes, and the sun under a dark or thick cloud, it being stirred up in
David by the ministry of Nathan the Prophet sent unto him by God to reprove
him and put him in mind of his sin, and in Peter, as by the crowing of the
cock so by Christ's looking back unto him. So gracious is God toward his
children, and so powerful in his own work that rather then his people should
perish, his mercies should allure them, his judgments shall terrify them, his
word shall humble them yea and raise them up also, his spirit shall draw them and
that which seems to be no mean shall be an effectual and powerful instrument
to manifest his glory and to work their good through Christ. And that this is
false that thou say Satan, that the faithful by their sins loose faith it
self, and the graces of the spirit, may appear by two places of Scripture.
The 1. is out of Psalm. 51. where the Prophet prays that god would not take
his holy spirit from him. Which if it had bin quite lost by his former
tra^sgression, he could not have prayed for, because it was gone before, but
rather should have prayed that the Lord would have restored his holy spirit
unto him; because taking away implies restoring, and praying not to take it
away, declares that it was there still howsoever in his own feeling and
falls, he supposed he had justly deserved (...) be deprived thereof. The second
is the words of our Savior to Peter Luke. 22. saying I have prayed for thee
that thy faith fail thee not. Which words as they contain in the^ a
protestation of Christ's unfeigned care and love, so he says I have prayed for
thee, so do they comprehe^d a faithful promise, in these words that thy faith
fail not, or if you will this being the end that Christ aimed at in his
prayers, or the fruit and effect that follows the^ in all Christ showing,
that is through his most fervent and continual prayers, that the whole Church
and the particular members of it, are so vpheld, that they do never utterly,
nor never shall utterly fall away from the faith: which thing spoken here as it
should seem particularly to and of Peter, and yet notwithstanding in truth and
vprightnes to be extended to all the faithful, because there is in their
measure and manner a like consideration of them in all and every faithful
person, is more at large described and proved in the 17. of John. Where we may
see that Christ's prayer was from the beginning, is now, and shall be to the end
of the world, the very foundation and groundwork of the stability and
continuance of the Church of God.

Another sore assault, that after the former, yea and indeed at the least wise
in outward show upon the former, Satan makes against us, or gives unto us is
this. If thy sins harm thee not, neither indeed ca^ hurt thee as thou say,
thou may after thou beleeuest once sin without fear of punishment.

Thou dealest Satan, like a Satan now: and that in a double respect* first in
the end of thy temptations, laboring every way if it may be to overthrow my
faith and obedience. In the former thou did assaye to draw me to despair.
In this latter thou labourest, to throw me headlong into security. So that
thou effect my ruin, thou carest not by what mean by either of these, or by
both of them together, or by any other. God has discovered this unto me, and I
hu^blie thank him, hoping that he that has given me grace to epsy thy
subtletie, will also grant me strength to overcome it. Secondly herein thou
show thy self an adversary, in that thou do falsify and pervert my
words. Where did I say simply, that sin could not hurt or harm? This I
believe in my heart and have and will confess it unto the end with my mouth,
that being ingrafted into Christ, my sins past or present cannot condemn me,
no more then they have done the faithful which have gone before me in the
flesh and in faith. And what have I said here, but that which the Scripture
speaks every where. The Apostle tells us. Romans 8. in terms that cannot be
corrupted with false glosses, there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. That again that the spirit speaks out of the Prophet Jeremy
as a part and piece of the new covenant. Hebrews 8. tends to the same
end. saying: I willbe merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will remember
their sins and their iniquities no more. That our sins offend our most
gracious and heavenly father, that they grieve the holy ghost within us, yea
that we by the^, not only as it were with cartrops, but with gable ropes pull
upon us, though not eternal, yet te^porary and corporal punishments, and so
indeed do harm and hurt us, I never denied nor will deny, because the truth
and certenty of al and every one of these things is propounded unto us in the
word of God. But in what sense I have said thus. I have showed before, and
let that suffice. As for that that thou woldst have me to infer thereupon,
namely that therefore I might live as I list, and sin without controulment,
it is most false in it self, most irreligious before God and most unseasonable
in the sight and judgment of men. Does not the Apostle tell us Romans 8 that
they that are led by the spirit of God are the childe^r of God* what meneth he
thereby? any thing else but this that they that are by the grace of God through
the work of regeneration, in the power of the spirit, and the exercises of the
word, freed from sin do not remain or continue therein? And is not the same
that he expresses in an other place in other terms, saying our old man is
crucified with Christ that the body of sin might be destroyed that
henceforth we should not serve sin? If we know any thing in Christ or of
Christ, we know this that so many as are justified from their sins by faith
in his blood are also by the spirit of Christ sanctified unto obedience of his
will for these are the two fruits that we have in and by the death and rising
again of our Savior: from whence also there follows this comfort to the
faith full, that they do many times in some good measure withstand and
overcome sin, not in others only, but in themselves principally. And sure we
are of these, that that sanctification which we have in and from Christ by
obedience of his will can no more be separated from free, justification from
all our unrighteousness through his blood, then heat from fire or light and
warmeth from the body of the sun. And therefore even this declares, Satan,
that thou art a falsifier of all good words and works. But besides I tell thee
that since we may by effects gather arguments to our selus touching the
salvation of our souls, that therefore thou can not or shall not herein shake
my faith. I take it to be the general drift of the Apostle. 2. Cor. 13. to
prove that by effects we may judge of our own and other men's good estates
before God. Since therefore God gives us that leave, it behooves us with all
careful endeavor, as to uphold these good things in us, so carefully to see
whether we can truly find them in our selves or no: or the more in number,
the more great and excellent in quality, and the more assured we shall after
due examination find them to be in us: the more assured we may be concerning
our own salvation, and so much the more valiantly oppose our selves against
Sathat in this same dangerous combat. Whereof also as seems to me there is
great reason. For if our sins which are from Satan's malice or our own
corruption, do grieve us and possess our hearts with fear why shall not the
fruits of our faith and obedience, which are from God, yield us comfort and
fill our hearts with hope not because they are in us, for so we do many times
weaken them at the lest, if not impair or hurt them, but as they are in us
from God, who we are sure will accept of his own good works and graces
vouchsafed unto us. Lastly I say, that as we abstain not from meat and
drink, and other necessary aides of natural life, because we know that the
term and time of the said life is limited by God: so there is no man, unless
he be wittingly and wilfully wicked, that therefore will give himself over to
sin, because he is assured of his own salvation, for that were to turn the
grace of God into wantonness, and to abuse the best grace that ever God gave
us, nay rather a good man will therefore the more heedily beware of sin, and
abstain from it because he knows that sin in it own nature grieueth god,
and make the seperatio^ between the Lord and us, and cleave fast unto
righteousness and well doing because our forsaking evil or departing from it,
as also our accomplishment and performance of good things, is a pledge of our
election, as the Apostle says. The strong foundation of God remains sure
having this seal set unto it, first the Lord knows them that are his: and
secondly let every one that calls upon the name of the lord Jesus Christ
depart from iniquity. And there fore, I tell thee Satan, I cannot harken to
any of thy voices, much less to this, by which thou labourest to thrust me
headlong into loose life, which will provoke god, hurt mine own soul, and
hinder other men from faith full obedience, but detest thee and it and will by
gods grace fly from these, and all other corruptions, whatsoever thou would
stir me unto.

FINIS.

