diagram of solar system and planetary orbits THE DISCOVERY OF A WORLD IN THE
MOON.
Saturnus Jupiter Mars Ceres et Proserpina ^ Venus Mercu^s
Sua fovent

Ame omnes




OR, A DISCOVRSE Tending, TO PROVE, that it is probable there may be another
habitable World in that Planet.

Quid tibi inquis ista proderunt? Si nihil aliud, hoc certe, sciam omnia
angusta esse. SENECA. Praef. ad 1. Lib. N. Q.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Michael Spark and Edward Forest, 1638.

Perlegi haec (...) and novitatis gratia typis mandari permitto.

Mart. 29. 1638. THO. WEEKS R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.

To the Reader.
IF amongst thy leisure hours thou can spare any for the perusal of this
discourse, and do look to find somewhat in it which may serve for thy
information and benefit: let me then advise thee to come unto it with an equal
mind, not swayed by prejudice, but indifferently resolved to assent unto that
truth which upon deliberation shall seem most probable unto thy reason, and
then I doubt not, but either thou will agree with me in this assertion, or at
least not think it to be as far from truth, as it is from common opinion.

Two cautions th^re are which I would willingly admonish thee of in the
beginning.

1. That thou should not here look to find any exact, accurate Treatise,
since this discourse was but the fruit of some lighter studies, and those too
hudled up in a short time, being first thought of and finished in the space of
some few weeks, and therefore you cannot in reason expect, that it should be
so polished, as perhaps, the subject would require, or the leisure of the
Author might have done it.

2. To remember that I promise only probable arguments for the proof of this
opinion, and therefore you must not look that every consequence should be of
an undeniable dependence, or that the truth of each argument should be measured
by its necessity. I grant that some Astronomicall appearances may possibly be
solved otherwise then here they are. But the thing I aim at is this, that
probably they may so be solved, as I have here set them down: Which, if it be
granted (as I think it must) then I doubt not, but the indifferent reader will
find some satisfaction in the maine thing that is to be proved.

Many ancient Philosophers of the better note, have formerly defended this
assertion, which I have here laid down, and it were to be wished, that some of
us would more apply our endeavors unto the examination of these old opinions,
which though they have for a long time lien neglected by others, yet in them
may you find many truths well worthy your pains and observation. It Is a false
conceit, for us to think, that amongst the ancient variety and search of
opinions, the best has still prevailed. Time (says the learned Verulam)
seems to be of the nature of a river or stream, which carries down to us
that which is light, or blown up, but sinketh that which is weighty and solid.

It is my desire that by the occasion of this discourse, I may raise up some
more active spirit to a search after other hidden and unknown truths. Since it
must needs be a great impediment unto the growth of sciences, for men still so
to plod on upon beaten principles, as to be afraid of entertaining any thing
that may seem to contradict them. An unwillingnesse to take such things into
examination, is one of those errors of learning in these times observed by the
judicious Verulam. Questionless there are many secret truths, which the
ancients have passed over, that are yet left to make some of our age famous for
their discovery.

If by this occasion I may provoke any reader to an attempt of this nature, I
shall then think my self happy, and this work successful.

Farewell.
The First Proposition, by way of Preface. That the strangeness of this
opinion is no sufficient reason why it should be rejected, -because other
certain truths have been formerly esteemed ridiculous, and great absurdities
entertained by common consent.
THere is an earnestness and hungering after noveltie, which does still adhere
unto all our natures, and it is part of that primitive image, that wide extent
and infinite capacity at first created in the heart of man, for this since its
depravation in Adam perceiving it self altogether emptied of any good does now
catch after every new thing, conceiving that possibly it may find satisfaction
among some of its fellow creatures. But our enemy the devil (who strives still
to pervert our gifts, and beat us with our own weapons) has so contrived it,
that any truth does now seem distastefull for that very reason, for which
error is entertained -- Novelty, for let but some upstart heresy be set
abroach, and presently there are some out of a curious humor; others, as if
they watched an occasion of singularity, will take it up for canonical, and
make it part of their creed and profession;-whereas solitary truth cannot any
where find so ready entertainment; but the same Novelty which is esteemed the
commendation of error and makes that acceptable, is counted the fault of
truth, and causes that to be rejected. How did the incredulous World gaze at
Columbus when he promised to discover another part of the earth, and he could
not for a long time by his confidence, or arguments, induce any of the
Christian Princes, either to assent unto his opinion, or go to the charges of
an experiment. Now if he who had such good grounds for his assertion, could
find no better entertainment among the wiser sort, and upper end of the
World; it is not likely then that this opinion which I now deliver, shall
receive any thing from the men of these days, especially our vulgar wits, but
misbeliefe or derision. It has always been the unhappiness of new truths in
Philosophy, to be derided by those that are ignorant of the causes of things,
and rejected by others whose perverseness ties them to the contrary opinion,
men whose envious pride will not allow any new thing for truth which they
themselves were not the first inventors of. So that I may justly expect to be
accused of a pragmaticall ignorance, and bold ostentation, especially since for
this opinion Xenophanes, a man whose authority was able to add some credit to
his assertion could not escape the like censure from others. For Natales
Mytholog. lib. 3. c. 17.
Comes speaking of that Philosopher, and this his opinion, says thus, Nonnulli
ne nihil scisse videantur, aliqua novo monstra in Philosophia^ introducunt, ut
alicuius rei inventores fuisse appareant. Some there are who least they might
seem to know nothing, will bring up monstrous absurdities in Philosophy, that
so afterward they may be famed for the invention of somewhat. The same author
does also in another place accuse Anaxagoras Lib. 7. c. 1.
of folly for the same opinion, Est enim non ignobilis gradus stultitiae, vel
si nescias quid dicas, tamen velle de rebus propositis hanc vel illam partem
stabilire.

It Is none of the worst kinds of folly, boldly to affirm one side or other,
when a man knows not what to say.

If these men were thus censured, I may justly then expect to be de^ided by
most, and to be believed by few or none; especially since this opinion seems
to carry in it so much strangeness, so much contradiction to the general
consent of others. But how ever, I am resolved that this shall not be any
discouragement, since I know that it is not the common opinion of others that
can either add or detract from the truth. For,

1. Other truths have been formerly esteemed altogether as ridiculous as this
can be.

2 Gross absurdities have been entertained by general opinion.

I shall give an instance of each, that so I may the better prepare the Reader
to consider things without a prejudice, when he shall see that the common
opposition against this which I affirm cannot any way derogate from its truth.

1. Other truths have been formerly accounted as ridiculous as this, I shall
specify that of the Antipodes, which have been denied and laughed at by many
wise men and great Scholars, such as were Herodotus, St. Austine, Lactantius,
the Venerable Bede, Lucretius the Poet, Procopius, and the voluminous Abulensis
with others. Herodotus counted it so horrible an absurdity, that he could not
forbear laughing to think of it. (...) (...). I cannot choose but laugh,
(says he) to see so many men venture to describe the earths compass, relating
those things that are without all sense, as that the Sea flows about the
World, and that the earth it self is round as an Orb. But this great
ignorance is not so much to be admired in him, as in those learneder men of
later times, when all sciences began to flourish in the World. Such was Saint
Austin who censures that relation of the Antipodes to be an incredible fable,
and de Civit. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 9.
with him agrees the eloquent Lactantius, quid illi qui esse contrarios
vestigiis nostris Antipodes Institut. l. 3. c. 24.
putant? number aliquid loquuntur? aut est quispiam tam ineptus, qui credat esse
homines, quorum vestigia sunt superiora quam capita? aut ibi quae apud nos
jacent inversa pendere? fruges and arbores deorsum versus crescere, pluvias and
nives, and grandinem sursum versus cadere in terram? and miratur aliquis ho^tos
pensiles inter septem mira narrari, quum Philosophi, and agros and maria, and
urbes and montes pensiles faciunt? etc. What (says he) are they that think
there are Antipodes, such as walk with their feet against ours? do they
speak any likelihood? or is there any one so foolish as to believe that there
are men whose heels are higher than their heads? that things which with us do
lie on the ground do hang there? that the Plants and Trees grow downwards,
that the hail, and rain, and snow fall upwards to the earth? and do we
admire the hanging Orchards amongst the seven wonders, whereas here the
Philosophers have made the Field and Seas, the Cities and mountains hanging.
What shall we think (says he in Plutareh) that men do clyng to that place
like worms, or hang by their claws as Cats, or if we suppose a man a little
beyond the Center, to be digging with a spade? is it likely (as it must be
according to this opinion) that the earth which he loosened, should of it
self ascend upwards? or else suppose two men with their middles about the
center, the feet of the one being placed where the head of the other is, and
so two other men cross them, yet all these men thus situated according to this
opinion should stand upright, and many other such gross consequences would
follow (says he) which a false imagination is not able to fancy as possible.
Upon which considerations, Bid also denies the being of any De ratione
temporum, Cap 32.
Antipodes, Neque enim Antipodarum ullatenus est Fabulls accommodandus
assensus, Nor should we any longer assent to the Fable of Antipodes. So also
Lucretius the Poet speaking of the same subject, says,

Sedvanus stolidis haec omnia finxerit error. Denat. rerum, Lib. 1.
That some idle fancy feigned these for fools to believe. Of this opinion was
Procopius Gazaeus, Comment. in 1. Cap. Genesis
but he was persuaded to it by another kind of reason; for he thought that all
the earth under us was sunk in the water, according to the saying of the
Psalmist, He has founded the Psalm. 24. 2.
earth upon the Seas, and therefore he accounted it not inhabited by any. Nay
Tostatus a man of later years and general learning does also confidently deny
that there are any such Antipodes, though the reason which he urges for it be
not so absurd as the former, for the Apostles, says he, traveled through the
whole Comment. in 1. Genes.
habitable world, but they never passed the Equinoctial; and if you answer
that they are said to go through all the earth, because they went through all
the known world, he replies, that this is not sufficient, since Christ would
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth, and therefore
1 Timothy 2. 4.
it is requisite that they should have traveled thither also, if there had been
any inhabitants, especially since he did expressly command them to go and
teach all nations, and preach the Gospel through the whole Mat. 28. 19.
world, and therefore he thinks that as there are no men, so neither are there
seas, or rivers, or any other convenience for habitation: it is commonly related
of one Virgilius, that he was excommunicated and condemned for a Heretic by
Zachary Bishop of Rome, because he was not of the same opinion. But Baronius
says, it was because he Annal. Eccles. A. D. 748.
thought there was another habitable world within ours. How ever, you may well
enough discern in these examples how confident many of these great Scholars
were in so gross an error, how unlikely, what an incredible thing it seemed
to them, that there should be any Antipodes, and yet now this truth is as
certain and plain, as sense or demonstration can make it. This then which I
now deliver is not to be rejected, though it may seem to contradict the common
opinion.

2. Gross absurdities have been entertained by general consent. I might
instance in many remarkable examples, but I will only speak of the supposed
labor of the Moon in her eclipses, because this is nearest to the chief
matter in hand, and was received as a common opinion amongst many of the
ancients, and therefore Plutarch speaking of a Lunary eclipse, relates, that at
such times 'twas a custom amongst the Romans (the most civil and learned
people in the world) to sound brass Instruments, and In vita Paul. Aemil.
hold great torches toward the heaven. (...). for by this means they supposed
the Moon was much eased in her labors, and therefore Ovid Metam. Lib. 4.
calls such loud Instruments the auxiliaries or helps of the Moon Cum frustra
resonant era auxiliaria Lunae. and therefore the Satyrist too describing a
loud scold, says, she was able to make noise enough to deliver the laboring
Moon.

Vna laboranti poterit s^ccurrere Lunae. Iuven. Sat. 6
Now the reason of all this their ceremony, was, because they feared the world
would fall asleep, when one of its eyes began to wincke, and therefore they
would do what they could by loud sounds to rouse it from its drowsinesse, and
keep it awake by bright torches, to bestow that light upon it which it began
to lose. Some of them thought hereby to keep the Moon in her orb, whereas
otherwise she would have fallen down upon the earth, and the world would have
lost one of its lights, for the credulous people believed, that Inchanters and
Witches could bring the Moon down, which made Virgil say, Can^us and e coelo
possunt deducere Lunam. And those Wizards knowing the times of her eclipses,
would then threaten to show their skill, by pulling her out of her orb. So
that when the silly multitude saw that she began to look red, they presently
feared they should lose the benefit of her light, and therefore made a great
noise that she might not hear the sound of those Charms, which would
otherwise bring her down, and this is rendered for a reason of this custom by
Pliny and Propertius: Not. Hist. Lib. 2. c. 12.


Cantus and e curru lunam deducere tentant,
Et facerent, si non era repulsasonent.
Plutarch gives another reason of it, and he says, it is because they would
hasten the Moon out of the dark shade wherein she was involved, that so she
might bring away the souls of those Saints that inhabit within her, which cry
out by reason they are then deprived of their wonted happiness, and cannot
hear the music of the Spheres, but are forced to behold the torments, and
wailing of those damned souls which are represented to them as they are
tortured in the region of the air, but whether this or what ever else was the
meaning of this superstition, yet certainly 'twas a very ridiculous custom,
and bewrayed a great ignorance of those ancient times, especially since it was
not only received by the vulgar, such as were men of less note and learning,
but believed also, by the more famous and wiser sort, such as were those great
Poets, Stesichorus and Pindar. And not only amongst the more sottish heathens,
who might account that Planet to be one of their Gods, but the primitive
Christians also were in this kind guilty, which made S. Ambrose so tartly to
rebuke those of his time, when he said, Tum turbatur carminibus Globus Lunae,
quando calicibus turbantur and oculi. When your heads are troubled with cups,
then you think the Moon to be troubled with charms.

And for this reason also did Maximus a Bishop, write a Turinens. Episc.
Homily against it, wherein he showed the absurdity of that foolish
superstition. I remember that Ludovicus Vives relates a more ridiculous story
of a people that imprisoned an Ass for drinking up the Moon, whose image
appearing in the water was covered with a cloud as the Ass was drinking, for
which the poor beast was afterward brought to the bar to receive a sentence
according to his deserts, where the grave Senate being set to examine the
matter, one of the Counsel (perhaps wiser than the rest) rises up, and out of
his deep judgment thinks it not fit that their Town should lose its Moon,
but that rather the Ass should be cut up and that taken out of him, which
sentence being approved by the rest of those Politicians, as the subtillest way
for the conclusion of the matter was accordingly performed. But whether this
tale were true or no I will not question, however there is absurdity enough in
that former custom of the ancients that may confirm the truth to be proved,
and plainly declare the insufficiency of common opinion to add true worth or
estimation unto any thing. So that from that which I have said may be gathered
thus much.

1. That a new truth may seem absurd and impossible not only to the vulgar,
but to those also who are otherwise wise men and excellent scholars; and hence
it will follow that every new thing which seems to oppose common principles is
not presently to be rejected, but rather to be pried into with a diligent
enquiry, since there are many things which are yet hid from us, and reserved
for future discovery.

2. That it is not the commonnesse of an opinion that can privilege it for a
truth, the wrong way is sometime a well beaten path, whereas the right way
(especially to hidden truths) may be less trodden and more obscure.

True indeed, the strangeness of this opinion will detract much from its
credit; but yet we should know that nothing is in its self strange, since
every natural effect has an equal dependence upon its cause, and with the
like necessity does follow from it, so that it is our ignorance which makes
things appear so, and hence it comes to pass that many more evident truths
seem incredible to such who know not the causes of things: you may as soon
persuade some Country peasants that the Moon is made of green Cheese (as we
say) as that it is bigger than his Cart-wheele since both seem equally to
contradict his sight, and he has not reason enough to lead him farther than
his senses. Nay suppose (says Plutarch) a Philosopher should be educated in
such a secret place, where he might not see either Sea or River and afterward
should be brought out where one might show him the great Ocean telling him the
quality of that water that it is brackish salt and not potable, and yet there
were many vast creatures of all forms living in it, which make use of the
water as we do of the air, questionless he would laugh at all this as being
monstrous lies, and fables without any color of truth. Just so will this truth
which I now deliver appear unto others; because we never dreamt of any such
matter as a world in the Moon, because the state of that place has as yet
been veiled from our knowledge, therefore we can scarcely assent to any such
matter. Things are very hardly received which are altogether strange to our
thoughts and our senses. The soul may with less difficulty be brought to
believe any absurdity, when as it has formerly been acquainted with some
colors and probabilities for it, but when a new, and an unheard of truth shall
come before it, though it have good grounds and reasons, yet the understanding
is afraid of it as a stranger, and dares not admit it into its belief without
a great deal of reluctanty and trial. And besides things that are not
manifested to the senses, are not assented unto without some labor of mind,
some travail and discourse of the understanding, and many lazy souls had
rather quietly repose themselves in an easy error, then take pains to search
out the truth. The strangeness then of this opinion which I now deliver will
be a great hinderance to its belief, but this is not to be respected by reason
it cannot be helped. I have stood the longer in the Preface, because that
prejudice which the mere title of the book may beget cannot easily be removed
without a great deal of preparation, and I could not tell otherwise how to
rectify the thoughts of the reader for an impartial survey of the following
discourse.

I must needs confess, though I had often thought with my self that it was
possible there might be a world in the Moon, yet it seemed such an uncouth
opinion that I never durst discover it, for fear of being counted singular and
ridiculous, but afterward having read Plutarch, Galileus, Keplar, with some
others, and finding many of mine own thoughts confirmed by such strong
authority, I then concluded that it was not only possible there might be, but
probable that there was another habitable world in that Planet. In the
prosecuting of this assertion I shall first endeavor to clear the way from
such doubts as may hinder the speed or ease of farther progress; and because
the suppositions implied in this opinion may seem to contradict the principles
of reason or faith, it will be requisite that I first remove this scruple
showing the conformity of them to both these, and proving those truths that may
make way for the rest, which I shall labor to perform in the second, third,
fourth, and fifth Chapters, and then proceed to confirm such propositions,
which do more directly belong to the maine point in hand.

Proposition 2. That a plurality of worlds does not contradict any principle of
reason or faith.
It Is reported of Aristotle that when he saw the books of Moses he commended
them for such a majesticke style as might become a God, but withal he
censured that manner of writing to be very unfitting for a Philosopher because
there was nothing proved in them, but matters were delivered as if they would
rather command than persuade belief. And it is observed that he sets down
nothing himself, but he confirms it by the strongest reasons that may be
found, there being scarce an argument of force for any subject in Philosophy
which may not be picked out of his writings, and therefore it is likely if
there were in reason a necessity of one only world, that he would have found
out some such necessary proof as might confirm it: Especially since he
labors for it so much in two whole Chapters. But now all the arguments which
he himself urges in this subject, De Coelo l. 1. c. 8. 9.
are very weak and far enough from having in them any convincing power.
Therefore it is likely that a plurality of worlds does not contradict any
principle of reason. However, I will set down the two chief of his arguments
from his own works, and from them you may guess the force of the other. The
1 is this, since every heavy ibid.
body does naturally tend downwards, and every light body upwards, what a
hudling and confusion must there be if there were two places for gravity and
two places for lightness: for it is probable that the earth of that other
world would fall down to this Center, and so mutually the air and fire here
ascend to those Regions in the other, which must needs much derogate from the
providence of nature, and cause a great disorder in his works. To this I
answer, that if you will consider the nature of gravity, you will plainly see
there is no ground to fear any such confusion, for heaviness is nothing else
but such a quality as causes a propension in 'its subject to tend downwards
toward its own Center, so that for some of that earth to come hither would
not be said a fall but an ascension, since it moved from its own place, and
this would be impossible (says Ruvio) because against nature, and therefore no
more to be feared De Coelo l. 1. c 9. q. 1.
than the falling of the Heavens.

Another argument he had Metaphys. l. 12. c. 8. Diog. Laert. lib. 3.
from his master Plato, that there is but one world, because there is but one
first mover, God.

But here I may deny the consequence, since a plurality of worlds does not take
away the unity of the first mover. Vt enim forma substantialis, sic primum
efficiens apparentem solummodo multiplicitatem induit per signatam Nic. Hill.
de Philosop. Epic. partic. 379.
materiam (says a Countreyman of ours.) As the substantial form, so the
efficient cause has only an appearing multiplicity from its particular
matter. You may see this point more largely handled, and these Arguments more
fully answered by Plutarch in his book (why Oracles are silent) and Jacob
Carpentarius in his comment on Alcinous.

But our opposites the Interpreters themselves, (who too often do jurare in
verba magistri) will grant that there is not any strength in these
consequences, and certainly their such weak arguments could not convince that
wise Philosopher, who in his other opinions was wont to be swayed by the
strength and power of reason: wherefore I should rather think that he had some
by-respect, which made him first assent to this opinion, and afterward strive
to prove it. Perhaps it was because he feared to displease his scholar
Alexander, of whom it is related Plutarch. de tranq. anim.
that he wept to hear a disputation of another world, since he had not then
attained the Monarchy of this, his restless wide heart would have esteemed
this Globe of Earth not big enough for him, if there had been another, which
made the Satyrist say of him,

Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi. Iuvenal.
That he did vex himself and sweat in his desires, as being pend up in a
narrow room, when he was confined but to one world. Before he thought to
seat himself next the Gods, but now when he had done his best, he must be
content with some equal, or perhaps superior Kings.

It may be, that Aristotle was moved to this opinion, that he might thereby
take from Alexander the occasion of this fear and discontent, or else,
perhaps, Aristotle himself was as loath to hold the possibility of a world
which he could not discover, as Alexander was to hear of one which he could
not conquer. It Is likely that some such by-respect moved him to this opinion,
since the arguments he urges for it are confessed by his zealous followers and
commentators, to be very slight and frivolous, and they themselves grant, what
I am now to prove, that there is not any evidence in the light of natural
reason, which can sufficiently manifest that there is but one world.

But however some may object, would it not be inconvenient and dangerous to
admit of such opinions that do destroy those principles of Aristotle, which
all the world has so long followed?

This question is much controverted by the Romish Divines; Apologia pro
Galilaeo.
Campanella has writ a Treatise in defense of it, in whom you may see many
things worth the reading and notice.

To it I answer, that this position in Philosophy, does not bring any
inconvenience to the rest, since it is not Aristotle, but truth that should be
the rule of our opinions, and if they be not both found together, we may say
to him, as he said to his Ethic. l. 1. c. 6.
Master Plato, (...). Though Plato were his friend, yet he would rather adhere
to truth than him.

I must needs grant, that we are all much beholden to the industry of the
ancient Philosophers, and more especially to Aristotle for the greater part of
our learning, but yet it is not ingratitude to speak against him, when he
opposes truth; for then many of the Fathers would be very guilty, especially
Justin, who has writ a Treatise purposely against him.

But suppose this opinion were false, yet it is not against the faith, and so it
may serve for the better confirmation of that which is true; the sparks of
error, being forced out by opposition, as the sparks of fire by the striking
of the flint and steel. But suppose too that it were heretical, and against
the faith, yet may it be admitted with the same privilege as Aristotle, from
whom many more dangerous opinions have proceeded: as that the world is
eternal, that God cannot have while to look after these inferior things,
that after death there is no reward or punishment, and such like blasphemies,
which strike directly at the fundamentalls of our Religion.

So that it is justly to be wondered why some should be so superstitious in
these days, as to stick closer unto him, than unto Scripture, as if his
Philosophy were the only foundation of all divine truths.

Upon these grounds both St. Vincentius and Senafinus de firmo (as I have seen
them quoted) think that Aristotle was the viol of Gods wrath, which was powered
out upon the waters of Wisdom by the third Angel; But Rev. 16. 4.
for my part, I think the world is much beholden to Aristotle for all its
sciences. But yet twere a shame for these later ages to rest our selves merely
upon the labors of our Forefathers, as if they had informed us of all things
to be known, and when we are set upon their shoulder^, not to see further
then they themselves did. 'Twere a superstitious, a lazy opinion to think
Aristotle's works the bounds and limits of all humane invention, beyond which
there could be no possibility of reaching. Certainly there are yet many things
left to discovery, and it cannot be any inconvenience for us, to maintain a
new truth or rectify an ancient error.

But the position (say some) is directly against Scripture, for

1. Moses tells us but of one world, and his History of the creation had been
very imperfect if God had made another.

2. Saint John speaking of Gods works, says he made the world, in the
singular number, and therefore there is but one: '^is the argument of Aquinas,
and he thinks Part 1. Q. 47. Art. 3.
that none will oppose it, but such who with Democritus esteem some blind
chance, and not any wise providence to be the framer of all things.

3. The opinion of more worlds has in ancient times been accounted a heresy,
and Baronius affirms that for this very reason Virgilius was cast out of his
Bishopric, and excommunicated from the Church. Annal. Eccl. A. D. 748.


4. A fourth argument there is urged by Aquinas, if there be more worlds than
one, then they must either be of the same or of a diverse nature, but they are
not of the same kind, for this were ibid.
needless and would argue an improvidence, since one would have no more
perfection than the other; not of diverse kinds, for then one of them could not
be called the world or universe, since it did not contain universal
perfection, I have cited this argument, because it is so much stood upon by
Julius Caesar la Galla, one that has purposely De Phaenom in orb Lunae
writ a Treatise against this opinion which I now deliver, but the dilemma is
so blunt that it cannot cut on either side, and the consequences so weak that
I dare trust them without an answer; And (by the way) you may see this author
in that place, where he endeavors to prove a necessity of one world, does
leave the chief matter in hand, and take much needless pains to dispute
against Democritus, who thought that the world was made by the casual
concourse of atoms in a great vacuum. It should seem that either his cause or
his skill was weak, or else he would have ventured upon a stronger adversary.
These arguments which I have set down are the chiefest which I have met with
against this subject, and yet the best of these has not force enough to
endanger the truth that I have delivered.

Unto the two first it may be answered, that the negative authority of
Scripture is not prevalent in those things which are not the fundamentals of
Religion.

But you will reply, though it do not necessarily conclude, yet it is probable if
there had been another world, we should have had some notice of it in
Scripture.

I answer, it is as probable that the Scripture should have informed us of the
planets, they being very remarkable parts of the Creation, and yet neither
Moses nor Job, nor the Psalms (the places most frequent in Astronomicall
observations) mention any of them but the Sun and Moon, and moreover you must
know that it is besides the scope of the Holy Ghost either in the new Testament
or in the old, to reveal any thing unto us concerning the secrets of
Philosophy; it is not his intent in the new Testament, since we cannot conceive
how it might any way belong either to the Historical exegeticall or
prophetical parts of it: nor is it his intent in the old Testament, as is well
observed by our Countryman Master WRIGHT. Non Mosis In Epist. ad Gilbert.
aut Prophetarum institutum fuisse videtur Mathematicas aliquas aut Physicas
subtilitates promulgare, sed ad vulgi captum and loquendi morem quemadmodum
nutrices infantulis solent sese accommodare. It Is not the endeavor of Moses or
the Prophets to discover any Mathematical or Philosophical subtilties, but
rather to acco^modate themselves to vulgar capacities, and ordinary speech, as
nurses are wont to use their infants. True indeed, Moses is there to handle the
history of the Creation, but it is observed that he does not any where meddle
with such matters as were very hard to be apprehended, for being to inform the
common people as well as others, he does it after a vulgar way, as it is
commonly noted, declaring the original chiefly of those things which were
obvious to the sense, and being silent of other things which then could not
well be apprehended. And therefore Aquinas observes that Part 1. Q. 68, Art. 3.
Moses writes nothing of the air, because that being invisible the people knew
not whether there were any such body or no. And for this very reason, Saint
Austin also thinks that there is nothing expressed concerning the creation of
Angels which notwithstanding are as remarkable parts of the creatures, and as
fit to be known as another world. And therefore the Holy Ghost too uses such
vulgar expressions which set things forth rather as they appear, then as they
are, as when he calls the Moon one of the greater Genesis 1. 16.
lights (...) whereas it is the lest, but one that we can see in the whole
heavens. So afterward speaking of the Genesis 11.
great rain which drowned the world, he says, the windows of heaven were
opened, because it seemed to come with that violence, as if it were poured out
from windows in the Firmament. Sr. W. Rawly c. 7.. 6.
So that the phrases which the Holy Ghost uses concerning these things are not
to be understood in a literal sense; but rather as vulgar expressions, and
this rule is set down by Saint Austin, where l. 2. in Genesis Psalm 136. 6
speaking concerning that in the Psalm, who stretched the earth upon the
waters, he notes that when the words of Scripture shall seem to contradict
common sense or experience, there are they to be understood in a qualified
sense, and not according to the letter. And it is observed that for want of this
rule some of the ancients have fastened strange absurdities upon the words of
the Scripture. So Saint Ambrose esteemed it a heresy to think that the Sun
and Stars were not very hot, as Wisd. 2. 4. 17. 5. Ecclus. 43. 3. 4.
being against the words of Scripture, Psalm. 19. 6. where the Psalmist says
that there is nothing that is hid from the heat of the Sun. So others there
are that would prove the heavens not to be round, out of that place, Psalm.
104. 2. He stretched out the Com. in c. 1. Genesis
heavens like a curtain. So Procopius also was of opinion that the earth was
founded upon the waters, nay he made it part of his faith, proving it out of
Psalm. 24. 2. He has founded the earth upon the seas, and established it upon
the floods. These and such like absurdities have followed, when men look for
the grounds of Philosophy in the words of Scripture. So that, from what has
been said, I may conclude that the filence of Scripture concerning any other
world is not sufficient argument to prove that there is none. Thus for the two
first arguments.

Unto the third, I may answer, that this very example is quoted by others, to
show the ignorance of those primitive times, who did sometimes condemn what
they did not understand, and have often censured the lawful and undoubted
parts of Mathematiques for heretical, because they themselves could not
perceive a reason of, it and therefore their practice in this particular, is no
sufficient testimony against us.

But lastly, I answer to all the above named objections, that the term World,
may be taken in a double sense, more generally for the whole Universe, as it
implies in it the elementary and aethereall bodies, the stars and the earth.
Secondly, more particularly for an inferior World consisting of elements. Now
the maine drift of all these arguments, is to confute a plurality of worlds in
the first sense, and if there were any such, it might, perhaps, seem strange,
that Moses, or St. John should either not know, or not mention its creation.
And Virgilius was condemned for this opinion, because he held quod sit alius
mundus sub terra, aliusque Sol and Luna, (as Baronius) that within our globe of
earth, there was another world, another Sun and Moon, and so he might seem
to exclude this from the number of the other creatures.

But now there is no such danger in this opinion, which is here delivered,
since this world is said to be in the Moon, whose creation is particularly
expressed.

So that in the first sense I yield, that there is but one world, which is all
that the arguments do prove, but understand it in the second sense, and so I
affirm there may be more, nor do any of the above named objections prove the
contrary.

Neither can this opinion derogate from the divine Wisdom (as Aquinas thinks)
but rather advance it, showing a compendium of providence, that could make the
same body a world, and a Moon; a world for habitation, and a Moon for the use
of others, and the ornament of the whole frame of Nature. For as the members of
the body serve not only for the preservation of themselves, but for the use
and convenience of the Cusanus de doct. ignor. l. 2. c. 12.
whole, as the hand protects the head as well as saves it self, so is it in
the parts of the Universe, where each one may serve as well for the
conser^ation of that which is within it, as the help of others without it.

I have now in some measure, showed that a plurality of worlds does not
contradict any principle of reason or place of Scripture, and so cleared the
first part of that supposition which is implied in the opinion.

It may next be enquired, whether it is possible there may be a globe of
elements in that which we call the aethereall parts of the Universe; for if
this (as it is according to the common opinion) be privileged from any change
or corruption, it will be in vain then to imagine any element there, and if we
will have another world, we must then seek out some other place for its
situation. The third Proposition therefore shall be this.

Proposition. 3. That the heavens do not consist of any such pure matter which
can privilege them from the like change and corruption, as these inferior
bodies are liable unto.
IT has been often questioned amongst the ancient Fathers and Philosophers,
what kind of matter that should be so, which the heavens are framed, whether or
no of any fifth substance distinct from the four elements, as Aristotle holds,
and with him some of De coelo. li. 1. cap. 2.
the late Schoolmen, whose subtle brains could not be content to attribute
to those vast glorious bodies, but common materials, and therefore they
themselves had rather take pains to prefer them to some extraordinary
nature, whereas notwithstanding, all the arguments they could invent, were not
able to convince a necessity of any such matter, as is confessed by their own
Colleg. Connimb. de coelo. l. 1. c. 2. q. 6. art. 3.
side. It were much to be desired, that these men had not in other cases, as
well as this, multiplied things without necessity, and as if there had not
been enough to be known in the secrets of nature, have spun out new subjects
from their own brains to find more work for future ages, I shall not
mention their arguments, since it is already confessed, that they are none of them
of any necessary consequence, and besides, you may see them set down in any of
the books, de Coelo.

But it is the general consent of the Fathers, and the opinion of Lombard,
that the heavens consist of the same matter with these sublunary bodies. Saint
Ambrose is In Hexam. lib. 4.
confident of it, that he esteems the contrary a heresy. True indeed, they
differ much among themselves, some thinking them to be made of fire, others of
water, but herein they generally agree, that they are all framed of some
element or other. For a better confirmation of this, you may see Ludovicus
Molina, Eusebius. Nirembergius, with diverse others. The In opere 6. dierum.
disput. 5.
venerable Bede thought the Planets to consist of all the four elements, and
it is likely that the other parts are of an aereous substance, In lib. de Mundi
constit.
as will be showed afterward; however, I cannot now stand to recite the
arguments for either, I have only urged these Authorities to countervaile
Aristotle, and the Schoolmen, and the better to make way for a proof of their
corruptibility.

The next thing then to be enquired after, is, whether they be of a corruptible
nature, not whether 2 Pet. 3. 12.
they can be destroyed by God, for this Scripture puts out of doubt.

Nor whether or no in a long time they would wear away and grow worse, for
from any such fear they have been lately privileged. But whether they are
capable of such changes and vicissitudes, By Doctor Hackwel Apol.
as this inferior world is liable unto.

The two chief opinions concerning this, have both erred in some extremity,
the one side going so far from the other, that they have both gone beyond the
right, whilst Aristotle has opposed the truth, as well as the Stoics.

Some of the Ancients have thought, that the heavenly bodies have stood in need
of nourishment from the elements, by which they were continually seed, and so
had diverse alterations by reason of their food, this is fathered on Heraclitus,
followed by that great Plutarch. de plac. philos. l. 2. c. 17. Not. Hist. l. 2.
c. 9.
Naturalist Pliny, and in general attributed to all the Stoics. You may see
Seneca expressly to this purpose in these words, Ex illa alimenta omnibus
animalibus, omnibus satis, omnibus stellis dividuntur, hinc Not. Quaest. lib.
2. cap. 5.
profertur quo sustincantur tot Sydera tam exercitata, tam avida, per diem,
noctemque, ut in opere, ita in pastu. Speaking of the earth, he says, from
thence it is, that nourishment is divided to all the living creatures, the
Plants and the Stars, hence were sustained so many constellations, so
laborious, so greedy both day and night, as well in their feeding as working.
Thus also Lucan sings, Necnon Oceano pasci Phoebumque

polumque credimus. Unto these Ptolome also that learned Egyptian seemed to
agree, 10. Apostel.
when he affirms that the body of the Moon is moister, and cooler than any of
the other Planets, by reason of the earthly vapors that are exhaled unto it.
You see these ancients thought the Heavens to be so far from this imagined
incorruptibility, that rather like the weakest bodies they stood in need of
some continual nourishment without which they could not subsist.

But Aristotle and his followers De coelo. li. 1. cap. 3.
were so far from this, that they thought those glorious bodies could not
contain within them any such principles, as might make them liable to the
least change or corruption, and their chief reason was, because we could not
in so long a space discern any alteration amongst them* but unto this I
answer.

1. Supposing we could not, yet would it not hence follow that there were none,
as he himself in effect does confess in another place; for speaking
concerning our knowledge of the Heavens, De Coelo. l. 2. cap. 3.
he says it is very imperfect and difficult, by reason of the vast distance of
those bodies from us, and because the changes which may happen unto it, are not
either big enough or frequent enough to fall within the apprehension and
observation of our senses; no wonder then if he himself be deceived in his
assertions concerning these particulars.

2. Though we could not by our senses see such alterations, yet our reason
might perhaps sufficiently convince us of them. Nor can we well conceive how
the Sun should reflect against the Moon, and yet not produce some alteration
of heat. Diogenes the Philosopher w^^ hence persuaded that those scorching
heates had burnt the Moon into the form of a Pumice-stone.

3. I answer that there have been some alterations observed there; witness
those comets which have been seen above the Moon. So that though Aristotle's
consequence were sufficient, when he proved that the heavens were not
corruptible, because there have not any changes been observed in it, yet this
by the same reason must be as prevalent, that the Heavens are corruptible,
because there have been so many alterations observed there; but of these
together with a farther confirmation of this proposition, I shall have occasion
to speak afterward; In the mean space, I will refer the Reader to that
work of Scheiner a late Jesuit which he titles his Rosa Vrsina, where he may
see this point concerning the lib. 4. par. 2. cy. 24, 35.
corruptibility of the Heavens largely handled and sufficiently confirmed.

There are some other things, on which I might here take an occasion to enlarge
my self, but because they are directly handled by many others, and do not
immediately belong to the chief matter in hand, I shall therefore refer the
Reader to their authors, and omit any large proof of them my self, as
desiring all possible brevity.

1. The first is this: That there are no solid Orbs. If there be a habitable
world in the Moon (which I now affirm) it must follow, that her Orb is not
solid as Aristotle supposed; and if not her, why any of the other. I rather
think that they are all of a fluid (perhaps aereous) substance. Saint Ambrose,
and Saint Basil did endeavor Isa. 51. 6.
to prove this out of that place in Isay, where they are compared Ant. lect. l.
1. c. 4.
to smoke, as they are both quoted by Rhodiginus, Eusebius, Nicrembergius does
likewise from that place confute the solidity and Hist. not. l. 2. c. 11. 13
incorruptibility of the Heavens, and cites for the same interpretation the
authority of Eustachius of Antioch; and Saint Austin, I am sure seems to
assent unto In lib. sup. Genesis ad lit.
this opinion, though he does often in his other works contradict it. The
testimony of other Fathers to this purpose you may see in Sixtus Senensis. l.
5. Biblioth. annot. 14. but for your better satisfaction herein, I shall
refer you to the above named Scheiner in his Rosa lib. 4. p. 11. 2 cap. 7.
26, 30.
Vrsina, in whom you may see both authorities and reason, and very largely and
distinctly set down for this opinion, for the better confirmation of which he
adjoynes also some authentical Epistles of Fredericus Caesius Lynceus a Noble
Prince written to Bellarmine, containing diverse reasons to the same purpose,
you may also see the same truth set down by Johannes Pena in his preface to
Euclids Optics, and Christoph. Rothmannus, both who thought the Firmament to
be only air: and though the noble Tycho do De stella. 15 72. l. 1. c. 9.
dispute against them, yet he himself holds, Quod propius ad veritatis
penetralia accedit haec opinio, quam Aristotelica vulgariter approbata, quae
coelum pluribus realibus atque imperviis orbibus cipra rem replevit. That this
opinion comes nearer to the truth than that common one of Aristotle which has
to no purpose filled the Heavens with such real and impervious Orbs.

2. There is no element of fire, which must be held with this opinion here
delivered; for if we suppose a world in the Moon, then it will follow, that
the sphere of fire, either is not there where it is usually placed in the
concavity of his Orb, or else that there is no such thing at all, which is
most probable since there are not any such solid Orbs, that by their swift
motion might heat and enkindle the adjoining air, which is imagined to be
the reason of that element. Concerning this see Cardan, Johannes Pena that
learned Frenchman, the noble Tycho, with diverse others who have purposely
handled this proposition.

3. I might add a third, viz. that there is no Music of the spheres, for if
they be not solid, how can their motion cause any such sound as is conceived? I
do the rather meddle with this, because Plutarch speaks as if a man might very
conveniently hear that harmony, if he were an inhabitant in the Moon. But I
guess that he said this out of incogitancy, and did not well consider those
necessary consequences which depended upon his opinion. However the world would
have no great loss in being deprived of this Music, unless at sometimes we
had the privilege to hear it: Then indeed Philo the Jew thinks De somniis.
it would save us the charges of diet, and we might live at an easy rate by
feeding at the ear only, and receiving no other nourishment; and for this
very reason (says he) was Moses enabled to tarry forty days and forty nights
in the Mount without eating any thing, because he there heard the melody of the
Heavens, -Risum teneatis. I know this Music has had great patrons both
sacred and profane authors, such as Ambrose, Bid, Boethius, Anselme, Plato,
Cicero and others, but because it is not now, I think affirmed by any, I shall
not therefore bestow either pains or time in arguing against it.

It may suffice that I have only named these three last, and for the two more
necessary, have referred the Reader to others for satisfaction. I shall in the
next place proceed to the nature of the Moons body, to know whether that be
capable of any such conditions, as may make it possible to be inhabited, and
what those qualities are wherein it more nearly agrees with our earth.

Proposition 4. That the Moon is a solid, compacted, opacous body.
I Shall not need to stand long in the proof of this proposition, since it is
a truth already agreed on by the general consent of the most and the best
Philosophers.

1. It is solid in opposition to fluid, as is the air, for how otherwise could
it beat back the light which it receives from the Sun?

But here it may be questioned, whether or no the Moon bestow her light upon
us by the reflection of the Sunne-beames from the superficies of her body, or
else by her own illumination. Some there are who affirm this latter part. So
Averroes, Caelius Rhodiginus, Julius Caesar, etc. and their reason is because
this light is discerned in many places, whereas De Coelo l. 2. com. 49. Ant.
lection. l. 20. c. 4. de phaenom. lunae. c. 11.
those bodies which give light by reflection can there only be perceived where
the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence, and this is only
in one place, as in a looking-glass those beams which are reflected from it
cannot be perceived in every place where you may see the glass, but only
there where your eye is placed on the same line whereon the beams are
reflected.

But to this I answer, that the argument will not hold of such bodies, whose
superficies is full of unequal parts and gibbosities as the Moon is.
Wherefore it is as well the more probable as the more common opinion, that her
light proceeds from both these causes, from reflection and illumination; nor
does it herein differ from our earth since that also has some light by
illumination: for how otherwise would the parts about us in a Sunshine day
appear so bright, when as all the rays of reflection cannot enter into our eye?

2. It is compact, and not a spungie Plut. de pla. phil. l. 2. c. 13. Opt. lib.
4. Com. Purbac. Theo. p. 164.
and porous substance. But this is denied by Diogenes, Vitellio, and Reinoldus,
and some others, who held the Moon to be of the same kind of nature as a
Pumice stone, and this, say they, is the reason why in the Suns eclipses
there appears within her a duskish ruddy color, because the Sun beams being
refracted in passing through the pores of her body, must necessarily be
represented under such a color.

But I reply, if this be the cause of her redness, then why does she not
appear under the same form when she is about a sextile aspect, and the
darkened part of her body is discernable? for then also do the same rays pass
through her, and therefore in all likelihood should produce the same effect,
and notwithstanding those beams are then diverted from us, that they cannot
enter into our eyes by a straight line, yet must the color still remain
visible in her body, and besides according to this opinion, the spots would not
always be the same, but diverse as the various distance of the Sun requires.
Again, if the Sun beams did Scaliger exercit. 80. 13.
pass through her, why then has she not a tail as the Comets? why does she
appear in such an exact round? and not rather attended with a long flame,
sicne it is merely this penetration of the Sun beams that is usually
attributed to be the cause of beards in blazing stars.

3. It is opacous, not transparent or diaphanous like Crystal or glass, as
Empedocles thought, Plut. de facie lunae.
who held the Moon to be a globe of pure congealed air, like hail enclosed
in a sphere of fire, for then,

1. Why does she not always appear in the full? since the light is dispersed
through all her body?

2. How can the interposition of her body so darken the Sun, or cause such
great eclipses as have Thucid. Livii. Plut. de facie Lunae.
turned day into night, that have discovered the stars, and frighted the birds
with such a sudden darkness, that they fell down upon the earth, as it is
related indivers Histories. And therefore Herodotus tellin of an eclipse which
fell in Xerxes time, describes it thus: Herodot. l. 7. c. 37.
(...). The Sun leaving his wonted seat in the heavens, vanished away: all
which argues such a great darkness, as could not have been, if her body had
been perspicuous. Yet some there are who interpret all these relations to be
hyperbolicall expressions, and the noble Tich^ thinks it naturally impossible,
that any eclipse should cause such darkness, because the body of the Moon
can never totally cover the Sun; however, in this he is singular, (...) other
Astronomers (if I may believe Keplar) being on the contrary opinion, by reason
the Diameter of the Moon does for the most part appear bigger to us then the
Diameter of the Sun.

But here Julius Caesar once more, puts in to hinder our passage. De phaenom.
Lunae. c. 11.
The Moon (says he) is not altogether opacous, because it is still of the same
nature with the heavens, which are incapable of total opacity: and his reason
is, because perspicuity is an inseparable accident of those purer bodies, and
this he thinks must necessarily be granted, for he stops there, and proves no
further; but to this I shall defer an answer, till he has made up his
argument.

We may frequently see, that her body does so eclipse the Sun, as our earth
does the Moon; since then the like interposition of them both, does produce
the like effect, they must necessarily be of the like natures, that is alike
opacous, which is the thing to be showed; and this was the reason (as the
Interpreters guess) why In lib. de animalib.
Aristotle affirmed the Moon to be of the earths nature, because of their
agreement in opacity, whereas all the other elements save that, are in some
measure perspicuous.

But the greatest difference which may seem to make our earth altogether
unlike the Moon, is, because the one is a bright body, and has light of its
own, and the other a gross dark body which cannot shine at all. It Is
requisite therefore, that in the next place I clear this doubt, and show that
the Moon has no more light of her own than our earth.

Proposition. 5. That the Moon has not any light of her own.
It Was the fancy of some of the Jews, and more especially of Rabbi Simeon, that
the Moon Tostatus in 1. Genesis Hieron. de 5. Hide. Haebreoma. l 2. c. 4.
was nothing else but a contracted Sun, and that both those planets at their
first creation were equal both in light and quantity, for because God did then
call them both great lights, therefore they inferred, that they must be both
equal in bigness. But a while after (as the tradition goes) the ambitious
Moon put up her complaint to God against the Sun, showing, that it was not fit
there should be two such great lights in the heavens, a Monarchy would best
become the place of order and harmony. Upon this, God commanded her to contract
her self into a narrower compass, but she being much discontented hereat,
replies, What! because I have spoken that which is reason and equity, must I
therefore be diminished? This sentence could not choose but much trouble her;
and for this reason was she in much distress and grief for a long space, but
that her sorrow might be some way pacified, God bid her be of good cheer,
because her privileges and charter should be greater then the Suns, he should
appear in the day time only, she both in the day and night, but her
melancholy being not satisfied with this, she replied again, that that alas
was no benefit, for in the day time she should be either not seen, or not
noted. Wherefore, God to comfort her up, promised, that his people the
Israelites should celebrate all their feast and holy days by a computation of
her months, but this being not able to content her, she has looked very
melancholy ever since; however she has still reserved much light of her own.

Others there were, that did think the Moon to be around globe, the one half
of whose body was of a bright substance, the other half being dark, and the
diverse conversions of those sides toward our eyes, caused the variety of her
appearances: of this opinion was Berosus, as he is cited Lib. 9. Architecturae
in enarrat. Psalm morum.
by Vitruvius, and St. Austin thought it was probable enough, but this fancy is
almost equally absurd with the former, and both of them sound rather like
fables, then philosophical truths. You may commonly see how this latter does
contradict frequent and easy experience, for it is observed, that that spot
which is perceived about her middle, when she is in the increase, may be
discerned in the same place when she is in the full: whence it must follow, that
the same part which was before darkened, is after enlightened, and that the one
part is not always dark and the other light of it self, but enough of this,
I would be loath to make an enemy, that I may afterward overcome him, or bestow
time in proving that, which is already granted, I suppose now, that neither of
them has any patrons, and therefore need no confutation.

It Is agreed upon by all sides, that this Planet receives most of her light from
the Sun, but the chief controversy is, whether or no she has any of her
own? The greater multitude affirm this. Cardan amongst the rest, is very
confident of it, and he thinks that De Subtle. lib. 3.
if any of us were in the Moon at the time of her greatest eclipse, Lunam
aspiceremus non secus ac innumeris cereis splendidissimis accensis, atque in
eas oculis defixis caecutiremus; we should perceive so great a brightness of
her own, that would blind us with the mere sight, and when she is
enlightened by the Sun, then no eagles eye if there were any there, is able
to look upon her. This Cardan says, and he does but say it without bringing
any proof for its confirmation. However I will set down the arguments that
are usually urged for this opinion, and they are taken either from Scripture or
reason; from Scripture is urged that place, 1 Cor. 15. where it is said, There
is one glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon. Ulysses Albergettus
urges that in Math. 24. 29. (...), The Moon shall not give her light:
therefore (says he) she has some of her own.

But to these we may easily answer that the glory and light there spoken off,
may be said to be hers though it be derived, as you may see in many other
instances.

The arguments from reason are taken either

1. From that light which is discerned in her, when there is a total eclipse
of her own body, or of the Sun.

2. From the light which is discerned in the darker part of her body, when she
is but a little distant from the Sun.

1. For when there are any total eclipses, there appears in her body a great
redness, and many times light enough to cause a remarkable shade, as common
experience does sufficiently manifest: but this cannot come from the Sun,
since at such times either the earth or her own body shades her from the
Sunne-beames, therefore it must proceed from her own light.

2. Two or three days after the new Moon, we may perceive light in her whole
body, whereas the rays of the Sun reflect but upon a small part of that which
is visible, therefore it is likely that there is some light of her own.

In answering to these objections, I shall first show, that this light cannot
be her own, and then declare that which is the true reason of it.

That it is not her own, appears

1. From the variety of it at diverse times; for it is commonly observed that
sometimes it is of a brighter, sometimes of a darker appearance, now redder and
at another time of a more duskish color. The observation of this variety in
diverse eclipses, you may see set down by Keplar and Opt. Astron. c. 7. number. 3.
many others, but now this could not be if that light were her own, that being
constantly the same, and without any reason of such an alteration: So that thus
I may argue.

If there were any light proper to the Moon, then would that Planet appear
brightest when she is eclipsed in her Perige being nearest to the earth, and so
consequently more obscure and duskish when she is in her Apoge or farthest from
it; the reason is, because the nearer any enlightened body comes to the sight,
by so much the more strong are the species and the better perceived. This
sequel is granted by some of our adversaries, and they are the very words De
nova stella. lib. 1. c. 10.
of noble Tycho, Si luna genuino gauderet lumine, utique cum in umbra terrae
esset, illud non amitteret, sed eo evidentius exereret, omne enim lumen in
tenebris, plus splendet cum alio majore fulgore non praepeditur. If the Moon
had any light of her own, then would she not lose it in the earth^ shadow, but
rather shine more clearly, since every light appears greater in the dark,
when it is not hindered by a more perspicuous brightness.

But now the event falls out clean contrary, (as observation Reinhold comment.
in Purb. Theor. page 164.
does manifest, and our opposites themselves do grant) the Moon appearing
with a more reddish and clear light when she is eclipsed being in her Apoge or
farthest distance, and a more blackish iron color when she is in her Perige
or nearest to us, therefore she has not any light of her own. Nor may we
think that the earths shadow can cloud the proper light of the Moon from
appearing, or take away any thing from her inherent brightness, for this were
to think a shadow to be a body, an opinion altogether mis-becomming a
Philosopher, as Tycho grants in the forecited place; Nec umbra terrae
corporeum quid est, out de^sa aliqua substanti, aut lunae lumen obtenebrare
possit, atque id visui nostro praeripere, sed est quaedam privatio luminis
solaris, ob interpositum opacum corpus terrae. Nor is the earths shadow any
corporal thing, or thick substance, that it can cloud the Moons brightness
or take it away from our sight, but it is a mere privation of the Suns light
by reason of the interposition of the earths opacous body.

2. If she had any light of her own then that would in it self be, either
such a ruddy brightness as appears in the eclipses, or else such a leaden
duskish light as we see in the darker parts of her body, when she is a little
past the conjunction. (That it must be one of these may follow from the
opposite arguments) but it is neither of these, therefore she has none of her
own.

1. It Is not such a ruddy light as appears in eclipses, for then why can we
not see the like redness, when we may discern the obscurer parts of the Moon?

You will say, perhaps, that then the neerenesse of that greater light takes
away that appearance.

I reply, this cannot be, for then why does Mars shine with his wonted
redness, when he is near the Moon? or why cannot her greater brightness
make him appear white as the other Planets? nor can there be any reason given
why that greater light should represent her body under a false color.

2. It Is not such a duskish leaden light, as we see in the darker part of her
body, when she is about a sextile Aspect distant from the Sun, for then why
does she appear red in the eclipses, since the more shade cannot choose such
variety, for it is the nature of darkness by its opposition, rather to make
things appear of a more white and clear brightness than they are in
themselves, or if it be the shade, yet those parts of the Moon are then in the
shade of her body, and therefore in reason should have the like redness. Since
then neither of these lights are hers, it follows that she has none of her
own. Nor is this a singular opinion, but it has had many learned patrons,
such was Macrobius, who being for this quoted of Rhodiginus, he calls him Somn.
Scip. l. 1. c. 20.
vir re conditissimae scientiae, a man Lect. antiq. l. 1. c. 15.
who knew more then ordinary Philosophers, thus commending the opinion in the
credit of the Author. To him assents the Venerable Bede, upon whom the gloss
has this comparison. As In lib. de nature. rerum
the Looking-glass represents not any image within it self unless it receive
some from without; so the Moon has not any light, but what is bestowed by the
Sun. To these agreed Albertus Magnus, Scaliger, Maeslin, and more De 4r
Coaevis. Q. 4a. Art. 21. Exercit. 62. 1. Epitom. Astron. l. 4. p. 2.
especially Mulapertius, whose words are more pa^ to the purpose then others,
and therefore I shall set them down as you may find them in his preface to
his Treatise concerning the Austriaca sydera; Luna, Venus, and Mercurius,
terrestris and humidae sunt substantiae, ideoque de suo non lucere, sicut nec
terra. The Moon, Venus, and Mercury (says he) are of an earthly and moist
substance, and therefore have no more light of their own, then the earth has.
Nay some there are who think that all the other Stars do receive that
light, whereby they appear visible to us from the Sun, so Ptolomie, Isidere
Hispalensis, Originum l. 3. c. 60. De Coelo: l. 2. De ratione tempor. c. 4.
Albertus Magnus, and Bid, much more then must the Moon shine with a borrowed
light.

But enough of this. I have now sufficiently showed what at the first I
promised, that this light is not proper to the Moon. It remains in the next
place, that I tell you the true reason of it. And here, I think it is probable
that the light which appears in the Moon at the eclipses is nothing else but
the second species of the Suns rays which pass through the shadow unto her
body: and from a mixture of this second light with the shadow, arises that
redness which at such times appears unto us. I may call it Lumen crepusculum,
the Aurora of the Moon, or such a kind of blushing light, that the Sun
causes when he is near his rising, when he bestows some small light upon the
thicker vapors. Thus we see commonly the Sun being in the Horizon, and the
reflection growing weak, how his beams make the waters appear very red.

The Moabites in Iehorams time when they rose early in the morning, 2 King. 3.
22.
and beheld the waters a far off, mistook them for blood. Et causa hujus est
quia radius solaris in Aurora contrahit quandam rubedinem, propter vapores
combustos manentes circa superficiem terrae, per quos radii transeunt, and ideo
cum repercutiantur in aqua ad oculos nostros, trahunt secum eundem ruborem, and
faciunt apparere locum aquarum, in quo est repercussia esse 2a. Quaest. in hoc
cap.
rubrum says Tostatus. The reason is, because of his rays, which being in the
lower vapors, those do convey an imperfect mixed light upon the waters. Thus
the Moon being in the earths shadow, and the Sun beams which are round about
it, not being able to come directly unto her body, yet some second rays there
are, which passing through the shadow, make her appear in that ruddy color:
So that she must appear brightest, when she is eclipsed, being in her Apoge
or greatest distance from us, because then the cone of the earths shadow is
less, and the refraction is made through a narrower medium. So on the
contrary, she must be represented under a more dark and obscure form when she
is eclipsed, being in her Perige, or nearest to the earth, because then she is
involved in a greater shadow, or bigger part of the cone, and so the refraction
passing through a greater medium, the light must needs be weaker which does
proceed from it. If you ask now what the reason may be of that light which we
discorne in the darker part of the new Moon. I answer, it is reflected from our
earth which returns as great a brightness to that Planet, as it receives from
it. This I shall have occasion to prove afterward.

I have now done with these propositions which were set down to clear the
passage, and confirm the suppositions implied in the opinion, I shall in the
next place proceed to a more direct treating of the chief matter in hand.

Proposition 6. That there is a world in the Moon, has been the direct
opinion of many ancient, with some modern Mathematicians, and may probably be
deduced from the tenants of others.
SInce this opinion may be suspected of singularity, I shall therefore first
confirm it by sufficient authority of diverse authors, both ancient and
modern, that so I may the better clear it from the prejudice either of an
upstart fancy, or an obsolete error. This is by some attributed to Orpheus,
one of the most ancient, Greek Poets, who speaking of the Moon, says thus,
(...), Plut. de plac. phil. l. 2. c. 13
That it has many mountains and cities, and houses in it. To him assented
Xenophanes, Anaxagoras, Democritus, Ibid. c. 25.
and Heraclitus, all who thought it to have firm solid ground, like to our
earth, containing Diog. Laert. l. 2. and l. 9.
in it many large fields, champion grounds, and diverse inhabitants, unto these
agreed Pythagoras, who thought that our earth was but one of the Planets which
moved round about the Sun, (as De Coelo. l. 2. cap. 13.
Aristotle relates it of him) and the Pythagoreans in general did affirm,
that the Moon also was terrestrial, that she was inhabited as this lower
world, That those living creature, and plants which are in her, exceed any of
the like kind with us in the same proportion, as their days are longer than
ours: viz. by 15. times. This Pythagoras Plut. ibid. cap. 30.
was esteemed by all, of a most divine wit, as appears especially by his
valuation amongst the Romans, who being commanded by the Oracle to erect a
statue to the wisest Grecian, the Senate determined Pythagoras to be meant,
preferring Plin. Not. Hist. l 34. cap. 6.
him in their judgments before the divine Socrates, whom their Gods pronounced
the wisest. Some think him a Jew by birth, but most agree that he was much
conversant amongst the learneder sort, and Priests of that Nation, by whom he
was informed of many secrets, and perhaps, this opinion, which he vented
afterward in Greece, where he was much opposed by Aristotle in some worded
disputations, but never confuted by any solid reason.

To this opinion of Pythagoras did Plato also assent, when he considered that
there was the like eclipse made by the earth, and this, that it had no light of
its own, Plat. de conviviis. Macreb. Somn. Scip. lib. 1. c. 11.
that it was so full of spots. And therefore we may often read in him and his
followers, of an aetherea terra, and lunares populi, an aethereall earth, and
inhabiters in the Moon; but afterward this was mixed with many ridiculous
fancies: for some of them considering the mysteries implied in the number 3.
concluded that there must necessarily be a Trinity of worlds, whereof the first
is this of ours, the second in the Moon whose element of water is represented
by the sphere of Mercury, the air by Venus, and the fire by the Sun. And
that the whole Universe might the better end in earth as it began, they have
contrived it, that Mars shall be a sphere of the fire, Jupiter of air,
Saturn of water; and above all these, the Elysian fields, spacious and
pleasant places appointed for the habitation of those unsported souls, that
either never were imprisoned in, or else now have freed themselves from any
commerce Exercit. 62.
with the body. Scaliger speaking of this Platonic fancy, quae intres
trientes mundum quasi assem divisit, thinks it is confutation enough, to say,
it is Plato's. However for the first part of this assertion, it was assented
unto by many others, and by reason of the grossness and inequality of this
planet, '^was frequently called quasi terra coelestis, as being esteemed the
sediment and more imperfect part of those De facie Lunae.
purer bodies, you may see this proved by Plutarch, in that delightful work
which he properly made for the confirmation of this Instit. ad discip. Plat.
Coel. Rhodig. l. 1. c. 4.
particular. With him agreed Alcinous and Plotinus, later Writers. Unto these I
might also add the imperfect testimony of Mahomet, whose authority of grant
can add but little credit to this opinion, because he was an ignorant
imposter, but yet consider that original, from whence he derived most of his
knowledge, and then, perhaps, his witness may carry with it some probability.
He is commonly thought by birth to be an Ismaelite, being instructed by the
Jews in the secrets of their philosophy and, perhaps, learned this from those
Rabbis, for in Azoara. 57. and 65.
his Alcaron, he talks much of mountains, pleasant fields, and clear rivers
in the heavens, but because he was for the maine very unlearned, he was not
able to deliver any thing so distinctly as he was informed. The Cardinal
Cusanus Cusa. de dect. ign. l. 2. cap. 12.
and Iornandus Brunus, held a particular world in every Star, and therefore
one of them defining our earth, he says, it is stella quaedam nobilis, quae
lunam and calorem and influentiam habet aliam, and diversam ab omnibus aliis
stellis; a noble star having a distinct light, heat and influence from all
the rest. Unto this Nichol. Hill, a country man of ours was inclined, when he
said Astrea terrae natura Philos. epicur. part. 434.
probabilis est: That it is probable the earth has a starry nature.

But the opinion which I have here delivered was more directly proved by Maslin
Keplar, and Galilaeus, each of them late writers, and famous men for their
singular In Thesibus dissertatio cum Nic. Hill. Nuncius Sydereus.
skill in Astronomy. As for those works of Maeslin and Keplar wherein they do
more expressly treat of this opinion, I have not yet had the happiness to see
them. However their opinions appear plain enough from their own writings,
and the testimony of others concerning them. But Julius Caesar, whom I have
above quoted, speaking of their testimony whom I now cite for this opinion,
viz. Keplar and Galilaeus De phaenom. lunae. c. 4.
affirms that to his knowledge they did but jest in those things which they
write concerning this, and as for any such world, he assuredly knows they
never so much as dreamt of it. But I had rather believe their own words, then
his pretended knowledge.

It Is true indeed, in many things they do but trifle, but for the maine scope
of those discourses, it is as manifest they seriously meant it, as any
indifferent Reader may easily discern; otherwise sure Campanella (a man as
well acquainted with his opinion, and perhaps his person as Caesar was) would
never have writ an apology for him. And besides it is very likely if it had
been but a jest, Galilaeus would never have suffered so much for it as
afterward he did. But as for the knowledge which he pretends, you may guess
what it was by his confidence (I say not presumption) in other assertions, and
his boldness in them may well derogate from Cap. 7.
his credit in this. For speaking of Ptolome's Hypothesis he pronounces this
verdict, Impossible est excentricorum and epicyclorum positio, nec aliquus est
ex Mathematicis adeo stultis qui veram illam existimet. The position of
Excentrickes and Epicycles is altogether impossible, nor is there any
Mathematician such a fool as to think it true. I should guess he could not
have knowledge enough to maintain any other Hypothesis who was so ignorant in
Mathematickes, as to deny that any good Author held this. For I would feign
know whether there were never any that thought the Heavens to be solid bodies,
and that there were such kinds of motion as is by those feined Orbs supplied;
if so, then Caesar la Calla was much mistaken. I think his assertions are
equally true, that Galilaeus and Keplar did not hold this, and that there were
none which ever held that other.

But in my following discourse I shall most insist on the observation of
Galilaeus, the inventor of that famous perspective, whereby we may discern the
Heavens hard by us, whereby those things which others have formerly guest at
are manifested to the eye, and plainly discovered beyond exception or doubt,
of which admirable invention, these latter ages of the world may justly boast,
and for this expect to be celebrated by posterity. It Is related of Eudoxus,
that he wished himself burnt with Phaeton, so he might stand over the Sun
to contemplate its nature; had he lived in these days, he might have enjoyed
his wish at an easier rate, and scaling the heavens by this glass, might
plainly have discerned what he so much desired. Keplar considering those
strange discoveries which this perspective had made, could not choose but cry
out in a (...) and rapture of admiration. O multiscium and quovis sceptro
pretiosius perspicillum! an qui te dextra tenet, ille non dominus constitnatur
operum Dei? And Johannes De macula in sole obser.
Fabrieius an elegant writer, speaking of the same glass, and for this
invention preferring our age before those former times of greater ignorance,
says thus; Adeo sumus superiores veteribus, ut quam illi carminis magici
pronunciatu de missam represent ass putantur nos non tantum innocenter
demittamus, sed etiam familiuri quodam intuitu ejus quasi conditionem
intueamur. So much are we above the ancients, that whereas they were feign by
their magical charms to represent the Moons approach, we cannot only bring
her lower with a greater innocence, but may also with a more familiar view
behold her condition. And because you shall have no occasion to question the
truth of those experiments, which I shall afterward urge from it; I will
therefore setdowne the testimony of an enemy, and such a witness has always
been accounted prevalent: you may see it in the abovenamed Caesar la De
phaenom. cap. 1.
Galla, whose words are these: Mercurium caduceum gestantem, coelestia
nunciare, and mortuorum animas ab inferis revocare sapiens finxit antiquitas.
Galilaeum vero novum Jovis interpretem Telescopio caducaeo instructum Sydera
aperire, and veterum Philosophorum manes ad superos revocare solers nostra
aetas videt and admiratur. Wise antiquity fabled Mercury carrying a rod in
his hand to relate news from Heaven, and call back the souls of the dead,
but it has been the happiness of our industrious age to see and admire
Galilaeus the new Ambassador of the Gods furnished with his perspective to
unfold the nature of the Stars, and awaken the ghosts of the ancient
Philosophers. So worthily and highly did these men esteem of this excellent
invention.

Now if you would know what might be done by this glass, in the sight of such
things as were nearer at hand, the same Author will tell you, when he says,
that by it those things which could ibid. c. 5.
scarce at all be discerned by the eye at the distance of a mile and a half,
might plainly and distinctly be perceived for 16 Italian miles, and that as
they were really in themselves, without any transposition or falsifying at all.
So that what the ancient Poets were feign to put in a fable, our more happy age
has found out in a truth, and we may discern as far with these eyes which
Galilaeus has bestowed upon us, as Lynceus could with those which the Poets
attributed unto him. But if you yet doubt whether all these observations were
true, the Cap. 1.
same Author may confirm you, when he says they were showed, Non u^i aut
alteri, sed quamplurimis, neque gregariis hominibus, sed praecipuis atque
disciplinis omnibus, ne^^on Mathematicis and opticis praeceptis, optime
instructis sedula ac diligenti inspectione. Not to one or two, but to very
many, and those not ordinary men, but to those who were well versed in
Mathematickes and Optics, and that not with a mere glance, but with a
sedulous and diligent inspection. And least any scruple might remain
unanswered, or you might think the men who beheld all this though they might
be skillful, yet they came with credulous minds, and so were more easy to be
deluded. He adds that it was showed, vires qui Cap. 5.
ad experimenta haec contradicendi animo accesserant. To such as were come with
a great deal of prejudice, and an intent of contradiction. Thus you may see
the certainety of those experiments which were taken by this glass. I have
spoken the more concerning it, because I shall borrow many things in my farther
discourse, from those discoveries which were made by it.

I have now cited such Authors both ancient and modern, who have directly
maintained the same opinion. I told you likewise in the proposition that it
might probably be deduced from the tenants of others: such were Aristarchus,
Philolaus and Copernicus, with many other later writers who assented to their
hypothesis, so Ioach. Rlelicus, David Origanus Lansbergius, Guil. Gilbert, and
(if I may believe Campanella) Innumeri Apologia pro Galilaeo.
alii Angli and Galli. Very many others, both English and French, all who
affirmed our Earth to be one of the Planets, and the Sun to be the Center of
all, about which the heavenly bodies did move, and how horid soever this may
seem at the first, yet is it likely enough to be true, nor is there any maxim
or observation in Optics (says Pena) that can disprove it.

Now if our earth were one of the Planets (as it is according to them) then why
may not another of the Planets be an earth?

Thus have I showed you the truth of this proposition: Before I proceed
farther, it is requisite that I inform the Reader, what method I shall follow
in the proving of this chief assertion, that there is a World in the Moon.

The order by which I shall be guided will be that which Aristatle a 10. cap.
ad 10m.
uses in his book De mundo (if that book were his.)

First, (...) of those chief parts which are in it; not the elementary and
aethereall (as he does there) since this does not belong to the elementary
controversy, but of the Sea and Land, etc. Secondly, (...), of those things
which are extrinsecall to it, as the seasons, meteors and inhabitants.

Proposition 7. That those spots and brighter parts which by our sight may be
distinguished in the Moon, do show the difference betwixt the Sea and Land in
that other World.
FOr the clear proof of this proposition, I shall first reckon up and refute
the opinions of others concerning the matter and form of those spots, and then
show the greater probability of this present assertion, and how agreeable it is
to that truth, which is most commonly received; as for the opinions of other
concerning these, they have been very many, I will only reckon up those which
are common and remarkable.

Some there are that think those spots do not arise from any deformity of the
parts, but a deceit of the eye, which cannot at such a distance discern an
equal light in that planet, but these do but only say it, and show not any
reason for the proof of their opinion: Others think that there are some
bodies betwixt the Sun and Moon, which keeping off the So Bid in li. de
Mund. constit.
lights in some parts, do by their shadow produce these spots which we there
discern.

Others would have them to be the figure of the mountains here below
represe^ted there as in a looking-glass. But none of those fancies can be
true, because the spots are still the same, and not varied according to the
difference of places, and besides, Cardan thinks it is impossible that any
image should De subtle. lib. 3.
be conveyed so far as there to be represented unto us at such a distance,
but it is commonly related of Pythagoras, that he by writing, what he pleased in
a glass, by the reflexio^ of the same species, would make those letters to
appear in the circle of the Moon, where they should be legible by any other,
who might at that time be some miles distant from him. Occulta-ad Philos. l. 1.
cap. 6.
Agrippa affirms this to be possible, and the way of performing it not
unknown to himself, with some others in his time. It may be that our Bishop
did by the like means perform those strange conclusions which he professes
in his Nuncius inanimatus, where he pretends that he can inform his friends
of what he pleases, though they be an hundred miles distant, forte etiam, vel
miliare millesimum, they are his own words, and, perhaps, a thousand, and all
this in a minutes space, or little more, quicker than the Sun can move.

Now, what conveyance there should be for so speedy a passage, I cannot
conceive, unless it be carried with the light, then which we know not any
thing quicker; but of this only by the way; however, whether those images can
be represented so or not, yet certain it is, those spots are not such
representations. Some think that when God had at first created too much earth
to make a perfect globe, not knowing well where to bestow the rest, he placed
it in the Moon, which ever since has so darkened it in some parts, but the
impiety of this is sufficient confutation, since it so much detracts from the
divine power and wisdom.

The Plut. de placit. phil. l. 2. c. 25.
Stoics held that Planet to be mixed of fire and air, and in their opinion,
the variety of its composition, caused her spots: Anaxagoras thought all the
stars to be of an earthly nature, mixed with some fire, and as for the Sun,
he affirmed it to be nothing else but a fiery stone; for which later opinion,
the Athenians Joseph^^ l. 2. con. App. August. de Civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 41.
sentenced him to death; those zealous Idolaters counting it a great blasphemy,
to make their God a stone, whereas notwithstanding, they were so senseless in
their adoration of Idols, as to make a stone their God, this Anaxagoras
affirmed the Moon to be more terrestrial then the other, but of a greater
purity then any thing here below, and the spots he thought were nothing else,
but some cloudy parts, intermingled with the light which belonged to that
Planet, but I have above destroyed the supposition on which this fancy is
grounded: Pliny Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 9.
thinks they arise from some drossie stuff, mixed with that moisture which
the Moon attracts unto her self, but he was of their opinion who thought the
stars were nourished by some earthly vapors, which you may commonly see
refuted in the Commentators on the books, d^ Coelo.

Vitellio and Reinoldus affirm Opt. lib. 9. comment. in Purb. page 164.
the spots to be the thicket parts of the Moon, into which the Sun cannot
infuse much light, and this (say they) is the reason, why in the Suns
eclipses, the spots and brighter parts are still in some measure distinguished,
because the Sun beams are not able so well to penetrate through those
thicker, as they may through the thinner parts of that Planet. Of this opinion
also was Caesar la Galla, whose words are these, The Moon does there appear
Ex qua part luna est transpicua nonsolum secundum superficiem, sed etiam
secundum substantiam, eatenus clara, ex qua autem part opaca est, eatenus
obscura videtur. De Ph^nom. cap. 11.
clearest, where she is transpicuous, not only through the superficies, but
the substance also, and there she seems spotted, where her body is most
opacous. The ground of this his assertion was, because he thought the Moon
did receive and bestow her light by illumination only, and not at all by
reflection, but this, together with the supposed penetration of the Sun
beams, and the perspicuity of the Moons body I have above answered and
refuted.

The more common and general opinion is, that the spots are Albert. mag. de
Coaevis. Q. 4. Art. 21. Colleg. Con.
the thinner parts of the Moon, which are less able to reflect the beams
that they receive from the Sun, and this is most agreeable to reason; for if
the stars are therefore brightest, because they are thicker and more solid
then their orbs, then it will follow, that those parts of the Moon which have
less light, have also less thickenesse. It was the providence of nature (say
some) that so contrived that planet to have these spots within it, for since
that is nearest to those lower bodies which are so full of deformity, it is
requisite that it should in some measure agree with them, and as in this
inferior world the higher bodies are the most complete, so also in the heavens
perfection is ascended unto by degrees, and the Moon being the lowest, must be
the least pure, and De Somniis.
therefore Philo the Jew interpreting Jacobs dream concerning the ladder, does
in an allegory show, how that in the fabric of the world, all things grow
perfecter as they grow higher, and this is the reason (says he) why the Moon
does not consist of any pure simple matter, but is mixed with air, which
shows so darkely within her body.

But this cannot be a sufficient reason, for though it were true that nature
did frame every thing perfecter as it was higher, yet is it as true that nature
frames every thing fully perfect for that office to which she intends it. Now,
had she intended the Moon merely to reflect the Sun beams and give light,
the spots then had not so much argued her providence, as her unskilfulnesse and
imperfection, as if in the haste of her work Scalig. exercit. 62.
she could not tell how to make that body exactly fit, for that office to
which she appointed it.

It Is likely then that she had some other end which moved her to produce this
variety, and this in all probability was her intent to make it a fit body for
habitation with the same conveniences of sea and land, as this inferior world
does partake of. For since the Moon is such a vast, such a solid and opacous
body like our earth (as was above proved) why may it not be probable, that
those thinner and thicker parts appearing in her do show the difference
betwixt the sea and land in that other world; and Galilaeus doubts not, but
that if our earth were visible at the same distance, there would be the like
appearance of it.

As for the form of those spots, some of the vulgar think they represent a
man, and the Poets guess it is the boy Endimion, whose company she loves so
well, that she carries him with her, others will have it only to be the face
of a man as the Moon is usually pictured, but Albertus thinks rather, that it
represents a Lion with his tail toward the East, and his head the West, and
Euscbius Nioremb. Hist. Not. lib. 8. c. 15.
some others have thought it to be very much like a Fox, and certainly it is, as
much like a Lion as that in the Zodiake, or as Vrsa major is like a Bear.

I should guess that it represents one of these as well as another, and any
thing else as well as any of these, since it is but a strong imagination, which
fancies such images as schoole-boyes ususual'y do in the marks of a wall,
whereas there is not any such similitude in the spots themselves, which rather
like our Sea, in respect of the land, appears under a rugged and confused
figure, and does not represent any distinct image, so that both in respect of
the matter and the form it may be probable enough, that those spots and
brighter parts may show the distinction betwixt the Sea and Land in that other
world.

Proposition. 8. The spots represent the Sea, and the brighter parts the Land.
When I first compared the nature of our earth and water with those
appearances in the Moon; I concluded contrary to the proposition, that the
brighter parts represented the water, and the spots the land; of this opinion
likewise was Keplar at the first, but my second thoughts, and the reading of
others, have now Opt. Astro. c. 6. number. 9. Dissert. cum nuncio Gal.
convinced me (as after he was) of the truth of that proposition which I have
now see down. But before I come to the confirmation of it, I shall mention
those seruples which at first made me doubt of the truth of this opinion.

1. It may be objected, it is probable, if there be any such sea and land as
ours, that it bears some proportion and similitude with ours: but now this
proposition takes away all likeness betwixt them, for whereas the superficies
of our earth is but the third part of the whole surface in the globe, two parts
being overspread with the water (as Scaliger observes) yet here according to
this opinion, the Exercit. 38.
Sea should be less then the land, since there is not so much of the
bespotted, as there is of the enlightened parts, wherefore it is probable, that
either there is no such thing at all, or else that the brighter parts are the
Sea.

2. The water, by reason of the smoothness of its superficies, seems better
able to reflect the Sun beams then the earth, which in most places is so full
of ruggedness of grass and trees, and such like impediments of reflection, and
besides, common experience shows, that the water shines with a greater and
more glorious brightness then the earth, therefore it should seem that the
spots are the earth, and the brighter parts the water.

But to the first it may be answered.

1. There is no great probability in this consequence, that because it is so
with us, therefore it must be so with the parts of the Moon, for since there
is such a difference betwixt them in diverse other respects, they may not
perhaps agree in this.

2. That assertion of Sculiger is De Meteoris l. 5. c. 1. Art. 1.
not by all granted for a truth. Fromondus with others think that the
superficies of the Sea and Land in so much of the world as is already
discovered is equal and of the same extension.

3. The Orb of thick and vaporous air which incompasses the Moon, makes the
brighter parts of that Planet appear bigger then in themselves they are; as I
shall show afterward.

To the second it may be answered, that though the water be of a smooth
superficies, and so may seem most fit to reverberate the light, yet because
it is of a perspicuous nature, therefore the beams must sink into it, and
cannot so strongly and clearly be reflected. Sicut in speculo ubi plumbum
abrasum fuerit, (says Cardan) as in Looking-glasses where part of the lead is
razed of, and nothing left behind to reverberate the image, the species must
there pass through and not back again; so it is where the beams penetrate
and sink into the substance of the body, there cannot be such an immediate and
strong reflection as when they are beat back from the superficies, and
therefore the Sun causes a greater heat by far upon the Land then upon the
water. Now as for that experiment where it is said, that the waters have a
greater brightness then the Land: I answer, it is true only there where they
represent the image of the Sun or some bright cloud, and not in other places,
as is very plain by common observation.

So that notwithstanding those doubts, yet this proposition may remain true,
that the spots may be the Sea, and the brighter parts the Land. Of this opinion
was Plutarch: unto him assented Keplar and Galilaeus, whose words are these, Si
quis veterum Pythagoreorum sententiam exuscitare De facielun. Dissertatio.
Nunc. Syd.
velit, lunam scilicet esse quasi tellurem alteram, ejus pars lucidior terrenam
superficiem, obscurior vero aqueam magis congrue repraesentet Mihi autem dubium
fuit nunquam terrestris globi a long conspecti, atque aradiis solaribus
perfusi, terream superficiem clariorem, obscuriorem vero aqueam sese in
conspectum daturam. If any man have a mind to renew the opinion of the
Pythagoreans, that the Moon is another earth, then her brighter parts may
fitly represent the earths superficies, and the darker part the water: and for
my part, I never doubted but that our earthly globe being shined upon by the
Sun, and beheld at a great distance, the Land would appear brightest and the
Sea more obscurely. The reasons may be

1. That which I urged about the foregoing chapter, because the water is the
thinner part, and therefore must give less light.

2, Because observation tells us, that the spotted parts are always smooth and
equal, having every where an equality of light when once they are enlightened
by the Sun, whereas the brighter parts are full of rugged gibbosities and
mountains having many shades in them, as I shall show more at large afterward.

That in this Planet there must be Seas, Campanella endeavors to Apologia pro
Galilaeo.
prove out of Scripture interpreting the waters above the Firmament, spoken of
in Genesis to be meant of the Sea in this world. For (says he) it is not
likely that there are any such waters above the Orbs to moderate that heat
which they receive from their swift motion (as some of the Fathers think) nor
did Moses mean the Angels which may be called Confession. l. 13. c. 32.
spiritual waters, as Origin and Austin would have it, for both these are
rejected by the general consent: Nor could he mean any waters in the second
region, as most Commentators interpret it. For first there is nothing but
vapors, which though they are afterward turned into water, yet while they
remain there, they are only the matter of that element, which may as well be
fire or earth or air. 2. Those vapors are not above the expansum but in it.
So that he thinks there is no other way to salve all, but by making the
Planets several worlds with Sea and Land with such Rivers and Springs as we
have here below: Especially since Esdras 2. Esdr. 4. 7.
speaks of the springs above the Firmament, but I cannot agree with him in
this, nor do I think that any such thing can be proved out of Scripture.

Before I proceed to the next position, I shall first answer some doubts which
might be made against the generality of this truth, whereby it may seem
impossible that there should be either Sea or Land in the Moon; for since she
moves so swiftly as Astronomers observe, why then does there nothing fall from
her, or why does she not shake something out by the celerity of her
revolution? I answer, you must know that the inclination of every heavy body
to its proper Center does sufficiently tie it unto its place, so that suppose
any thing were separated, yet must it necessarily return again, and there is
no more danger of their falling into our world then there is fear of our
falling into the Moon.

But yet there are many fabulous relations of such things as have dropped
thence. There is a tale of the Nemean Lion that Hercules slew, which first
rushing among the herds out of his unknown den in the Mountain of Cytheron
in Boeotia, the credulous people thought he was sent from their Goddess the
Moon. And if a whirle-winde did chance to snatch any thing up, and afterward
rain it down again, the ignorant multitude are apt to believe that it dropped
from Heaven. Thus Avicenna relates the story of a Calfe which fell down in a
storm, the beholders thinking it a Moon-calfe, and that it fell thence. So
Cardan traveling upon the Apennine Mountains, a sudden blast took off his
hat, which if it had been carried far, he thinks the peasants who had
perceived it to fall, would have sworn it had rained hats. After some such
manner many of our prodigies come to pass, and the people are willing to
believe any thing, which they may relate to others as a very strange and
wonderful event. I doubt not but the Trojan Palladium, the Roman Minerva, and
our Ladies Church at Loretto, with many sacred relics preserved by the
Papists might drop from the Moon as well as any of these.

But it may be again objected, suppose there were a bullet shot up in that
world, would not the Moon run away from it, before it could fall down,
since the motion of her body (being every day round our earth) is far swifter
than the other, and so the bullet must be left behind, and at length fall down
to us. To this I answer,

1. If a bullet could be shot so far till it came to the circumference of
those things which belong to our center, then it would fall down to us.

2. Though there were some heavy body a great height in that air, yet would
the motion of its center by an attractive virtue still holds it within its
convenient distance, so that whether their earth moved or stood still, yet
would the same violence cast a body from it equally far. That I may the
plainer express my meaning, I will set down this Diagramme.

diagram of Earth, magnetic field, and orbit

Suppose this earth were A, which was to move in the circle C, D. and let the
bullet be supposed at B. within its proper verge; I say, whether this earth did
stand still or move swiftly toward D, yet the bullet would still keep at the
same distance by reason of that Magneticke virtue of the center (if I may so
speak) whereby all things within its sphere are attracted with it. So that
the violence to the bullet, being nothing else but that whereby it is removed
from its center, therefore an equal violence can carry a body from its proper
place, but at an equal distance whether or no the center stand still or move.

The impartial Reader may find sufficient satisfaction for this and such
other arguments as may be urged against the motion of that earth in the
writings of Copernicus and his followers, unto whom for brevities sake I will
refer them.

Proposition 9. That there are high Mountains, deep valleys, and spacious
plains in the body of the Moon.
THough there are some who think Mountains to be a deformity to the earth,
as if they were either beat up by the flood, or else cast up like so many
heaps of rubbish left at the creation, yet if well considered, they will be
found as much to conduce to the beauty and convenience of the universe as any
of the other parrs. Nature (says Pliny) purposely Not. hist. l. 36. c. 1.
framed them for many excellent uses: partly to tame the violence of greater
Rivers, to strengthen certain joints within the veins and bowels of the
earth, to break the force of the Seas inundation, and for the safety of the
earths inhabitants, whether beasts or men. That they make much for the
protection of beasts the Psalmist Psalm. 104. v. 18.
testifies, The highest hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks
for conies. The Kingly Prophet had learned the safety of these by his own
experience, when he also was feign to make a mountain his refuge from the
fury of his Master Saul, who persecuted him in the wilderness.

True indeed, such places as these keep their neighbors poor, as being most
barren, but yet they preserve them safe, as being most strong, witness our
unconquered Wales and Scotland, whose greatest protection has been the
natural strength of their Country, so fortified with Mountains, that these
have always been unto them sure retraites from the violence and oppression of
others, wherefore a good Author does rightly call them natures bulwarks cast
up at God Almighties own charges, the scorns and, curbes of victorious
armies, which made the Barbarians in Curtius so confident of their own safety,
when they were once retired to an inaccessible mountain, that when Alexanders
Legate had brought them to a parley and persuading them to yield, told them of
his masters victories, what Seas and Wildernesses he had passed, they replied
that all that might be, but could Alexander fly too? Over the Seas he might
have ships, and over the land horses, but he must have wings before he could
get up thither. Such safety did those barbarous nations conceive in the
mountains whereunto they were retired, certainly then such useful parts were
not the effect of man's si^ne, or produced by the Worlds cu^se the flood, but
rather at the first created by the goodness and providence of the Almighty.

So that if I intend to prove that the Moon is such a habitable world as this
is, it is requisite that I show it to have the same conveniences of habitation
as this has, and here if some Rabbi or Chymick were to handle the point they
would first prove it out of Scripture, from that place in Moses his blessing,
where he Deuteronomy. 33. 15.
speaks of the ancient mountains and last^ng hills, Deuteronomy. 33. (...) for
having immediately before mentioned those blessings which should happen unto
Joseph by the influence of the Moon, he does presently exegetically iterate
them in blessing him with the chief things of the ancient mountains and
lasting hills; you may also see the same expression used in Jacobs blessing of
Joseph. Genesis 49. 26.


But however we may deal pro or con in Philosophy, yet we must not j^st with
divine truths, or bring Scripture to patronize any fancy of our own, though,
perhaps, it be a truth. For the better proof of this proposition, I might here
cite the testimony of Diodorus, who thought the Moon to be full of rugged
places, vel ut terrestribus tumulis superciliosam, but he erred much in some
circumstances of this opinion, espicially where he says, there is an Island
amongst the Hyperboreans, wherein those hills may to the eye be plainly
discovered, and for this reason Lect. aut l. 1. cap. 15. Plut. de plac. l. 2.
c. 25.
Caelius calls him a fabulous Writer, but you may see more express authority
for the proof of this in the opinions of Anaxagoras and Democritus, who held
that this Planet was full of champion grounds, mountains and valleys, De coelo.
l. 2. part. 49.
and this seemed likewise probable unto Augustinus Nifus, whose words are
these: Forsitan non est remotum dicere lunae parts esse diversas, veluti sunt
parts terrae, quarum aliae sunt vallosae, aliae montosae, ex quarum
differentia effici pot^st facies illa lunae; nec est raetioni dissonum, nam
luna est corpus imperfecte Sphaericum, cum sit corpus ab ultimo coelo
elongatum, ut supra dixit Aristoteles. Perhaps, it would not be amiss to say
that the parts of the Moon were diverse, as the parts of this earth, whereof
some are valleys, and some mountains, from the difference of which, some spots
in the Moon may proceed; nor is this against reason, for that Planet cannot be
perfectly sphericall, since it is so remote a bod^ from the first orb, as
Aristotle had said before. You may see this truth assented unto by Blancanus De
Mundi fab. pars 3^. c. 4.
the Jesuit, and by him confirmed with diverse reasons. Keplar has observed in
the Moons Astron. Opt. c. 6. number. 9
eclipses, that the division of her enlightened part from the shaded, was made
by a crooked unequal line, of which there cannot be any probable cause
conceived, unless it did arise from the ruggedness of that planet, for it
cannot at all be produced from the shade of any mou^tains here upon earth,
because these would be so lessened before they could reach so high in a
conicall shadow, that they would not be at all sensible unto us (as might
easily be demonstrated) nor can it be conceived what reason of this difference
there should be in the Sun. Wherefore there being no other body that has any
thing to do in eclipses, we must necessarily conclude, that it is caused by a
variety of parts in the Moon it self, and what can there be but its
gibbosities? Now if you should ask a reason why there should be such a
multitude of these in that Planet, the same Keplar shall jest you out an
answer, for supposing (says he) those inhabitants are ^^gger than any of us
in the same proportion, as their days are longer than ours, vix. by fifteen
times it may be for want of stones to erect such vast houses as were requisite
for their bodies, they are feign to dig great and round hollowes in the
earth, where they may both procure water for their thirst, and turning about
with the shade, may avoid those great heats which otherwise they would be
liable unto; or if you will give Caesar la Galla leave to guess in the same
manner, he would rather think that those thirsty nations cast up so many and so
great heaps of earth in digging of their wine cellars, but this only by the
way.

I shall next produce the eye witness of Galilaeus, on which I Nuncius
Sydereus.
most of all depend for the proof of this Proposition, when he beheld the new
Moon through his perspective it appeared to him under a rugged and spotted
figure, seeming to have the darker and enlightened parts divided by a tortuous
line, having some parcells of light at a good distance from the other, and this
difference is so remarkable, that you may easily perceive it through one of
those ordinary perspectives, which are commonly sold amongst us, but for your
better apprehending of what I deliver, I will set down the Figure as I find it
in Galilaeus:

diagram of Moon

Suppose A B C D to represent the appearande of the Moons body being in a
sextile, you may see some brighter parts separated at a pretty distance from
the other, which can be nothing else but a reflection of the Sun beams upon
some parts that are higher then the rest, and those obscure gibbosities which
stand out toward the enlightened parts must be such hollow and deep places
whereto the rays cannot reach, but when the Moon is got farther off from the
Sun, and come to that fullness, as this line B D does represent her under,
then do these parts also receive an equal light, excepting only that
difference which does appear betwixt their sea and land. And if you do
consider how any rugged body would appear, being enlightened, you would easily
conceive that it must necessarily seem under some such gibbous unequal form,
as the Moon is here represented. Now for the infalibility of these
appearances, I shall refer the reader to that which has been said in the
6th. Proposition.

But Caesar la Galla affirms, that all these appearances may consast with a
plain superficies, if we suppose the parts of the body to be some of them,
Diaphanous, and some opacous; and if you object that the light which is
convayed to any diaphanous part in a plain superficies must be by a continued
line, whereas here there appear many brighter parts among the obscure at some
distance from the rest. To this he answers, it may arise from some secret
conveiances and channels within her body, that do consist of a more diaphanous
matter which being covered over with an opacous superficies, the light passing
through them may break out a great way off, whereas the other parts betwixt
may still remain dark. Just as the River Arethusa in Sicily which runs
under ground for a great way, and afterward breaks out again. But because
this is one of the chiefest fancies whereby he thinks he has fully answered
the arguments of this opinion, I will therefore set down his answer in his
own words, least the Reader might suspect more in them then I have expressed.
Non Cap. 11.
est impossible coecos ductus diaphani and perspicui corporis, sed opacd
superficie protendi, usque in diaphanam aliquam ex profundo in superficiem,
emergentem partem, per quos ductus lumen longo postmodum interstitio erumpat,
etc. But I reply, if the superficies betwixt these two enlightened parts
remain dark because of its opacity, then would it always be dark, and the
Sun could not make it partake of light more then it could of perspicuity: But
this contradicts all experience as you may see in Galilaeus, who affirms that
when the Sun comes nearer to his opposition, then that which is betwixt them,
both is enlightened as well as either. Nay this opposes his own eyewitness,
for he confesses himself that he saw this by the glass. He had said before
that he came to see those strange sights discovered by Galilaeus his glass
with an intent of contradiction, and you may read that confirmed in the
weakness of this answer, which rather bewrayes an obstinate then a persuaded
will, for otherwise sure he would never have undertook to have destroyed such
certain proofs with so groundless a fancy.

But it may be objected, that '^is almost impossible, and altogether unlikely
that in the Moon there should be any mountains so high as those observations
make them, for do but suppose according to the common principles, that the
Moons diameter unto the Earths is very near to the proportion of 2. to 7,
suppose withal that the Earths diameter contains about 7000 Italian miles,
and the Moons 2000 (as is commonly granted) now Galilaeus has observed that
some parts have been enlightened when they were the twentieth part of the
diameter distant from the common term of illumination, so that hence it must
necessarily follow that there may be some Mountains in the Moon so high,
that they are able to cast a shadow a 100 miles off. An opinion that sounds
like a prodigy or a fiction; wherefore it is likely that either those
appearances are caused by somewhat else besides mountains, or else those are
fallible observations, from whence may follow such improbable inconceiveable
consequences.

But to this I answer:

1. You must consider the heighr of the Mountains is but very little, if you
compare them to the length of their shadows. Sr. Walter Hist. l. 1. c. 7.. 11.
Rawleigh observes that the Mount Athes now called Lacas casts its shadow 300
furlongs, which is above 37 miles, and yet that Mount is none of the highest,
nay Solinus (whom I should rather Poly. histor. c. 21.
believe in this kind) affirms that this Mountain gives his shadow quite
over the Sea, from Macedon to the I Will of Lemnos which is 700 furlongs or 84
miles, and yet according to the common reckoning it does scarce reach 4 miles
upwards, in its perpendicular height.

2. I affirm that there are very high Mountains in the Moon. Keplar and
Galilaeus think that they are higher than any which are upon our earth. But I
am not of their opinion in this, because I suppose they go upon a false ground
whilst they conceive that the highest mountain upon the earth is not above a
mile perpendicular.

Whereas it is the common opinion and found true enough by observation, that
Olympus, Atlas, Taurus and E^us, with many others are much above this height.
Tenariffa in the Canary Islands is proved by computation to be above 8 miles
perpendicular, and about this height is the mount Hist. l. 1. c. 7.. 11.
Perjacaca in America: Sr. Walter Rawleigh seeme^ to think, that the highest
of these is near 30 miles upright: nay Aristotle speaking Meteor. l. 1. c. 11.
of Caucasus in Asia, affirms it to be visible for 560 miles, as some
interpreters find by computation, from which it will follow, that it was 78
miles perpendicularly high, as you may see confirmed Comparatio Arist. cum
Platone Sect. 3. c. 5.
by Jacobus Mazonius, and out of him in Blancanus the Jesuit. But this
deviates from the truth more in excess then the other Exposi. in loc. Math.
Arlis. loc. 148.
does in defect. However though these in the moon are not so high as some
amongst us, yet certain it is they are of a great height, and some of them at
the least four miles perpendicular. This I shall prove from the observation of
Galilaeus, whose glass can show this truth to the senses, a proof beyond
exception and certain that man must needs be of a most timorous faith who
dares not believe his own eye.

By that perspective you may plainly discern some enlightened parts (which are
the mountains) to be distant from the other about the twentieth part of the
diameter. From whence it will follow, that those mountains must necessarily be
at the least four Italian miles in height.

diagram of Moon

For let BDEF be the body of the moon, ABC will be a ray or beam of the
Sun, which enlightens a mountain at A and B is the point of contingency, the
distance betwixt A and B must be supposed to be the twentieth part of the
diameter which is an 100 miles, for so far are some enlightened parts severed
from the common term of illumination. Now the aggregate of the quadrate from A
B a hundred, and B G a 1000 will be 1010000, unto which the quadra^e arising
from A G must be equal according to the 47th proposition in the first book of
elements. Therefore the whole line A G is somewhat more than 104, and the
distance betwixt H A must be above 4 miles, which was the thing to be proved.

But it may be again objected, if there be such rugged parts, and so high
mountains, why then cannot we discern them at this distance, why does the
moon appear unto us so exactly round, and not rather as a wheel with teeth?

I answer, by reason of too great a distance, for if the whole body appear to
our eye so little, then those parts which bear so small a proportion to the
whole will not at all be sensible.

But it may be replied, if there were any such remarkable hills, why does not
the limb of the moon appear like a wheel with teeth to those who look upon
it through the great perspective on whose witness you so much depend? or what
reason is there that she appears as exactly round through it as she does to
the bare eye? certainly then either there is no such thing as you imagine, or
else the glass fails much in this discovery.

To this I shall answer out of Galilaeus.

1. You must know that there is not merely one rank of mountains about the
edge of the moon, but diverse orders, one mountain behind another, and so
there is somewhat to hinder those void spaces which otherwise, perhaps, might
appear.

Now where there be many hills, the ground seems even to a man that can see the
tops of all. Thus when the sea rages, and many vast waves are lifted up, yet
all may appear plain enough to one that stands at the shore. So where there
are so many hills, the inequality will be less remarkable, if it be discerned
at a distance.

2. Though there be mountains in that part which appears unto us, to be the
limb of the Moon, as well as in any other place, yet the bright vapors hide
their appearance: for there is an orb of thick vaporous air that does
immediately compass the body of the Moon, which though it have not so great
opacity, as to terminate the sight, yet being once enlightened by the Sun, it
does repres^nt the body of the Moon under a greater form, and hinders our
fight from a distinct view of her true circumference. But of this in the next
Chapter.

I have now sufficiently proved, that there are hills in the Moon, and hence
it may seem likely that there is also a world, for since providence has some
special end in all its works, certainly then these mountains were not
produced in vain, and what more probable meaning can we conceive there should
be, than to make that place convenient for habitation.

Proposition 10. That there is an Atmo-sphaera, or an orb of gross vaporous
air, immediately incompassing the body of the Moon.
AS that part of our air which is nearest to the earth, is of a thicker
substance than the other, by reason it is always mixed with some vapors, which
are continually exhaled into it. So is it equally requisite, that if there be a
world in the Moon, that the air about that should be alike qualified with
ours. Now, that there is such an orb of gross air, was first of all (for
ought I can read) observed by Meslin, afterward assented unto by Keplar and
Galilaeus, and Vide Ruseb. Nierem. de Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 11.
since by Baptista Cisatus, Sheiner with others, all of them confirming it by
the same arguments which I shall only cite, and then leave this Proposition.

1. It Is observed, that so much of the Moon as is enlightened, is always part
of a bigger circle then that which is darker. Their frequent experience has
proved this, and an easy observation may quickly confirm it. But now this
cannot proceed from any other cause so probable, as from this orb of air,
especially when we consider how that planet shining with a borrowed light, does
not send forth any such rays as may make her appearance bigger then her body.

2. It Is observed in the Solary eclipses, that there is a great trepidation
about the body of the Moon, from which we may likewise argue an Atmo-sphaera,
since we cannot well conceive what so probable a cause there should be of such
an appearance as this, Quod radii Solares a vaporibus Lunam ambientibus fuerint
intercisi, that the Sun beams were broken and Scheiner. Ros. Vrs. l. 4. pars
2. c. 27.
refracted by the vapors that encompassed the Moon.

3. I may add the like argument taken from another observation which will be
easily tried and granted. When the Sun is eclipsed, we discern the Moon as
she is i^ her own natural bigness, but then she appears somewhat less
then when she is in the full, though she be in the same place of her supposed
excentrick and epicycle, and therefore Tycho has calculated a Table for the
Diameter of the diverse new Moons. But now there is no reason so probable to
salve this appearance, as to place an or be of thicker air, near the body of
that Planet, which may be enlightened by the reflected beams, and through
which the directraies may easily penetrate.

But some may object that this will not consist with that which was before
delivered, where I said, that the thinnest parts had least light.

If this were true, how comes it to pass then, that this air should be as
bright as any of the other parts, when as it is the thinnest of all?

I answer, if the light be received by reflection, then the thickest body has
most, because it is best able to beat back the rays, but if the light be
received by illumination (especially if there be an opacous body behind, which
may double the beams by reflection) as it is here, then I deny not but a thin
body may retain much light, and perhaps, some of those appearances which we
take for fiery comets, are nothing else but a bright cloud enlightened, so that
probable it is, there may be such air without the Moon, and hence it comes to
pass, that the greater spots are only visible toward her middle parts, and
none near the circumference, not but that there are some as well in those
parts as else where, but they are not there perceiveable, by reason of those
brighter vapors which hide them.

Proposition. 11. That as their world is our Moon, so our world is their Moon.
I Have already handled the first thing that I promised according to the Method
which Aristotle uses in his Book de Mundo, and showed you the necessary parts
that belong to this world in the Moon. In the next place it is requisite that I
proceed to those things which are extrinsecall unto it, as the Seasons, the
Meteors, and the Inhabitants.

1. Of the Seasons;

And if there be such a world in the Moon, it is requisite then that their
seasons should be some way correspondent unto ours, that they should have
Winter and Summer, night and day, as we have.

Now that in this Planet there is some similitude of Winter and Summer is
affirmed by Aristotle De genesis animal. l. 4. 12.
himself, since there is one hemispheare that has always heat and light,
and the other that has darkness and cold. True indeed, their days and years
are always of one and the same length, but it is so with us also under the
Poles, and therefore that great difference is not sufficient to make it
altogether unlike ours, nor can we expect that every thing there should be in
the same manner as it is here below, as if nature had no way but one to bring
about her purposes. We may easily see what great differences there are amongst
us, betwixt things of the same Plut. de fac. De natura populorum c. 3.
kind. Some men (say they) there are, who can live only upon smells, without
eating any thing, and the same Plant, says Besoldus, has sometimes contrary
effects. Mandragora which grows in Syria, inflames the lust, whereas Mandragora
which grows in other places does cool the blood and q^ench lust.

Now if with us there be such great difference betwixt things of the same
kind, we have no reason then to think it necessary that both these worlds
should be altogether alike, but it may suffice if they be correspondent in
something only, however it may be questioned whether it does not seem to be
against the wisdom of providence, to make the night of so great a length,
when they have such a long time unfit for work? I answer no, since it is so,
and more with us also under the poles; and besides, the general length of
their night is somewhat abated in the bigness of their Moon which is our
earth. For this returns as great a light unto that Planet, as it receives from
it. But for the better proof of this, I shall first free the way from such
opinions as might otherwise hinder the speed of a clearer progress.

Plutarch one of the chief patrons Plut. de fac. lunae.
trons of this world in the Moon, does directly contradict this proposition;
affirming, that those who live there may discern our world as the dregs and
sediment of all other creatures, appearing to them through clouds and foggy
mists, and that altogether devoid of light, being base and unmovable, so that
they might well imagine the dark place of damnation to be here situate, and
that they only were the inhabiters of the world, as being in the midst betwixt
Heaven and Hell.

To this I may answer, it is probable that Plutarch spoke this inconsiderately,
and without a reason, which makes him likewise fall into another absurdity,
when he says our earth would appear immovable, whereas questionless though
it did not, yet would it seem to move, and theirs to stand still, as the Land
does to a man in a Ship; according to that of the Poet:

Provehimur portu, terraeque urbesque recedunt. And I doubt not but that
ingenuous Author would easily have recanted if he had been but acquainted
with those experiences which men of latter times have found out, for the
confirmation of this truth.

2. Unto him assents Macrobius, Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 19.
whose words are these; Terra accepto solis lumine clarescit, tantum-modo, non
relucet. The earth is by the Sunne-beames made bright, but not able to
enlighten any thing so far. And his reason is, because this being of a thick
and gross matter, the light is terminated in its superficies, and cannot
penetrate into the substance; whereas the moon does therefore seem so bright
to us, because it receives the beams within it self. But the weakness of
this assertion, may be easily manifest by a common experience, for polished
steel (whose opacity will not give any admittance to the rays) reflects a
stronger heat then glass, and so consequently a greater light.

3. It Is the general consent of Philosophers, that the reflection of the
Sunne-beames from the earth does not reach much above half a mile high, where
they terminate the first region, so that to affirm they might ascend to the
moon, were to say, there were but one region of aier, which contradicts the
proved and received opinion.

Unto this it may be answered: That it is indeed the common consent, that the
reflection of the Sunne-beames reach only to the second region, but yet some
there are, and those too Philosophers of good note, who thought otherwise. Ant.
lect. l. 1. c. 4.
Thus Plotinus is cited by Caelius, Si concipias te in sublimi quopiam mundi
loco, unde oculis subjiciatur terrae moles aquis circumfusa, and solis
syderumque radiis illustrata, non aliam profecto visam iri probabile est, quam
qualis modo visatur lunaris globi species. If you did conceive your self to
be in some such high place, where you might discern the whole Globe of the
earth and water, when it was enlightened by the Suns rays, it is probable ^t
would then appear to you in the same shape as the moon does now unto us. Thus
also Carolus Malapertius, whose Praefat. ad Austriaca syd.
words are these* Terra haec nostra si in luna constituti essemus, splendida
prorsus quasi non ignobilis planeta, nobis appareret. If we were placed in the
moon, and from thence beheld this our earth, it would appear unto us very
bright, like one of the nobler Planets. Unto these does Fronondus assent, when
he says, Credo equidem quod si oculus quispiam in orb lunari foret, globum
Meteor. l. 1. c. 2. Art. 2.
terrae and aquae instar ingentis syderis a sole illustrem conspiceret. I
believe that this globe of earth and water would appear like some great Star
to any one, who should look upon it from the moon. Now this could not be, nor
could it shine so remarkably, unless the beams of light, were reflected from
it. And therefore the same Fromondus expressly holds, that the first region of
air is there terminated, where the heat caused by reflection begins to
languish, whereas the beams themselves do pass a great way further. The
chief argument which does most plainly manifest this truth, is taken from a
common observation which may be easily tried.

If you behold the Moon a little before or after the conjunction, when she is
in a sextile with the Sun, you may discern not only the part which is
enlightened, but the rest also to have in it a kind of a duskishlight, but if
you choose out such a situation, where some house or chimney (being some 70 or
80 paces distant from you) may hide from your eye the enlightened horns, you
may then discern a greater and more remarkable shining in those parts unto
which the Sun beams cannot reach; nay there is so great a light, that by the
help of a good perspective you may discern its spots. In so much that
Blancanus the Jesuit speaking of it says, Haec experientia ita me De mundi
sab. p. 3^. c. 3.
aliquando fe fellit, ut in hunc fulgorem casu ac repent incidens, existimarim
novo quodam miraculo tempore adolescentis lunae factum esse plenilunium. This
experiment did once so deceive me, that happening upon the sight of this
brightness upon a sudden, I thought that by some new miracle the Moon had
been got into her full a little after her change.

But now this light is not proper to the Moon, it does not proceed from the
rays of the Sun which does penetrate her body, nor ^is it caused by any
other of the Planets and Stars. Therefore it must necessarily follow, that it
comes from the earth. The two first of these I have already proved, and as for
the last, it is confidently affirmed by Caelius, Quod si in l. 20. c. 5.
disquisitionem evocet quis, an lunari syderi lucem foenerent planetae item
alii, asseveranter astruendum non foenerare. If any should ask whether the
other Planets lend any light to the Moon; I answer they do not. True indeed,
the noble Tycho discussing the reason Progym. 1.
of this light attributes it to the Planet Venus, and I grant that this may
convey some light to the Moon, but that it is not the cause of this whereof
we now discourse, is of it self sufficiently plain, because Venus is
sometimes over the Moon, when as she cannot convey any light to that part
which is turned from her.

It does not proceed from the fixed stars, for then it would retain the
same light in eclipses, whereas the light at such times is more ruddy and dull.
Then also the light of the Moon would not be greater or lesser, according to
its distance from the edge of the earths shadow, since it did at all times
equally participate this light of the stars.

Now because there is no other body in the whole Universe, save the earth, it
remains that this light must necessarily be caused by that which with a just
gratitude repaies to the Moon, such illumination as it receives from her.

And as loving friends equally participate of the same joy and grief, so do
these mutually partake of the same light from the Sun, and the same
darkness from the eclipses, being also severally helped by one another in
their greatest wants: For when the Moon is in conjunction with the Sun, and
her upper part receives all the light, then her lower Hemispheare (which would
otherwise be altogether dark) is enlightened by the reflection of the Sun
beams from the earth. When these two planets are in opposition, then that part
of the earth which could not receive any light from the Sun beams, is most
enlightened by the Moon, being then in her full; and as she does most
illuminate the earth when the Sun beams cannot, so the grateful earth
returns to her as great, nay greater light when she most wants it; so that
always that visible part of the Moon which receives nothing from the Sun,
is enlightened by the earth, as is proved by Galilaeus, with many more
arguments, in that Treatise which he calls Systema mundi. True indeed, when the
Moon comes to a quartile, then you can neither discern this light, nor yet
the darker part of her body, but the reason is, because of the exuperancy of
the light in the other parts. Quippe illustratum medium speciem Scal. exerc. 62.
recipit valentiorem, the clearer brightness involves the weaker, it being
with the species of sight, as it is with those of sound, and as the greater
noise drownes the less, so the brighter object hides that which is more
obscure. But they do always in their mutual vicissitudes participate of one
another light; so also do they partake of the same defects and darknings, for
when our Moon is eclipsed, then is their Sun darkened, and when our Sun is
eclipsed, then is their Moon deprived of its light, as you may see affirmed by
Maeslin. Quod si terram Epit. Astro. l. 4. part. 2.
nobis ex alto liceret intueri, quemadmodum deficientem lunam ex longinquo
spectare possumus, videremus tempore eclipsis solis terrae aliquam partem
lumine solis deficere, eodem plane modo sicut ex opposito luna deficit, If we
might behold this globe of earth at the same distance as we do the Moon in
her defects, we might discern some part of it darkened in the Suns
eclipses, just so as the Moon is in hers. For as our Moon is eclipsed by the
interposition of our earth, so is their Moon eclipsed by the interposition of
theirs. The manner of this mutual illumination betwixt these two you may
plainly discern in this Figure following.

diagram of Sun, Moon, and Earth

Where A represents the Sun, B the Earth, and C the Moon; Now suppose the
Moon C to be in a sextile of increase, when there is only one small part of
her body enlightened, then the earth B will have such a part of its visible
Hemispheare darkened, as is proportionable to that part of the Moon which is
enlightened; and as for so much of the Moon, as the Sun beams cannot reach
unto, it receives light from a proportional part of the earth which shines
upon it, as you may plainly perceive by the Figure.

You see then that agreement and similitude which there is betwixt our earth
and the Moon. Now the greatest difference which makes them unlike, is this,
that the Moon enlightens our earth round about, whereas our earth gives light
only to that Hemispheare of the Moon which is visible unto us, as may be
certainly gathered from the constant appearance of the same spots, which could
not thus come to pass, if the Moon had such a diurnall motion about its own
axis, as perhaps our earth has. And though some suppose her to move in an
epicycle, yet this does not so turn her body round, that we may discern both
Hemispheares, for according to that hypothesis, the motion of her eccentrick,
does turn her face toward us, as much as the other does from us.

But now if any question what they do for a Moon who live in the upper part
of her body? I answer, the solving of this is the most uncertain and difficult
thing that I know of concerning this whole matter. But yet I will give you two
probable conjectures.

1. Perhaps, the upper Hemispheare of the Moon does receive a sufficient light
from those planets about it, and amongst these Venus (it may be) bestows a
more especial brightness, since Galilaeus has plainly discerned that she
suffers the same increases and decreases, as the Moon has, and it is probable
that this may be perceived there without the help of a glass, because they are
far nearer it than we. When Venus (says Keplar) lies down in the Perige or
lower part of her supposed Epicycle, then is she in conjunction with her
husband the Sun, from whom after she has departed for the space of ten
months, she gets plenum uterum, and is in the full.

But you will reply, though Venus may bestow some light when she is over the
Moon, and in conjunction, yet being in opposition, she is not visible to them,
and what shall they then do for light?

I answer, then they have none: nor does this make so great a difference
betwixt those two Hemispheares as there is with us, betwixt the places under
the poles, and the line, but if this be not sufficient, then I say in the
second place that

2. Perhaps there may be some other enligh^ned body above the Moon which we
cannot discern, nor is this altogether improbable because there is almost the
like observed in Saturn, who appears through this glass with two lesser
bodies on ^ach side, which may supply the office of Moons, unto each
hemispheare thus:

depiction of Saturn and Moons

So in this world also there may be some such body, though we cannot discern
it, because the Moon is always in a straight line, betwixt our eye and that.
Nor is it altogether unlikely that there should be more moons to one Orb,
because Jupiter also is observed to have four such bodies that move round
about him.

But it may seem a very difficult thing to conceive, how so gross and dark a
body as our earth, should yield such a clear light as proceeds from the
Moon, and therefore the Cardinal de Cusa (who thinks every Star to be De
doct. ig. l. 2. c. 12.
a several world) is of opinion that the light of the Sun is not able to
make them appear so bright, but the reason of their shining is, because we
behold them at a great distance through their regions of fire which do set a
shining luster upon those bodies that of themselves are dark. Vnde si quis
esset extra regionem ignis, terra ista in circumferentia suae regionis per
medium ignis lucida stella appareret. So that if a man were beyond the region
of fire, this earth would appear through that as a bright Star. But if this
were the only reason then would the Moon be freed from such increases and
decreases as she is now liable unto.

Keplar thinks that our earth receives that light whereby it shines from the
Sun, but this (says he) is not such an intended clear brightness as the
Moon is capable of, and therefore he guesses, that the earth there is of a
more chokie soil like the I Will of Creete, and so is better able to reflect a
stronger light, whereas our earth must supply this inten^ion with the quantity
of its body, but this I conceive to be a needless conjecture, since our earth
if all things were well considered will be sound able enough to reflect as
great a light. For

1. Consider its opacity, if you mark these sublunary things, you shall
perceive that amongst them, those that are most perspicuous, are not so well
able to reverberate the Sun beams as the thicker bodies. The rays pass
singly through a diaphanous matter, but in an opacous substance they are
doubled in their return and multiplied by reflection. Now if the moon and the
other Planets can shine so clearly by beating back the Sun beams, why may
not the earth also shine as well, which agrees with them in the cause of this
brightness their opacity.

2. Consider what a clear light we may discern refl^cted from the earth in
the midst of Summer, and withal conceive how much greater that must be
which is under the line, where the rays are more directly and strongly
reverberated.

3. Consider the great distance at which we behold the Planets, for this must
needs add much to their shining and therefore Cusanus (in the above cited
place) thinks that if a man were in the Sun, that Planet would not appear
so bright to him, as now it does to us, because then his eye could discern but
little, whereas here we may comprehend the beams as they are contracted in a
narrow body. Keplar beholding the earth from a high mountain when it was
enlightened by the Sun confesses that it appeared unto him of an incredible
brightness, whereas then the refl^cted rays entered into his sight obliquely;
but how much brighter would it have appeared if he might in a direct line
behold the whole globe of earth and these rays gathered together. So that if
we consider that great light which the earth receives from the Sun in the
Summer, and then suppose we were in the Moon, where we might s^e the whole
earth hanging in those vast spaces where there is nothing to terminate the
sight, but those beams which are there contracted into a little compass; I
say, if we do well consider this, we may easily conceive, that our earth
appears as bright to those other inhabitants in the Moon, as theirs does to
us.

Proposition 12. That it is probable there may be such Meteors belonging to that
world in the Moon, as there are with us.
PLutarch discussing this point affirms that it is not necessary there should
be the same means of growth and fructifying in both these worlds, since nature
might in her policy find out more ways then one how to bring about the same
effect. But however he thinks it is probable that the Moon her self sends
forth warm winds, and by the swiftness of her motion there should breathe out
a sweet and comfortable air, pleasant dewes and gentle moisture, which might
serve for the refreshing and nourishment of the inhabitants and plants in that
other world.

But since they have all things alike with us, as sea and land, and vaporous
air encompassing both, I should rather therefore think that nature there
should use the same way of producing meteors as she does with us (and not by a
motion as Plutarch supposes) because she does not love to vary from her usual
operations without some extraordinary impediment, but still keeps her beaten
path unless she be driven thence.

One argument whereby I shall manifest this truth, may be taken from those new
Stars which have appeared in diverse ages of the world, and by their paralax
have been discerned to have been above the Moon, such as was that in
Cassiopeia, that in Sagittarius, with many others betwixt the Planets.
Hipparchus in his time took especial notice of such as Plin. not. hist. l. 2.
c. 26
these, and therefore fancied out such constellations in which to place the
Stars, showing how many there were in every asteri^me, that so afterward
posterity might know, whether there were any new Star produced or any old one
missing. Now the nature of these Comets may probably manifest, that in this
other world there are other meteors also; for these in all likelihood are
nothing e^^e but such evaporations caused by the Sun, from the bodies of the
Planets. I shall prove this by showing the improbabilities and inconveniences
of any other opinion.

For the better pursuit of this it is in the first place requisite that I deal
with our chief adversary, Caesar la Galla, who does most directly oppose that
truth which is here to be proved. He endeavoring to confirm the
incorruptibility of the Heavens, and being there to satisfy the argument which
is taken from these comets, He answers it thus: Aut argumentum desumptum ex
paralaxi non est efficax, aut si est efficax, eorum instrumentorum usum
decipere, vel ratione astri vel medii, vel distantiae, aut ergo erat in suprema
part aeris, aut si in coelo, tum forsan factum erat ex reflectione radiorum
Saturni and Jovis, qui tunc in conjunctione fuerant. Either the argument from
the paralax is not essicacious, or if it be, yet the use of the instruments
might deceive either in regard of the star or the medium, or the distance,
and so this comet might be in the upper regions of the air, or if it were in
the heavens, there it might be produced by the reflection of the rays from
Saturn and Jupiter, who were then in conjunction. You see what shifts he is
driven to, how he runs up and down to many starting holes, that he may find
some shelter, and in stead of the strength of reason, he answers with a
multitude of words, thinking (as the Proverb is) that he may use hail, when
he has no thunder, Nihilturpius (says Epist. 95.
Seneca) dubio est incerto, pedem modo referente, modo producente. What can
there be more unseemely in one that should be a fair disputant, then to be
now here, now there, and so uncertain, that one cannot tell where to find him.
He thinks that there are not Comets in the heavens, because there may be many
other reasons of such appearances, but what he knows not, perhaps (he says)
that argument from the paralax is not sufficient, or if it be, then there may
be some deceit in the observation. To this I may safely say, that he may
justly be accounted a weak Mathematician who mistrusts the strength of this
argument, nor can he know much in Astronomy, who understands not the paralax,
which is the foundation of that Science, and I am sure that he is a timorous
man, who dares not believe the frequent experience of his senses, or trust to a
demonstration.

True indeed, I grant it is possible, that the eye, the medium, and the distance
may al deceive the beholder, but I would have him show which of all these was
likely to cause an error in this observation? Merely to say they might be
deceived is no sufficient answer, for by this I might confute the positions of
all Astronomers, and affirm the stars are hard by us, because it is possible
they may be deceived in their observing that distance. But I forbear any
further reply; my opinion is of that Treatise, that either it was set forth
purposely to tempt a confutation, that he might see the opinion of Galilaeus
confirmed by others, or else it was invented with as much haste and negligence
as it was printed, there being in it almost as many faults as lines.

Others think that these are not any new Comets, but some ancient stars that
were there before, which now shine with that unusual brightness, by reason of
the interposition of such vapors which do multiply their light, and so the
alteration will be here only, and not in the heavens. Thus Aristotle thought
the appearance of the milkie way was produced, for he held that there were many
little stars, which by their influence did constantly attract such a vapor
toward that place of heaven, so that it always appeared white. Now by the
same reason may a brighter vapor be the cause of these appearances.

But how probable soever this opinion may seem, yet if well considered, you
shall find it to be altogether absurd and impossible: for,

1. These stars were never seen there before, and it is not likely that a
vapor being hard by us can so multiply that light which could not before be at
all discerned.

2. This supposed vapor cannot be either contracted into a narrow compass or
dilated into a broad: 1. it could not be within a little space, for then that
star would not appear with the same multiplied light to those in other
climates: 2. it cannot be a dilated vapor, for then other stars which were
discerned through the same vapor would seem as bigg as that; this argument is
the same in effect with that of the paralax, as you may see in this Figure.

diagram of a hemisphere of Earth, the atmosphere, and space

Suppose A B to be a Hemispheare of one earth, C D to be the upper part of the
highest region, in which there might be either a contracted vapor, as G, or
else a dilated one, as H I. Suppose E F likewise to represent half the
heavens, wherein was this appearing Comet at K. Now I say, that a contracted
vapor, as G could not cause this appearance, because an inhabitant at M could
not discern the same star with this brightness, but perhaps another at L,
betwixt which the vapor is directly interposed. Nor could it be caused by a
dilated vapor, as H I, because then all the stars that were discerned
through it would be perceived with the same brightness.

It Is necessary therefore that the cause of this appearance should be in the
heavens. And this is granted by the most and best Astronomers. But, say some,
this does not argue any natural alteration in those purer bodies, since it is
probable that the concourse of many little vagabond stars by the union of
their beams may cause so great a light. Of this opinion were Anaxagor as and
Zeno amongst the ancient, and Baptista Cisatus, Blancanus, with others amongst
our modern Astronomers. For, say they, when there happens to be a concourse of
some few stars, then do many other fly unto them from all the parts of
heaven like so many Bees unto their King. But 1. it is not likely that amongst
those which we count the fixed stars there should be any such uncertain
motions, that they can wander from all parts of the heavens, as if Nature had
neglected them, or forgot to appoint them a determinate course. 2. If there be
such a conflux of these, as of Bees to their King, then what reason is there
that they do not still tarry with it, that so the Comet may not he dissolved?
But enough of this. You may commonly see it confuted by many other arguments.
Others there are, who affirm these to be some new created stars, produced by
an extraordinary supernatural power. I answer, true indeed, it is possible they
might be so, but however it is not likely they were so, since such appearances
may be salved some other way, wherefore to fly unto a miracle for such things,
were a great injury to nature, and to derogate from her skill, an indignity
much mis-becomming a man who professes himself to be a Philosopher. Miraculum
(says one) est ignorantiae Asylum, a miracle often serves for the receptacle
of a lazy ignorance which any industrious Spirit would be ashamed of, it being
but an idle way to shift off the labor of any further search. But here is the
misery of it, we first tie our selves unto Aristotle^ principles, and then
conclude that nothing could contradict them but a miracle, whereas 'twould be
much better for the Commonwealth of learning, if we would ground our
principles rather upon the frequent experiences of our own, then the bare
authority of others.

Some there are who think, that these Comets are nothing else, but exhalations
from our earth, carried up into the higher parts of the Heaven. So Pen^,
Rothmannus and Galilaeus, but this Tycho Progym. l. 1. c. 9.
is not possible, since by computation it is found that one of them is above 300
times bigger than the whole Globe of Land and Water. Others therefore have
thought that they did proceed from the body of the Sun, and that that Planet
only is Cometarum officina, unde tanquam emissarii and exploratores
emitterentur, brevi ad solemn redituri: The shop or forge of Comets from whence
they were sent, like so many spies, that they might in some short space return
again, but this cannot be, since if so much matter had proceeded from him
alone, it would have made a sensible diminution in his body. The Noble Tycho
therefore thinks that they consist of some such fluider parts of the Heaven,
as the milky way is framed of, which being condenst together, yet not attaining
to the consistency of a Star, is in some space of time rarifyed again into
its wonted nature. But this is not likely, for if there had been so great a
condensation as to make them shine so bright and last so long, they would then
sensibly have moved downwards toward some center of gravity, because
whatsoever is condenst must necessarily grow heavier, whereas these rather
seemed to ascend higher, as they lasted longer. But some may object, that a
thing may be of the same weight, when it is rarefied, as it had while it was
condenst, so metals when they are melted and when they are cold, so water also
when it is frozen, and when it is fluid, does not differ in respect of gravity.
But to these I answer: First, Metals are not rarefied by melting, but
molified. Secondly, waters are not properly condensed but congealed into a
harder substance, the parts being not contracted closer together, but still
possessing the same extension.

And beside, what likely cause can we conceive of this condensation, unless
there be such qualities there, as there are in our air, and then why may not
the Planets have the like qualities as our earth? and if so, then it is more
probable that they are made by the ordinary way of nature, as they are with us,
and consist of exhalations from the bodies of the Planets. Nor is this a
singular opinion; but it seemed most likely to Camillus De Comet. l. 5. c. 4.
Apolog. Meteor. l. 3. c. 2. Art. 6.
Gloriosus. Th. Campanella, Fromondus, with some others. But if you ask
whither all these exhalations shall return, I answer every one into his own
Planet: if it be again objected, that Johan. Fabr. Carolus Malaptius de
Heliocyc. Scheiner. Rosa Visina.
then there will be so many centers of gravity, and each several Planet will
be a distinct world; I reply, perhaps all of them are so except the Sun,
though Cusanus thinks there is one also, and later times have discovered some
lesser Planets moving round about him. But as for Saturn, he has two Moons
on each side. Jupiter has four, that incircle his body with their motion.
Venus is observed to increase and decrease as the Moon. Mars, and all the
rest, derive their light from the Sun only. Concerning Mercury, there has
been little or no observation, because for the most part, he lies hid under
the Sun beams, and seldom appears by himself. So that if you consider
their quantity, their opacity, or these other discoveries, you shall find it
probable enough, that each of them may be a several world. But this would be
too much for to vent at the first: the chief thing at which I now aim in this
discourse, is to prove that there may be one in the Moon.

It has been before confirmed, that there was a sphere of thick vaporous
air encompassing the Moon, as the first and second regions do this earth. I
have now showed, that thence such exhalations may proceed as do produce the
Comets: now from hence it may probably follow, that there may be wind also and
rain, with such other meteors as are common amongst us. This consequence is so
dependant, that Fromondus dares De meteor. l. 3. c. 2. Art. 6.
not deny it, though he would (as he confesses himself) for it the Sun be
able to exhale from them such fumes as may cause Comets, why not then such as
may cause winds, and why not such also as may cause rain, since I have above
showed, that there is Sea and Land as with us. Now rain seems to be more
especially requisite for them, since it may allay the heat and scorchings of
the Sun, when he is over their heads. And nature has thus provided for those
in Peru, with the other inhabitants under the line.

But if there be such great, and frequent alterations in the Heavens, why
cannot we discern them?

I answer:

1. There may be such, and we not able to perceive them, because of the
weakness of our eye, and the distance of those places from us, they are the
words of Fi^nus, as they are quoted by Fromondus in the above cited place)
Possunt maximae permutationes in coelo fieri, etiam si a nobis non
conspi^rantur, hoc visus nostri debilita^ and immensa coeli distantia faciunt.
And unto him assents Fromondus himself, when a little after he says, Si in
sphaeris planetarum deg^re^us, plurima forsan coelestium nebularum vellera toto
athere passim dispersa videremus, quorum species jam evanescit nimia spatis
intercapedine. If we did live in the spheres of the Planets, we might there
perhaps discern many great clouds dispersed through the whole Heavens, which
are not now visible by reason of this great distance.

2. Maeslin and Keplaer affirm, that they have seen some of these
alterations. The words of Maeslin are these (as I find them Dissert. 2. cum
nunc. Galil.
cited.) In eclipsi lunari vesp^re Dominicae Palmarum A^ni 1605. in corpore
lunae versus Boream, nigricans quaedam macula conspecta fuit, obscurior caetero
toto corpore, quod candentis ferri figuram repreaesentabat; dixisses nubila in
multam regionem extensa pluviis and tempestuosis imbribus gravida, cujusmodi ab
excelsorum montium jugis in humiliora convallium loca videre non raro
contingit. In that lunary eclipse which happened in the even of Palme-sunday in
the year 1605 there was a certain blackish spot discerned in the Northerly
part of the Moon, being darker than any other place of her body, and
representing the color of red hot iron; you might conjecture that it was some
dilated cloud, being pregnant with showers, for thus do such lower clouds
appear from the tops of high mountains.

Unto this I may ad another testimony of Bapt. Cisatus, as he is quoted by
Nicrembergius, grounded Hist. Not. l. 2. c. 11.
upon an observation taken 23. years after this of Maeslin, and writ to this
Eusebius. Nicremberg. in a letter by that diligent and judicious Astronomer. The
words of it run thus: Et quidem in eclipsi nupra solari quae fuit ipso die
natali Christi, observavi clare in luna soli supposita, quidpiam quod valde
probat id ipsum quod Cometae quoque and maculae solares urgent, nempe coelum
non esse a tennitate and variationibus aeris exemptum, nam circa lunam adverti
esse sphaeram seu orbem quendam vap^rosum, non secus atque circum terram,
adeoque sicut ex terra in aliquam usque spharam vapores and exhalationes
expirant, ita quoque ex luna. In that late solary eclipse which happened on
Christmas day, when the Moon was just under the Sun, I plainly discerned
that in her which may clearly confirm what the Comets and Suns spots do
seem to prove, viz. that the heavens are not solid, nor freed from those
changes which our air is liable unto, for about the Moon I perceived such an
orb, of vaporous air, as that is which does encompasse our earth, and as
vapors and exhalations are raised from our earth into this air, so are they
also from the Moon.

You see what probable grounds and plain testimonies I have brought for the
confirmation of this Proposition: many other things in this behalf might be
spoken, which for brevity sake I now omit, and pass uno the next.

Proposition 13. That it is probable there may be inhubitants in this other
World, but of what kind they are is uncertain.
I Have already handled the Seasons and Meteors belonging to this new World:
it is requisite that in the next place I should come unto the third thing which I
promised, and to say somewhat of the inhabitants, concerning whom there might
be many difficult questions raised, as whether that place be more inconvenient
for habitation then our World (as Keplar thinks) whether they are the seed of
Adam, whether they are there in a blessed estate, or else what means there may
be for their salvation, with many other such uncertain enquiries, which I
shall willingly omit, leaving it to their examination, who have more leisure
and learning for the search of such particulars.

Being for mine own part content only to setdowne such notes belonging unto
these which I have observed in other Writers. Cum tota illa regio nobis ignota
sit, remanent inhabitatores illi ignoti De doct. ignorantia. l. 2. c. 12.
penitus, (says Cusanus) since we know not the regions of that place, we must
be altogether ignorant of the inhabitants. There has not yet been any such
discovery concerning these, upon which we may build a certainty, or good
probability: well may we guess at them, and that too very doubtfully, but we
can know nothing, for if we do hardly guess aright at things which be upon
earth, if with labor we do find the things Wisd. 9. 16.
that are at hand, how then can we search out these things that are in heaven?
What a little is that which we know, in respect of those many matters contained
within this great Universe, this whole globe of earth and water? though it
seem to us to be of a large extent, yet it bears not so great a proportion
unto the whole frame of Nature, as a small sand does unto it, and what can such
little creatures as we discern, who are tied to this point of earth? or what
can they in the Moon know of us? If we understand any thing (says Esdras)
it is nothing but 2 Esd. 4. 21
that which is upon the earth, and he that dwells above in the heavens, may
only understand the things that are above in the height of the heavens.

So that 'twere a very needelesse thing for us to search after any particulars,
however we may guess in the general that there are some inhabitants in that
Planet: for why else did providence furnish that place with all such
conveniences of habitation as have been above declared?

But you will say, perhaps, is there not too great and intolerable a heat,
since the Sun is in their Zenith every month, and does tarry there so long
before he leaves it?

I answer, 1. This may, perhaps, be remedied (as it is under the line) by the
frequency of midday showers, which may cloud their Sun, and cool their
earth: 2. The equality of their nights does much temper the scorching of the
day, and the extreme cold that comes from the one, require some space before it
can be dispelled by the other, so that the heat spending a great while before
it can have the victory, has not afterward much time to rage in. Wherefore
notwithstanding this, yet that place may remain habitable. And this was the
opinion of the Cardinal de Cusa, when speaking of this Planet, he says, Hic
locus Mundi est habitatio De doct. ign. l. 2. c. 12.
hominum and animalium atque vegetabilium. This part of the world is inhabited
by men and beasts and plants. To him assented Campanella, but he cannot
determine whether there were men or rather some other kind of creatures. If
they were men, then he thinks they could not be infected with Adams sin; yet
perhaps, they had some of their own, which might make them liable to the same
misery with us, out of which, perhaps, they were delivered by the same means as
we, the death of Christ, and thus he thinks that place of the Ephesians may be
interpreted, where the Apostle says, God gathered all Ephesians. 1. 10.
things together in Christ, both which are in earth, and which are in the
heavens: So also that of the same Apostle to the Colossians, where he says,
that it pleased the Father to reconcile Col. 1. 20.
all things unto himself by Christ, whether they be things in earth, or things
in heaven.

But I dare not jest with divine truths, or apply these places according as
fancy directs. As I think this opinion does not any where contradict
Scripture, so I think likewise, that it cannot be proved from it, wherefore
Campanella's second conjecture may be more probable, that the inhabitants of
that world, are not men as we are, but some other kind of creatures which
bear some proportion and likeness to our natures, and Cus^nus too thinks they
differ from us in many respects; I will set down his words as they may be
found in the above cited place, Suspicamus in regione solis magis esse solares,
claros and illuminatos intellectuares habitatores, spiritualiores etiam quam in
luna, ubi magis lunatici, and in terra, magis materiales, and grossi, ut illi
intellectualis naturae solares sint multum in actu and parum in potentia;
terreni vero magis in potentia, and parum in actu, lunares in medio
fluctuantes. Hoc quidem opinamur ex influentia ignili solis aqua^ica simul and
aeria lunae, and gravedine materiali terrae, and consimiliter de aliis
stellarum regionibus suspicantes, nullam habitatoribus carere, quasi tot sint
parts particulares mundiales unius universi, quot sunt stellae quarum non est
numerus, nisi apud eum qui omnia in numero creavit.

We may conjecture (says he) the inhabiters of the Sun are like to the
nature of that Planet, more clear and bright, more intellectual and
spiritual than those in the Moon where they are nearer to the nature of that
duller Planet, and those of the earth being more gross and material than
either, so that these intellectual natures in the Sun, are more form than
matter, those in the earth more matter than form, and those in the Moon
betwixt both. This we may guess from the fiery influence of the Sun, the
watery and aereous influence of the Moon, as also the material heaviness of
the earth. In some such manner likewise is it with the regions of the other
stars, for we conjecture that none of them are without inhabitants, but that
there are so many particular worlds and parts of this one universe, as there
are stars which are innumerable, unless it be to him who created all things in
number.

For he held that the stars were not all in one equal orb as we commonly
suppose, but that some were far higher than others which made them appear
less, and that many others were so far above any of these, that they were
altogether invisible unto us. An opinion (which as I conceive) has not any
great probability for it, nor certainty against it.

The Priest of Saturn relating to Pluiarch (as he faignes it) the nature of
these Selenites, told him they were of diverse dispositions, some desiring to
live in the lower parts of the Moon, where they might look downwards upon
us, while others were more surely mounted aloft, all of them shining like the
rays of the Sun, and as being victorious are crowned with garlands made with
the wings of Eustathia or Constancy.

It has been the opinion amongst some of the Ancients, that their heavens and
Elysian fields were in the Moon where the air is most quiet and pure. Thus
Socrates, thus Plato, with his followers, did esteem this to Not. Com. l. 3.
c. 19.
be the place where those purer souls inhabit, who are freed from the
Sepulcher, and contagion of the body. And by the Fable of Ceres, continually
wandering in search of her daughter Proserpina, is meant nothing else but the
longing desire of men, who live upon Ceres earth, to attain a place in
Proserpina, the Moon or heaven.

Plutarch also seems to assent unto this, but he thinks moreover, that there
are two places of happiness answerable to those two parts which he fancies to
remain of a man when he is dead, the soul and the understanding; the soul
he thinks is made of the Moon, and as our bodies do so proceed from the
dust of this earth, that they shall return to it hereafter, so our souls were
generated out of that Planet, and shall be resolved into it again, whereas the
understanding shall ascend unto the Sun, out of which it was made, where it
shall possess an eternity of well being, and far greater happiness than
that which is enjoyed in the Moon. So that when a man dies, if his soul be
much polluted, then must it wander up and down in the middle regions of the
air where hell is, and there suffer unspeakbale torments for those sins
whereof it is guilty. Whereas the souls of better men, when they have in some
space of time been purged from that impurity which they did derive from the
body, then do they return into the Moon, where they are possessed with such a
joy, as those men feel who profess holy mysteries, from which place (says
he) some are sent down to have the superintendance of oracles, being diligent
either in the preservation of the good, either from or in all perils, and the
prevention or punishment of all wicked actions, but if in these employments
they mis-behave themselves, then are they again to be imprisoned in a body,
otherwise they remain in the Moon till their body be resolved into it, and
the understanding being cleared from all impediments, ascends to the Sun which
is its proper place. But this requires a diverse space of time, according to
the diverse affections of the soul. As for those who have been retired and
honest, addicting themselves to a studious and quiet life, these are quickly
preferred to a higher happiness. But as for such who have busied themselves in
many broils, or have been vehement in the prosecution of any lust, as the
ambitious, the amorous, the wrathful man, these still retain the glimpses and
dreams of such things as they have performed in their bodies, which makes them
either altogether unfit to remain there where they are, or else keeps them
long ere they can put off their souls. Thus you see Plutarchs opinion
concerning the inhabitants and neighbors of the Moon, which (according to the
manner of the Academickes) he delivers in a third person; you see he makes
that Planet an inferior kind of heaven, and though he differ in many
circumstances, yet does he describe it to be some such place, as we suppose
Paradise to be. You see likewise his opinion concerning the place of damned
spirits, that it is in the middle region of the air, and in neither of these
is he singular, but some more late and Orthodox Writers have agreed with him.
As for the place of hell, many think it may be in the air, as well as any
where else.

True indeed, St. Austin affirms De Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 16.
that this place cannot be discovered; But others there are who can show the
situation of it out of Scripture; Some holding it to be in some other world
without this, because our Savior calls (...), outward Mat. 25. 30.
darkness. But the most will have it placed toward the center of our earth,
because it is Ephesians. 4. 9.
said, Christ descended into the lower parts of the earth, and some of these
are so confident, that this is its situation, that they can describe you its
bigness also, and of what capacity it is. Francis Ribera in his Comment on the
Revelations, speaking of those words, where it is said, that the blood went out
of the winepresse, Rev. 14. 20
even unto the horses bridles by the space of one thousand and six hundred
furlongs, interprets them to be meant of hell, and that that number expresses
the diameter of its concavity, which is 200 Italian miles; but Lessius thinks
that this opion De Morib. div. l. 13. c. 24.
gives them too much room in hell, and therefore he guesses that it is not so
wide; for (says he) the diameter of one league being cubically multiplied,
will make a sphere capable of 800000 millions of damned bodies, allowing to
each six foot in the square, whereas (says he) it is certain that there shall
not be one hundred thousand millions in all that shall be damned. You see the
bold Jesuit was careful that every one should have but room enough in hell,
and by the strangeness of the conjecture, you may guess that he had rather be
absurd, than seem either uncharitable or ignorant. I remember there is a
relation in Pliny, how that Dionysiodorus a Mathematician, being dead, did send
a letter from this place to some of his friends upon earth, to certify them
what distance there was betwixt the center and superficies: he might have done
well to have prevented this controversy, and informed them the utmost capacity
of that place. However, certain it is, that that number cannot be known, and
probable it is, that the place is not yet determined, but that hell is there
where there is any tormented soul, which may be in the regions of the air as
well as in the center; but of this only occasionally, and by reason of
Plutarchs opinion concerning those that are round about the Moon; as for the
Moon it self, he esteems it to be a lower kind of heaven, and therefore in
another place he Cursilent oracula.
calls it a terrestrial star, and an Olympian or celestial earth
answerable, as I conceive, to the paradise of the Schoolmen, and that paradise
was either in or near the Moon, is the opinion of some later Writers, who
derived it (in all likelihood) from the assertion of Plato, and perhaps, this
of Plutarch. Tostatus lays this opinion upon Isiodor. Sr. W. Raw. l. 1. c. 3.
7. in Genesis
Hispalensis, and the venerable Bede; and Pererius fathers it upon Strabus and
Rabanus his Master. Some would have it to be situated in such a place as could
not be discovered, which caused the penman of Esdras to make it a harder matter
to know the outgoings of Paradise, then to weigh the weight of the fire, or
measure the blasts of wind, or call again a day that is past. But
notwithstanding 2 Esd. 4. 7.
this, there be some others who think that it is on the top of some high
mountain under the line, and these interpreted the torrid Zone to be the
flaming sword whereby Paradise was guarded. It Is the consent of diverse others,
who agree in this, that Paradise is situated in some high and eminent place. So
Tostatus: In Genes.
Est etiam Paradisus situ altissima, supra omnem terrae altitudinem, Paradise
is situated in some high place above the earth: and therefore in his Comment
upon the 49. of Genesis, he understands the blessing of Jacob concerning the
everlasting hills to be meant of Paradise, and the blessing it self to be
nothing else but a promise of Christ's coming, by whose passion the gates of
Paradise should be opened. Unto him assented Rupertus, Scotus, and most of the
other Schoolmen, as I find them Comment. in 2 Genesis v. 8. l. 1. c. 3. 6. 7.
cited by Pererius, and out of him in St W. Rawleigh. Their reason was this:
because in probability this place was not overflowed by the flood, since there
were no sinners there which might draw that curse upon it. Nay Tostatus thinks
that the body of Enoch was kept there, and some of the Fathers, as Tertullion
and Austin have affirmed, that the blessed souls were reserved in that place
till the day of judgment, and therefore it is likely that it was not overflowed
by the flood; and besides, since all men should have went naked if Adam had not
fell, it is requisite therefore that it should be situated in some such place
where it might be privileged from the extremities of heat and cold. But now
this could not be (they (thought) so conveniently in any lower, as it might in
some higher air. For these and such like considerations have so many affirmed
that Paradise was in a high elevated place, which some have conceived could be
no where but in the Moon: For it could not be in the top of any mountain, nor
can we think of any other body separated from this earth which can be a more
convenient place for habitation than this Planet, therefore they concluded that
it was there.

It could not be on the top of any mountain.

1. Because we have express Genesis 7. 19.
Scripture, that the highest of them was overflowed.

2. Because it must be of a greater extension, and not some small patch of
ground, since it is likely all men should have lived there, if Adam had not fell.
But for a satisfaction of these arguments, together with a farther discourse of
Paradise, I shall refer you to those who have written purposely upon this
subject. Being content for my own part to have spoken so much of it, as may
conduce to show the opinion of others concerning the inhabitants of the Moon,
I dare not my self affirm any thing of these Selenites, because I know not
any ground whereon to build any probable opinion. But I think that future ages
will discover more; and our posterity, perhaps, may invent some means for our
better acquaintance with these inhabitants. It Is the method of providence not
presently to show us all, but to lead us a long from the knowledge of one thing
to another. 'Twas a great while ere the Planets were distinguished from the
fixed stars, and some time after that ere the morning and evening star were
found to be the same, and in greater space I doubt not but this also, and far
greater mysteries will be discovered. In the first ages of the world the
Islanders either thought themselves to be the only dwellers upon the earth, or
else if there were any other, yet they could not possibly conceive how they
might have any commerce with them, being severed by the deep and broad sea,
but the aftertimes found out the invention of ships, in which notwithstanding
none but some bold daring men durst venture, there being few so resolute as to
commit themselves unto the vast Ocean, and yet now how easy a thing is this,
even to a timorous and cowardly nature? So, perhaps, there may be some other
means invented for a conveyance to the Moon, and though it may seem a
terrible and impossible thing ever to pass through the vast spaces of the
air, yet no question there would be some men who durst venture this as well as
the other. True indeed, I cannot conceive any possible means for the like
discovery of this conjecture, since there can be no sailing to the Moon,
unless that were true which the Poets do but feign, that she made her bed
in the Sea. We have not now any Drake or Columbus to undertake this voyage, or
any D^^alus to invent a conveyance through the air. However, I doubt not but
that time who is still the father of new truths, and has revealed unto us many
things which our Ancestors were ignorant of, will also manifest to our
posterity, that which we now desire, but cannot know. Not. Quast. l. 7. c. 25.
Veniet tempus (says Seneca) quo ista quae nunc latent, in lucem dies
extrahet, and longioris aevi diligentia. Time will come when the endeavors of
after ages shall bring such things to light, as now lie hid in obscurity. Arts
are not yet come to their Solstice, but the industry of future times assisted
with the labors of their forefathers, may reach unto that height which we
could not attain to. Veniet tempus quo posteri nostri nos tam aperta nescisse
mirentur. As we now wonder at the blindness of our Ancestors, who were not
able to discern such things as seem plain and obvious unto us. So will our
posterity admire our ignorance in as perspicuous matters. Keplar doubts not,
but that as soon as the art of flying is found out, some of their Nation will
make one of the first colonies that shall inhabit that other world. But I
leave this and the like conjectures to the fancy of the reader; Desiring now
to finish this Discourse, wherein I have in some measure proved what at the
first I promised, a world in the Moon. However, I am not so resolute in this,
that I think it is necessary there must be one, but my opinion is, that it is
possible there may be, and it is probable there is another habitable world in
that Planet. And this was that I undertook to prove. In the pursuit whereof,
if I have showed much weakness or indiscretion; I shall willingly submit my
self to the reason and censure of the more judicious.

The Propositions that are proved in this Discourse.
Proposition 1. That the strangeness of this opinion is no sufficient reason
why it should be rejected, because other certain truths have been formerly
esteemed ridiculous, and great absurdities entertained by common consent. By
way of Preface. Prop. 2. That a plurality of worlds does not contradict any
principle of reason or faith. Prop. 3. That the heavens do not consist of any
such pure matter which can privilege them from the like change and corruption,
as these inferior bodies are liable unto. Prop. 4. That the Moon is a solid,
compacted, opacous body. Prop. 5. That the Moon has not any light of her
own. Prop. 6. That there is a world in the Moon, has been the direct
opinion of many ancient, with some modern Mathematicians, and may probably be
deduced from the tenants of others. Prop. 7. That those spots and brighter
parts which by our sight may be distinguished in the Moon, do show the
difference betwixt the Sea and Land in that other World. Prop. 8. That the
spots represent the Sea, and the brighter parts the Land. Prop. 9. That there
are high Mountains, deep valleys, and spacious plains in the body of the
Moon. Prop. 10. That there is an Atmo-sphaera, or an orb of gross vaporous
air, immediately encompassing the body of the Moon. Prop. 11. That as their
world is our Moon, so our world is their Moon. Prop. 12. That it is probable
there may be such Meteors belonging to that world in the Moon, as there are
with us. Prop. 13. That it is probable there may be inhabitants in this other
World, but of what kind they are is uncertain.
FINIS.

