E. W. HIS THAMESEIDOS.

Divided into three Books, or Cantos.

Nunquam stigias ibit ad vmbras Inclita virtus.

printer's device of William White (McKerrow no. 165): "a pelican in her piety,
on a shield of irregular outline"

AT LONDON, Printed by W. W. for Simon Waterson, 1600.

THAMESEIDOS, Liber Primus.
NOw gentle blastes, forerunners of the day,
Had summond hateful Darkness pack away:
And Horror, Coachman unto ougly night,
Made his black Steedes poast with all speed he might,
From forth our Hemisphere, not daring bide
To look upon Auroras gorgious pride.
And now from new sows'd wife, the fiery Sun
Was risen, and from Ocean seas begun,
To drive his golden Chariot, that he might
To all the world declare his glorious light.
When Thamesis, the fairest Queen on earth,
To solemnise her annual day of birth,
Appareled in Robe of purest white,
All thick of golden shimiring Spangles dight;
Which against the Sun reflecting beams did cast,
As do the Stars, that in the heavens are plast.
Her hair bound up in knots like golden Wier,
And crowned with Garlands of sweet smelling Brier:
Unto a Meddow by, his flowing streams
Did go: where she from heat of Phoebus beams,
Under the cool shade of the spreading Trees,
Did mean to sport and sing sweet virolees.
With her fair Nymphs, each having in her hand,
To fill with precious flowers a little maund.
It was about the self same time of year,
When from the midst of heaven the Sun does bear
His scorching heat, and makes it swiftly role,
Unto the Stars of the Antartique Pole.
Then when Pomona lades her slender bows,
To serve Autumnus her discased spowse.
Autumnus who in press with naked feet,
From sweet ripe Grapes, make pleasant Wines to fleet.
In Inorie hand fair Thames a Maund did hold,
Most rarely painted, and adornd with gold:
Which precious Jewel great Ocean did
To Doris give, what time he did her wed:
Which precious rich Maund lovely Doris after,
Did give to Thames her derling and her daughter.
Upon that Maund were many Histories
Depicted in such rare and curious wise,
That seemd as Art with Nature strove t'excell
In the rare workmanshyp, for none could tell,
Save Vulcane, who some said, did make the same,
How like to it, an other Maund to frame.
There might y'haue seen a very stately Bed,
Made like a Boat; which certain Tritons did
With their strong scaly backs uphold and stay,
All armde with Oars, all coullard like the Sea:
Bout whom, fair Sea-Nimphs sported cheerfully,
Delighted with the Tritons company:
Where, on the poop, stood Neptune; who did hold
In his right hand his Trident tinde with gold.
And under his left arm a winding Shell,
Like those from whence (as ancient Poets tell)
The heads of Tiber and of Nilus ran,
Or ere their floodes unto the salt Sea came.
Jove's braine-bred-daughrer at the prow was placed,
Armed as then when she from heaven chaced
The hundred handed Titan to his grave,
Upon the Fish that did Orion save.
The Testerne like a Tile, all covered
With purple Velvet richly imbrodered,
With orient round Pearl was supported by;
Certain fair Sea-Nimphes on whose head did lie,
The Arched Ribs in very stately order,
As on so many columns: on a border
Bout which was painted the imagerie
Of many Sea-gods, very curiously;
With Curtains suitable thereto: whereon
The Roman Lucrece liuelesse, pale, and wan,
Lay all besmeared in her own goare blood,
Which with a Poyniard her own hand had shod,
As sacrifice unto her chastity;
Which was bereaved by Tarquine spightfully.
And there by cunning Woorkman curiously,
Was made a Land-shaft, in which one might see,
Steep craggie Rocks, high Mountains, shady Woods,
Green pleasing Fields, and crooked winding Floodes;
Where, in the middle of a pleasant Lawne,
There was a stately Fountain sweetly drawn;
Whose water from a Harpies breast did fall,
Of Brass, into a Cesterne paued all
With polisht Marble, and with Porphire stone;
In which the Painter had his cunning shown,
In neately laying of his colors, that
It seemd a true Fount, and no counterfect:
In which was chaste Diana with her Nymphs,
All naked, bathing of their tender limbs;
On whom Acteon in the changed shape
Of fearful Dear, full greedily did gape,
Turned thereto because he should not tell,
Had seen Diana naked in a Well:
By whom were made his weary Hound that lapped
The water which from forth the Fountain drapped;
Whom fearing, he did seek to fly: for as
His body, so his mind transformed was;
And on the hanger of a Hill hard by,
The Dogs pinching his hantches you might see;
A rewfull sight, yet could not be amended,
Since he Dianas grace had so offended.
And bout the Verges seemly to behold,
Trailes of Morisco works were wrought in gold.
Thus lovely Isis with his comely train
Of beauteous Nymphs, into the Meddow came;
Where, on one side a shady Forest grew;
To which Aurora often her self withdrew,
To hear her Loves complaint, and where the Moon,
Often stayde to look upon the Latmian Lowne:
In which did grow the tough and hardy Ash,
The builder Oak; Holme fit for Carters lash,
Chaste lovely Daphne closed under rind,
Incestuous Mirh, that weepeth still of kind:
Then peaceful Olive, and the wholesome Pine;
The sailing Fur, and eke the drunken Vine:
Upon whose boughs, pearcht the lascivious Sparrow,
The temperate Turtle, and the wight wingd Swallow,
Who flying singes, and singing studieth where,
With more art then with cost, her nest to rear:
The which, as pattern may be looked on
By rarest Archytect and cunningst man.
The little Owsle, and the mounting Lark;
The pretty Quail, and charitable Storke,
Whose kindness to old Parents children learn;
For often to aged Parents you are more stern.
High flying Cranes, by whose orderly flight,
Mars first was taught in rancked squadrons fight.
And Peacoks, which against the Sun do rear
Their painted tails with Argus eyes made fair.
With little Nightingales, who diversely
With changed notes do make sweet melody,
Feigning sometime a base, sometime a trebble,
Often a mean, then sweetly forth do warble
A descant, which the minds of standers by,
Does ravish, hearing such sweet harmony.
On the other side, a secret Cave was seen,
Which for his fitness, often times has been
A refuge for those Nymphs, the which would shun,
The scortching heat of Midday of the Sun:
The entrance decked with Moss, pleasing the sight,
And always fresh and green for more delight,
To land-ward did there rise a Hill so high,
That wel-nie it did face the azurd sky:
From foot of which, did run a purling Brook
Through the Meade, with many a winding crook:
Whose slyding streams the heavens calm seemd blew,
Whence store of pleasure to the eyesight grew;
Yet clearer then was Aganippe Fount,
Or Acidalia, where the Charicts wount
To bath their Iuorie breasts and golden hair,
Ere they make ready Cithereas care.
About whose banks did grow small tangled Trees,
Which made it seem a heaven to gasers eyes:
Whose boughs the needy Wood-man near had cut,
Nor hungry Beast the tender shootes had brut.
And in the middle of that Meddow grew
A stately Beech, which his large arms forth threw
To shadow them that under her should sport,
To which with Lea, Isis did resort
With Lea; on whose banks Ardea was turned
Into a Bitterne, cause she Glaucus scorned.
Whilst Colne, and Kenet, with the fair Chrew went
To gather Flowers of most pleasing sent;
For there were Roses with Virmilion died,
Cool Dasies, and white Lillies; Summers pride:
The Marigold, that does affect the Sun,
Hiding her beauty when his light is gonne:
The Be alluring Thime, the sweet Costmarie,
Gray Lauender, and strong senting Rosemarie,
And what else might be pleasing to the view,
Within this fair and princely Meddow grew:
But that which garnisht most this Paradise,
Were Isis lovely look, and sparkling eyes.
For mark how brighter Cinthia does appear
Above the Stars within her motive Spheere:
So much more fairer did this lovely Dame
Exceed those comely Nymphs, that which here came.
Not she, whom Venus gave for the rich Ball,
The cause of ten years war, and Troyes fall:
Nor that fair Dame whom Jove in shape of Swan,
Whylome did court, when he her love first wan:
Nor yet Europa, whose love made him take
A proud Bulls shape (tho then when he did make)
To look like a fair untamed Heyfer:
Had he turned to a Bull, it had been better;
For Beauty might in any point compare
To Isis, tho they were exceeding fair.
You learned Muses, race of mighty Jove,
That often sport within a sacred Grove,
In pleasant Tempe, and do daily drink,
Of those clear waves that flow from Pinples brinke.
O you that guide their enterprises right,
Who take in hand to grave with rarest slight,
Upon the Alter of Muemosine,
Within the Temple of Immortality,
Sweet pleasing beauty, which else subject were,
In shade of lasting silence still to ere,
Guide me, that with your help I may begin
To frame Thams beauty; whose like near has bin:
And grant these Rithmes, which slenderly are done,
May show hereafter when as I am gone.
She was the fairst and most accomplished Dame,
Excelling 'all whom Nature ere did frame.
Her heavenly Head the miracle of Nature,
Surpassing far the fairest earthly creature:
With yelow Tramels all of beaten gold,
Which gasers thoughts in curled knots did hold;
Seemd ouerspred with flowers fresh and gay,
The myrtle Forests where the loves do play.
Like to a Table was her Front to see,
Of whitest Marble, seat of Majesty:
Well polished, as on a summers day,
VVithouten waves united seems the Sea:
Where Cupid had an Alter built to offer,
Their hearts that did refuse his laws to suffer.
Her Eyelids black, of Heben arches made,
Were like the bow that Psiches husband had;
In which so liberal was Nature to her,
That every one suspected (that did view her)
She only 'made fair Isis to deceive them:
And both of sight and judgment to bereave them.
Of different force were her two sparckling eyes,
Disdain in the one, grace in the other lies:
Two eyes? O no, rather two heavenly Stars;
The One proffering Peace, the other threatening Wars:
In which Mars bastard Boy, his lodging took
Thence wounding them which at those stars did look.
Her Nose did seem (being somewhat highly raised)
A little Hill between two Valleys placed.
Her round and tender Ear, white polished:
With Rubies hung her Cheeks embellished:
Cheeks which with lively Cynab're ore spread.
Seemd like the Morning, new risse from her bed.
Not all those Flowers sprung from Princes gore,
Nor Amaranthus loves Flower made of Yore,
Like color had to hers, which did amaze
Those careless eyes, that on her cheeks did gaze.
Full was her Mouth of thousand Odours sweet,
Where there in single ranckes did seemly meet
Bright oriental Peatles in stead of Teeth:
All which, embalmd the Heavens with their breath.
From thence sweet word and pleasing smiles did come,
All made to charm, and make beholders dome:
And which hard Rocks that stand in Seas aloft,
Could by their mighty power, of hard make soft.
Round was her Chin, with in whose dimples lay
Enchaunting spells, tho seeming fair and gay.
Her Neck a stay, this little world to'pholde,
Of Iuorie was, or Alabaster mould,
Plast on two hills in whitnes that did pass.
Her snow-white Breasts that was Agenous less:
Between which hills, Love often times did lurk,
When cruel stratagems he meant to work.
Her little, but long fingered Hand, more white
Then whitest Lillies that the Spring does dight:
With enterchanged Veins adorned was.
Her small Feet such as some say Tethis has:
With which she nimbly could trip ore the Lawns,
And chase swift Row-bucks, and young wanton Fawns.
But for those parts the which her Garments hid,
What should we say? Surely dame Nature did
Keep those things secret, least they should excel
All she had made in heaven, in earth, in hell.
But O! what boots it to have things surpass,
Since fairest things do fade like Summers grass:
Alas naught in this world does firmly stay,
But turns still like Billows of the Sea:
Which near do cease to roll till with great rore,
Their rushing beat and break against the shore.
And thou the cause of this unstableness,
That do delight in naught but fickleness;
Whose customs never to abide in one,
But uses headlong daily throw us down,
When we are raised by thy benignity,
Unto the top of all felicity.
While thus with their fair Nimphs this lovely Queen
Was in this pleasant Meade, by them was seen
A Sheapheard, in the pride of all his days:
Who whilst his tender Flock on salts did grase,
Sat senseless, like an Image made of stone
Long while, at last fetching a deep sad groan
Of inward grief, the trewest sign of all;
They forth his eyes perceiud salt tears to fall:
So after great Jove's hidious thunders past,
A cloud of rain, the heavens does ouercast:
And when his tears were spent, with heavy cheer,
Sang to his Pipe this Song; which they did hear:
And hearing, could not choose but simpathise
His heavy grief with water in their eyes.
O whither (quoth he) whither shall I fly,
To purchase end unto my misery?
Within what Rock, or to what desert place,
That never is enricht by Phoebus face?
Shall I unfold in great and grievous pain,
Which makes me wretcheder then any Swain?
If there be any place where daily cries
The Night-rau'n and the Owl, that by night flies,
Whereto no living wight does ere resort:
From whence foul Winter never does depart,
And where the Spring her verdure will not sow,
A place of deadly horror and foul woe,
Where ougly sorrow daily may present,
Her self before mine eyes me to torment:
That will I choose as best befitting me,
In this distress and great extremity.
And you my little flock, the small remain
Of a far greater, which once more my pain
Might with most neighbor flocks have made compare
For number or for wool, both fine and fair:
Then when for change of pasture silly I,
In th'Aprill of mine age left Germany;
Where I among Stadian bowers had nigh been slain,
Cause I my Princess honor did maintain:
Which was, and is, more dearer unto me,
Then is the precious apple of mine eye:
And hoping for I wat not what to gain,
To Englands pleasant soil brought you again.
Go wander, go; and take your liberty,
Grasing where is best pasture, while that I
Bewail m' Icarian flight in mounting pride,
Plumed with waxe-forg'd-wings, which thought to ride
Above the cloudy welkin of the air,
To view the order their Latonas heir;
Holds in guiding of that glorious light,
That is the nourish of each living wight;
But was deceaud for coming near the Sun:
My wings did melt, and I did tumble down.
O had I kept along the humble gill,
When first I did attempt to climb the hill.
Or had I bounded mine ambitious mind,
Which careless thought to build above the wind,
Sprung from remembrance of those deeds were done
By my great Graundsirs, long-since dead and gone:
And a desire to register my'name,
Might them within the sacred book of fame:
Then might I now as I have done before,
Pasture you still along this pleasant shore.
Or had not rather greet Chrusophilus,
Whose greedy humor passing covetous,
Thought all that went beside himself quite lost:
Me too much wronged, and me too much crossed;
Whose soul with many filthy crimes made black,
Now fleetes about Auernus fearful lake:
Then might I now as I have done before,
Pasture you still along this pleasant shore.
For which, you Lords of the infernal Bower,
Who ore deceassed souls have mighty powet,
T'inflict, or to remit their punishment:
O do you all at my request assent,
Ixion from his wheel a while to take;
And false Chrusophilus fast there to make.
Or if great Iunos wrath be not yet done,
Let Sisiphus t'hen leave his rolling stone.
Or pull from Cawcasus Prometheus,
And let the Vulturs tear Chrusophilus.
Or if that may not be, Jove angry yet,
O then drag Tantalus forth of his pit.
And let Chrusophilus up to the chin,
Still, but in vain, wade up an'downe therein.
Let him at that fair seeming fruit, often snatch;
Which thereby hanges, but never any catch.
A torment well beefitting such a wight,
Who living ore his own, had never might;
And let his late made gentle of spring, which
Are with stolen Plumes of others pride made rich:
Dispoyld thereof like to their Grandsirs fare,
Who unto Ceres slavish servants wear.
And for assenting to my wished boon,
Sad Hecatombes by me shall be done,
And monthly I will offer a black Ram,
As sign that I am thankful for the same,
For had not he lately from me bereft
Unjustly all my Sheep, save these few left;
To stanch his never satisfied lust
Of Gold, earths dross, that does consume with rust;
Then might I now, as I hane done before,
Pasture you still along this pleasant shore.
But since it cannot be as it was of late,
Since Fortune now has given me the mate,
Dispoyld me quite of all my woonted mirth,
Clad me with woes, and thrown me to the earth:
And like a Tyrant triumphs over me,
That fore her prostrate on the ground does lie;
Near reckning whether it be just and sound,
To trouble him, lies groueling on the ground.
O you the remnant of a greater flock,
Go get you gone, while to some desert rock
I make repair, where for my bed shall be
The cold dry ground, whereon I still will lie;
For morning mattens, mournings full of care:
For walks, the wretched paths of foul despair:
For meat, sad discontent: for drink, salt tears:
For nightly sleeps, naught else but slumbring fears;
Till those last duties I do pay to Nature,
Which I am bound too, being a mortal creature:
What time my soul freed from this earthly gaile,
Where now it tired lies, shall to thee veil:
Of fair Elisium fly, where void of pain,
Among blessed souls in joy it shall remain.
And thou sweet Pipe, the which wonts often display
My wrongs unto these Woods, these Rocks, and Sea,
And moouedst them at once to rue my lot,
When living men seemd senseless, and would not;
But held hard hearts, the which I do repent,
More harder far, then hardest Adamant.
From that rude race, degenerating naught,
Which was of hard Stone, by Deiecalion wrought.
Here hang thou (therewith on a Beechen tree
He hung his Pipe) for now no more for thee,
Nor for thy sugared melody I care,
(Quoth he) which done like one drowned in despair:
Thence heavy he departed, passing naught,
What Fortune, or foul Envy could alot.
On whom, whilst ISIS looked, perceive she might
The Sea to swell, which did her much affright:
For she discerned on their tops to ride
Great Neptune, poasting to the shore with speed.
Whose coming so amas'd the fearful Thams,
(Who knew full well that he those scorching flames,
With her fair eyes within his breast had wrought,
Would seek to quench by farce, if he her caught)
As in a shadie Wood the hydeous stroke
Of rattling Thunder on the sudden broke,
Does scare the small Birds, pearched on the spray:
And like how Foul that by a River play,
Spying a Falcon towering in the sky,
Straight leave their sport, and for their safety fly,
VVithouten order crying here and there:
So ISIS and her Nymphs, being in fear
Of hated Neptune, from thence straight began fly,
Shreeking and crying very pitteously.
Aye me, What is this world but vanity?
Subject to change; full of inconstancy:
Now is the Welkin glorious to the eye,
Clad in a Mantle of an asurd die.
And Phoebus now his fair light does display,
When by and by a black Cloud forth the Sea
Does rise and dark the heavens were Iouiall,
Troubling both air and earth with waters fall.
Aye, now I see that mourning follows mirth,
That sorrow drives pleasure from the earth;
That happiness does not long time remain,
But ere it is at full begi'nes to waine:
That all in vain man strives to keep his state,
When dangerous storms labor it to abate:
That vainly men do boast of Fortunes favors,
Since like a weather-cocke she always wauers,
Threatening them most, and bringing soonest under
Those, at whose fortunes most the world did wonder.
And strange, what ere within this world is done,
Ordained was before this world begun:
So that great JOVE, who moderateth Heaven
As sovereign, and commands ore Gods and men:
At whose beck, earth and air, and all else move,
Will not o^^^ enterprise the Fates to prove:
Whom neither prayers, nor ought else can resist,
Cause still they are fixed, and still in one persist.
FINIS Lib. Prim.
THAMESEIDOS, Liber Secundus.
WHen cold staru'n Winter white with Ice and Snow
Declining from our Hemisphere does go:
And watrie Planets plunged deep do yield,
Their mantions unto Hyems pleasant child.
When lucklesse Echo learnes again to sing,
The pastoral Songs which Sheapheard near a Spring;
Or hard beside some murmering Brook repeat,
Whilst little Lambkins bout the fields do bleat.
The amorous God that lovely Tyro knew,
In likeness of her Husband Enipeu,
Hated by Grecian Nymphs, him whilome loved,
And by the Thuscane, French, and Spanish glouted:
Remembering the rare beauty that was said
T'adorne fair ISIS face, himself araide:
And falling forth the straights of Gibraltare,
Where by Alcides plast to Coloms are,
His nimble teame of Dolphins he made post,
Along the Spanish and the Gallicke coast:
And when he came where Englands pride does pay
Her daily tribute to her Sovereign Sea,
There he at last vnyoakt his weary teeme,
And went to seek the fair commended Queen:
Whom by her silver slyding streams he found,
Amid her Maidens on th'enameld ground:
Whose face fair without art, did quickly daze
His eyes, that greedely on it did gaze,
As Phoebus does our ^ver feeble sight,
When we dare look on upon his daseling light;
For like the man that unawares does see
A blasing Comet in the sable sky,
Not having ere before seen such a sight,
Astond, long stares upon the streaming light:
This great God long beheld her beauteous face;
Her beauteous face that Natures works does grace,
Till therewith ravished, he perceiud his heart
Began to faint, and wonted courage part:
And felt each sense enchaunted by her beauty,
Forget his wonted office, and his duty:
Which wanton Cupid saw as he did lie
Lurking under a sandy bank, to pry
On JSIS beauty, and being v'ery glad,
That then the long desired mean he had
T'auenge him for the envious tale he told,
Unto his mother then, when feign he would
Have married Psiches: straight he to the heart
Struck ISIS with a leaden headed dart:
Then with an other all of burnisht gold,
He warmd his heart, that had long time been cold;
And made him supplyant, crave remedy
For those hot flames that in his breast began fry:
But crave in vain; for when his suite she heard,
At first she waxed pale, being afeard:
But after, like the Rose in month of May,
Coullard with heat of Phoebus goulden ray
For shame her face did seem, and to him said,
That she long since had vowed to die a Maid:
Therefore in vain he labourd, and in vain
Should sue, if in the end he hoped to gain
That guerdon, whereto they have only right,
Who under Loves lascivious banner fight:
And therewith with her fair troop went her way,
Leaving the God behind, who did not stay
Long after her; but wroth that she was gone,
He studied long which way she might be won
Unto his will; like to a gallant Soldier,
Who for the first repulse does not give over
The fortress, which to gain he goes about:
Who thereby more enraged, does wax more stout;
And back returns, meaning in spite of foes,
To sack the walls, and enter ere he goes.
But after he had long time beat his brain,
And could devise no way how her to gain,
He vowed the next time that he could come to her,
To use his force, and not his words to woe her.
Within a Wood from ISIS streams a part,
There is a Cave made in despite of art,
So fitly is the growing Marble wrought,
To beautify the entry of the Vault:
Through this a River glides, whose sands do show,
Like those that do in western Tagus grow:
Which left the earth some while, her self to drown,
Within this dark, but pleasant mansion*
Much like the Nubian Niger, which does slide
In one place under earth of no man spide:
Hither proud Medwaie, one of JSIS train,
In hunting having lost his company came;
Where, with her days toil ouer-wearied,
Down on a bancke she laid her weary head,
Meaning when she had slept a while, to go
After her lost Companions: but o,
We entend often one thing, when an other
Crosses our purposes; the which, o there
Was to be seen: for that place which she thought
Should work her rest, her most disquiet wrought:
Because a Satire that before had spide her,
Taking the Vault when she thought none had eyed her,
Who did imagine she was Phoebus sister:
And with Endimion, who had often kissed her,
Appointed there to meet, whereby they might
Reap that same harvest, that does Love delight,
Did follow her: and had't been true, he then,
Meant to bewray it unto Gods and men:
All in revenge of that disgrace was done,
To Marsius, by the God that guides the Sun.
But when the fearful Satire came unto
The entrance of the Cave, he durst not go
Boldly in to it, afraid least he espied,
His base leawd enterprise might be denied:
But villain-like stale softly to, and peeped
At first there in, where he a Nymph that sleeped
On the bare floare did see, whom straight he knew:
But nor for Phaebe, nor one of her crew.
And woondring at his hap, forgate anon
The Goddess, and her dear Endimion:
And look how that same Faun that doated on
Fair Iole, stood like a senseless stone,
Scard and amas'd, when softly he had crept,
It being dark where as Alcides slept,
Thinking that he fair Iole had bin,
Cause she was armd with Club and Lions skin.
So stood this Satire for a while astond,
Viewing the sleeping Nymph on the bare ground:
Yet that unlooked for change pleased him so well,
That straight to toying on her lips he fell,
Whereby he causd her from her sleep awake;
Where she spying this Satire, straight began quake,
And stood even like, if that the like might be:
Scard and amassed at his company,
Like Gadian Spaniards, when as they did see,
The valiant English by their chivalry,
Caesarean conquerours of their town before,
They are suspected they had gaind their shore.
Or like to him whose fellows suddenly,
Stroke with a Dart sent from Joues armorie.
But as the Bird besnarled in the net,
Which the false Fowler closely for her set,
Although fast bound, yet flutters with her wings,
And to be gone, stands biting of the stringes:
So did she with her tender force withstand,
And strugled strongly both with foot and hand,
Thinking her self thereby again to free
Away out of his brutish company;
And with sharp words reuilde him, to maintain
Her honor spotless, but it was all in vain:
For the young Satire fealt she was unable,
Being so tender bond, with him to graplet
Yet seeing her so hot, and out of quiet,
And very desirous for to put her by it,
So gently as he could he asked her why,
She so should ha:e the harmless Satirie?
Who answered straight, Their foul deformed shapes,
Their manners rude, unfit for Maidens laps;
Did make her loath their vile base company:
To which the Satire forthwith did reply.
Sweet Nymph (quoth he) What? is it these that grow
Forth of our forheads, that dislike you so?
(Poynting unto his little horns) If these?
That God which conquered Jndia, and did please
The Candian Queen, had such: or if too red
My face does seem? know Phoebus from the bed
Of his fair Love arysing, redder far
Does look; yet rode he often in Climens Carre.
But happily, nor these our Horns nor Face,
But these our hayrie Breasts, work our disgrace:
Which I confess are rough, but like his Breast
Where lovely Venus often has stolen her rest.
Nor should we ought the more ill shapen seem,
Because Goate-like we cloven footed been,
Since Cupids mother is wed unto him,
That has a pool-foote, and halts of a lim.
And well I wot, we Joue our shape did take
When to Antiope he love did make:
Therefore I must conclude, if Nature had
This perfect shape of ours imperfect made,
Because in heaven and earth the like there are,
Among God and men to be excused it were:
This said, he threw her down upon the sand,
For, O her force too weak was to withstand:
And there in spite of her, he pulled the flower,
The fragrant Rose, which near before that hour;
(Tho ofted sought) by any was obtained:
Hard was her hap that so vile slave it gained.
That done, he shook her off, as great men now,
Those that their turns have served use to do;
And thence departed, leaving her full woe,
And sorrowful behind, for she did know,
She like the Rose, was cropped from native stem,
Whose virtues wholly lost, do nor young men,
Nor lovely Maids delight, or ought content
Either for show, or for their pleasing sent.
Yet went she home again, but did not tell,
What hard misfortune was to her befell,
But proudly, as before, when she was free,
She presses next her Mistress still to be,
And iets it by her side; she never showde
By any action she awry had trod.
Nor did her fellows ere her fault perceive:
So studied she their eye sight to deceive.
Yet after this, scarce Phaebe the ninth time
Had shown her self to this our northern Clime,
When Isis almost fainting through heat,
And hunting in the chase, being in a sweat:
By chance a fair and pleasant Lawne espied,
Through midst of which a shallow Brook did slide:
And liking well the place, the upper brimme,
Touched with her foot, and finding cool and trim
The water, willed all her Maidens there,
To bath themselves, which when Medwaie did hear,
She hung the head, afraid she should bewray,
That yet none knew, and only sought delay,
Till jealous Thams whether she would or no,
Caused her Maids her garments to undo;
Where, with her naked body straight was shown,
Her shame; the which unwilling to have known,
She couerd with her hands: but all serud naught,
It Was known, and she confessed where it was wrought:
Desiring pardon, cause it was forced on her,
And against her will, she suffered that dishonor.
But as Diana raged when she knew
Calisto, one of her fair retinew
By Jove was forced; so did ISIS now:
And straight commanded her from thence to go,
And told her for her leawd fact angered,
That whether to the Northern Pole she fled,
Where windy Boreas does daily strew
The tops of Hyperborean hills with Snow:
Or to the Tropicks, where Apollos torch
With extreme heat the sandy ground does scortch:
Yet therefore should she not escape or fly
The just reward of her hypocisie,
Which could so vilde a fact so long time hide,
From being by her, or her fellows spide.
Which when poor Medwaie heard, discomfited;
Unwitting what to do; for fear half dead:
From thence she traueld by uncertain ways,
Like a great Ship in the wide Ocean Seas;
Whose stately Maste being spent, and proud Sails lost,
Is by each wave hither and thither tossed:
And still bewailde her miserable state,
Her wretched life brought to so low a rate:
Life seeming long to folk in misery,
But short to those live in felicity.
Yet comfortless as she was, like that wight,
Which on the high Alps, having lost by night
His way, and knows not which hand to turn,
Sits on a Bancke, where while as he does mourn
His happes unto the sable mantled Skies,
Far off some Sheapheards by a fire espies,
She farde; hearing the iangling of a Bell:
Following the which, she came unto a Cell,
Amidd the shadow of fair spreading trees:
Through which did breath a cool refreshing brees,
Where the woods Burgeses did daily sing
Sweet Lays unto a pleasant purling Spring,
That thereby ran: which pleasing melody
Might well delight, with his rare harmony
Each mortal creature; whereas she did see
An old Man clad in russet, on his knee,
Devoutly mumbling Mattens: which good sight,
At that time cheard her over dulled spright:
And till his mourning duties he had ended,
At th'entrance of the Cell she him attended:
Which finished, in she went; whom when he spied,
What wight she was much mused, and more her eied.
All in a stoond, for silly man he nere
Before that time, like strange sight had seen there.
If she some Goddess were, he wist not well;
For of strange Goddesses he had heard tell,
That would leave hautie heaven, and resort
To earthly Springes and Groves, to take their sport.
Or if some Nymph to neighbour-woods belonging,
He did not know; yet for he had a longing
To wit what mister wight she was, he did,
After he thither had her welcome bid,
Entreat her show, by knowing, which quoth he,
You may be duly honored by me?
To which, Medwaie reuiud by's courtesy,
Him mildly answered: Father take not me
For other then a wretched wight, oppressed
With mighty grief, who crave but room to rest,
Till weary limbs I have refresht again,
Wherewith from forth her eyes great shewers of rain
Fell down her blubbred cheeks, whereat the old man
Rewing her sad distressed state, began
Entreat her tell the causes of her grief.
Who (sighing) did her fortunes tell in brief,
Both how the Satire in the Cave had used her,
And how therefore her Mistress had refused her:
Which when the old man heard, rewing her pain:
Alas fair daughter (quoth he) do not plain,
For plaintes in these extremes do nothing veil:
And it is not good in vain to weep and wail.
What woman, know there is no malady
So hard to cure, but has his remedy.
Jove does not always forth his thunder cast,
Nor still does the hot raging Summer last,
Still Boreas does not with impetuous sway,
Raise mighty tempests in the Ocean Sea.
Nor will these sorrows daily on thee tend,
Thy patience proud away from thee they will wend.
All human accidents about do wheel,
And in one place do never soiorne still,
No more then this great heaven which daily we,
To turn with an vnwearie course do see:
Then even as Heaven the which is Fortunes horse sourse,
About the earth does keep a lasting course:
So must we think those fortunes which do fall,
Bred by high heaven; yet not perpetual.
Cold Winter past, the healthy Spring does come,
Then choleric Summer, after sick Autum:
Nor does the influence of the heavens each hour,
Down in one place still good or bad luck power:
Therefore sad Nymph, since what is thee befall,
Thou can by no art back again recall.
Comfort thy self, and hope that God will send
To these thy grief, when he sees time, an end.
In the mean season, and till thou have reard
Th'vnwildie burden, and thy self have cheard,
Stay here with me. So down he wild her sit,
And ease her weary limbs: who glad of it,
Did rest her self straight on the dustie ground,
As glad so good an harbor she had found
In her great need; as weather beaten Thrush,
In a great shower is of a sheltring bush.
Not far from hence where this old man abode,
Down in a bottom grew a shadie Wood:
By which a River serpenteth so clear,
That from the bottom each thing does appear
Most lively to the curious gasers sight:
Hither at any time no Shepherd might
Drive his rich fleecie bleating flock to grase,
For reverence of those Nymphs that haunt the place.
So't fortuned as sad Medwaie walked about
One day to ease her grief, she did find out
This pleasant place, where by the River side,
An entrance through a stony Rock she spide:
To which she went, and did by steps descend,
Into a dark some Hall, through which she wend:
Unto a fair room, lightened all by art,
For under ground it was, and far apart
From sight of heaven; the things that there made light,
Were precious Carbuncles, and Diamonds bright,
Reflecting Christalls, Rubies cherrie red;
Rich Emeraulds, and Opols discolored:
About which room, the antique Images
Were plast, of many worthy personages.
Fame says, that Merline while he lived, did make
(Doting upon a Lady of the lake)
This bower, by his great skill at her request,
And therein plast the pictures of the best,
And noblest wights that should in Britain be,
After his death: There sad Medwaie did see,
On one side, the last man bore name of King,
In Brutes long reigning race, who thought to bring
From Armorick an Host of valiant men,
To foil the Saxons, that had footing then
In Britain taken, had not him Visions stayde,
That wild to Rome his Journey should be made.
There was that Rhodericke, the great surnamde,
Who for dividing Wales, was highly famde:
And Howel Dha, who ancient laws corrected,
And Officers to see right done, elected:
With Griffeth Conon, who victorious reigned
Full fifty years; and when he peace had gained
Unto his Country, dyed: And Llewelline,
The brave last Prince of ancient British line;
Whose life by them whom he did trust, betrayde;
Alterd the government which they had swayde
Two thousand and four hundred years and od.
Aye me, that naught on earth has his abode,
Here permanent: aye me, that one man's fall,
Should be the ruin and decay of all
His house: aye me, I should have cause to rue
His loss, whose memory old griefs renew.
On the other side, in lively Tables were
Pictures of Noblemen, and Ladies fair:
Among all which, those seemd the liueliest,
That should live under Fair ELIZA'S rest:
Who though a Woman, yet beyond compare
Of all the Princes in the world that are:
For in her reign Arachne busely,
Makes her webs in rusty Armorie:
And mighty Staves by rotten Woormes are eaten,
For want of use, that death had wont to threaten.
These when she had oreseene, she further went,
And to an other Room thereby had meant
To go, wherein the carved Pictures were,
Of those that Englands royal Crown should wear:
And reached at the Key that thereby hung,
But could not moou't, so to the wall it clung:
For that same entrance, cause she was no Maid,
(Like the fair Empress who the Scepter swayde)
Was her denied, for so by hidden skill
Of Magicks art, and by infernal spell
It Was framde, that none might have access therein,
That were defiled with Venerian sin:
Only she hapt through the Keyhole to spy
The fairest Picture that she ere did see.
The counterfeict of Englandes Sovereign,
ELIZABETH, thrice happy in her reign:
Under whose rule her Subjects not desire
To change their state of womanish Empire:
Who whilst hateful Erinnis hell does leave,
And both with fire and sword her neighbors grieve,
And in the murmr of a cruel storm,
Which threats the machine of the world to harm:
In peace and quiet does her Realm maintain;
Suppressing Will, and suffering Justice reign.
Thou most bright Sun of this our Northern clime,
Live thou for ever, or live Nestors time,
To maintain Arts, as hitherto thou have done;
For wayle the Muses must when thou art gone:
And if it fortune that at any time,
(Luckely) this ragged and unpolished Rithme,
Into those fair hands fall, that holds the bridle,
With which thou justly rulest many people;
Behold it with a favorable eye,
And think that none can praise thee worthelie.
After the Nymph perceiude she was denied
The entrance of that room, she would abide
No longer there, but left the enchaunted place;
And thought return, and show what she that space
Had seen, unto her Host: but being weary
Of that vnweeldie burden she did carry,
She sat her down to rest, and by and by,
Was feign for help unto Lucina cry:
Who hearing her, strait came, and with her goes
Some other Nymphs, to help her in her throws:
Where they to get her, speaking words of ease,
Did from her womb a little babe release.
Which by and by they laid in mothers lap,
Who with salt tears began thus to wail her hap.
O cruel Mistress (quoth she) that exilde me,
When a rude Satire against my will beguilde me.
Making me wander like a vacabone,
Through dark woods and ore bleere hills unknown:
Or like a Ghost, whose friends forgotten have,
The senseless corpse to bury in a grave.
Well hoped I for my long service don,
A better guerdon then this, to have won:
But hopte in vain; for woe! my cursed fate
I now do find: but find it all too late.
Who serves thanklesse folk, shall be rewarded
Not as they hopte, nor as they have deserved.
More had she said, had she not bin by him
Even then surpised, that long to Thams had bin
A weary suter, who then from his Son
Old Proteas, the skillful God, did come.
Deep in the Ocean, where yet never ground,
By longest fadome ^^^e could ere be found:
Under a hollow Rock, there is a vault,
By often beating of great Billows wrought:
So that it seems to be the noble act,
Of some rare Mason, or skild Architect:
About which secret Cave, do daiy lorke
Amid the Rocks, the monstrous cruel Orke:
The admirable Whale, which with great rore,
An other Sea, into the Sea does pour:
All with the dead-sleepe charming cold Torpil,
That knows he carries in his flancke, that will
Decaue the traitrous Fisher of his pray:
And Scolopenders, who into the Sea
(Caught with sharp hooks) their entrails forth do cast:
And when the hooks are found, and danger past,
Receive them in again; where as each one
His office holds, as he before had done.
There dwells old Proteus, who by his great skill,
In the deep secrets of black Magic, will
Command Apollo stay his foaming horse,
Pluck down heavens stars, and stop fair Cinthias course:
And can great Pluto in his Realm affright,
When ere him list, to show his powrefull might.
Here had old Neptune bin, in hope to gain
Some help from him, but then his art proved vain:
His Circles, Characters, strange words, all used
In order, number, time, his will refusde:
For sure that art has no power ore the soul,
Nor does the world afoard an herb so foul:
Or potion made of poisoned Mineral,
That can the mind unwilling, make loves thrall:
Which made Jove's Brother discontent, thence part,
Dispayring ere to ease his greiuous smart.
Since then, his hopes did fail, but as he went,
He heard a woman woefully lament,
With pitteous plaintes her grievous martyrdom:
And going that way whence the plaintes did come,
Distressed Medwaie, he did hap to spy,
Bewayling of her Babies myserie.
Whose sight did comfort him that hoped by her,
He might work means to slake his tortring fire:
Which to effect and bring about the sooner,
Knowing her fortunes, thus he straight began woo her.
The much grief (quoth he) I have boren long,
Makes me the more to rue thy too much wrong,
Sad Nymph, all vndeserude (I wot) by thee:
Wherefore if thou wilt, devise, and but tell me
How I may quench these fires in my breast,
By fraud or force I pass not, I protest,
Of all those many Sea-gods wait on me,
The choice and comliest I Will besto we on thee,
To be thy Husband, in thy Mistress place.
This said, straight Medwaie began to weigh her case,
And sadly counts the wrongs she had endured,
The great disgraces nere to be recured:
All by her Mistress, all without desert,
As she did judge: yet judged she not her part,
Traytrously sell her to her greatest foe,
Though by her sh'ad bin wronged far much more:
But, but a small while that thought did possess her,
So much did Neptunes promised husband press her,
'T should seem sh'ad not forgot the sport was made
Late in the Cave, how ere at last she said:
If to that place great God where sometime you,
With all the Sea-gods of your retinue,
Were by Ocean richly entertained,
When he proud Thetis to his first wife gained:
Do go to morrow ere the fiery Sun
The harness from his horses has vndunne:
There you that cruel Lady straight shall find,
That to us both has proved too unkind:
Where having caught her, you may force her stench
Your bleeding wounds, and burning fires quench.
But be you sure to catch her by some slight,
Else will she escape you (for she is woondrous wight)
And serve you as Coronis has to fore,
When she out ran you on Phocaion shore:
But poor soul she, no sooner told this tale,
When Neptune being afeard the time would fail,
If he would longer stay, in have did hie
To seek his love; which when Medwaie did see,
Repenting (but too late) that ever he,
Had her deceived by his flattery;
Even as a wild Bull darted by some one,
Begins to roar, and up and down to run
Amid the press, all fearelesse of his harm:
So Medwaie vexed, cause he did not perform
His oath; and for her fault in conscience stunge,
Void of all patience, furilike flunge,
And often for spite, her body threw to ground,
And all for spite her body to confound;
Till at the last, she with her self did take
A truce, and summoned sad words, to make
Her sorrows known; with which the quiet sky
She vexed, and sighing, thus at last began cry.
O foolish, that I was foolish and madd,
To think that false forsworen Neptune had
Faith in his words, or to imagine he,
(Changing his nature) would be true to me.
You hollow Caves, grim Plutoes ancient place,
You hellish furies, black nights ougly race:
Thou triple headed Cerberus; and you
Infernal Floodes, O plundge me deep into
The bottom of that hot abisme, where lie
Tormented Ghostes in wretched misery.
O thou the guyder of the golden light,
O thou fair Queen that clearly shinst by night,
And you bright Stars that wander in the Skies,
If you have power over our Destenies,
And that you be both of our good and ill,
The only authors, then together will
So many mischiefs on my head to light,
As can, or may, upon a wretched wight.
And thus as she lamented in despair,
Her tatterd Garments she in pieces taire:
And her two snow-white hands plaighted together,
Enraged she wrong, and thumped without measure*
Her tender Arms against the senseless ground,
And her small Babe (strange tale) being unbound,
And laid along upon the soft green gras;
No sooner touched the earth, but straight ways was
Ore-growne with earth; and from her tooes out went
Small writhing roots in vnquoth wonderment.
And her small body being lessoned,
Into a small long stalk was fashioned.
To Flagges her fingers changd: and last of all,
Her Head turned to that plant we Cats-talle call.
Which wondrous change, when Medwaie saw, she mournd,
Cause to so vile a plant the Gods had turned
Her guiltless Babie; till at last even she
Did like to snow, that on the Alps does lie
All Winter time; which when as western winds,
Together with the warmth of Sun vnbindes,
The clodded lumpes to water straight does change,
Making small Brooks, as down hill it does range:
For she consuming unto watrie tears,
Was to a Riuet turnde; the which now bears
Th'vnfortunate Nymphs name, fallen by the fault,
Which in the Gave was by the Satire wrought.
Finis Lib. Secund.
THAMESEIDOS, Liber Tertius.
IN all the world so great an enemy,
Either to man, or man's felicity
There never was, if we do judge aright,
And be not led away with blinded sight,
Then is our own ore-bold severity: (...)
For still thereby fit opportunity,
Our foes have for to ceaze on us, before
We think that they are near aboard the shore:
Witness fair Thames, who doubting naught at all,
Was nigh surprisd, and made God Neptuns thrall:
Who next day, when Hiperions son began
To drive his Chariot to the Ocean,
Arrived in the Meddow where as she
Was sporting in her Maidens company:
Whom happily fair Thamisis espied;
And spying, her fair lovely cheeks (straight) died
With a Vermilion blush, abashed as
Naked Diana among her Maidens was:
Then when she in the clear Gargaphian Spring,
By th'haples Nephew of the Thebane King
Unawares was found; and from the place straight fled,
Leaving her Maids behind all in the Mead:
A way she ran, as raging storms does fly,
Tumbling up clouds within the fable sky,
Nere looking back, nor making any stay:
So feared she the sovereign of the Sea.
Not half so fast distressed Florimel
Fled from the sight of that Hiena fell,
Which the dispightfull Witch after her sent,
To bring her back, and her in pieces rent.
Nor half so fast from Phoebus Daphne fled,
As ISIS now, to save her maydenhead:
Whereat the Lord of the unconstant Sea
Did chafe, yet loath that she should get away,
He began with sugared speeches for to woe her,
But all was spent in vain, that he said to her.
Thou that my soul holds captive in thine eyes,
(Quoth he) and still new torments do devise
To plague me, stay; and those hot fires fee,
That burning in my breast, have vexed me
Ere since the shaftes which from thy sparkling stars
Did come* and wounded me all unawares:
And in thy golden hair my heart was taken,
Which now dispaires to have freedom ere again:
But bootelesse were these Words; which seeing, he
A loud unto her, thus again began cry.
Stay cruel ISIS, harder far then Flint,
And rougher then the Oak on Ida, stint
Thy hasty pace; and cause the Nimphos thou do
Excel in fairenes, do not therefore bost;
But think, that as thy flood bears to my realm,
with an infatigable course his stream,
Returning nere again unto his head:
So th'howre the day, the day thy youth will lead,
Till on it death, or wrinckled age will sease:
Which come, thou wilt rue the time which thou did lease.
Love therefore while as time is offered thee,
And while thou may again like loved be:
For times do change and alter every day,
And in those times we change, and do decay:
Then present time's better, then time to come,
Since Golden, Silver, Brazen age, is done;
And naught is left, but Irons cankred rust,
Which daily turns all from worse to worst.
Look but upon the fair sweet senting Rose,
Which cropped from the tree whereon he grows,
Straight loses all the fairness that it had:
And know, thy beauty one day, so will fade.
Nor think thou can the Gods in heaven excel,
Since thundering love, loves fire could not quell.
Since bright Apollo spite of all his art,
With Cupids shafts, was wounded to the heart:
Since the fair Ciprian Queen, wanton Loves Mother,
By no means could her youngling fire smother:
And that Diana on Endimion doated,
Yet for a maid, and chaste, is still reputed.
But rather think, though now from love thou art free,
That love will one day show his power on thee.
Thou know, how late disdainefull Ardea,
Who Glaucus scornde; a God, and of the Sea:
Had her due merits on thy maidens strond.
Be warned by her, that God which can commund*
The greatest Gods, will take revenge on thee,
If thus thou do persist in crueltee:
And if thou know me not, then stay and view
What one he is, that for thy love does sue.
I am not one that hauntes the craggie Rocks,
Yet Lord of Seas: nor tend I fleecie flocks,
From whom thou fleest, I think thou do not know;
For if thou did, thou would not use me so.
Were I a Saluadge, that man's flesh does eat,
A foul black Moore, a Tartar, or a Get:
Had I bin fosterd in Hircanian wood,
By wild Bears milk, or cruel Tigers blood:
Then might thou scorn me justly, and hold me
Too too presumptuous, thus to follow thee:
Then might thou have excuse, and not be blamed,
To let me die, with beauties fire inslam'd.
But I in Seas keep Court, my Temples stand.
At Istmus, and within Calabria land.
In Italy the people do me honor,
And Jove himself is known to be my brother.
With crooked Keele men learned first by me,
To cut the Seas; and tame the Horse was free.
And though my Beard seem white, my Carkas old,
Prove me, and thou shall find me hot and cold:
Prove me, my artires wants no strength: and though
That I seem light, yet have I pith enough.
Still pleasure shall yield force unto my raines:
Prove, I will not deceive thee of thy pains,
For often vnidelie I have spent the night,
And when I rose, I have bin fresh and light:
O run no further then, but stay and prove,
Stay, and let us mutually joy others love.
Feign more he would have spoke, but she afraid,
Fled fast away, not heeding what he said:
And as she ran, so meeting winds did blow,
That naked skin above her knee did show,
And her gold hair now fallen loose and slack,
At every step did wave behind her back:
All which, far more did set his heart a fire,
And far more did increase his hot desire,
So that he lustely did mende his pace,
Hopeing to catch her, whom he had in chase.
But as a Pirate has bin long at Sea,
Whose Ship foul and unwashed, makes but small way,
Does nerethelesse if that he spies a chase,
Unto his courses straight his drablers lace,
And up a trip hoyse topsailes, though in vain,
For foul, the more they sail, the less they gain:
So was it twixt fair ISIS and her foe;
For she more lighter, did him fair outgoe.
Which when he saw, vexed to be so crossed,
Even like a Tiger fell, the which has lost
Unawares her sucking Whelps, does rage and fling,
Amid the shrubbes and bushes that do spring,
On Ganges golden strond so took he on,
Stamping and stareing like a frantic man.
After staying his rage, and lookeing round about:
In broken speeches thus he did break out.
Now Heavens, I see my Godhead is but small:
My power far less, my might just naught at all:
But shall I leave her tho? No, I will after:
And never lin, till these same hands have caught her:
Yet she is young and wight, I o^^e and slow:
And as I follow, she does me outgoe.
Oh Cupid, why art thou mine enemy,
And to my grief do give no remedy?
Why ad'st thou stars to heaven? leaves to green trees?
Why gathered waters, unto grown Seas?
Why do thou make me languish for that Lady,
That is more coy, then ever I knew any?
Yet you mine eyes were cause first of this same,
For through you descended beauties flame:
That in mine entrails burns like Mongibell,
But were mine eyes in fault? no I wot well,
Had my weak mind ore-rulde my greedy eye,
Then from this torment had I now bin free.
Here did he stop again, and as you see,
Some well skilde actor in a tragedy,
Whose purpose bent to execute his will,
Is countermaunded by some unlooked ill,
Falls like a mad man in a raging vain:
Even so did he, and thus began again.
My Harvest is in Grass, I now do see,
And fear that it ripe Corn will never be:
What tho; I am the self same God that has
The Scepter of the Seas, who in my wrath
Can cause my raging Billows to arise:
And armde with fury, buckle with the skies;
Then shal't be said, that I shall suffer this,
And thus be crossed by scornful Thamisis?
No? Who will then acknowledge me a King?
Or on my Aulters offer any thing?
It Is only force must purchase me, what Love
And my long woeing, from her nere could move;
And though it be not gotten by constraint;
But kind and gentle mean (they say) must gaint.*
Yet since I long have gently woed her,
And all in vain; by reverend Stix I swear,
Hence forth I will no ^^^ger woe, nor sew,
But ha'er in spite of all that she can do.
O which of all the sacred Muses now,
Shall I entreat to show the base means how
False Neptune sought to gain his wished pleasure:
But one's too few, help therefore all together;
For well I wot, you hearing her sad chance,
Did leave your Springs bout which you wont to dance,
And went to wail with her sad Maidens, which
Did nothing else but cry, naught else but scritch.
Now weary Phoebus had vnharnised
His fiery steedes, and got him self to bed
To his fair Love: and now the sable Night
Had causd sleep ceaze upon each mortal wight.
When Neptune causd his Coatch be brought to him,
The which two yoaked Delphins makes to skim
Ore the large furrows of his spacious plains,
In which he mounted, and with scaly reigns,
Gouernd their heads; seated in Iuorie,
Like a great Prince adornd with majesty,
Bearing his three tinde Trident in his hand:
Whom Glaucus being accomp'ned with a band
Of Tritons, follows till unto the ground
They came, where winds in Irons fast they found:
A cloudie Country, compast all with Hills:
Where wrestling winds with blustrous blasting filles:
From darksome Caves sent out the foggie air:
There Aeolus within a stately Chair
He found, holding his royal Mace in hand,
With which th'vnruly Winds he does command,
Whom Neptune in this manner did entreat.
King Aeolus, for thee my brother set
To rule the Winds according to thy pleasure,
To let them loose, or keep them locked together.
On farthest shores of Ocean Seas there lies
A pleasant Island, in triangle wise,
Which on the East the mouth of Rhyne does face,
With a great Angle, and from thence apace
Withdrawes his shoring sides, butting proudly
France with the one, with the other Germany:
Which Island, does in honor far surpass
Creat; which my brother Joues nurse whylome was.
Nor may with it ^^ Samos or Rhodes compare:
Ore which, once Juno, or and Loves Queen had care:
For there within that land, no living wight
Has want of needful thing, or sweet delight:
Nor are they scarde with blastes of bloody fears,
Which braying Trumpet soundes in fearful ears;
But of the murthring and life quelling blade,
For Husbandmen there hookt Sithes often are made,
And Huswiues there do hiue the little Be,
In rusty Caskes that by the walls do lie.
In this, there is a cruel, but fair Maid,
Within whole hair, deceitful Love once made,
Sly subtle Nets, by which all closely wrought,
My faynting senses troytrously he caught,
When least suspecting; ravished at her sight,
They on her rareness fed with great delight:
And now six Moons with borrowed brothers light,
Six times have shynd, and six times out of sight
Bin, since I her began woe; but all in vain,
For from my suite is sprung naught but disdain:
Foul scorns, that mock me and my deity,
And frowning looks, all void of piety.
That Dame whose loss of life and chastetie,
Freede Rome from servile yoke of tyranny.
And that fair Isbell who would loose her head,
Rather then yield to Pagans lustful bed,
Were not so coy, as is Doris proud daughter;
Witness those means, whereby so often I sought her:
Therefore th'vntamed winds, at my request,
Send out against her, that by them oppressed,
She may without conditions yield to me,
And I thereby recure my malady.
Now I Will enlarge thy straighted Kingdoms bounds,
And give to thee thy bordering neighbors grounds;
If yielding, thou assentes to me in this,
And help me get my wished Thamisis.
This he with feigned sighs so uttered,
That foolish Aeolus thought all he sed
To be as true, and therefore pitying
The languishing estate of the old King;
Without aduisement, straight made his reply.
Thrice Noble Neptune, whose dominions lie
Beyond the borders of the ruddie Inde:
If I, or all my power, can bring to end,
What you desire, in us shall want no will:
And therewith did he strike through an hill
His Mace; whence straight a crew of hellish mates
In crowdes came thronging forth the Iron gates;
Whose chief was Boreas, who with violent sway,
Does chase the pestred Clouds, and toss the Sea:
Who in his rage does turn up knottie Oaks,
And beats the ground in hayle with sturdie strokes;
Who trembling Ghostes does vex in Stigian lake;
And got in Caves, makes all the world to quake:
To whom turning, thus flattering Neptune said,
You in your fury, make the world afraid:
Turmoyling earth and seas, I did not lock
You, fettred with these strong gives in this Rock;
But frowning Joue, whose will for law must stand.
Nor with like tirranny do I command,
You know: for in my Realm you may be bold,
Not any one gainsaying what you would.
Therefore stout Boreas, if Orithia thou
Did ere entirely love, assist we now,
T'obtaine my love: who far unlike to thine,
Both scorns my person, and what else is mine.
Scarce this was said, when sturdy Boreas began
To flaske his wings: with wauing which even than
He raisde a storm, and with his company,
Mad, and enragde, with fury thence did fly:
And like fierce Dogs, long time in Irons chainde,
And long in darkesome kennelles have remainde:
Once broken loose, run rageing here and there,
And all they meet, with ravening teeth do tear.
So these same villains now at liberty,
And freed from fetters, do a madding fly.
Troubling each place with their impetuous sway,
And made the world seem like a dismal day:
Until they came where lovely Thames abode,
Whom they did chase; base villains, rude, and wood:
Not waighing ought the wrong she offered had,
Nor yet the plaintes which her sad maidens made.
But like how often in stormy raynie weather,
The waters falling twenty hours together,
The floods made proud thereby above their bounds,
Do swell and ouerflow the meddow grounds.
With the great fury of their ouerflowing,
Driving small Birds away from trees by growing:
Small Birds which on the spray had built their nestes,
And causing fishes, as unwonted guestes
To harbor in their room: so ISIS was
Forced by the woodnesse of fell Boreas:
To leave her maidens pleasant companies,
Who filled the air with hoarse unwonted cries
For her departure being ill opayd,
As Niobe, Amphions Queen is said,
When all her brood, the darlings of her joy,
Latonas children did for spite destroy.
The hollow sandy banks that wont rebound,
To their rare charming music; a sweet ground,
Sent now unpleasant Echoes, like the notes
Came through the hollow of their feeble throats.
The light foot Fairies, and the Oreades,
The Dryads, Hamadriads, and the Naiades,
Who often delighted with their harmony,
Did by their streams keep ISIS company:
Now hearing all theses Nymphs so heauely mourn,
Like heauely at once unto them goane,
Nere Thetis so bewailde stout Peleus son,
When Coward Paris him to death had done.
Never Halcion with like grief did mourn,
On sandy sea shore her dear spouse forlorn:
Nor was the sorrow my Phebe did make,
When death her dere-ling forth her lap did take,
Though down her cheeks did issue brackish seas,
To be compard unto the sorrow, these
Sad doleful Nymphs did make, when they did see
The fair haird Thames in such extremity:
For like a Meade, dispoyled of his flowers;
A goodly Picture, robbed of her colors:
Like to the Heaven, if all his Stars were lost;
A goodly Ship, wanting her Sails and Mast:
So fair eyed ISIS wanting, seemde that place;
Who thereof was the flower, the beauty, and grace:
And when as words free passage had obtained,
Of pressing griefs, their harms they thus complained.
O who (quoth they) will make whole Seas fall down
Our blubbred cheeks, where we our selves may drown?
Or what God, full of pity shall we call,
Who t'end our woes, to Rocks will turn us all?
From hence forth, Pleasure be thou banished
Out of this wretched place, and in thy stead
Let ouglie sorrow daily on us tend.
And thou bright Sun, would thou from hence would wend,
And let thy light in mystie clouds be pent,
For darkness best besitteth discontent:
And take her with thee, who borrowes her light
From the clear rays of thy most glorious sight:
Take her, which often amidd her Nymphs does play
On Cinthus hill, and often times does stay
Among Stigian Hagges: for Thames dear to you both,
Is forced to fly, for fear of Neptunes wroth.
And thou that wrapst all in forgetfulness,
And mortal folk do ease of heaviness,
Under thy black wings bringing diverse dreams
From forth Cimerian fields, now hide the beams
Proroceeding from the Stars in th'Hemisphere,
And make a general darkness every where.
And Phylomell, since thou art wont to moan,
Remembering still the great disgrace was done
By thy false brother, help us to lament:
Or if thy mourning notes are fully spent,
Then give a quiet ear to that we say,
For we huge wrongs in sad tunes will display.
And you o Trees, in whom there life does rest,
Show forth some sign, as pitying our unrest.
Let little Birds be silent on your spray:
And on your boughs, let Ravens croope by day.
But you that late your branches down did bend,
From Thames fair face, the Sunbeams to defend,
Now in despite, to ground your branches throw,
Since Thames is gone, to show you wail her woe.
You Lillies white, whom whiter hands did gather:
And you fair blooming Roses, Natures treasure,
Upon your selves sad sable Weeds bestow,
Since Thames is gone, to show you wayle her woe.
She was the Rose, the Lilly of the day,
Whose leaves b'vntimely storms, do fall away:
Oh echo all this place, with mouring fill,
And mark the doleful accents of our ill.
Sound forth our grief, and let them never end,
Until the Heavens our fortunes do amend.
Oh let our just complayninges loud and shrill,
Through these winding waters wander still,
Whereby those seas that on our shores do flow,
Our heavy grief to foreign lands may show:
And on their banckes let never trees more grow,
Since Thams is gone, as sign you wail her woe.
And thou great Joue, if any care thou have
Of earth, or earthly things, O do thou haste,
And save her from false Neptunes treachery,
Who honored still thy sacred deity:
Save who the corners of thine Aulters dud
Purple continually with luke warm blood.
But o! it seems great Joue, thou have no care
Of us, nor of this world; but it does ere,
At all adventure: for if that you had
Regard of humane things, or if you made
Esteem of us, your own hands workemanshyp;
Then would you of sad ISIS take some keep,
And her protect from Neptune, who amine
Does seek her spotless chastetie to stain:
And he should not, that has so labored
To Abuse chaste Maidens, escape unpunished:
Wherefore since Heaven, and all therein are deaf,
And hearing not, can not amend our grief,
Let us be gone, and cease hence forth to plain,
For all our plaintes are spent, but all in vain.
This said, they all arose, all ill apayde,
And thence departed, in despair of aid
From heaven, or elie where; vexing still the skies,
With their hot scalding sighs and grievous cries:
But nor the cries, nor sighs, did ISIS good,
Whom Boreas foul uncivil Groom stark wood,
Did with a crew of wicked mates pursue,
As she some Felon were, or wight untrue:
Who poor soul, seeing how she was oreborne,
Like pittious plaintes did make, and so did mourn,
As with her husband Epimethius daughter
Did then when they could see nothing but water;
When only they of all mankind bereft,
Amid the billows of the Seas were left.
Then when themselves were solely left in woe,
And saw no land, nor any fellows more,
And fearing least at last she might be caught,
By that foul Leatcher, who this wrong first wrought:
With hands lift up, she thus besought great Joue.
Hear thou great Father of the Gods above,
By whom all is made, maintained, and disposde,
And from whom naught on earth is vndisclosde:
Who full of equity, do all things right,
And wicked folk beholds with eyes of spite.
Hear and behold the miserable state,
Of me thy Daughter, dolfull, desolate.
These tears, ay me, that from mine eyes do fall,
For succor at thy helping hands do call.
Oh let not then my foe obtain his will,
On me poor Maid: nor let the winds fulfill
The treason that he has deuisd against me:
But force them all retire, and bacward flee,
To their abode; O pity me I pray,
Least following ages do hereafter say,
In vain thou holds the thunder in thy hand,
Not helping those that help of thee demand.
So prayed Thamisis, and straight great Joue,
Shaking his head, thrice thundered from above,
In sign he heard, and called Mercury,
Charging him straight unto Aeolia hie,
And tell the King when first I did accord,
Over the wrestling winds, to make him Lords
I gave in chardg he no man should opresse,
But seek still offered injuries to redress.
But since with Neptune, he confederate is,
To wrong my tender darling Thamesis:
If he his winds do not in have reclaim,
By Sytx tell him, to his eternal shame,
Like how with Titans rude rebellious race,
I whilome dealt: so will I him disgrace.
Yet for this wrong, which is already done,
At what time, twixt the place where sets the Sun,
And the right Northen Pole, there does appear,
By Cassiopeia, seated in her Chair:
Within that milkie way, made by my Queen,
A blasing Commet, like fire flameing sheene;
Which shall be ere Apollo eight times leads
About the Zodiake his trampling steades:
Two princely Beasts shall come from Thames cool stream
Which shall more dammadge do undo his Realm,
Then did that mighty Boore Diana sent,
The Field of Calidon to spill or rent:
All (quoth he) in revenge he durst attempt,
To wrong her, whom from wrong I have exempt.
This said, fair Maias Son the subtle God,
Taking in have his dead sleep charming rod,
And winged shoes, did leave the crystal sky,
Jove's princely Palace, where continually
Th'erraticke stars in their sweet harmony,
Do make rare soundes of heavenly melody:
And down from thence, unto this lower world,
Swifter then thunder bolt, himself he hurlde,
And sought King Aeolus: to whom he straight,
The purport of his coming, did dilate.
Have any ere in May a Garden seen,
With diverse slowers enameld fresh and green,
And it reuewes when Phoebus is declinde
Unto the Southern pole, the same does find
Oregrowne with wild weeds, and with stinking grass;
Now would have said, in Aeolus there was
Like change, hearing great Jove's Ambassador:
For never was he troubled so before,
Save when his Nephews bawling did detect,
His Childrens lewd crime, and incestious fact:
For which, the guiltless Babe as punishment,
He cast to Dogs, which it in peecemeale rent;
And to desilde Canace, sent a sword;
With which her own self to the heart she gor'de:
For he much feared Joue his Sovereign,
Knowing he might depose him from his Reign
And regal power: therefore t'amend his fault,
And please the angry God, Postillians straight
He after Boreas sent, and did command
To bring them back, and cease their suit in hand:
Who never stayed, till they the winds had found,
And brought them back, and them again had bound
In their base bonds of during Iron, wrought
Long since in Aetna by the Cyclops: taught
Their art by Lymping Vulcan, who was plast there
To be Joues workman, and the chief Forge-maister;
Whereby distressed Thamesis was freed,
From those that had her overthrow decreed
And back returned to her sad Nimphs, whom she
Did find, her loss bewailing heavily:
Who when they saw her first, fared like to her
Has but one Son; that for a Soldier
Pressed, in his Princes service forth is gone,
To keep his Country from invasion;
Whom fearing to be drowned in the deep,
Or by hard steel sent t'euerlasting sleep,
She does bewail as dead, and will not be
When he returns, from death and danger free,
Persuaded it is her Son, but some vain sight,
That would with idle shadows her delight,
Till her cold fears are past; for all of them
thinking her wholly lost, thought they had seen
Her shadow, not her self, till she spoke to them:
What time assured, they all received her,
As an Hungarian Father does his heir,
And only Son: which has a longsome time,
Among hated Turks, in hellish prison line:
Their sighs to songs, their tears now almost spent,
They turned to laughter, and to merriment;
And thankt the motor of the whirling Spheres,
That had not them forgot drowned in tears.
But stay my Muse, the Sky is fair and clear,
The Seas are calm, no wind does whistle here;
Here let us anchour then, for here we may
^^de ^afe, to morrow being Holiday.

