A CATHOLICON, that is, A general preservative or remedy against the
Pseudocatholike religion, gathered out of the Catholic epistle of S. IVDE,
briefly expounded, and aptly, according to the time, applied to more then half
an hundredth of popish errors, and as many corruptions of manners. With a
Preface serving as a preparatiue to the Catholicon, and a diet prescribed after.

2. Tim. 2. 24, 25. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle
toward all men, apt to teach, suffering evil men patiently,

Instructing them with meekenes that are contrary minded, proouing if God at
any time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. 1602 And are
to be sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard by Simon Waterlon.

REVERENDO IN CHRIsto pat^i D. Martino Heaton Episcopo Eliensi, salutem in
Christo.
MErito ab omnibus illud Lysa^dri Spartani explosum est (reuere^de Antistes)
veritate^ nihilo esse mendacio meliore^, sed vsu tantu^ alteru^ alteri prstare:
Lysa^dro isti similes illi omnes mihi vide^tur (quo^quot aetate hac nostra
extiterint,) quiveritati indagandae operam impendere superfluum, and religioni
perpurgandae studium accommodare rem putant haud necessaria^: in sua porro
que^que professione saluum esse posse, and securum esse debere: quod videtur
sensisse Rhetorius quidam, qui, vt testatur Augustinus, omnes haereticos recte
ambulare affirmaret. Isti errori vi^ille Lib de haer^^^ her. 72.
omnium sapientissimus prudenti suo consilio restitit, sic inqui^ns, veritatem
compara, ac non vendito: qui omni conatu in veritatis studium incumbendum
suadet, and illi acquisitae acquiescendum. Non ergo frustra ille labor
suscipitur, sed necessarius and vtilis est, qui in veritate disquirenda, errore
dissipando, and tenebris disc^tiendis ponitur: in rebus fidei nimia diligentia
nulla est, and recta via incedens nimium festinare non potest: been Ambrosius,
est fidei religiosa violentia, segnitia criminosa. Lib. 8. in (...).


Aliud porro hominum genus est, qui tenebras suas amant, nec errores suos
sanari patiantur: euangelij vero lucem far nullo modo possunt, nec caligantes
eorum oculi solemn aspicere sustinent. Apud Lacedaemonas haec feriur viguisse
lexsiue invaluisse mos, vt per plateas Plutarch. inter Laconic. instit.
noctu transeuntes sine face praeeunte incedere^t, vt sic assueti in tenebris
intrepide ambularent. Tales plerumque papistae sunt, qui se tam diu Pontificiis
oblectarunt vmbris, and in densis superstitionis suae tenebris grassari
consueueru^t, vt sibi facem praeferri euangelicam non sinant, nec ad lucernam
pedes suos dirigere cupiant. Qui tamen nobis non negligendi sunt, nec eorum
omnis abiicienda cura: sed omnibus modis tentandum est, and adhibendi conatus,
vt ex superstitionis suae sieve pelago, quo fere submerguntur, sieve quo turpiter
volutantur erroris caeno, tandem emergant, and se recipiant, vt been monet
Apostolus: Leniter corripiendi sunt contrario animo affecti, ecquando det eis
deus vt resipiscentes agnoscant veritatem: 2. Tim. 2. 25.
Et recte Augustinus, Non ideo negligenda medecina est, quia nonnullorum
insanabilis Epist. 48.
pestilentia.

Cum vero a Pontificiis partibus quistant, capita sua exerere incipiant,
scriptis suis nos lacessant, virus evomant, and errores suos long lateque
disseminare conentur: (nam superstitionis isti magistri in proposito suo
pertinaces sunt, and improbo labor se obtinere posse sperant, quod iusta
defensione non assequuntur) and quod de sui temporis haereticis scripsit
Hieronymus: Ardentius ab illis defenditur haeresis, Theophil.
quama nostris oppugnatur; Istorum igitur conatus nobis prohibendi sunt, and
torrentis tam turbulente decurrentis impetus sistendus and repellendus est:
speciem illi prae se ferunt eximiae pietatis, sed vere in illos cadit illud
Origenis: Multi sunt, qui Christi nomen Hom. 3. in Leuk.
habent, sed veritatem non habent Christi. Catholicos se iactant, sed cum
Augustino Catholici non esse incipient, nisi haeretici esse destiterint.
Pontificii Epist. 167.
soli apud suos eruditorum nomen adepti sunt, Verum, inquit, est, a Pleiston.
apud Plutarch.
vobis enim nihil mali didicimus: It a nos huiusmodi doctrina Pontificiis
inferiores fatemur: ad malitiam non tam prudentes aut docti sumus, de caeteris
non est, quod glorientur. Sed numero and multitudine praeeunt: neque hac de re
nos multum sumus solliciti: veritas non pereuntium multitudo peccantium: vt ait
Hieronymus, nouit veritas paucorum man^ (...). tom. 3.
vincere: and de multis non militum copiis, sed causae bonitate triumphare:
confidenter illo magnum hostium numerum praedicanti: tanto, inquit, mayor erit
gloria, quia plures interficiemus: atque hoc ad summa^ ducis nostri gloriam
Phaedaretus L^co.
redundabit, qui pusillum gregem suum contra luporum agmina armare possit. Sed
Pontisicii veterani milites sunt and periti, vt cui festive Antalcidas,
pulchram a Thebanis mercede^ reportas, qui illos invitos and rudes pugnare
docuisti. It a profecto po^tificiorum maledica importunitas, nobis, qui in ocio
confidere maluimus, si per illos licuisset, and vires maiores addidit, and
militandi etiam peperit peritiam.

Atqui non dubito (reverende Domine) quin ex vtraque Academia, tanquam ex equo
Troiano plures propediem prodituri sint, qui Romanam superstitionem a veteri
illa Troia oriundam pessundent and pedibus conculcent, si vestro reliquorumque
gravissimorum praesulum hortatu and consilio invitati, vestroque auxilio and
operaadiuti (vbi vestram gravitatem nequaquam defuturam speramus) ad hoc
studium incitentur. Isthac vbi been successerit, querelae illi veteri non
amplius erit apud nos locus: Ingemui tantam nobis inesse negligentiam, vt nec
veritatem possimus astruere, Hieron* d^ vir perfect.
cum alij valcant pro veritate inculcare mendacium.

Nunc paucis ostendam, quid in hoc opusculo praestiterim: periculum feci, an,
sicut ante in co^troversus fidei pertractandis ita nunc in scripturis
explicandis ecclesiae vsibus deservire possem, and ad publicum commodum aliquid
adiumenti comportare: and recte dixime periculum facere: video enim me in
periculo versari, du^ subitaneas has meas commentationes in omnium conspectum
profero. Non inepte Periandro medico docto, dum versus male scriberet, dixit
quidam: quid tibi in mentem venit, vt pro scito medico, appellari velis malus
poeta? Archidam^^ ^^ni^r.
quod in illos retorquere quis possit, qui ad scribendum se accingunt, ne^ ex
concionatoribus non malis, scriptores reddantur mali. Sed intelligant velim qui
doctiores sunt, me illis ista non scribere, sed imperitis, qui, vt been Hieron.
in scripturis sine praevio and monstrante semitam, ingredi non possunt. At que
in ipsorum Paulin. tom. 3.
gratiam, non eloquentiae consectans rivulos, sed vulgares miscens sermones,
non verbis inhians, sed rebus studens, and ad singulorum captum me accommodans,
istaraptim and festinanter pertexui: vt been ille, nobis propositum est non
plausum legentium, Hieron. praefat. in Orig. ad Roman.
sed fructum proficientium quaerere.

Haec qualiacunque in tuo nomine apparere volui (gravissime Episcope) ^um vt
aliqua grati animi mei erga te significatio extaret, cui me, vt perhumano and
perqua^ benigno ecclesiae meae Barleiens. patrono devinctum agnosco, at que
etiam vt scires, quan^a de ^ide and pietate tuae, and (...) opinio nobis
ingenita ^it: in quo caepto pietatis cursu and itinere sic fortiter pergas, vt
ad finem optatum foeliciter pervenias in Christo Jesus cui lau^ in secula.

Dat. Barleiae. 5. calend. September. Tuae reverentiae observantiss. Andraeas
Wille^^.

THE PREFACE to the Christian Reader, serving as a preparative to the Treatise
following.
Skillful Physicians, to work safely and cure soundly, do use preparatiues
before they minister to their patients, and prescribe a diet to be observed
after: the same course will I take: that whereas I have out of S. Iudes
Catholic epistle, confected a Catholicon, that is, a general preservative
against popish infection, I will first briefly prepare the mind of the
discreet Reader, in showing the danger of this ouerspreading and contagious
disease. Seneca Nihilmagis aegris prodest qua^ curari ab eo, a quo volunt. lib,
4. declamat.
says, that nothing does more profit the sick, then to be cured of him, whom
they desire to be cured by. I trust then that this enterprise of mine, shall
not be fruitless to any, proceeding from him which wishes well to the cause
of religion, and to all those that unfeignedly love the Lord Jesus, that they
which stand, may continue, they which waver may be settled, which doubt, may be
confirmed. Such a physician therefore, as is a friend, and such physic as is
wholesome, is that, I trust, which every man desires, that either would have
his sickness cured, or his health preserved.

Now to know how dangerous and hurtful the contagion of Popery, and popish
religion is, no better rule can be given, then that prescribed by our Savior,
Math. 7. 16. Exfructibus eorum. etc. By their fruits ye shall know them. And
the wise man describes the harlot by these properties. Her cruelty: Her house
tends to death, Prove. 2. 18. Her treachery and unfaithfulness: She forsakes
the guide of her youth, verse. 17. Her flattery: verse. 16. She flattereth with
her words. As a dishonest and unchaste woman is thus discerned, so is a corrupt
religion. And these are the very badges and ensigns of the whore of Babylon,
Cruelty, Treachery, Flattery. Where they get the sword, they show all
cruelty: where their power fails, they work by treachery: where this
speedeth not, they will deceive by flattery and hypocrisy.

Their rage and cruelty against the members Of Romanists.
of Christ, have been most brutish and unnatural; what tortures can be
devised, which they have not applied? what grievous death which they have not
executed upon the poor members of Christ? Some they have hanged, as a good
minister in Germany in his own house. Fox p. 880. Some drowned; as Peter
Spengler at Ensishem. Some beheaded. Nicholas Paul at Gaunt. Fox p. 896. Some
buried quick, as two women at Lovaine. Ann. 1543. ex Francis Encen. Some
pulled asunder by peecemeale: John Clarke at Melden. An. 1524. ex Crispino.
Some had their eyes put out, as a priest in Germany. Fox. p. 891. Some put
into the pinchbacke, hanging by the hands and ^russed up behind, with a great
weight at their feet. p. 882. Some poisoned, as a priest at E^ford. p. 896.
Some burned with oil. Steven Brown at Poitiers. Ann. 1540* Some burned by
peecemeale: Peter Gavart at Paris. Ann. 1558 Some burned being smeared with
fat and brimstone, as Martius Alba, Petrus Scriba at Lions. ex Pa^taleon. Some
burned with brimstone and gunpowder, as Iulianus Leville at Sanserre. Ann.
1554. ex Iohanne Crispino. Some burned with pitch and tar dropping upon them.
Of Romanists.
George Marsh. p. 1567. Some broyled. John Whiteman at Ostend Fox. p. 2113.
Some pressed with hot iron, hands and feet; Bertrande. Fox. p. 896. Some drawn
Here is the patience and faith of Saints. Rev. 13. 10.
and torn upon the rack; Bennet Roman. Fox. p. 926. Some had their tongues
cut out; Peter Roscan at Bloys. An. 1556. Crispin. And Peter Serre at Tholosse.
An. 1553. William Hasson at Roane. Ann. 1544. ex Crispino. And it was generally
decreed at Paris, that the Martyrs should have their tongues cut out. Ann.
1546. Crispin. Some had their tongues boared through; Henry Conboron. ex
Crispin. Some had their throats cut, as 88. in Calabria. p. 942. Some women
slain with child, and their infants tumbling out, troaden under feet, and
trampled upon: as the women of Merindoll. Fox. p. 952. Unspeakable are the
torments which thousands of Gods Saints have endured and suffered under the
tyranny of Antichrist. 1500. were apprehended at once in Calabria. Fox. p.
942. Ten thousand were slain in Paris in three days, in the bloody massacre.
Within less then five years, three hundredth faithful servants of Christ,
were burned to ashes in England. God be blessed for the happy change, and the
Lord in Of Romanists.
mercy deliver his Church from such Marian times.

Thus, as the Apostle spoke of the servants of Christ in former times, they
were tried with mockings and scourgings: moreover by bonds and imprisonment:
they were stoned, hewn asunder, tempted, they were slain with the sword: whom
the world was not worthy of, Hebr. 11. 37. so have the true worshippers of God
been handled in these latter times. And whereas they could not overcome by
subtlety and sophistry, they have tried them by force and cruelty, as Hierome
says in the Tallbu* institutus es disciplinis, vt cui respo^dere non po^eris,
caput auferas, and linguam quae tacere non potest, seces? Apolog. 3. ad Ruff.
like case; Are you sowell taught, that, whom you can not answer, you will
take off his head, and cut out his tongue that will not hold his peace? So did
Fulvia to Cicero, and Herod to John. And thus did the Papists deal with the
learned Martyrs: whom they could not conquer by Scripture, they thought to
subdue by torture: they persecuted them with fire and sword, whom they could
not conquer by the word. Much like are these Romanists to their forefathers the
old bloody Romans, whose measure they fulfill.

Seneca reports, that L. Scylla commanded M. Marius legs to be broken, Of
Romanists.
his eyes to be pulled out, his hands to be cut off, and so tormented him by
peecemeale, as some of the Martyrs were handled. Lib. 3. de Ira.
Caius Caesar used this torment, to stop their mouths with sponges, and pieces
cut off from their garments, whom he cruelly put to death: even as the popish
Romanists boared through the tongues of the Martyrs, and thrust balls of y^on
into their mouths, and of some they cut out their tongues, that they should
not complain of their cruelty. Volesus the proconsull of Asia, under Augustus
Caesar, having in one day beheaded 300. walked ^en l. 2. de Ira.
among the dead bodies, vaunting himself with these words, Rem vere regiam, O
kingly act! The like cruel part, if not worse, was showed by the Romanists in
Calabria Ann. 1560. when 88. Martyrs in one day had their throats cut. The
manner whereof Fox. p. 942.
was this. They being all shut up in one house together as in a fold, the
hangman took them out one by one, and so dispatched them: going from one to an
other with the bloody knife in his mouth, and a bloody muffler in his hand,
with his hands up to the ellboes in goare blood. Did not this cruel wretch
think also in his mind, that he had done a princely act? Of Romanists.
Such have been, and yet is, the cruelty of the popish Roman Church, whereby
we may certainly discern that they are not guided by the spirit of God: for,
the fruits of the spirit are meekness, gentleness, peace, Gal. 5. 22. These
beastly cruel bloodsuckers show themselves to be the right members of
Antichrist, and the brood of Romulus that laid the foundation of Rome in the
blood of Remus his brother. Neither are we to look for better entertainment,
or other measure at their hands. For one of their own country men that best
knew the bloody disposition of the Romanists, Hoc inter caetera pessimum habet
crudelitas, perseverandum est: nec ad meliora patet regressus: scelera
sceleribus tuenda sunt. Sen. l. 1. de clem^n.
has thus described their nature: This bad quality has cruelty among the
rest, they must hold out: and hardly return they to a better mind: for
wickedness must be defended with wickedness.

God grant his faithful servants patience, that suffer under their cruel
hand, and to his Church in England continue this favor, that as we have shaken
off their tyrannical yoke, so we may never be brought under the same again.
Amen. So be it. Lord Jesus.

But, because the Romanists do falsely object against the Protestants, their
extreme cruelty executed upon the Popes Feverdentius re^elled.
Catholics, for stopping of their slanderous mouth, I will briefly set down
the truth herein.

A certain brawling friar of Paris, namely Feverdentius, has stepped forth of
late, opening his lying mouth wide, against the proceeding of the Protestants
in France especially and England. Concerning France he says, that the whole
nation did abound with blood, their Churches made stables, or burned to ashes,
their fields wasted, their rivers ran with blood: atque hi, novi evangelij,
fructus: and these are Dial. 1. p. 7.
the fruits, says he, of the new gospel. And, of troubles in England moved
against Catholics, he is not ashamed thus impudently to write: that they are
drawn to come to hear sermons; if they refuse to come, they are imprisonned,
whipped, hanged, racked, bowelled, their members quartered and boiled, and cast
forth to be Dial. 1. p. 15.
eaten of fowls, beasts, and dogs, because they desire to observe the
religion received from their fathers.

Would any man think, that they were so shameless, as to publish such wicked
slanders and impudent lies, to the view of the world?

This lying friar has most slanderously Feverdentius refuted.
charged the protestants, with the civil wars and troubles of France, with
defiling of the temples, shedding of blood, laying wast the country: whereas
it is most notoriously known, that the Papists were the only causes of all
these mischeifes. Did not Miniers that cruel tyrant, when he had taken the
town of Cabrieis by treachery, Fox p. 932 ex histor. Gallica.
enter into the Church, and cause men, women, and children, that were fled
thither for succor, to be cruelly slain? Did not the Duke of Guise at
Vassiacum do the like, causing his soldiers to enter ex Insti. Go^^ler.
the Church, and with a great slaughter put them all to the sword?

Again, is it not notoriously known, that in that treacherous massacre in
France, An. 1572. there were in Paris, Lions, Orleance, Rhoane, and other
cities, within one month, above thirty thousand Protestants slain, in so
much that the channels in the streets ran with blood? how then are they not
past all shame to object these things, and lay them to the charge of the
Protestants? And what other cause is there of the treacherous practices of some
french papists against their now most worthy king, both before time, and now
of late, (but that God in his mercy has prevented Feverdentius ^^futed.
their mischeifes) but, for that his majesty pitying the desolation and spoil
of so famous a kingdom, has in his wisdom appeased the civil wars and
troubles there, to the great rejoicing of all that love their country. Who
then were the first authors of those domestical tumults, but they who secretly
work to have them renewed, and the honorable edict of pacification to be
dissolved? Wherefore, I may say here, to this lying friar, as S. Augustine Non
invenire^ quo modo te refellerem, nisi vt, aut iocantem riderem, aut
insaniente^ dolerem: sed quia te iocari non credo, vides quid restac. l. 2. c.
38.
said to Petilian the Donatist: If thou should say unto me, that I am
Petilian, how could I tell to refute thee, but either to deride thy scoffing,
or bewail thy madness? but because I think you jest not, you know what
follows. See this shameless friar in charging the protestants with the
persecution in France, has coined as impudent a lie, as if he should face me
down that write this, to be lying Feuerdentius; which if he should do, he
might be truly judged to be out of his wits: and so, I think he was possessed
with a spirit of frenzy and madness, when he set his mouth and pen to utter
this slander.

Now concerning the affairs of the state in England, this frantic
Franciscan has couched many lies and untruths together. Feverdentius refuted.
1. that Catholics are drawn and forced to come to Church. 2. that they
Protrahunt ad conciones.
are put to death, for refusing to come to Church; for simple recusancie is
fined only with a pecuniarie monthly mulct, they are not otherwise violently
drawn to the exercises of religion, much less suffer death for it. 3. that
the body of any are cast out to beasts and dogs, is a great untruth. But, it
is most true that once a popish bishop in Hungary, did cause a Ex tomo 2.
convival. ^erm. Johan. Gast.
godly minister, hanged round with hares, geese, hens, to be torn in pieces,
and woorried of dogs. 4. As untrue it is that inaudira supplicia* etc. that
punishments never heard of are inflicted upon Catholics. For it has been the
ancient and most deserved punishment for traitors, by the law of this land,
to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. 5. That any pope-catholiks are put to
death, for keeping the ancient religion of their Fathers, is a great
blasphemy of our state, as now shall be showed for the satisfaction of all.

The Romanists suffer not death for religion, but for rebellion, not for their
profession, but for their practicing against the state, not for popery but for
treachery, it may diversely appear. 1. Because there Feuerdentius refuted.
are so many thousand known papists in the land, and yet few of them but such
as are seditious and treacherous, are capitally punished. 2. Heretics that do
swerve from the faith, are by the law adjudged to the fire: but, no papists
have yet felt that heat, as protestants did, who were consumed with the flames
of fire, above 300. in less then five years space. 3. None of these
traitorous papists that have suffered for their demerits, were indicted,
arraigned, examined, or condemned for any article of faith, as it may appear
in the several proceedings against them. 4. There is no law in England, to put
any papist to death for his conscience: and without law our state punishes
none.

It will be objected, that the act which makes the coming in of the Jesuits
and Seminary priests, treason, does for their profession condemn them. I
answer: that this is altogether untrue: 1. because that this act was but
lately made in comparison of the whole time of Her Majesty's reign hitherto,
about Anno regni 27. when it was found by experience, that the end of their
coming over into England, was to pervert the obedience of the subject, and to
contriue most unnatural For religion in England.
conspiracies against our most gracious Sovereign. Then was it high time to
restrain them by law. 2. If it be objected that though some of them have
conspired against the prince, yet all of them do not so: I answer, that they
being birds all of a feather, and receiving their direction from the Romish
chair of pestilence, are all to be feared, though perhaps not all alike
employed, yet they are all dangerous, being devoted to execute the Popes will,
who is a professed enemy to our state. 3. Their very purpose to alienate the
subjects from due obedience, and to reconcile them to a foreign potentate, is,
and has always bin adjudged by the laws of this land, a treasonable act: as
to be adhrent or ayding to the kings enemies, such as the pope is, was made
treason, An. Edwardi. 3. 25. c. 2. But, it cannot be denied that all Jesuits
and Seminaries are adhaerent and aiding to the Popes proceeding, who is the
chief adversary to our state. 4. All laws (...) civil and canon have
condemned all practices and conspiracies against the state. Arcadius made this
law, that a conspiracy against the counselors of the prince (much more
against the prince himself) though it take not effect, is to be punished with
For religion in England.
the sword: which law is rehearsed in the par. 2. c. 6. q. 1. can. 22.
decrees. par. 2. c. 11. q. 1. can. 31.
Fabian decreed, that he which did lie in wait against the Bishop, should be
committed to prison. By the council of Tolet. 12. c. 1.
Toletane, he is anathematized which did seek any occasion to hurt the prince.
He is by the Constant. council. sest. 15.
Canons adjudged an heretic that did seek privily to take away the life,
though of a tyrant. This point then, I trust is sufficiently cleared, that not
the protestants, but the papists are the cruel persecutors of these days, and
the spillers of the blood of the Saints, so that by their barbarous cruelty,
and insatiable blood thirstinesse, it is no hard matter to judge of their
religion, what it is, and of themselves, by what spirit they are led.

Now I proceed to the second cognizance and Antichristian badge, which is
treachery: for, where by open violence, they cannot make a way, they do
attempt by wicked conspiracy to effect their cruel desires: wherein they
follow the counsel and sentence of Lysander, whose saying this was, Ubi
Leonina pellis non sufficit, assuenda Vulpina: That where a Lions skin Plutar.
will not serve, a Foxes skin must eeke it out. To pass over the old
treacherous practices of Popes and popelings against The treacheri^*
kings and Emperors; Caxton. l. 7.
as how king John was poisoned by a monk of Swinstead; Gregory the seventh
hired a russian to murder Penno. card.
Henry the fourth. Many treasons and practices attempted by Gregory the ninth
against the Emperor Frederick the second. Henry the sixth Emperor poisoned
in receiving the sacrament Fox. p. 30^.
by one friar Bernard procured by Clemens Avent in annal. lib. 7.
the fifth. To let pass these and many other such wicked conspiracies contrived
in times past, I will descend to the memorable accidents of these days.

Was not the death of the prince of Auringe procured by the treachery of
papists? and the late king of France, Henry the third, by a dominican friar
most treacherously murdered? But no country has had greater experience of
popish seditious practices, then this nation of ours, nor yet any people bound
more to thank God, for the deliverance of their prince from so many dangers, as
we are. What shall I speak of Mortons conspiracy who was Pope Pius the fifths
agent to raise the rebellion of the North? of Saunders attempts in Ireland, of
Parry suborned by Gregory the thirteenth, of Arden, Soomerfield, Lopeze,
Babington, York, Williams, Their treachery.
Stanly, Squire? all which, with others, set a work by that beast of Rome with
his accomplices, have conspired the death of our Sovereign prince, as is
exta^t in our Chronicles. Yet God in his mercy has preserved his anointed,
and been a wall of fire unto her against al her enemies, and I trust shall
still be her protection, to be a comfort to his Church for his own glorious
name sake.

Are these then the Catholics of these days, and is this that holy father of
Rome, out of whose head such monstrous and hydeous practices are forged? and
call ye this (ye papists) the holy Catholic Roman faith, that brings forth
such ungodly fruits? Even old heathenish Rome would have been ashamed of such
dealings. They might have remembered, how C. Fabricius, when Pyrrhus physician
sent him word by a letter, that he would, if he thought good, poyso^ the said
Pyrrhus that noble captain discovered the treason to Pyrrhus, who caused his
physician to be hanged. This Fabricius had before refused great sums of gold
sent him from Pyrrhus, of whom Sen^ca thus writes, Eiusdem animi fuit, auro
non vinci, veneno non Epist. 120.
vincere: He showed the same mind, both not Their treachery.
to be overcome with gold, nor yet to overcome with poison. So unlike our
Romanists now, are to these ancient Romans. Fabricius would not accept of the
physicians offered service to poison his master: the popelings corrupted Lopeze
physician to the Queens household, with great sums to poison her Majesty. He
revealed a conspiracy against an enemy: the other do not only conceal, but
contriue conspiracies against the prince. And he did this to a violent and
professed adversary, that with all hostility had invaded the confines of
Rome, and made a great slaughter of the Romans before; but, they have offered
this hard measure to a peaceable prince, that till she was most justly
provoked by their wrongs, offended none, but only defended her self and her
people. And, as this new generation of pretended Catholics and Christian
Romanists, has degenerated from the ancient Romes, yet being idolatrous
heathen; so herein they do far exceed the barbarous Mahumetans the Turks.
For it is a rare thing amongst them to hear of insurrections, mutins, or
rebellions, much less of any confederacy of co^iuration against the h^^ of
the prince.

These that hold of Peter and Paul, who, Their treachery.
they say, were founders of the Romish Church, how unlike are they unto them in
their profession and practice? Paul excused himself, because he had
unwittingly called the high priest, painted wall, Act. 27. but Papists do
justify, not their reuilings only, but rebellions against the highest powers
on earth. Peter says, Submit your selves to all manner of ordinance of man,
for the Lords sake, as to Kings, to superiors, and unto other governors, 1.
Pet. 3. 13, 14. but these Petrians follow not Peter's steps, but in stead of
submitting, seek to subdue Princes. Much unlike be they to David, whose heart
smote him, because he had cut off the lap of Saul's garment: but their heart
is not touched, for seeking to cut off the life of Princes. So that as Agis
made answer to an evil man, asking, Quis Spartanorum, optimus, Who was the
best of the Plutar. Apoth.
Spartans? answered, Qui tui dissimillimus: he that is vnlikest thee: even so
it may be answered concerning the Romanists, that he is the best Catholic that
is most unlike them.

But now whereas the Popes champions do fail in these disloyal and
traiterous enterprises, there is a third engine which they put in ure, and that
is Flattery The flattery ^^ fair shows of Romanists.
and hypocrisy, when under the pretense of friendship and profession of
obedience, they work mischief. Like as Ioab making show of friendship to
Abner, taking him aside, as if he would speak with him peaceably, smote him
that he died. 2. Sam. 3. 27. And as Ismael served Gedaliah, who eating bread
with him as his friend, rose up and slew him. Ier. 41. 1. As Judas betrayed our
Savior with a kiss; so, this is a new popish trick, that where neither open
violence and tyranny prevails, nor secret practicing and unfaithful
treachery takes place, there by deceitful subtlety they think to make a
way. Thus was that great slaughter of Protestants in France, contrived Ann.
1572. under pretense of solemnizing the marriage between the king of Navarre,
and the king of France his sister. Thus the Admiral with a great sort of most
worthy men beside, whom they could not overcome by force, were overthrown by
fair promises, and a vain hope and expectation of peace: that, like as
Absalo^s sheep shearing feast was made a snare, to intrappe his brother Amnon,
2. Sam. 13. 29. so this marriage feast and princely solemnitic, was but a stale
to draw the Protestants into their nets. And as Annibal is reported to have
said thus of the Roman captains Fabius and Marcellus, whereof the one
wrought by policy, the other by force: Magis se a non pugnante Fabio, quam a
pugnante Marcello, sibi metuere: Plutar. apoth.
that he was more afraid of Fabius not fighting, then of Marcellus fighting: So
the sequel of this enterprise showed, that the Papists are more to be feared
feasting then fighting in the field. The like device has been set afoote in
England, when as, to the intent to make her Majesty and the Counsel secure in
that behalf, they set forth a book, declaring it to be Fulk. in epist. Jude,
v. 8.
unlawful to conspire her Highness death, which yet notwithstanding since the
coming forth of that book, has been often attempted, as all the world
knows, but to their shame and confusion, thanks be given to God. And now of
late there is broken forth a fire of dissension kindled between the Seminary
priests and Jesuits (or Iebusites, if you please, as our learned countriman
calls them, some other Esauits, D. Sutliff^.
some Suits, all fitter names then that they would be called by: if you will
Iudasites, for they imitate Judas, and not Jesus) wherein the priest does
deeply charge the other sect, as principal or accessarie in the conspiracies
attempted formerly against her Majesty, and do clear themselves as good and
faithful subjects. The scope of which their invention is this, that they may
obtain greater liberty, and so may corrupt and pervert the subject more
surely; in that they protest they are good subjects, and seem to wish well to
the State, and condemn the others as turbulent practisers against it. We
mislike not the words, but we fear their deeds, as Augustine well says, Non
accuso verba, tanquam vasa preciosa, sed vinum quod illis propinatur ab
ebriosis doctoribus. I accuse not the words, as precious vessels, but the wine
that in them is offered to us, by these drunken teachers. Now seeing I am
fallen into mention of this matter, I will briefly lay open the deceit, that is
like to mask and lie hid under the vizzard of this dissension. True it is,
that these popish sectaries, priests and Iebusites, the Pharisees and Sadduces
of these days, are bitterly fallen out among themselves; neither is it a
formal or devised contention, as some have imagined, but a very material and
real division among them: kindled secretly a long time before it brake forth
unto these open flames.

Which being espied by the vigilant eye of some worthy persons, was suffered
to flame forth, as it does, that other men seeing the same might keep it from
their own houses, though it burn a while where it began. And here, by the
way, I can not pass over with silence some forward affections, that take upon
them to censure the proceedings of the State herein: as though it were not safe
that such dangerous stuff as the Quodlibets and other books contain, should
not be published. Wherein (as to me it seems) they take a preposterous
course. For the Magistrate is not to give a reason of his doings The secrets of
Magistrates not curiously to be searched.
to every one: neither should we rashly enter into their secrets. The wise man
says, The heaven in height, and the earth in deepenes, and the Kings heart,
can no man search out. Prou. 25. 3. So that the counsel of the magistrate is
as a great depth, that is not by every one to be sounded. It is said, that
while Alexander was reading a letter of secrets, he suffered his friend
Ephestion Plutar. apoth.
to look on, but when he had done, with his ring he sealed his lips, by that
ceremony enioyning him silence And Ecclesiasticus says, If thou have heard a
word, let it die with thee, it will not burst thee. chapter 19. v. 10. So should we
neither be inquisitiue to know, nor knowing, discover the secrets of State:
but, as the Apostle bids, we should pray for Kings and magistrates, that God
would direct their counsels; not pray or talk our pleasure of them, to
prejudice their proceedings. Wherefore, till such time as it shall seem good
to the State, to have those popish books more fully answered, I will set down
some aduertisments for the satisfaction of the reader concerning the foresaid
dissentions.

1. Whereas the Priests do lay all the blame upon their fellow Jesuits as
authors Dissension between priests and Jesuits.
and contriuers of all the treacherous plots against her Majesty and the
state, they can not justify themselves. For it is certain that priests as well
as Jesuits, have had their hand in many of the said conspiracies. Morton,
Allin, Hall, Ballard, Gifford, were priests and not Jesuits. The first, the
instrument of the commotion in the North: the second, a continual practiser
against the State: the third, incited Arden and Somerfield: the fourth,
Babington and his fellows: the last, yet alive, provoked Savadge, Williams,
York, to take in hand their wretched enterprise. It may be that all priests
are not treacherously bent, but yet we see, they can not clear every one of
their profession. They have been both very dangerous and are so to be held
still. Me think then, their fellows may very well say unto them, as Jerome
said to Ruffinus, though the case be not alike, Quid vulneribus tuis prodest,
si ego fuero vulneratus? an solacium percussi est atnicum socium videre
morientem? What does it help thy wounds, if I be wounded? Is it a comfort to
him that is smitten to see his friend die with him? Secondly, they affirm and
maintain this position, that notwithstanding they do depend upon the pope for
their faith, yet they may be and are good subjects to the Queens highness:
which is a very false ground. 1. Because they gave the pope preheminencie
before the prince, and authority to excommunicate. 2. They allow appeals to
be made to Rome, which is contrary to the laws of this land. 3. They make the
pope chief in all spiritual causes; and so do maime the office of a prince.
4. They count all these martyrs, which have been executed for treason, which
is a great slander to the state. 5. They commend Cardinal Alle^, D. Gifford
with others, which were known to be sworn enemies to the state. 6. They give
aid and maintenance to the Seminaries, and society of Iudasites, Jesuits I
would say, which is no good subjects part to foster enemies to their country.
Wherefore I conclude upon these reasons, that a professed and absolute papist,
priest, Jesuit, pope catholic, lay, regular or secular, can be no good
subject, though he may be no traitor. And if the Queen had no better subjects
then such, her majesty were ill bestead. And if the common wealth had no
better shield to defend it self, it might deceive them, as Brasidas the
Lacedemonian being wounded through his shield said, Prodente me clypeo
vulneratus: I was wounded, Plutarch.
my shield betraying me.

Thirdly, whereas a question is moved by the popish priests, which of them,
or the other faction are likest to the puritans, and it is resolved, that the
sect of the Jesuits comes nearer unto them, though not so absurd in doctrine,
nor yet so malicious against either Church or common wealth: neither yet are
they such gross heads, but much finer wits then the puritans: for these are
their own words. Let it here be considered, that if by the name of puritans,
they did understand such buisie factious heads, as being malcontents, of a
covetous and greedy mind, seek the havoc and spoil of the Church, not
indeed, nor in truth, touched with any conscience of religion, such as Martin
Mareprelate might seem to be, we would not greatly stand with them for this
comparison. For such a puritan may prove a good stock to graffe a papist in,
as that vile Hacket that justly suffered for his villainies, and did leap, as it
is reported, out of such a puritans skin into a papists hide. But whereas
under this scandalous name of puritans, they do gall and wound the credit
Puritans better subjects then papists.
of many worthy ministers of the Gospel as Calvin, Beza, and the preachers of
Scotland, and diverse amongst us, who otherwise, setting aside their opinion of
some external vsages of the Church, are very profitable laborers, and most
loyal subjects: between these and the best learned of the papists, for true
religion and sound divinity, and faithful obedience, and love to their
prince, there is no comparison at all. First, these whom they vpbraid with the
name of puritans, do hold soundly all points of religion, and articles of the
protestants faith, throughout, excepting only concerning external matters of
discipline and ceremonies, which belong rather to the policy of the Church,
then to faith and doctrine. And therefore, they admitting of no absurd point of
popery, are by many degrees to be preferred, and I doubt not, but are better
liked of the state, 2. Those preachers and ministers of the Gospel, never yet
attempted any thing against the life of their prince, as priests and Jesuits
have done; neither (do I trust) shall it ever be seen. They never conspired
the death of Queen Marie, as these have done of Queen Elizabeth. Wherefore it
is a great sla^der of the^ to say, they seek to pull down kings and princes.
3. These admit of no foreign potentate to have power in matters
ecclesiastical as the popish priests do, wherein they curb the authority of
princes. 4. They persuade to obedience to their prince, and thankfulness to
God, for the purity of religion professed among them. The other creep in
corners to seduce and pervert the subjects from the faith, and so consequently
from due obedience to their prince. 5. They communicate with the assemblies of
the Church, in the word, prayers, and Sacraments: the Romanists refuse so to
do, and dissuade whom they may from our Church assemblies. 6. They both in
their public and private prayers, do lift up their hands for the life of our
Sovereign, and the continuance of her state; of popish priests it is to be
doubted. For, whom the pope their head curses, how dare they bless? and
whom he would have cut off, is it like they desire to continue? 7. They have
been means to detect the conspiracy of the common adversary, and are ready
with all their power to do it: popish priests use not to reveal but to
conceal them. 8. They are bound by oath to acknoweledge the princes supreme
authority in all causes, and to renounce all foreign jurisdiction: popish
priests will take no such oath. 9. They acknowledge a Church here in England,
and themselves to be members of it; the popes priests count us no Church, but
Gifford praefa. 2, impudently and traitorously says, that in England, haerefis
est regio diademat^ ornat^.
hold all protestants heretics, and consequently, her Majesty (under whose
authority, we profess the Gospel, which they call heresy) in that number,
and out of the Church. 10. Those whom they call puritan ministers, have both
by preaching and writing, impugned the common adversary, as much as any, and
therein have done God good service in his Church. And this is the cause, if the
truth were known, why popish priests have such a spite at them, because they
stand so much in their way, staying the spreading of their infection, by the
contrary exposition of sound doctrine. And as for grossum caput and his
fellow, let them seek him among themselves. I doubt not, but they, whom they
most scorn of the protestants, are able to set forth from them those, which
either by writing or conference shall encounter the proudest priest or
Iebusite. But in truth we disdain this comparison, that the best popish priest
should match with the worst protestant preacher, either for doctrine or
obedience to his prince. Let them, the priests and the Iebusites measure
themselves with themselves, and compare themselves with themselves, as the
Apostle says of the false teachers of Corinth; 2. Cor. 10. 12. We dare not
make our selves of the number, nor compare our selves with them. But, as Jerome
says of the dialogue of Origin and Valentinian, so we of this contention
between these Apolog 2. ad. verse. Ruffin.
popelings, In quo duos Andabatas inter se digladia^tes spectasse mihi videor:
Me thought I see two blind sword-plaiers play together. The fourth and last
consideration is the scope and end of these popish books, which is to insinuate
themselves to the State, and to persuade a toleration of religion, which A
toleration of popery dangerous.
I trust, they shall never obtain, neither is it convenient they should upon
these reasons.

1. It were not for her majesty's safety; for if they have practiced so
against her Highness person, in the time of their restraint, what will they
do having further liberty?

2. It were not for her Majesty's honor, that having held a constant course in
religion these 44. years, should in her sacred old age, listen to any such
motion.

3. It would be an offense to all other protestant princes, that the famous
church and common wealth of England should give such an example.

4. It would breed a confusion and disquietnes in the land, and tend to the
overthrow and abrogation of diverse profitable laws already made against
popish practices and the mass.

5. It would be an offense to God, that a Christian prince should suffer
idolaters, such as Romanists are, to exercise their idolatrous worship freely.
Iaacob would not suffer it to be done in his house, but buried all the images
under an oak, Genesis 35. 5. much less is it to be permitted in a kingdom. And
Eliah well said, 1. Kings, 18. 21. How long will ye halt between two opinions?
if the Lord be God follow him: but if Baal be, then go after him. So to admit
two contrary religions, were to halt between two opinions.

6. The pope in none of his territories nor where he has absolute
jurisdiction, does grant any liberty to protestants, but tolerateth rather
Jews and Turks: neither is it reason that his popelings should receive any
such toleration.

7. It would be a means to obdurate and harden papists in their superstition,
whereas I trust, there may be hope of the^, so many as God shall call to
return to the Gospel.

8. Her Majesty has the example of the good kings of Judah, for her warrant:
they are commended which did expel all contrary worshipps; as Asa because he
brake down the altars and images of strange Gods, 2. Chro. 14. 3. Iehosaphat
for remoouing the high places and groves, 2. Chro. 17. 6. Josias for putting
down the Chemarims that were idolatrous priests, 2. King. 23. 5. Whereas the
scripture notes such kings as did not take away the high places, as Iehoash,
2. King. 12. 3. and Azariah, 2. Kings. 15. 4.

9. Her Highness has a president from virtuous and blessed prince Edward 6. her
Majesty's brother, who notwithstanding the request of Charles the Emperor, and
the instance of Bishop Cranmer, and B. Ridley, would not consent to grant to
his sister the lady Marie, to have mass in her house. Fox. p. 1295. edition
1583.

10. Lastly, I will propound the most worthy example of the Emperor
Valentinian, that when the city of Rome sent Ambros. in obi^^^ Valentin.
unto him to restore the rytes of the temples of the idols, and all the
consistory being Christians persuaded thereunto: the Emperor alone, being a
young man, gainsaid them, alleging the example of his brother Gratian; Quod
pius frater eripuit, quo modo a me putatis esse reddendum, cum in co relligio
laedatur, and frater: a quo se nollet pietate superari? How can I restore that
which my brother took away? for both religion should receive hurt, and my
brother, of whom he would not be overcome in religion. Postulet parens Roma
alia quaecunque desideret: Let my mother, says he, ask any thing else that
she please: but, in this request he would not yield. The like constancy and
firm resolution, thanks be to God, has well appeared in her Majesty. And so
I conclude with that saying of Ambrose to Valentinian, with whom certain
dealt to have their altars restored: Sed hac siiam sublata non essent,
auferenda tuo imperio comprobarem. Epist. 30. ad Valentinian.
But, if they were not already taken away, I would prove that they ought to
be removed by your authority: much less being now abolished, is it fit to
have them restored.

And to these Romanists, sacrificing priests, and others, I wish that either
they would return home again to us, and that God would give them repentance,
that they may know the truth, and that they come to amendment out of the snare
of the devil, of whom they are taken at his will, ^ S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 2.
26. or, if they be settled and frozen in their dregs, that they would keep them
where they are, or return to the Pope from whence they come, and trouble no
more the peace of our Church. And as Flaminius said to the Achiui, which
invaded their neighbors, Ne Plutar. Romans apotheg.
instar testudinum, prolato extra testam capite, se periculo exponerent: least
like the torteyse, they thrusting their head beyond the shell, should offer
themselves to danger.

CERTAIN ADuertisments to the Reader.
FIrst, in the unfolding and expounding this Epistle, I have throughout
observed this course. 1. To note the doctrine. 2. Then follows the probation
by testimony of Scripture. 3. Then the demonstration by example. 4. After
that, the illustration or exornation by some similitude or comparison, likewise
out of the Scripture. 5. Next the Aitiologia or confirmation by declaring the
cause or reason. 6. Lastly, is adjoined the application.

Secondly, where the Apostle shows a double use of the Scripture, to improoue
error of doctrine, and to correct corruption of life, 2. Tim. 3. 16. I have
throughout so applied every doctrine, both to refute some error of popery, and
to reprove some faults of manners.

Thirdly, the latter part I have enlarged more then the former, not then
purposing at the beginning, to make these private exercises common. But since,
seeing the restless attempts, and subtle practices of the adversaries, that
cease not to disperse the paultrie pa^phlets, and lying libels: I thought good
speedily to address somewhat against sturbridge, by way of opposition, as
other of our learned brethren have done: that as I have travailed formerly in
setting down the controversies of religion, so I would assay to profit the
Church in this kind. Wherein, if my travail be accepted, I may be encouraged
to proceed. So I commend you to the grace of God, who both give us wisdom to
discern the truth, and strongly with constancy to hold the same to the end.

Amen.
THE CATHOLICON, OVT OF THE Catholic epistle of Jude, consisting of certain
Lectures upon the said epistle.
The first lecture.
BEfore I come to handle this epistle, four things I will briefly touch, the
author, the occasion, the authority of this epistle, the matter, argument, and
parts thereof.

1. The author, is Jude the Apostle, called here the brother of lames: there
are two called James, one the brother of John which was beheaded by Herod, Act.
12. 20. the sons of Zebedeus, Mark. 3. 17. the other was James the younger,
the son of Alpheus, Math. 10. 3. there were of them four brethren, James,
Ioses, Simon, Jude: Math. 13. 55. their mother was Marie, Math. 27. 56. the
wife of Cleophas, John 19. 25. who was also called Alpheus, and the sister of
Marie: there were two Apostles of this name; as there were two Simons, Simon
Peter, and Simon Cananeus: two James, one of Zebedeus, the other of Alpheus: so
two Judas, one Iscariot, which betrayed Christ, the other the brother of James:
and three of these brethren, James, Judas, Simon were Apostles.

2. The occasion was this, Jude remaining after most of the Apostles, until
the time of Domitian, some 50. years after Christ, and seeing the decay of
religion and manners, that some making a show of faith, yet gave themselves to
all voluptuous living, such as were the Nicolaitans mentioned, Apoc. 2. 6. the
Apostle takes occasion to write this epistle against such carnal professors,
admonishing the brethren to take heed of such.

3. Some of the authority of this epistle have seemed to doubt: both because
it is compiled out of S. Peter his second epistle, second chapter: and for that
mention is made of obscure and hid matters, not mentioned in Scripture; as of
the body of Moses, v. 9. of the prophecy of Henock. v. 14. For answer
whereunto, we say first, for one Apostle to follow another in their writings
does no more derogate from them, then for one prophet to follow another: as
the 36. and 37. chapters of I say are word for word the same with the 18. and
19. chapters of the second of the Kings: and in diverse other places, who
lists to observe, shall find the latter prophets do borrowe of the former:
secondly, these writings are now perished, which the Apostle cites, or he had
them by some approved tradition, which he allowed, as he was directed by the
spirit, as Saint Paul makes mention of Iannes and I ambres, 2. Tim. 3. 8. and
like mention is made of the book of Iaser, Iud. 10. 13. and Number. 21. 14. there
is mentioned the book of the battles of the Lord.

4. The parts of this epistle are four, 1. the title or inscriptio^, v. 1. 2.
the proposition containing the matter of the whole epistle, v. 2. 3. the
amplification, which comprehends a description both of the sins of these
carnal professors, and of their judgments, unto verse. 17. 4. The conclusion
containing a vehement exhortation to careful circumspection, and heed taking:
from v. 17. to the end.

Verse. 1. Jude the servant of Jesus:] The inscription contains three things;
the person saluting, the person saluted, the salutation in self, v. 2.

Jude, servant:] he was also called one of Christ's brethren after the flesh,
Math. 13. Doctrine, 1. Servant of Christ, most honorable title.
yet he counts this the most honorable title of all to be Christ's servant.

Probation: 1. Cor. 7. 23. It is a most excellent freedom to be the Lords
servant: 1. Tim. 1. 12. He put me in his service.

Demonstrat. Romans 1. 1. 2. Pet. 1. 1. Paul and Peter first name themselves
servants, then Apostles: so that the name of Servant is more excellent: and
James which is called the Lords brother, Galath, 1. 19. yet leaves that name,
and calls himself the Servant of Christ: Iam, 1. 1. The Berheans entered into
the service of Christ are counted honorable. Act. 17. 11.

Exornat: If it were such an excellent privilege to be a subject to Caesar, a
Roman, Act, 22. 25. much more to be servant to Christ.

Reasons: 1. In regard of our Masters high protection, Heb. 13. 5. He will
never leave nor forsake us. 2. In regard of his provision, Luke 15. 17. They
have bread enough: that is, God provides all necessary things for his. 3. In
regard of the great reward of Gods service, Mat. 19. 28.

Use: 1. We lay open the hypocrisy of the pope who calls himself a servant
Error. 1.
of servants, yet takes upon him to be a king of kings: who professing
himself a servant, does his own will and not his masters, like unto that evil
servant, which smites his fellows, Mat. 24. 48. Secondly, we are taught, that
every man in his place should seek to do some acceptable service unto Christ,
in setting forth his truth: that no man be an unprofitable member, as they are
which spend their time in riot and wantonness.

Called and sanctified] Here are set down three parts of our justification and
incorporation Doctrine 2.
into Jesus Christ, vocation by God the father, sanctification by the holy
Ghost, preservation by Christ: so that it is in vain to be called first,
unless we be sanctified, and to be sanctified unless we be kept and
preserved, not to loose our sanctification.

Doctrine: that it is in vain to be called, that is, stirred and moved to
receive the faith, unless we be sanctified.

Probat: Math: 20. 16. Many are called but few are chosen, that is, truly
sanctified: Iam. 1. 14. it avails not to be so called to the faith.

Demonst: Mark. 6. 20. Herod seemed to be called and somewhat in wardly touched,
but he was not sanctified; he would not forsake his sweet sin of incest in
keeping his brothers wife. Simon Magus was baptized, and so called, Act. 8. but
he was not sanctified to leave his gaineful sin of covetousness.

Exornat: Like as the Israelites were called out of Egypt into the wilderness,
but there they murmured against God, and did not sanctify him in his works.

Confirmat: I am. 1. 22. Deceiving your own selves: that is, they think it
enough to hear the word only: another cause is forgetfulness, v. 24. The
love of the world and their own pleasure puts from them the desire of
sanctification.

Use: 1. The papists slander us, that say, we preaching faith destroy good
works: Error 2.
whereas we affirm with the Apostle, that our calling is fruitless without
sanctification. 2. Let no man content himself to come to hear the word, but
labor to amend your lives, your dru^kennes, extortio^.

Reserued] or preserved by or to Christ, that is, that he should keep and
continue them in their holy profession.

Doctrine: That they which are given unto Doctrine. 3.
Christ, and truly called, shall be preserved Faith never lost.
to the end, Phil. 1. 6.

Testim: 1. Pet. 1. 5. which are kept by the power of God through faith.

Exampl: 2. Tim. 4. 18. God will deliver me from every evil work, and
preserve me to his kingdom. Like as Zachar. 4. 9. Zerubbabel did both lay the
foundation of the temple and finish the work, so God will establish and make
perfect the work begun in us: Psalm. 68. 28.

Reason: The cause of this continuance and perseverance is not in our selves,
because we are subject to mutabilitie, and are ready to fall like water, as
Reuben that lost his birthright, Genesis 49. 5. but the cause is in Christ that
holds us: Ioh. 6. 39.

Use: 1. Against the papists that say, faith Error. 3.
faith may be lost, and that a man may fall away from his election, for Christ
loses nothing that is his, and Gods word and decree is immutable: Heb. 6. 2.
That seeing many do fall away, as Demas did, 2. Tim. 4. that we pray
continually, that Jesus Christ may hold us.

Verse. 2. Mercy, peace, love be multiplied] Mercy from God the father in
forgiveness Doctr 4.
of sin, peace in Christ in feeling our conscience settled, love in the holy
Ghost, in being more and more assured of Gods love toward us.

Multiplied] doctrine: that we endeavor Assurance of salvation.
to increase in the graces of Gods spirit, and in inward feeling and assurance.

Probat: Phil. 1. 9. Coloss. 1. 10. The Apostle wishes that they may increase
and abound in all graces.

Demonst. 2. Cor. 1. 5. Saint Paul shows concerning himself, that as his
sufferings increased, so his consolation much more in Christ: such an one was
Mark, at the first weak and fearful, Act. 13. 39. but afterward strong and
profitable. 2. Tim. 4. 11. In this respect, Judge. 5. last verse, the righteous
are compared to the sun that still from his rising increases.

Reason. The cause of this increasing, 1. Cor. 15. 10. The grace of God in us
is not in vain, but makes us abound.

Use. 1. The papists are confuted, who think a man can not grow up to an
assurance Error. 4.
of salvation: seeing that the children of God may increase till they come to a
perfect growth in Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11. 2. They are reproved, that either loose
their first love, or increase not but continue in one state.

The second lecture.
v. 3. Here begins the second part of this epistle, wherein is propounded
the whole argument and matter; namely to exhort them to strive and contend for
the faith: wherein we have these four things to consider. 1. The cause, which
moved him to write; not only his own desires, but the present necessity. 2.
Whereof he writes; of the common salvation. 3. To what end; to exhort them to
strive for the faith. 4. A reason of this end: the faith, which was once
given: once for all, that they are not to expect a new faith, but it was given
once to continue for ever.

When I gave all diligence, etc* it was needful:] These two join together, as
the general and special causes of his writing: the general cause, is his
diligent desire to profit: the sepciall, this necessary occasion because of
seducers and false brethren.

Doctrine. That all which are called to Doctrine 1.
be dispensers of the word, should use all diligence in preaching of the same.

Probat. 2. Tim. 4. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season.
(...). that is, let him take all occasion fit or unfit, either in respect of
the time, or of the opinion of the people.

Demonst. Act. 20. 7. S. Paul continued the preaching till midnight: he taught
thorough every house, v. 20. at all seasons, v. 18. S. Peter, 2. Pet. 2. 15. I
will endeavor always, etc.

Exornat. 1. Cor. 4. 2. As stewards and disposers of their masters goods should
be faithful, so also Ministers, which are disposers of the secrets of God: and
as shepherds are diligent to know the state of the flock. Prou. 27. 23.

Confirmat. 1. Cor. 9. 16. Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me if I
preach not the gospel. Ezech. 33. 6. God will require his blood that perishes
at the watchmans hand, if he do not warn them.

Application. 1. The Papists hold, that the Scriptures are not necessary now,
no Error 5.
more then in the Patriarks time, who lived many hundred years without any
Scripture both before the flood and after. Ans. God did then teach them by
visions and revelations, and they had Prophets and Patriarks taught of God to
instruct them: but now, we have neither Prophets nor Apostles, and revelations
and visions are ceased, so that the Scripture and written word of God are now
most necessary: as here the Apostle says, (...), necesse habui, or it was
needful for me to write unto you.

2. Idle pastors and ministers are reproved, who use not this diligence to
take all occasions to instruct their people, who if they loved Christ, would
feed his flock. Ioh. 21. 16.


3. As the pastors should use all diligence to teach, so the people should be
as forward and diligent to hear: Swift to hear, slow to speak, Iam. 1. 19.
But now contrariwise, they are swift to speak, and to open their mouths
against the Ministers of God, but exceeding dull and slow to hear Gods word:
take heed also of itching ears, 2. Tim. 4. 3. Some are like nice and dainty
persons, that take no meat, unless it be dressed after their own fanfie;
that like any water, better then out of their own fountain, Prove. 5. 15. and
other Ministers better, then their own.

Common saluation] Doctrine. That there 2. Doctrine. Christ died only for the
Elect.
is one common way unto salvation, whereby all, that are appointed thereunto,
shall be saved.

Probation. Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord, one faith, one baptism.

Demonstrat. Romans 4. 23. It was not written only for Abraham, etc. Abraham had
not a special way by himself to be saved, but the same common way with the
rest. 2. Tim. 4. 8. S. Paul looks for one common reward with all the
faithful.

Exorn. Like as they which live in one kingdom be they strangers, or homeborne
are subject to one law, Exodus 12. 49. so there is one law for all that
appertain to the kingdom of Christ.

Reason. Act. 10. 34, 35. God is no accepter of persons, to privilege some,
and not others, but he that fears God in every nation is accepted.

Applicat. 1. Against the Papists, who Error 6.
make this way too common, saying, that Christ died verily for all, Jews,
Turks, infidels, for the damned as well as the Elect. Whereas the Scripture
testifies, he died only for his sheep, Ioh. 10. 11. who is the Savior of
all men, but especially of them which believe, 1. Tim. 4. 10. then not of all
alike.

2. Against schismatikes, that make not this way common enough, but think they
only have found out the way to heaven, as being holier then the rest, as
those hypocrites in Isaias time, 65. 5. Which say, Stand apart, come not near
me, I am holier then thou.

3. If it be a common salvation, none are to be ignorant of it: the ignorance
then of the people is reproved, who seek not to know the means of their
salvation: who are like to the fool, whom the wise man speaks of, that
knows not the way into the city. Eccl. 10. 15.

That you strive for the faith, etc.] Doctr. Doctr. 3.

Every one must strive for the faith.


It is every man's part, according to his place and calling, to contend for the
defense and maintenance of the truth, and to resist the gainsayers.

Testim. Prou. 23. 23. Bu^e the truth, but sell it not: that is, by all means
compass the truth, but by no means by thy silence or negligence betray it.

Demonst. Christ is herein an example to us, Ioh. 18. 37. who came to be a
witness to the truth: and S. Paul, 2. Cor. 13. 8. We can do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth. This is also the commendation of the whole Church of
Ephesus, Apoc. 2. 2. because they sifted and examined the false Apostles, and
hated the Nicolaitans.

Exorn. Like as Genesis 26. 21. the servants of Isaac do strive with the
Philistims for the well of water, which they had found; so for the truth and
faith we ought to contend.

Confirmat. The reason is taken from the excellency and price of faith: men
will contend for things of great price; so, we must not neglect so great
salvation, which began to be preached by the Lord himself, Hebr. 2. 3. which
has been commended to us by the travail of the Apostles, by the blood of
Martyrs. David would not drink the water, which was compassed with the peril
of his captains lives, but powered it out to the Lord. 2. Sam. 23. so should
not we make light account of the truth, which have been defended by the
sufferings of so many martyrs.

Applicat. 1. Against the Papists, who say that the trial of faith depends
upon Error 7.
the judgment of the prelates of the Church, that the people must not skanne
their faith, but receive it at their hands. The Apostle here exhorts all the
brethren to strive for the faith: yea and the Berheans are commended, for
examining the Apostles doctrine according to the Scriptures, Act. 17. 11. 2.
This doctrine is against their carnal security, which make no account of the
defense of the truth, but stand indifferent to every religion, ready to be
carried about with every wind of doctrine. Ephesians. 4. 14.

Which was once given to the Saints] That is, once for all, not ever to be
changed or 4. Doctr.

Doctrine of faith unchangeable.


altered, and therefore this faith steadfast and unchangeable ought to be
striued and contented for.

Doctr. That the faith of Jesus Christ, preached first by the Lord, and
confirmed by the Apostles, as it is contained in their scriptures and writings,
ought to be kept inuiolably without change and alteration to the worlds end.
For the Apostle says, 1. Tim. 6. 14. I charge thee to keep this commandment
unrebukable to the appearing of the Lord Jesus. Therefore S. Paul reprooueth
the Galatians, for that they were so soon turned to an other Gospel, Gal. 1.
6. verse. 7. He calls the perverting of the Gospel of Christ, in corrupting of
the doctrine of justification by faith, with justification by law or by works,
an other Gospel.

Exorn. 1. Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay, Like as the house once
builded, and the foundation laid, whosoever will enterprise to lay a new
foundation will overthrow the whole building: like as the law of the Medes and
Persians altered not, Dan. 6. 8. so neither is the law of Christ changed:
therefore is it called a testament, which is ratified, when men are dead. Heb.
9. 17.

Confirmat. Heb. 13. 8. Jesus Christ, yesterday and to day, and the same for
ever. As Christ changes not, so neither his law nor Gospel.

Applicat. 1. Against the Papists, who in most of their articles have varied
from Error ^.
the doctrine of the Apostles: in their seven sacraments, in the real
presence, sacrifice of the mass, invocation of Saints, adoration of images,
purgatory, works, traditions, like as the Pharisees had corrupted the law of
God by their traditions, Math. 7. 9. They slander us, every year to invent a
new faith, but we maintain the old, ancient, Apostolic faith, we stand in
the old way. Ierem. 6. 16. 2. We see how dangerous a thing it is to depart from
the faith once received; as salt, that wants his savor can not be seasoned.
Math. 9. 50.

The third lecture.
Verse. 4. Certain men are crept in, etc.] 1. Doctrine.

Teaching in corners to be suspected.


Here begins the third part of this epistle, which contains a description
of the wicked hypocrites, that troubled and molested the Church, both as
touching their sin, and just punishment. This description is either general,
as in this verse; or in particular, from hence to the 17. v.

This verse contains three things, their hypocrisy, in that they are said to
creep in, to insinuate themselves under a pretense and show of holiness: 2. the
certentie of their punishment, being of old ordained, etc. 3. their impiety
both in their life, turning the grace of God into wantonness: and as touching
the faith, they deny the Lord Jesus Christ.

Creept in] Doctrine. It is the fashion of hypocrites closely and secretly to
insinuate themselves, to corrupt the faith.

Testim. 2. Tim. 4. 6. Of this sort are they, which creep into houses, etc.

Exempl. Math. 23. 14. Such were the Pharisees, which devoured widows houses
under color of long prayer: such corner creepers were Iaazaniah and his
company, that through a secret way in the wall committed idolatry. Ezech. 8.
8. 11.

Exornat. These are likened unto frogs, Apocal. 16. 13. that do craule
secretly, and creep into houses: and like the spider, that makes her web
even in kings palaces. Prou. 30. 28.

The reason of their working is alleged, Ioh. 3. 20. Because they hate the
light, neither will come to the light, least their deeds should be reproved.

Applicat. First against the Papists, and their Jesuits and Seminary priests,
that Error 9.
lurk in corners, and secretly corrupt the faith of many: by this do we know
that they are deceitful mockers.

Object. Protestants also in time of persecution did teach privily and in
secret places. Ans. The reason is not alike to preach faith secretly, when it
is openly impugned, and to persuade error privily, where the faith is
publicly preached: again that faith which Protestants taught privately, they
defended publicly, in dying for the same; but Papists die not for religion:
further, Protestants in their private teaching, though they persuaded faith,
yet they seduced not the hearts of the subject from the obedience of their
prince, nor sought to bring in a foreign power, as the Papists do.

2. For our instruction we are taught, to suspect all actions that are done in
corners: Ephesians. 5. 12. as drunkenness, adultery, theft, are works of darkness,
and to be avoided.

Of old. ordained] Doctrine. That God 2. Doctrine.

Decree of Election not changed.


from the beginning in his everlasting decree has appointed wicked and ungodly
men to everlasting damnation, as he has elected some in his mercy to be
heirs of salvation.

Testim. Prouer. 16. 4. The wicked are made for the evil day. Revel. 17. 8.
Whose names were not written in the book of life from the beginning.

Exampl. So Pharao was appointed of God to destruction, Exodus 9. 16. Judas also
is called the child of perdition, Ioh. 17. 12. who was thereunto appointed of
God.

Exornat. Like as in an house there are vessels of honor and vessels of
dishonor, 2. Timoth. 2. 20. as psalm. 60. 7. Judah is the lawgiuer, Moab a
washpot: as in the administration of civil affairs some are appointed to
honor, some live in dishonor: Pharaoh his butler was exalted, his baker was
hanged, Genesis 40. so some are elected of God, some ordained to danation.

Confirmat. 1. The moving cause is Gods gracious purpose, why some are
elected, some not elected. 2. The end is to Gods glory. Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. both
the efficient and final cause are expressed.

Applicat. First this doctrine is profitable to improoue the doctrine of the
Papists Error 10.
and Lutherans: one Pighius affirms, that God decreed nothing aforehand
before it began to be done, contrary to the Apostle here, who says, they
were of old ordained. The Lutherans affirm, that the decree of election may be
changed, and that one of the vessels of honor may be made a vessel of
dishonor, contrary to the Apostle, who calls the decree of God, a sure
foundation, 2. Tim. 2. 19. but if it might be changed, it is not sure.

2. This doctrine is profitable to instruction, that seeing none but the
ungodly are condemned, they should endeavor to lead a godly life, so shall
they be sure to escape the decree of reprobation: as Saint Paul says,
concerning the civil magistrate, Will thou be without fear of the power? do
well, Romans 13. 3. so will thou be without fear of reprobation? lead a godly
and upright life, and fear to do evil.

Turn the grace of God into wantonnesse] Doctrine. 3.

Papists turn the grace of God into wantonness.


Doctrine, That we should not abuse the law of liberty, and of the grace of
God unto licentiousness.

Testim. Against such Saint Paul writes, Romans 3. 8. that did evil, that good
might come thereof: that is, would commit sin, more freely, that Gods mercy
might more abound in remission of their sins. Saint Peter also would not have
us to make the law of liberty a cloak of maliciousness, 1. Pet. 2. 16.

Examp. Such were the Nicolaitanes, that being called to the knowledge of the
Gospel, did teach licentious doctrine, as that it was lawful for women to be
common: these the Church of Ephesus were troubled with, Apoc. 2. 6. Simon Magus
made baptism a cloak of his covetousness, and Diotrephes of his ambition, Ioh.
epist. 3.

Exornat. As a lewd woman makes marriage a cloak of her vicious and wanton
life, Proverb. 7. 19. So do these take liberty by their profession, to live
ungodly. And as the Israelites abused Manna, and the quails unto wantonness
and excess.

The reason, why we ought not to turn the grace of God into wantonness, is
taken from the end of our calling, Luke 1. 74. that we being delivered from
our enemies should serve him without fear. As God delivered the Israelites out
of Egypt to serve him in the wilderness.

Applicat. 1. Against the Papists, who under color of religion, do challenge
exemption from the civil magistrate, and Error. 11.
so, do make their liberty a cloak as S. Peter says: the like do the
Anabaptists, that do urge the liberty of the Gospel, to bring in an
anarchie, and a popular co^munitie: likewise the Pope by his pardons and
indulgences gives men license to sin, as the Pharisees by their Corban gave
children license to be disobedient to their parents, Mark. 7. 11. 2. This
dodoctrine is profitable to instruct; that men abuse not their holy profession
unto wantonness: the grace of God teaches us to deny ungodly lusts, not to
live in them, Tit. 2. 12. But thou, whosoever thou art, that art called to the
faith of Christ, if thou be a blasphemer, a drunken person, envious, an
extortioner, thou art of them that turn the grace of God into wantonness,
make thy belly thy God, the end of such is damnation, Phil. 3. 19.

And deny God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ] These words thus
translated seem to speak of two persons, of God the father and God the son:
but indeed the whole sentence is to be understood of Christ, who is called
God, and (...), master, and (...), Lord: so that Lord here in the first place
should be translated master: for Christ is God, in respect of his Godhead with
his father: he is our master, because he has bought us, 2. Pet. 2. 1. he is
our Lord, because by him all things are preserved, 1. Cor. 8. 6. Hebr. 1. 3. so
that he is God as our creator, Lord as our preserver, master as our Redeemer.

Doctrine. That there are two sorts of deniers Doctr. 4.

Papists, how deniers of Christ.


of Christ, either such as in opinion detract from Christ, and publish
heresies, as the Arrians denied his Godhead, the Anabaptists his humanity: or
such as deny him in their life and conversation.

Testim. For the first, 2. Pet. 2. 1. 1. John, 4. 3. For the second, 2. Tim. 3.
5. They have a show of godliness, denying the power, etc.

Exampl. Of the first deniers Hymeneus and Philetus, 2. Tim. 2. 18. which
denied the resurrection of the body, and so consequently denied Christ's
resurrection. Of the second, such were the Jews which gloried in the law, and
yet in breaking the law dishonored God, Romans 2. 23.

Exornat. They which deny Christ are as those that should have refused to
strike the posts of their doors with the blood of the Paschall Lamb, or that
did eat unleavened bread; they should be cut off: Exodus 12. 13. 19. The
striking of the blood is the profession of faith, the unleavened bread is
innocence of life.

Confirmat. John, 13. 35. Christ gives charity as his cognizance, whereby his
Disciples are known: they then that live not thereafter, deny their master,
and pull off his cogniscance.

Applicat. 1. Against Papists, that deny the offices of Christ: his
prophetical, ^^ror. 1^.
in making their traditions equal to scripture: regal, in setting up another
head, to make laws to bind the conscience, namely the Pope: priestly office,
in making other Mediators beside, and other satisfactorie sacrifice, as of the
mass, beside his death.

Secondly, all carnal gospellers are reproved, who are now convinced to
deny Christ, because by the power of his death, they die not unto sin, Romans
6. 6.

The fourth lecture.
Uers. 5. I will put you in remembrance for as much as ye once knew:] Now the
Apostle declares by the examples of Gods judgments in times past, what
punishment these hypocrites also are to expect: and he produces three
principal examples: of the Israelites, the angels, and the third is of Sodom
and Gomorrha.

Doctrine. That it is profitable even to put the people of God in mind of those
Godly conference profi^^ble.
things, they already know.

Testim. 2. Pet. 1. 12, 13. I will stir you up by putting you in remembrance,
though you have knowledge.

Examp. Mich. 6. 5. O my people remember Balaak etc. Heb. 10. 32. Call to
remembrance, etc.

Confirmat. Phil. 3. 1. For you it is a sure thing: often to recapitulate and
repeat the same thing is profitable.

Exornat. Like as, when a nail is driven to the head. Ecclesiast. 12. 11. So
is a doctrine or precept well urged: and they are like the clean beasts that
chawe the cudde, which do ruminate and meditate of the same things often.

Applicat. First against the papists, who allow not the people to confer and
reason Error. 13.
together of such things as they heard, which we see notwithstanding was the
practice of the primitive Church, Act. 17. 11. Secondly, we see it is an
approved course both for the minister to use some repetition and rehearsal of
that which has been taught, and that it is a frivolous objection, when any man
says, he heard nothing but that he knew, for it is somewhat to have that
called to his remembrance, and to be better imprinted in his mind, which he
knew before. Thirdly, this Christian practice is commended, that people should
confer together of those things they hear, that they be not as leaking and
running vessels, Heb. 2. 1. It were much better for them so to do, then to
make themselves busy bodies, in prattling and talking their pleasure of others,
when they are met together.

The Lord, after he had delivered, etc. destroyed them which believed not] By
this Doctrine. 1.

Doubtfulnesse in faith a sin.


example the Apostle shows, that as the Israelites, though they were
delivered out of Egypt, perished because they murmured and lusted, and brought
forth no fruits of their faith: so they which seem to be delivered and
redeemed by Christ from the bondage of sin, shall not be saved if they lead a
carnal and corrupt conversation.

Doctrine. That they which live in carnal pleasures and voluptuousness are
convinced not to believe, as the Israelites wished to return to the fleshpots
of Egypt, because they believed not the promises of Canaan.

Testim. Phil. 3. 19. They which make their belly their God, and mind earthly
things are enemies to the cross of Christ. 1. Tim. 5. 6. She that lives in
pleasure is dead.

Exampl. Luke 16. 19. This was the condemnation of the rich man, his voluptuous
living, who notwithstanding lived in the external co^munitie of the faithful,
and calls Abraham father: such an one was Herod, Mark. 6. 20. who made
semblance of religion, yet lived in unlawful lust.

Exornat. Saint Peter compares such to the dog that returns to his filthy
vomit, and to the sow that returns to the wallowing in the mire. 2. Pet. 2.
22. Such are they which having once received the faith, do pollute it with
their lives.

Confirmat. Heb. 10. 29. Their sin is great, because they count the blood of
the testament as an unholy thing: that is, not able to sanctify and cleanse
them.

Applicat. 1. Against the papists, in this manner: all that died in the
wilderness, were not unbelievers and altogether incredulous; but some of them
only doubted, as Moses, Numb. 20. 12. You believed me not, says the Lord,
that is, they were wavering and not constant: here we conclude, that we ought
to be undoubtedly Error. 14.
assured of our salvation: and therefore it is an erroneous assertion of the
papists, that the certainty of faith, whereby a man is assured of salvation,
is presumption. 2. We see what a dangerous thing it is, by this example, for
those, which have taken upon them the profession of faith, not to live
thereafter: as to follow adultery, idolatry, drunkenness, 1. Cor. 10. 7. 11.

Uers. 6. The angels which kept not their first estate, or principality (...):
Doctrine, Here we see, that there are some good, Doctr. 3.

We must be certain of our ^aith.


some evil angels: 1. Tim. 5. 21. Elect angels: and so are there reprobate
angels: but these were also created good in the beginning, but fell for their
pride.

Testim. Ioh. 8. 44. He stood not in the truth. 2. Pet. 2. 6. The angels that
sinned.

Exemp. Job 1. 6. The good angels are called the sons of God, but the evil
spirit is called Satan: an enemy. And a false spirit, 1. king. 22. 22.

Aitiolog. His folly and pride was the cause. Job 4. 18. The word tahalah,
signifies madness, foolishnes, praise: and Jude insinuates as much, that they
were not content with their own state or habitation.

Exorn. And therefore Nebuchadnezzar is resembled for his pride to Lucifer, who
is called heelill of the same root, that signifies light. Isa. 14. 16.
wherefore God cast him down, and he fell like lightening, luke 10. 18. that
is, violently and speedily.

Applicat. 1. The Manichees are condemned, who did hold two equal beginnings,
and two kingdoms, of light and darkness: for we see that the devil in the
beginning was created good, but continued not therein.

2. Because the Apostle makes mention only of the fall of the angels, not
showing the time when, or the place from whence, or who and how many fell, we
are taught to stay our curiosity, and not to move needless questions. Yet so
far as Of the fall of Angels.
the Scripture does lead us we may safely wade. 1. For the time, it was in the
beginning, as soon as they were created, or not long after their creation, as
it is said in Job, he found no steadfastnes in the angels, Job 4. 18. and Ioh.
8. 44. He was a liar from the beginning: that is from the beginning, not of his
own creation, but of the world and man's being: and they fell before the
stars were made, Job 38. 7. For the children of God, that is, the angels
rejoiced, gave praise unto God, so did the devil never, not his angels that
fell. 2. They fell from their estate, that is, that perfection of glory,
holiness, innocence, wherein they were created: their fall was of two sorts,
the first was voluntary and sinful in their wilful apostasy, the other
necessary and penal in being cast down from heaven: as the fall of man was
first in his transgression, then in his expulsion out of paradise: and so the
Apostle here says, that the angels first kept not their estate, and then lost
their habitation, being deprived of their glory.

The state] wherein they were created according to Gods image did consist,
either in holiness and innocence, or in their knowledge and power: for these
are the two parts of Gods image; knowledge, Col. 3. 10. holiness, righteousness,
Ephesians. 4. 25. Then like as man has wholly lost his innocence, which was a
supernatural gift, and his naturalls, as knowledge, wisdom, are empaired,
though not altogether lost: so Satan is clean fallen from the truth, Ioh. 8.
44. his power and knowledge remains, though not like to the elect angels, yet
very great and incomparable in respect of man's weakness: and therefore the
Apostle Ephesians. 6. 12. gives the name of powers, principalities, governors, even
unto wicked angels.

3. For the third: though directly in Whether more good or bad angels.
Scripture it be not expressed, which is the greater number of Elect, or
reprobate spirits; yet I hold it most probable, that the number of good angels
is greater: as may appear first by these places of Scripture, Psalm. 55. 18.
Many were with me. 2. king. 6. 16. 2. chron. 32. 7. They are more that are with
us, then they that be with them: which is to be understood of the angels and
invisible spirits. Again, the greatest number of evil spirits, that I
remember mentioned in Scripture is a legion, which contained 6000. but we read
of 12. legions of angels. Math. 26. 43. and of not legions only, but of whole
hoasts. Genesis 32. 2. of thousand thousands, etc. ten thousand thousands. Dan. 7.
10. yea twenty thousand thousand. Psalm. 68. 17.

Applicat. 3. Further by this doctrine we are taught, to take heed unto our
selves, that we fall not away from the first grace received, seeing the angels
stood not, let him that stands, take heed least he fall, 1. Cor. 10. 12.
Neither is there any strength in man's freewill to hold him, as the Papists
Error 15.
affirm, seeing the Angels freewill could not keep them from falling. Again
we see what a dangerous thing it is to despise government, and to speak evil
of those that are set over us in the Lord, either in Civil or spiritual
matters: to the which end all these examples are produced by the Apostle, as
the Israelites murmured against Moses, the Angels rebelled against God, the
Sodomites skorned the admonition of Lot. Men for fear of the law, refrain to
speak evil of the Magistrate, but the tongues and stomachs of many are
whetted against the Ministers, and they judge it no fault: whereas their
murmurings are not against them, but against God. Exodus 16. 8.

The fifth lecture.
verse. 6. He has reserved in everlasting Whether the devils be in the local
place of hell.
chains to the judgment of the great day.] Doct. That the devil and his
angels though not yet in their full torment, are reserved and prepared to
everlasting damnation.

Testim. Math. 25. 41. Everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
Reu. 20. 10. The devil shall be cast out. So that by these places it
appears, he has not yet received his full punishment, nor yet is chained in
the local place of hell, because he rules in the air, Ephesians. 2. 2. and he
goes up and down like a roaring lion, etc. 1. Pet. 5. 8. But out of hell
there is no returning, Luke 16. yet he is truly said to be in hell and chained,
because he carries about a fearful and desperate conscience, fettered and
chained with the lively sense of Gods wrath and decree of condemnation.

Exempl. Math. 8. 29. The devils desire not to be tormented before their time:
that is, not to be sent down into the deep, luke 8. 31. This shows that
they look for unspeakable torment, but yet feel not the full measure of it.

Exorn. As Pharaohs baker lay in fetters comfortless, especially after the
interpretation of his dream, and was afterward hanged and executed, Genesis 40.
so the devil is now kept in chains till the day of execution.

Confirmat. Revel. 12. 9. The devil is cast out, because to God he is Satan,
an enemy; to his Church, diabolus, an accuser; to the world a serpent, that
is, a deceiuer.

Applicat. 1. Against the heresy of the Origenists, that in the end the
devils shall be saved: seeing the Scripture says, they are kept in
everlasting chains.

2. Against the Papists, that make diverse Error 16.
degrees of hell, and two of them, the Limbus patrum, and Purgatory, they say
are but for a time: here we see the chains of hell are everlasting, and that
there is no hell, but for ever.

3. Here is a lesson of fear and terror, that if God spared not the angels, if
they could not escape Gods judgment, how much less shall men, though never so
mighty escape?

4. A lesson of comfort, that the devil is chained and fettered, he is able to
do us no more hurt, then the Lord permits: he could not without leave hurt
the swine. Mark. 5.

v. 7. Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them, which in like manner,
etc.] Doctrine. Like sins deserve like punishment, and partakers in evil
shall be partakers in reward. These cities were Admah and Zeboim, Deuteronomy. 29. 23.
which perished in the flames of Sodom and Gomorrha.

Testim. Revel. 18. 4. Go out of her that ye be not partakers in her sins,
and receive of her plagues.

Exempl. Genesis 49. 5. Simeon and Leui, as they were brethren in evil, so are
they partakers in the same punishment. verse. 7. they are divided in Israel. For
Simeon had his lot under Judah, Ios. 19. 1. and Leui was dispersed among the
tribes. Obadiah, v. 14. 15. the Edomites because they did partake with the
Assyrians in the destruction of Jerusalem, are partakers also of their
destruction.

Exorn. Eccl. 9. 12. Like as fishes running into the net together, are taken
together, and birds in the snare; so the wicked confederating themselves shall
be enwrapped in the same judgment of God, when it comes.

Reason. For as it stands with Gods justice, that they which have labored
together in Gods service, should be rewarded together, Luke 22. 28, 29. so on
the other side it is just, that they which sin together, should be punished
together.

Applicat. 1. Against the Papists, who being idolatours as the Israelites
were, Error 17. Papists idolaters.
why should they not fear the same punishment? 1. Cor. 10. 7. But they will
answer, they are not such idolatours, for they do not worship an image, but as
it has relation to the Saint whose image it is. Ans. No more did the
Israelites think that the golden calfe was the God that brought them out of
Egypt, but a memorial of him, because they did sacrifice such beasts unto God:
as it may appear, Exodus 32. 5. To morrow, says Aaron, shaeli be an holy day
laiehovah, to the Lord Iehova. Neither were the people so blockish to think,
that a calfe could bring them out of Egypt, nor Aaron so wicked to worship a
calfe.

2. We learn, that every man should take heed of those sins, which he sees
before his eyes to be severely punished; why should he think himself to be
exempted? Nabal slain for his covetousness and erueltic, 1. Sam. 25. the
Israelites for their gluttony and adultery, the blasphemer was stoned, Leuit.
24. Dathan and Abiram for their murmuring and rebellion, Numb. 16. Herod for
his pride devoured of worms, Act. 1^. why should not covetous persons,
adulterous, drunkards, blasphemers, fear the same punishments?

Are set forth as examples: or, for an ensample. Doctrine. 3.
Doctrine. That Gods judgments upon men for sin, are not only executed as
punishments of their wickedness, but to be ensamples to admonish others.

Testimon. Proverb. 19. 25. If thou smite a scorner the foolish will beware:
that is, the simple will be warned by another punishment. Prou. 24. 32. I
considered it well, etc.

Examp. Genesis 38. 11. Judah provides for his son Selah by the example of Er
and Onan, whom God killed for their wickedness: but contrariwise Lamech is
set forth as a profane person, Genesis 4. 23. that would not be warned to take
heed of murder by Cains example.

This example of Sodom and Gomorrha is often repeated in the scripture as most
famous, Deuteronomy. 29. 23. Ier. 20. 16. 49. 18. Hosh. 11. 8.

Exornat. Like as a visible mark was set in Caine that all men should take
warning by him: Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salt, to be a perpetual
monument to all posterity: vt te suo exemplo condiret, to season thee with her
example, as Augustine says.

Aitiolog. Psalm. 111. 4. God has made his wonderful works to be had in
remembrance: This is the end why God shows his judgments in the world, that
other may be learned: like as the lightening and the rain falls in the
wilderness, Job. 38. 26. and the hayle in the forest, Isay, 32. 19. that men
may take heed: as a man will correct his servant, that his child may be warned,
so God punishes the wicked, to admonish his own children.

Applicat. 1. Against the Papists, that Error. 18.
keep back these examples from the peoples Scriptures not to be kept from the
people.
knowledge, and shut up the scriptures in a strange tongue, as the Pharisees
did shut up the kingdom of heaven, Math. 23. 13. 2. Against the carnal
security of those, which make no use of Gods examples upon others: but the
righteous will be admonished. Isay. 26. 9. But the wicked will not behold the
high hand of God. See what Christ says, Luke 13. 4. Unless ye repent, ye
shall likewise perish.

Uers. 7. Committed fornication, and followed Doct. 4.
strange flesh, suffer vengeance of everlasting fire, etc. Here the Apostle
shows some of the chief sins of Sodom, fornication, and that sin of
uncleanness which is against nature, which yet has the name of Sodom: such
as the Apostle describes to have been the sin of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 27.
This the Apostle calls strange flesh: other sins also are described, Ezech.
20. 29. pride, fullness of bread, idleness, unmercifulness.

Doctrine. These sins are worthy, and rewarded with everlasting damnation.

Testim. 1. Cor. 6. 9. Neither fornicators, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven. what is their reward then? they shall be cast into the lake of fire,
Reu. 21. 8.

Examp. In the rich man, that led his life in all carnal pleasure and
wantonness: he is tormented in hell flames, Luke 16. God judged the old world
for their sins, who now are in prison, that is, in hell, 1. Peter, 3. 20.

Exornat. Like as magistrates have here their prisons, to the which they commit
offenders: as Math. 18. 34. So hell is Gods prison.

Aitiolog. The reason why God punishes the sins of men with everlasting fire
and destruction is both in respect of the majesty of God, who is offended, and
his everlasting will transgressed: as we see sins committed against the
prince, are most grievously punished, 1. Sam. 2. 25. as also in respect of
themselves, because they have a will to sin ever, if they could live ever; as
Gregory says, Adiusticiam dei pertinet, vt nunquam careant supplicio, qui
carere noluerunt peccato: It belongs to Gods justice, that they should never
want punishment, that would never have been without sin. God punishes the
will as well as the act, as he rewards the will, 2. Cor. 8. 12.

Applicat. 1. For the solution of certain doubts: first, whether hell fire be
a material or spiritual fire? Answ. We neither Hell fire not only corporal.
think the same to be only spiritual, as Hierome imputes to Origin, Gehenna
tormenta non ponit in suppliciis, sed conscientia peccatorum: that he thought
hell torment not to consist in punishment, but in the conscience of sinners:
neither is the fire corporal only, as Augustine seems to be of opinion,
that the devils may be tormented with a corporal fire: but our opinion is,
that hell fire shall be both a spiritual torment to the soul, and a corporal
punishment to the body: as it is called the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Revel, 21. 8. Mark. 9. 46. the worm dies not: there is the torment
of conscience, the fire never goes out, that is, which tormenteth the bodies.

Secondly, it is objected how it may stand with Gods justice to punish twice
Whether one sin may be twice punished.
for the same sin: and so Hierome seems to think upon these words of
Nahum. 1. 9. Non consurget tribulatio duplex: affliction shall not come twice:
that the Sodomites, Egyptians, Israelites, were but temporally punished. Answ.
1. The Apostle says, The Sodomites suffer everlasting fire: that as they were
consumed with fire and brimstone once, and that country remains yet
accursed, as we may see, Deuteronomy. 29. 23. being now turned to the dead sea; so
they are for ever tormented in hell, their burning flames of unnatural lust
are punished with everlasting flames. 2. That place of the prophet has no such
meaning, but only, that the Lord will punish thoroughly at once, that he shall
not need to punish the second time, as Abishai says, He would not smite Saul
again, 1. Sam. 26. 8. 3. Amongst men it is a very good rule not to punish
twice for the same sin where there is hope of amendment: but where they are
incorrigible they may punish often: as God punished Pharao with one plague
after another, because his heart was still hardened: David was chastised but
once with the death of the child, because he repented. And as godliness has
the promises both of this life, and the next, 1. Tim. 4. 8. so it is just that
impiety should have the punishment of both.

Thirdly, against the papists let it be observed that only make the greater
sins, which they call mortal and deadly worthy of condemnation, and there are
seven of Error. 19.
them, pride, envy, wrath, idleness, covetousness, gluttony, lust: whereas
all sins of themselves deserve death, Romans 6. 23. but in Christ both these
and all other are pardonable, Ioh. 1. 29.

Fourthly, all Atheists are here convinced, that believe no hell, who shall
feel it before they believe it, if they take not heed: let us then fear God,
that is able to punish body and soul, Math. 10. 28. and let us by repentance
cleanse our selves from these sins, so shall they never weigh us down to
hell, 1. Cor. 6. 11.

The sixth lecture.
Uers. 8. Likewise these dreamers] The Apostle proceeds to describe the
sins of these hypocrites, having thus propounded the examples of Gods
judgments: and first he charge them with three sins, uncleanness,
despising of government, and envy in speaking evil of things they know not, v.
10. wherein they are like to the example before expressed; in uncleanness to
the Sodomites, envy to the angels, rebellion to the Israelites; as afterward
also he resembles them to three other examples, to Cain for envy, to Balaam
for uncleanness, who gave that counsel to Balaack, to allure Israel to defile
themselves, for rebellion to Core.

Dreamers, (...)] They are called dreamers, not as Joseph was called a Doctr. 1.

Dreamers in religion, what they are.


dreamer, (...), Genesis 37. 19. for his dreams were no dreams, but true
visions; but they are called dreams in two respects, both in regard of their
ignorance, they imagined to themselves many opinions and erroneous doctrines:
and for their sense because it is dull, as he that dreameth and sleeps
feels nothing, as Eccles. 5. 2. Multitude of business causes dreams: and
their foolish imaginations breed vain and false opinions. Lot perceived
nothing in his sleep. Gen 19.


Doctrine. That we be not as dreamers or sleepers in matters of religion, either
without judgment or affection.

Testim. Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep. which he expounds, v. 17. to
understand what the will of God is.

Examp. Such a dreamer was Balaam, Numb. 24. 14. 15. who had his eyes shut
up, and dreaming of his reward, went on as in a sleep to curse Israel: such a
dreamer was Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. utterly ignorant in the matter of regeneration,
as one a sleep.

Exornat. Who are like to those dreamers, Isay, 29. 8. that dream of meat and
drink being hungry and thirsty, and yet are not a whit fuller: so are they
which feed themselves with their own dreams and fancies.

Aitiolog. As the heaviness of the eyes is the cause of sleep, Math. 26. 43.
so the heaviness or hardness of the heart is the cause of the slumber of the
soul. Ephesians. 4. 18. hardenesse of heart, (...), is the cause of ignorance, Romans
11. 7. 8. hardness of heart causes the spirit of slumber, (...).

Applicat. 1. Against the papists whose doctrine is known to be fuller of
fables Error. 20.

^op^^y full of dreams.


and dreams, then any religion in the world beside: so they dream of
purgatory fire, of Christ's carnal presence in the sacrament, their doctrine
of merits, of adoration of images, invocation of Saints; what are they but
mere dreams? 2. Against carnal professors, to whom the mysteries of
religion seem to be but dreams, as Psalm. 126. 1. they thought their
deliverance to be as a dream: and as Act. 12. 15. they thought the maid to be
mad, for saying Peter was at the door: eue^ such dreaming and drousie
professors of the word are many now a days.

Defile the flesh] by fornication, and other unlawful lusts and uncleanness,
giving Doct. ^.
themselves to all licentiousness.

Doctrine. That we should not defile our bodies with unclean lusts, with riot,
excess, but possess them in holiness.

Testim. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. possess their vessels in holiness, wherein he
alludeth to the use of the law, who used holy vessels for holy things, 1. Sam.
21. 5.

Exemp. Such unclean persons were the Nicolaitanes in the Church of Pergamus,
who like unto Balaam taught the people to commit fornication: and the false
prophetess Iezabel in Thyatyra, Revel. 2. 15. 20. Contrary example in Peter,
Act. 10. 14. who as he ate nothing polluted, so committed no unclean act: and
S. Paul was vnrebukable as concerning the law, Phil. 1. 6.

Exor. Like as Moses was bid put off his shoes, Exodus 3. and the Israelites to
wash their clothes, Exodus 19. so we should keep our bodies clean.

Aitiolog. 1. Cor. 6. 20. Our bodies are the temples of the spirit: he that
destroieth or polluteth Gods temple, him will God destroy, 1. Cor. 3. 17. and
because no unclean thing shall enter into heaven, Reu. 21. 27.

Applicat. 1. Against the Papists, whose religious sectaries are known to be
notorious Error 21.
defilers of the flesh. At the dissolution of the Abbeies, there were some
found that had 6. some 7. some 10. some 20. concubines, as it may appear in
the acts and records of the Kings visitation, at the suppression of the
Abbeies, as M. Bale has set down in his preface to hit book, De actis
Romanorum Pontificum. 2. This doctrine touches all carnal professors, that
make no conscience to defile themselves with adulteries, fornications,
drunkenness, which make their bodies vessels of uncleanness: do they think,
that such bodies shall be made vessels of honor, which they do here in earth
so defile and dishonor? for as Reuben by his uncleanness lost his birthright
among his brethren, Genesis 49. 4. so they lose their birthright in heaven.

Despise government:] They do not only speak evil of the person of the
governors, Doctr. 3.
as it follows afterward, but do despise and overthrow the rule and order of
government itself.

Doctrine. That government is necessary, and to be honored, and that they
which think otherwise, are in a great error, and lead with an erroneous
spirit.

Testim. Isa. 34. 12. The nobles shall call to the kingdom, and there shall be
none: the Prophet shows what a miserable state they are in, which have no
governor.

Exempl. Such an one was Ismael, Genesis 16. 12. a wild man, under no government,
his hand against every man, and every man's hand against him. Again this was
the state of the Israelites, Iud. 21. 25. Every man did what seemed good in his
own eyes, there being no King.

Exorn. Like as when the hedge is taken away from the vinevard, Isa. 5. 4. so
is it where no governor is: like as a widow bereft of her husband. Isa. 47. 9.

Aitiolog. 1. Cor. 14. 33. Because God is the author of peace and order, not of
confusion: therefore it is Gods will and ordinance, that there should be rule
among men.

Appl. 1. Against despisers of government either in general, as the Anabaptists
and Libertines, that would have no Magistrates among Christians: or in part, as
the Papists, that deny Princes to have authority Error 21.

Papists despisers of government.


either in Ecclesiastical causes, or over Ecclesiastical persons: the Bishop
of Rome has trod upon Emperors necks, made them to kiss his foot, to hold
his stirrup, to lead his horse by the bridle: what is this else but to despise
government?

2. They are reproved, which do wilfully and stubburnly resist and
transgress the good laws and constitutions of princes, made for their own
good: they must be obeyed for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. As, where good laws
are made against usury, extortion, theft, profanation of the Lords day,
negligence in resorting to divine service: to be careless in these things and
the like, is a contempt of Gods ordinance, namely the authority of the
magistrate.

Speak evil or blaspheme them in dignitie] Doctrine. As it is one sin to
despise or Doctr. 4.

Princes not to be railed upon.


disobey authority, so it is an other, to revile their persons.

Testim. Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not rail upon the Judges.

Exemp. Shemei cursed David, 2. Sam. 16. we see his reward for it, 1. king. 29.
46. S. Paul excuses himself for calling the high priest painted wall* Act.
23. 4.

Exornat. Prou. 26. 27. He that speaks evil of the prince, is as he that
diggeth a pit, or rolleth a stone: it shall return upon him.

Aitiolog. One reason to move us to take heed of this evil is because they
murmr against God, which do open their mouth against the Magistrate. Exodus
16. 8. An other, Pro. 10. 20. because the Lord by secret means and speedily
will bring it to light: as we have seen experience, that they, which have
spoken words even in their bed chamber against the prince have been disclosed.

Applicat. 1. We may see what spirit the Papists are of, who in their writings
do Error 22.
rail of our Prince, and the Pope accurseth her, as Shemei did David, but God
has turned it into a blessing, as David says, 2. Sam. 16. 12. 2. We are
taught, that we should not only refrain our words, yea thoughts, from
speaking and thinking evil; but on the contrary, it is our part to pray for
kings and princes, 1. Tim. 2. 1. First of all for kings, etc.

The seventh lecture.
Uers. 9. Michael the Archangel, etc.] First I will briefly open the sense and
meaning of this verse and then descend to the particular doctrines.

I find two special expositions of these words; one is, that Michael one of
the principal angels, designed of God to be a special agent in the affairs of
his church, did strive against and resist the devil, which would have brought
the body of Moses to light, and so have put a stumbling block before the
Israelites, to cause them to commit idolatry, as Balaam gave wicked counsel
to Balaack, Numb. 25. The other exposition is, that Michael is here understood
to be Christ, as it may Michael the Archangel understood to be Christ.
appear, Zach. 3. 2. where he is called Iehoua, and there the very same words
are used, the Lord rebuke thee Satan. And by the body of Moses some understand
the people of the Jews, whose return out of captivity Satan hindered. Some
the Gospel, which is the body the law being the shadow: some conjecture,
that Moses was mistaken for Joshua the high priest, as Beza, but he does not
much stand upon it.

These two expositio^s in part I receive, in part I refuse: from the latter I
take the first, that Michaelis here to be understood to be Christ: from the
first I take the latter part, that I had rather here understand the body of
Moses, after the literal sense.

The reasons of the first are these: 1. because wheresoever else in scripture
we find mention made of Michael Christ is employed: as Dan. 10. 13. 21. Michael
your prince: but there is no prince of Gods people but Christ: Revel. 12. 7,
10. Michael is expounded to be Christ. 2. The word it self, being
interpreted, quiest par deo, who is like unto God, best agrees unto Christ. 3.
This angel that did bury Moses body, that the people should not make an idol
of it, was the same Angel, that was the protector, and conductour of the
Israelites, which was Christ, Exodus, 32. 21. in whom Gods name was, which was
also Jacobs Angel, Genes. 48. 16. 4. Because in Zachary the same form of
words is used, translated by the Septuagint. (...): increpet te deus, Iignar
Iehoua beca: The Lord rebuke thee. This angel is called Iehoua, Zach. 3. 1. 2.

Now I think it more proper to understand Moses body literally, because,
Moses body how to be taken.
it is without any wresting or crackled sense, and more agreeable to the
story, Deuteronomy. 34. 6.

The objections made against this sense are three: two against the first part,
one against the latter.

1. Because Saint Peter speaks of angels properly, that they give no railing
judgment, 2. Pet. 2. 11.

Answer, 1. Saint Peter speaks not altogether of the same case; for there the
angels rail not against the Magistrates of the earth, here Michael does not
against the Devil.

2. They may both very well agree; Jude speaks of Michael himself, Peter of
Michaels Angels, that follow the example of their prince.

Object. 2. But the word here used is, (...), he durst not, how can this be
spoken of Christ who is equal unto God and fears none?

Answer, 1. Christ is to be considered as our Mediator both God and man, and
in this respect he is minor patre, less then his father: and the Apostle
doubts not to ascribe unto him (...), fear, Hebr. 5. 7. and (...), he shall
be subject to his father, 1. Cor. 15. 28. either of these is as much as (...),
he durst not.

2. We say this word may be otherwise translated, by this word sustineo, to
sustain, or bear: as Romans 5. 7. One dare or will endure to die for a good
man: (...): mori sustineat, as Master Beza expounds: so that the sense may be
this; Michael dust not, or would not endure to give railing sentence, etc.

3. Object. The greatest matter objected against this sense is, for that this
story of Michaels contending with the devil about the body of Moses is not
found in scripture.

Answer. 1. It is like that some historical books of scripture are perished,
as that Iosu. 10. 13. out of the which the Apostle had this story, as S. Paul
that of Iannes and Iambres, 2. Tim. 3. 8. and yet the scripture remaining is
sufficient. 2. Or it may be affirmed, that these stories were preserved in the
Church by faithful tradition: neither will it follow, this being allowed,
that popish traditions are to be admitted. Error 23.
Traditions we absolutely condemn not, but receive them with these three
conditions. 1. That they be traditions historical, What traditions may be
received.
not doctrinall, as this of Moses body: for the scripture contains all
sufficiency of doctrine. 2. They must be consonant and agreeable to the
scriptures, as this is to that place, Zachar. 3. 2. 3. There must be an
apparent certentie and evidence of them, as there was of this* the Apostles
being directed by Gods spirit, being able to judge, of true and forged
traditions. Wherefore this is no warrant at all, for popish traditions, which
are of doctrine, repugnant to Scripture, and fabulous and uncertain.

Now having laid open the sense, I come to the doctrine.

Archangel] Though Christ be here understood to be this Archangel, who is 1.
Doctrine.
also called the angel of the covenant, Mal. 3. 2. and a mighty angel* Revel.
10. 1. yet this name Archangel, which signifies the first or chief angel,
shows that among the angels and blessed spirits there are diverse degrees and
orders.

Testim. Coloss. 1. 16. The diverse names of thrones, dominions, principalities,
powers, show diverse degrees: for they are not idle names. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
Christ shall descend with the voice of the Archangel, who shall be appointed as
a chief Minister to summon the world, and call the elect together.

Exemp. Luke 2. 9. One angel as the chief does the message to the angels, the
residue called heavenly soldiers, do sing the song. verse. 13.

Exornat. For like as there is a difference of glory among the stars, 1.
Cor. 15. 41. and as there were diverse degrees in the Leuiticall priesthood,
which was a pattern Heb. 8. 5.
of heavenly things; so is it among the angels.

Aitiolog. Psalm. 148. 2. Laudate cum omnes angeli, omnes exercitus. i. varietas
ordinu^: Praise him all his angels and armies: that this variety of orders as
in an army, does more set forth the praise of God.

Applicat. 1. We condemn the curiosity of the Papists, who have found out
nine orders of angels: principalities, powers, Error 14.
dominions, thrones, Coloss. 1. 16. mights, Ephesians. 1. 22. Seraphim, Cherubim,
angels, arkeangels: all these names we confess to be found in scripture: but
to distinguish these into their ranks and orders, as they take upon them to
make three orders, is too great curiosity: in so doing they understand not
what they speak, nor whereof they affirm, as the Apostle says, 1. Tim. 1. 7.

2. As there are degrees among the angels, so shall there be among the elect:
for Degrees among the Angels.
we shall be as the angels, Math. 22. 30. There is a Prophets reward, and a
Disciples reward, Math. 10. 41. Many mansions in Gods house, Ioh. 14. 2. as in
the Arc were three loftes one above an other. This ought to prick us forward
to godly emulation: that we should strive one to outstrippe an other in
goodness, as they which run in a race. 1. Cor. 9. 24.

Striving against the devil, etc.]

Doctrine. As in this one particular in not suffering Moses body to come to
light: Doctr. 2.
so at all other times there is a continual strife and opposition between
Christ and his angels, and the devil and his.

Testim. Revel. 12. 7. Romans 16. 20. The God of peace shall tread, etc. which
shows a resistance in Satan, that he is not at the first trodden down.

Exempl. Dan. 10. 13. Michael with the good angels strive against the prince of
Persia, a chief minister of Satan. Luke 22. 31, 32. Christ strives against
Satan in upholding Peter's faith.

Exorn. Therefore is Satan compared to the lightening, Luke 10. 18. which at
the first rumbleth, and resists in the clouds, but at the length violently
breaks forth: like as Moses serpents devoured the sorcerers serpents which
strove against his.

Aitiolog. Genesis 3. 15. The reason of this strife is that enmity, which is
between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent. Because Satan
goes about to destroy the children of God, Michael takes our part against the
dragon that is ready to devour the child. Revel. 12.

Applicat. 1. We see then the cause why Papists hate Protestants, Atheists and
profane Error 25.
persons such as are religious, because darkness is an enemy to light: the
children of the flesh persecute them after the spirit. Gal. 4.

2. We are encouraged manfully to stand out against Satan and his ministers,
Papists, Atheists, carnal worldly men, because Christ fights with us: and if
God be on our side, who can be against us? Romans 8. 31.

Durst not blame him with cursed speaking] or give him the judgment of
blasphemy, Doctr. 3.
(...): but said the Lord rebuke thee]

Doctrine. Such a moderation should be kept in all reprehension, that we rail
not neither revile the most wicked that are in authority: as Michael raileth
not of the devil; neither to seek to revenge our selves by railing speech,
but refer the revenge to God.

Testim. Prou. 20. 22. Say not I will recompense evil, that is, either by word
or deed: but wait upon God, etc.

Exemp. 1. King. 22. 20. The angels revile not Ahab: c. 21. 20. Eliah calls
not Ahas enemy again, as the king had reviled him, but denou^ceth Gods
judgments.

Exornat. Eccles. 10. 8. 9. Like as he that remooueth an hedge shall be bitten
of a serpent, or that remooueth stones disorderly, etc. or that heweth wood
with a blu^t tool; so are they that unadvisedly seek their own revenge.

Aitiolog. The reason is, because they take Gods office into their hand, Ierem.
51. 36. I will maintain thy cause, and take vengeance for thee, etc.

Applicat. 1. We may see how contrary the practice of the Church of Rome is,
that do not only rail and revile princes Error. 26.
in their uncharitable writings, but also take No conspiracy against princes.
upon them to revenge themselves by treacherous conspiracies. 2. We are taught
to qualify our spirits, both in public and private wrongs, and to depend upon
god; as Ierem. 11. 20. Let me see thy vengeance upon them, for to thee have I
opened my cause.

The eight lecture.
Uers. 10. These speak evil of those things they know not.] Here is the
third sin, which these hypocrites are detected of: their presumption in
speaking evil of such things they understand not, and their brutish abusing of
that knowledge they have.

Doctrine. That men ought not to presume beyond their skill, nor to censure
Doctr. 1.
where they have no sense, nor to speak evil of that they cannot discern. So
the Apostle says of some, 1. Tim. 1. 7. They would be doctors of the law but
understand not what they speak, nor whereof they affirm. So the wise man
says, Prou. 18. 13. He that answers a matter before he hear it, it is a
folly and a shame unto him.

Such were those high priests and Pharisees that spoke evil of Christ, and of
his doctrine and works not knowing what he had done, and therefore are
worthily rebuked of Nicodemus, Ioh. 7. 51. such was that false prophetess
Iezabel, and her fellows that troubled the church of Thyatira, who professed
deep knowledge being ignorant, which is therefore called the deepnes of
Satan, Reu. 2. 20, 24.

For like as he that hastes with his feet, not having considered his way,
stumbleth and falls, so the mind without knoweledge is not good, Prou. 19.
2. that is, erreth and is deceived: and therefore the preacher says, that the
wise man's heart is upon his right hand, the fools upon his left, Eccles. 10.
2. that is, the heart and affections of the one is grounded upon a right
knowledge and judgment, the others is rash and inconsiderate, the Apostle
shows the reason, 1. Pet. 4. 4. They speak evil of you, because ye run
not with them to the same excess and riot: when as either the men, or their
doctrine is not fitting their corrupt humor, they blaspheme both.

We see then the cause first why papists Error. 27.

Papists speak evil of things they know not.


speak evil of the profession of the Gospel, of the doctrine of
justification by faith, calling it an enemy to good works; of assurance of
salvation, tearming it presumption; of predestination, naming it a doctrine of
desperation, and of such like holy doctrines they speak blasphemously: they
herein speak evil of those things they know not. So do all Atheists that
open their mouths against heaven, psalm. 73. 9. deriding the holy mysteries of
the incarnation of Christ, of the resurrection of the body, of the Trinity,
of the day of judgment: these also speak evil of that they know not. Here
also are they reproved, who are ready to speak evil of Magistrates and
Ministers especially, whom they know not; being carried only with false
rumors and reports, as Shemei falsely charge David with the blood of Saul's
house. 2. Sam. 16. 8.

v. 10. Those things, which they know naturally, Natural knowledge abused.
etc. as beasts without reason, they therein corrupt themselves:] That is,
whereas Doctr. 2.
God has given unto every man a certain light of nature to be some guide unto
him, these as bruit beasts, are lead only with a sensual appetite, as though
they had no such light of reason at all.

S. Peter to the like purpose says, 2. Pet. 2. 12. As bruit beasts, led with
sensuality, and made to be taken: that is, as bruit beasts, having no reason
to guide themselves, following their raging appetite, are made a pray; so
these, thorough their corrupt lusts, fall into the snare of the devil. So S.
Paul speaks of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 18. that they did withhold the truth in
unrighteousness, that is, suppressed the light of truth in them, by their own
unrighteousness.

Such were the Sodomites, Genesis 19. which left the natural use of the woman,
and turned it into that which is against nature, Romans 1. 27. and did burn with
unnatural lusts. Such also were the Jews, that having this natural light,
did not acknowledge God their creator. Ioh. 1. 9, 10.

S. Peter compares such to the dog, which returns to his vomit, and to the
sow, which goes again to her wallowing in the mire, 2. Pet. 2. 22. The reason
hereof Saint Paul shows, Romans 1. 21. 26. because when they knew God, they did
not glorify him as God: God gave them up to vile affections: that is, the
abusing of their natural knowledge does work in them these beastly
corruptions.

First then this text may be applied against the Papists, who do corrupt
themselves in their gross idolatry, even against Error 28.

Idolatry against the light of nature.


the light of nature, as the Apostle shows of the Gentiles* to whom the
eternal power and Godhead being manifest in the creatures, Roman. 20. they
notwithstanding turned the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude
of the image of a corruptible man. v. 23. and so do the Papists. And whereas
they say, they worship no idols but images, the Apostle here condemns the
images of the heathen: for he uses the word (...), which signifies an image,
not an idol.

Secondly all carnal gospellers, that give themselves to gluttony, drunkenness,
adultery, wantonness, are reproved: for even these are sins against nature:
for even Abimelech by the instinct of nature, knew adultery to be unlawful,
Genesis 20. And bruit beasts, when they have satisfied their nature, take no more:
and they have a natural affection to provide for their young: so have not
these, that spend upon their belly, and suffer their wife and children to
want, who herein are worse then infidels, that were but natural men. 1. Tim.
5. 8.

Whatsoever they know naturally] (...): Here it shall not be amiss briefly to
show, Doctr. 3.
how far this natural knowledge does extend it self: as there are three
degrees thereof; in natural things: civil and moral duties: and spiritual.

1. This light of nature does teach not only men but bruit beasts, what is
naturally good, as to eat, to drink, to sleep, to shun that is hurtful to
nature. Isa. 1. 3. The ox knows his owner, the ass his masters cribbe. But
to do these things well, and to refer them to a good end, is a work of
grace, above nature. 2. Nature also gives some light of moral duties. Romans 2.
14. The Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the law, though not as
they should. 3. The light of nature serves also for the knowledge of
spiritual things, Romans 1. 20. The godhead and eternal power are seen in the
creatures: but after a general, confused, and imperfect manner.

An example of natural knowledge we hauein labal, Genesis 4. 20. who invented
tents and the keeping of cattle. Of moral duties in Pharao, who thought it
unlawful even by the light of nature, to touch an other man's wife. Genesis 12.
18. Abimelech also being an heathen man, had some knowledge of God, when he
said to Abraham, God is with thee in all that thou do. Genesis 21. 22.

But this natural light is imperfect and insufficient, like unto that light,
which was made at the first to distinguish the day and night before the Sun
was created, Genesis 1. 2. which was but a dim and obscure light to the
brightness of the sun: like as the cloud on the forepart gave light to the
Israelites, on the back part it was darkness to the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 20.
Such difference is there between the light of nature, and the light of grace.
The reason of this natural light S. Paul shows, Romans 1. 20. That the world
should be left without excuse. This light of nature is not sufficient to direct
men, but to correct them, not to conduct them, but to condemn them; not to
justify them, but to testify against them.

First then here we reprove certain errors of the Papists, who doubt not to
affirm, that nature does not only affoard a Error 29.
general and common knowledge of the Godhead, but that it is able to bring a
man to the true knowledge and worship of God, and that by the light of nature a
man may attain to right moral duties, and true virtuous acts. But for the
first, our Savior shows, that to know the only very Lord, is a work of
faith, and given by Christ, ioh. 17. 3. And for the other S. Paul testifies,
that we are not able of our selves to think a good thought, 2. Cor. 3. 5. much
less to produce any virtuous act.

Secondly if notwithstanding the light of nature be able to give some direction
to discern between good and evil, between just things and unjust, the light
of grace ought to do much more: wherefore if Christians being taught of God
shall come short even in external duties of civil honesty, the Gentiles
shall rise up in judgment against them: yea I am afraid, that many of us, that
do profess the name of Christ, do not show that example of justness,
sobriety, temperance, humblenes, which is to be found among the heathen: nay I
am more afraid, that even among Christians such enormous sins may be found,
that the Gentiles would have been ashamed of: as the Apostle vpbraideth the
Corinthians, with such fornication as is not once named among the Gentiles,
that one should have his fathers wife, 1. Cor. 5. 1. so for craft, extortion,
adultery, malice, and such like, I doubt me, many Christians exceed the
profane Gentiles.

The ninth lecture.
v. 10. Woe unto them, etc.] The Apostle In what sense the Apostle cries Woe.
now amplifieth and enlarges the former part, wherein he had described the
great sins and corruptions of these deceivers and false hypocrites, both by
examples in this verse, of Came, Balaam, Core, and by similitudes and
comparisons, in the two verses following. v. 12, 13.

This verse has two parts: the denouncing of a woe, and the ground thereof,
which is the imitation of Cams envy, Balaams covetousness, Core his rebellion
and schism, which did arise of pride.

But it will be here objected, how the Apostle having before made mention of
Michael, that he would give no railing sentence against the devil, so soon
forgets himself, and pronounces a curse against these men. Ans. There is
great difference, when one out of his private corrupt affection raileth or
curses, as Shemei did David, 2. Sam. 16. and when one in the name of the Lord
pronounces a curse: which is no imprecation of evil, but a prediction of
their just punishment: as the Prophets every where, and our Savior often do
cry woe against the wicked hypocrites. Whereof there are two reasons yielded:
one by Ambrose* Non maledicit propheta, in psalm. 119.
sed quasimedicus vult illos sanare, vt de proprijs flagitijs erubescant. The
prophet curses not, but as a physician he would heal the^, that they may be
ashamed of their sins. Hierome gives an other reason, answering unto a
cavil of wicked Porphirie, who objected, that Peter did curse Ananias and
Saphira to death: Not so (says he) sed dei iudicium spiritu annuntiat vt poena
duorum Ad Dem^tr^ada.
hominum sit doctrina multorum. But he with a prophetical spirit does declare
Gods judgment, that the punishing of two might be a warning to many. And so
does the Apostle here, prophecy and foretell the fearful end of these
wicked men, and testify Gods just judgment against them.

The doctrine here is, that it is no idle speech or word of course, where we
Doctr. 1.
find Woe, in Scripture; but it is an evident demonstration of Gods judgment
sure to follow, if no amendment go before.

So the Lord says by the prophet Isa. 14. 24. Surely as I have purposed, it
shall come to pass, and as I have consulted it shall stand.

For like as an ouerflowing stream can not be kept back, so the decree of God
shall ouerflow, Isa. 10. 22. and Gods arrows are as of a strong man, that is
expert: none shall return in vain. Ier. 50. 9.

Thus the woe of Christ propounded over Corazin and Bethsaida two unthankful
cities of Judea, undoubtedly was accordingly accomplished, Matthew. 11. and
those eight woes thundered out by our Savior against the Scribes and Pharisees,
Math. 23. answerable to those eight beatitudes, Mat. 5. had their effect
accordingly, for both the country, policy, and priesthood of the Jews, was
within 42. years destroyed.

The reason is given, Isay, 45. 23. I have sworn by my self, the word is
given out of my mouth in righteousness and shall not return. The certentie
then of Gods judgments depends both upon the justness of them, and the
strength of the oath of God, which is immutable.

First then, we are here put in great comfort, Error. 30. Babylonish Rome
begins to fall. Rome Babylon.
if all the woes of Gods book shall be fulfilled, that the destruction of
Antichrist and his false Church shall certainly come to pass, and that it
cannot be far off: as it is evident in the prophecy of the Revelation, c.
16. 19. Babylon is come in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of
the wine of the fierceness of his wrath: and 17. 16. The ten horns (which
are ten kings) shall hate the whore and make her desolate and naked: for God
has put it into their hearts to fulfill his will: this we see in part
fulfilled already, that God has turned the hearts of some Christian princes
that before were slaves to the whore of Rome, now to hate her: and other
princes must follow, and had played their parts ere this, but that our
diffident, faint, and distrustful hearts, are an hinderance. Again, let all
covetous persons, and oppressors, all that are mighty to drink wine, and to
pour in strong drink, all that are wise in their own conceit, that is,
which do despise instruction, take heed unto themselves, and all other
against. whom the scripture declares any word, as it does against these,
Isay, 5. 8. against oppressors, against drunkards. Isay, 5. 11. 22. against
the proud and wise in their own ^ies, v. 22. for certainly how secure soever
they are, these words shall come to pass.

For they have followed the way of Caine] Caines way was to hate his brother
because Doct. 2.
his works were good, and his own evil: 1. Ioh. 3. 12. so then it is a
grievous sin to hate, or envy any man for his goodness. This the preacher
well observed, that the perfection of a work is the cause of the envy of a
man against his neighbor, Eccles. 4. 4.

As Joseph was envied of his brethren, because of that excellent gift of
divination and expounding of dreams, Genesis 37. 8. and Joshua envied E^dad and
Medad because they prophesied, whom Moses therefore reproved, Numb. 11. 29.
Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing, Genesis 27. 41.

Therefore the Patriarchs, that hated Joseph are compared to archers, that
shoot Genesis 49. ^^.
at a mark or white; so the wicked do aim at the virtue and innocence of
the righteous. The cause of envy in some is the corruption of nature, because
as Saint Peter says, the spirit and the flesh do one lust against another,
and are contrary each to other, Gal. 5. 17. In some vain glory breeds
envy, because it grieueth them to be exceeded and excelled of others, as the
Apostle says: let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another.

First then we see, why the Church of God is persecuted of the Antichristian
synagogue, Error. 31.

Why Antichrist persecuteth the gospel.


because they envy the profession of the true faith: they are persecuted for
their righteousness, Math. 5. 10.

Again, let all wordly and carnal men take heed that they hate not any for
their righteous and honest life, as he that swears, steals, commits
adultery, hates him that is not like minded: so Ahab hated the prophet
Micaiah: so Caine hated Abel: but woe is unto them that follow the way of
Caine.

And are cast away with the deceit of Balaams wages:] the word signifies to
be Doctr. 3.
poured out, (...), that is, have given themselves over for lusts sake to
follow the error of Balaam. who for reward sake was hired by Balaack against
his conscience Balaams wages.
to curse Israel, and shifted from place to place, from Baal to Sedesophim,
from thence to Peor to fetch diuinations: and perceiving that God would not
suffer him to curse, Number. 24. 1. then he gave wicked counsel to cause Balaack
to set a stu^bling block before the Israelites, to entice them to commit
fornication and commit idolatry. (...). 2. 14.


Doctr. We are taught, what an abomination it is for lucre sake to follow
evil, or to be persuaded unto it. So Moses says, that a gift blinds the
wise or seeing, Exodus 23. 8. which while some have lusted after, they have
erred from the faith, 1. Tim. 6. 10.

Thus Judas was corrupted with money to betray Christ: Saint Peter calls it
the reward of iniquity, Act. 1. 18. and as he received money, so Haman offered
great sums to destroy the innocent Jews; Est. 3. 9.

These are like to Esau that sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, so
they make shipwreck of their conscience for lucre: or as Adam, that for
greediness of an apple lost paradise.

The reason Saint Paul shows, 1. Tim. 6. 9. They that will be rich fall into
tentations and snares: that is, Satan seeing the corruption of the heart,
lays a fit bait for him, and so intangleth him in his snares.

First then this text may be better applied against the papists, and with much
greater right, then they force it against Error. 2^.
protestants, as the Rhemists in their annotation upon this place: for
covetousness is the very ground of popery: their doctrine of purgatory,
merits, pilgrimages, indulgences, the Popes supremacy, are all builded upon
this foundation: yea it is notoriously known how with great sums he has
corrupted diverse to betray and murder their princes.

Secondly, let every man take heed how like unto Balaam he corrupt his
conscience for desire of gain: the marcha^t, buier, seller, executor, jury
men, and all other: but let them embrace the sentence of the wise man, Prou 23.
23. Buy the truth but sell it not.

And perish in the gainesaying of Core.] that is, they despise government, and
resist Doctr. 4.
those, which are in authority, as Core, Dathan, and Abiram, whom the earth
swallowed up, Numb. 16.

Doctrine. That God will not suffer them to go unpunished that do make a rent
We must t^ke heed of schism.
or schism in the Church in resisting lawful authority.

So the wise man says, Fear God and the king, and meddle not with the
seditious, for their destruction shall rise suddenly, Proverb. 24 21.

Absoloms example shows this for the civil state, who for his rebellion was
hanged, and Shemaiah for the ecclesiastical, who for his seditious letters
against Jeremy was worthily punished, with the utter ruin of his posterity,
Ierem. 29. 25, 32.

As he that kindles a fire, shall be compassed about with the sparks thereof,
Isay, 50. 11. Like as Nadab and Abihu were consumed of fire, censing with
strange fire before the Lord, Leuitic. 10. 1.

The reason Saint Paul renders; they shall receive to themselves judgment,
because they resist the ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2.

First then not the protestants, as the Rhemists falsely charge our Church, are
Error. ^^.
like unto Core, because they are departed from the obedience of the pope: no
more then Christ and his Apostles could be charged with schism, because they
forsook the corrupt doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, and high priests:
but they are the followers of Core, which have practiced against the Lords
anointed, our Moses, and seditiously labor to pervert the subjects from the
right faith.

Secondly, brethren let us take heed of schisms, seditions, mutinies, neither
obstinately to resist the civil state, nor wilfully to forsake the felloweship
of the Saints, as the manner of some is, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10. 25.
but to yield our selves in all obedience to our superiors; that it may be said
of us, as of the Israelites: Thou did lead thy people like sheep by the hand
of Moses and Aaron. Psalm. 77. 20.

The tenth lecture.
Uers. 12. These are spots in your feasts of charity, etc. without all
fear feeding themselves.]

As before the Apostle amplified this part, in describing the corruptions of
these hypocrites by examples, so now he does illustrate the same by diverse
similitudes: by the first, in calling them spots in feasts, he sets forth
gluttony; by the two next of dry clouds and barren trees, their hypocrisy:
comparing them to the foaming sea, he shows their vain glory: by the
similitude of wandering stars, which are dimmed and darkened, their
everlasting misery.

We see then that this is a sure note of a carnal professor that only
seeks his Doctr. 1.
pleasure, to pamper and feed his belly, and to live delicately.

So S. Peter says, they count it pleasure to live deliciously for a season,
spots they are and blottes, in feasting with you, etc. 1. Pet. 2. 13. Of such
also S. Paul speaks, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame,
Phil. 3. 19. Such were those Israelites, which perished having the flesh yet
within their teeth, Numb. 11. 33. Such were they in the prophet Amos time, that
did eat the lambs of their flocks, and calves of the stall, and did drink
wine in bowls: but no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph, Amos ^. 6.
that is, they did eat and drink without all fear of God, or pity to his
poor afflicted members.

So then, like as a spotte or blemish in a comely face, so were they a disgrace
to the charitable feasts of the Church, which were then used for the cherishing
of brotherly love and releeuing of the poor. Like the fowls that did seize
upon Abraham's sacrifice* Genesis 15. 11. so these devour holy things, and pollute
the holy feasts.

The reason is expressed by the Apostle, They make their bellies their Gods,
etc. because they mind earthly things. Philip. 3. 19.

First, this note may fitly be applied against the Monks idle Epicures life in
Error 34. Monks idle bellies.
popery, whose chief desire was to feed their bellies, furnish their tables,
and fill their kitchins; as Erasmus wittily answered the Duke of Saxony,
asking his opinion of Luther, that he meddled with two dangerous points, the
Popes crown, and the Monks belly.

Secondly we are taught, not to be given to a greedy appetite: for such an
one, does as the wise man says, put a knife to his throat. Proverb. 23. 2. He
that eats and drinks more then suffices, does eat and drink to his own
hurt both of body and soul. We should then behave our selves at feasts, as in
the presence of God: as it is said of Iethro Moses father in law, that he did
eat before God, Exodus 18. 12. and the elders of Israel saw God and did eat
and drink; so let us so eat and drink, that we may see God, that we be not
made unapt to praise him, and pray unto him.

Clouds without water, corrupt trees, etc.] The word is (...), pthinoporina:
Doctr. 2.
which signifies trees of autumn decaying, when the fruit is gathered. By
this then the Apostle sets out their hypocrisy, that made a show of
religion, as clouds promise water, and trees fruit, and yet yield none: so
these promised to their sectaries great matters both for their doctrine and
life, and yet performed neither.

Of such speaks the Apostle, 2. Timoth. 3. 5, 6. Which have a show of
godliness, yet deny the power thereof: of this sort are they, etc. which lead
captive simple women laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts.

Such were the Pharisees, Math. 23. 15. That compass sea and land to make a
Proselyte, and when he is made he is twofold more the child of hell then your
selves: that is, there was neither true doctrine, nor holiness of life to be
found in their religion.

Very well is the doctrine and life of such compared to the grass in the house
top, wherewith the mower cannot fill his hand, Psalm. 129. 6. and as potsheards
covered with silver, Prou. 26. 23. such is the profession of hypocrites.

The reason hereof the Apostle shows, 2. Tim. 3. 5. before rehearsed. They
deny the power of godliness, contenting themselves only with the show
thereof: for remedy whereof, S. Peter bids us to sanctify the Lord God in
our hearts: that is, not to leave, till we feel the power of religion within
us.

First, this doctrine lays open the hypocrisy of Papists, and nakedness of
their religion: which has no true substance of Error 35.
comfort in it. For this I dare be bold to No true comfort in pope^i^.
say, that a reprobate may go every iotte, foot by foot, as far as is
required of a Papist: and notwithstanding the goodly promises which they make
of their religion, their followers remain still in fear, doubt, and
uncertainty of salvation, and many of them the children of hell, that they may
truly say unto them, as Job to his friends, Miserable comforters are ye, and
physicians of no value, Job 13. 4. Secondly we are taught, that profess the
Gospel, that we be not as wells without water, or clouds without rain, or
trees without fruit, but that all, both pastor and people, do adorn our holy
profession with wholesome fruits, not overthrowing in practice, which we build
by our profession, nor destroying by life, what we defend by learning.

v. 13. They are the raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame,
etc.] Here Doctr. 5.
the Apostle touches their vain glory, that in their raging affections both
ambitiously commend themselves, and maliciously despite others, which is but a
revealing of their own shame.

So the Apostle says, Their glory is their shame. Phil. 3. 19. S. Peter
says, Speaking swelling words of vanity, they beguile with wantonness, etc.
2. Pet. 2. 18. Such an one was proud Diotrephes, that pratled against the
Apostle with swelling words. Ioh. epist. 3. v. 10. Such were the swelling and
malicious words of the false prophet Zidkiah, when he smote Micaiah upon the
face, saying, When went the spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? 1.
king. 22. 24.

This similitude the Apostle takes from the prophet Isai, 57. 20. The naked
are like the raging sea, etc. whose waters cast up mire and dirt: so these by
the foame of their mouths and words, do cast up the dirt of their hearts.

Our Savior Christ shows the reason, Math. 12. 34. Out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks: as their heart is wicked and corrupt, so are
their words.

First then this note fitly agrees to all Error 36.
popish writers: for let a view be taken of their books; therein shall you
find cursing, railing, proud boasting, presumptuous Papists rayl^rs.
words, blasphemous speeches; so that their manner of style and writing does
easily bewray their envious spirit wherewith they are pricked forward: they
call us heretics, reprobates, accursed, worse then turks, with such like
opprobrious terms: as also, while they defend the grossest errors of
popery, as of the carnal presence, purgatory, adoration of images, works of
supererrogation, and such like, they foame out their own shame.

Secondly, we are taught every man to govern his tongue: to refrain lying,
slandering, swearing: for what do these else, then bewray their filthy shame,
neither shall escape unpunished: as Psalm. 52. 4. Thou love all words that may
destroy, so shall God destroy thee for ever: and therefore, Prou. 14. 3. it is
said, that in the lips of fools is a rod of pride: that is, his proud
foolish tongue is a rod to whip himself.

As wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blacknes of darkness for ever:]
That is, Doctr. 4.
horrible and everlasting darkness. Here then the doctrine is, that they which
do err themselves and mislead others as they delighted in darkness, so shall
be punished with everlasting darkness.

This the Apostle shows, thus alleging out of the Psalm, Destruction and
calamity, are in their ways, the way of pease (or truth) they have not
known, Romans 3. 17. They are overwhelmed with destruction, because they
perverted others with their errors.

Such was that great seducer Simon Magus, to whom S. Peter says, Thy money
perish with thee, etc. thou have neither part nor fellowship in this business,
Act. 8. 21.

For like as wandering stars do sometime loose their light, being
ouershadowed of the funne: and as falling stars, are extinct like a torch
quenched in waters, Revel. 8. 10. so are false teachers compared: and they have
the key of the bottomless pit to open it to themselves and others. Revel. 9. 1.

The reason is given by the Apostle, 1. Ioh. 1. 5. God is light, and in him is
no darkness: therefore they which delight in error and darkness, can have no
access unto God.

First we see the end of all seducers and false teachers, whether Papists or
others: the devil that deceived, and false prophets, shall be cast into the
lake of fire and brimstone. Revel. 20. 10.

Secondly, neither give you ear to false and erroneous doctrines, to be as
wandering stars to wander from one doctrine to an other to your own confusion.

The 11. lecture.
verse. 14. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam, prophesied of such, saying,
etc.]

The Apostle having first discou^^ and descried the sins and corruptions of
these seducers, v. 8, 9, 10. and then amplified the same by examples, v. 11. by
similitudes and comparisons, v. 12, 13. he returns again to show the
certentie of their judgment, which as he did first by the former examples of
Gods justice against the incredulous Israelits, v. 5. the apostatat angels, v.
6. the wicked cities of Sodo^ and Gomorra, v. 7. so now he does verify the
same by an ancient prophecy of Enoch, contained v. 14, 15. Where we have to
consider of the Prophet, here named to be Enoch the seventh from Adam, then of
the prophecy, which is of Gods final judgment: both of the form and manner
thereof, The Lord comes with thousands, etc. and of the matter or subject,
first God shall rebuke or convince both of their wicked deeds, and cruel
words, and then he shall give judgment and sentence against them.

First then, seeing Enoch so long ago, even Doctr. 1.
four thousand six hundred year since, prophesied of the coming of the Lord
to judgment, when as yet the world had not been destroyed by waters: we do
The certentie of the day of judgment.
see the certentie of this day of the Lord, that it shall surely come.

Thus the prophets believed: Behold, says Esaias, The Lord will come like fire,
and his chariots like whirlewind that he may recompense his anger with wrath,
and his indignation with the flame of fire, for the Lord will judge with fire,
Isay, 66. 16. Thus the Apostles preached, as S. Paul testifies, Behold he will
appoint a day, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, Act. 17. 31.

A president of this judgment day we have, 1. King, 22. 19. I saw the Lord
(says Michaiah) sit on his throne, and all the host stand about him on his
right hand, and on his left. And Dan. 7. 9. I beheld till the thrones were set,
and the ancient of days did sit, etc. v. 10. a fiery stream issued from
before him, thousand thousands mustered before him, the judgment was set and
the books opened: such shall be the coming of Christ to judgment.

For like as the husbandman in the evening calls his laborers to pay them
their hire, Matthew. 20. 8. the master reckons with his servants, Math. 25. 19.
the rich man takes account of his steward, Luke 16. 2. so the Lord has
appointed a day of reckoning, wherein he will call all men to account.

The reason why God has purposed a general judgment is grounded upon his
justice, 2 Thessalonians. 1. ^. It is just with God to render tribulation to those
which trouble you, and to you which are troubled, rest, when the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels.

First then whereas some take occasion to reject the authority of this book,
because it cites a testimony out of the book of Henoch, which was
Apocryphal, as Hierome Catalog. scrip.
testifies: and the Papists by this, and that of Michael, v. 9. which are not
found in the Canonical scripture, do infer that there are many trueths to
be found, which are not written in scripture. Our answer then is this* first,
that there are many Apocriphal books of obscure and uncertain authority; as
the Acts of Peter, the gospel and revelation of Peter, a gospel to the
Hebrews, the epistle of Barnabas, the travail of Paul and Tecla, and such
other whereof Hierome makes mention; and among the rest, there was the
Catalog. scrip.
book of Henoch, cited by Origin: yet this testimony is not alleged out of
any Hom. 34. in nu^er.
such obscure book, but either delivered by faithful tradition, or else extant
in some book of authority, which is now perished: as we read of other books
in scripture now lost; as the book of the battles of the Lord, cited by
Moses, Numb. 21. 14. the book of Iasher or the righteous, Joshua, 10. 13. the
books of Nathan, Gad, Iddo, and other prophets mentioned in the Chronicles.

Secondly, our answer to the Papists Error. 37.

Of the prophecy of Henoch.


is this, 1. that although some books of scripture be wanting, yet these
remaining are sufficient. 2. that although this prophecy of Henoch were
delivered by tradition, yet is it agreeable and consonant to scripture, which
every where testifies the same: this makes not then for traditions contrary
or repugnant to scripture, such as are their unwritten traditions.

Thirdly, this text conuinceth Atheists, that expect no such day of judgment:
who herein are worse then some of the heathen, who believed a judgment after
this life, which they say was committed to the Judges, Minos, Rhadmanthus,
Aeacus: of this opinion was Plato: they erred In Gorgia.
in the manner, for God has committed all judgment to his son, but they
granted the thing. But it is safe for us to stand in awe of Gods judgment, and
to be in expectation of this day, as the Apostle says; Knowing the tenor of
this day we persuade men, 2. Cor. 5. 11. as one of the Fathers has fitly
resembled it thus, That like as scholars coming to render their lesson to
their Master, which they had received, I^ s^hola^^ esses acciperes and ^on
redderes, aut cum expe^^^ teddere si^^ metu ^^is plagarum ^modo ergo accepimus,
poste^ statuemur cora^ magistro vt ration^ redda^us de omnibus quae accepimus.
Aug. Ps. 93.

Doct. 2.


do it not without fear; so we should tremble to think of this day, when we
shall give account unto God of all things given us in charge.

Behold the Lord comes with thousands of Saints, etc.] or with his holy
thousands: that is, the holy Angels with their royal host shall accompany our
Lord Christ to judgment, and his holy Saints also shall wait and attend upon
him being eftsoons at his coming received up to glory.

We see then the prerogative of the Saints, that they shall not stand like
malefactors at the bar, before the tribunal seat of Christ, to be judged
with the wicked, but shall presently receive honor, in the sight of those
which are damned. This is that which S. Paul says, that they shall be caught
up in the clouds, and meet Christ in the air. 1. These. 4. 17. A president of
this we have, Reu. 14. 1. where the Lamb stands upon Mount Sinai with an
144. thousand that were marked in the foreheads.

Like as the virgins make haste to meet the bridegroom, Math. 25. 1. and as
the eagles gather together, where the carcass is, Math. 24. 28. so the Saints
shall be forthwith gathered to Christ.

The reason is given by our Savior, John. 12. 26. where I am there shall my
minister be: the saints then as Christ's ministers shall wait and attend upon
him.

First then by this that has been said, we may easily reco^cile two places of
scripture, which have much troubled the Fathers: the one, Psalm. 1. 6. The
wicked shall not rise up or stand in judgment: and the other, Ioh. 5. 24. He
that believes shall not come into judgment. If neither the believers nor the
wicked shall come to judgment, then it would follow that none at all should
come. Hilarie therefore and Origin think that neither the godly faithful, nor
the wicked infidels shall be judged, the one being cleared, the other condemned
in their own conscience: but they which are, inter impios, piosque medii, as
in the midst between Hilar* in Psalm. ^* Origin. in 3. lib. ^ob.
the godly and ungodly, which are in the faith and yet live not thereafter. But
S. Paul takes away this sense, saying, We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ. Godly, ungodly, good, and bad. S. Ambr. 2. Cor. 5.
10. Sermon 20. in Psalm. 119.
thinks, that the righteous only shall come into judgment: quia ^estinant
innoxij ad iudiciu^: because the guiltles and innocent make haste to judgment,
as not fearing it, the wicked do tremble at it, and dare not come near it:
but the Apostle says otherwise, that the wicked above all other, shall not
escape the judgment of God, Romans 2. 3.

But the places are better thus reconciled: the believers shall not come into
judgment, that is, as Augustine expounds iudicium condemnationis, the
judgment of condemnation: and the wicked shall not stand in judgment, that
is, in that judgment, which the righteous shall receive, as it follows in
the next words; nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. And to this
purpose Ambrose well says, He will not house fellowshippe of judgment
between the Non vult common sanctis cum di^boli sociis iudic^i e^^econso tium
Sermon 20 in Psalm. 116.
Saints and the wicked, which are companions of the devil: they shall receive
each their sentence and judgment apart. For first, the Saints shall be gathered
together, Psalm. 50. 5. and to them shall be pronounced the joyful sentence,
Come ye blessed, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, Math. 25. 34. and
afterward shall follow the fearful judgment of the wicked, v. 41. Depart
from me ye cursed.

So then we refuse Origens conceit, which upon these words, Psalm. 37. 34.
When the wicked shall perish, thou shall see: Hom. 5. in Psalm. (...).
infers that the Saints shall first see the wicked condemned, and then they
themselves shall be exalted. But the contrary is gathered out of the Gospel,
Luke 13. 28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see
Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob, etc, in the kingdom of God, and your selves
thrust out at the doors: the exaltation of the Saints in the sight of the
wicked shall go before. The prophet then in the forerecited place either
speaks of the experience which the righteous shall have in this life, when
they see the destruction of the wicked, or else it may well be, that the Saints
though first exalted, may yet see and behold the just condemnation of the
unjust: as Abraham and Lazarus did see the rich man in torment, as he saw them
in glory, Luke 16.

Secondly, the opinion of the papists may here also be refuted, who affir me,
that the Rhemists.

Error 38.

How the ^aint^ shall judge the world.


Saints shall give sentence with Christ, misunderstanding the Apostle, where
he says, the Saints shall judge the world, 1. Cor. 6. 2.

For the Apostle in so saying, means not, that God has committed the
judgment of the world to the saints, for then he should be contrary to
Christ, who says. that the father has committed all judgment to the son,
Ioh. 5. 22.

But the Apostles and saints are said to judge the world because their life and
doctrine shall be a condemnation to the world: as Christ says, His word shall
judge in the latter day, Ioh. 12. 48. And Origin does well interpret this
place thus: Not Non Paulus ^pse^ed opus Pauli, quod faci^^at in Euangelio
iudicabit.
Paul himself, but Paul's work and labor in the Gospel shall judge them. Or
by this phrase the Apostle only does express the great honor, that Christ
shall give unto Hom. 11. number
his saints, as Psalm. 149. 9. That they may execute upon them the judgment
that is written, such honor have all his saints: for like as Solomon sitting
in his throne, placed his mother in a seat at his right hand. 2. King. 2. 19.
and as Iehu took Iehonadab by the hand up into his chariot: yet neither
Solomon makes his mother, nor Iehu the other partners in the kingdom, though
they thus honored them. Neither does Christ make his Apostles his fellow
judges, though they shall sit in thrones; but hereby Cohaeredes Ch^istus non
solum in partem haereditatis, sed and in consortium pocestatis accepit. in 8.
ad Romans
their great honor is signified. And so Origin is to be understood, saying:
Christ has taken his coheires, not only to be partners of the inheritance,
but fellows with him of his power.

Thirdly, this is much to the comfort of the faithful, that howsoever they are
despised in the world, yet the Lord will advance them: as our Savior says,
Fear not Luke 12. 3^.
little stock, it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom. That we
should now so arm our selves with faith, so labor for the peace of
conscience, so love the appearing of Christ, that at his coming we may stand
forth with joy and confidence; and so decline the ways of the wicked here,
that we may escape their judgment at that day, and may be associate and
gathered to the blessed company of the Elect, that Christ may be honored in
us; and the rest of the thousands of his Saints. Amen.

verse. 15. To give judgment against all men, etc.] That is, all ungodly men,
high Doctr. 3.
or low, great or small, none shall be exempted from the judgment of that day.

So the Lord says by the prophet Jeremy, 25. 30. The Lord shall roar from
above, and thrust out his voice, etc. v. 31. The sound shall come to the ends
of the world, for the Lord has a controversy with all nations, and will enter
into judgment with all flesh, etc.

And therefore the Lord is said, when he comes to judge, to stretch out his
hands, as one that swimmeth. Isa. 25. 11. that is, his judgments shall extend
to all: and like an ouerflowing river, that goes over all the banks, and
passes through, and comes up to the neck, Isa. 8. 8. so shall be the
indignation of that day: none shall escape it, no more then the wicked people
of the old world could preserve themselves from the flood.

The giants and great men before the flood, could not deliver themselves by
their strength, Genesis 6. 4. and Pharaoh, for all his power, was overwhelmed in
the sea, Exodus 14. and the rich glutton could not be exempted from hell by his
riches.

The reason is taken from the great power of God. Who is like me, or who is the
shepherd (that is, any ruler so mighty) that can stand before me? Ier. 49. 19.

First then we see that the mighty and great Potentates in the world, shall be
judged: even the great Antichrist of Rome, Antichrist judged.
whom his clawbackes and flatterers call an other God on earth, and that he is
not to be judged of any, and though he should carry a thousand souls with him
to hell, no man is to say unto him: why do you so? yet God shall judge him.
For the devil, the beast, and false prophet, shall be cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, Revel. 20. 10. Yea the Lord shall judge the gods of the
heathen: Venus, Jupiter, and other Tunc Venus cum prolesu^ exhibebitur: and
ignitus Jupiter adducetur. Hier. ad Heliodor.
whom they worshipped as Gods, shall be brought to judgment before that great
God, who is to be feared above all gods. 1. Chron. 16. 25.

Secondly, seeing the greatest Potentates of the world cannot escape the wrath
of that day, this should keep men in fear and awe: and thus to reason with
themselves as the men of Samaria did concerning Iehu, Two kings could not stand
before him, how then shall we stand? 2. King. 10. 4. If then the mighty states
of the world shall not be exempted, thou foolish simple man, why do thou
flatter thy self in thy sins, dreaming of impunitie?

To rebuke all the ungodly among them of Doctr. 4.
all their wicked deeds, etc.] And of all their cruel or hard speakings,
which wicked sinners have spoken against him, etc.

From hence it is enforced, that wicked men shall not only give account for
their We shall answer for idle words.
ungodly works, but be accountable also for their blasphemous tongue and
impious words.

This our Savior Christ testifies, Matthew. 12. 36. that of every idle word,
that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of judgment:
for by thy words thou shall be justified, (that is, discerned, and declared to
be just) and by thy words, thou shall be condemned.

Agreeable to this, is that of Saint Paul, that every man shall receive
according to that he has done in his body, whether it be good or evil, 2.
Cor. 5. 10. but words as well as works are things done by the body, the one
by the hands, the other by the mouth and tongue, and therefore even men shall
answer for their words.

It was the just condemnation of Core, Dathan, and Abiram, for speaking
insolent and rebellious words against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. 3. And the
Scribes are judged worthy of everlasting condemnation, for speaking blasphemy
against Christ our Savior. Mat. 3. 28.

The reason is rendered by our Savior, Matthew. 12. 34. Out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks. Therefore an evil tongue is justly punished,
because besides the euilnesse thereof, it bewraieth a corrupt heart: like as
bitter waters do show the fountain to be impure: and therefore the Psalmist
compares a cruel and deceitful tongue, to the sharp arrows of a giant, and
to coals of juniper, Psalm. 130. 4. that like as arrows sent out of a strong
man's bow, go with great force and violence, and as juniper coals are
fervently hot, and continue long: such are wicked words forced out of an
evil heart, and set on fire by the malice thereof.

First then by this doctrine we may discern Error 39.
of what spirits the Papists are, that with most cruel words and reuiling
Papists bitter raylings.
speeches do blaspheme the Gospel and the professors thereof: as one most
wickedly Harding.
calls us, p. 359.
Cananites, 18.
Apostataes, 342.
sathanical, 510.
detestable blasphemers, deuillish rabble, with such other ungodly terms:
others of them blaspheme us with Rhemists.
the names of Iam. 5. sect. 5.
miscreants, Rom 1^. v 33.
reprobates, worse then Act. 8. sect. 10.
Simon Magus, Arthur. de invocat. sanct. these. 91. c. 9.
Atheists. Neither do they only thus wound and gall our persons, but do
revile the truth it self, and Church of God among us: calling it the Hard.
apol. 459.
synagogue of Satan, and our Communion the Rhem. 1. Cor. 10 sect. 9.
table of devils, and the Ioh. 4. sect. 4.
sacrifice of Ceres and Bacchus. But this is our comfort, as Hierome well
says, Aliter hominum malitia, ad Julian.
aliter Christus iudicat: the malice of men judges one way, Christ an other.
And thus they revile not us, but open their mouths against the God of heaven,
the author and finisher of our faith. They remember not, that they shall one
day give account of their wicked words, spoken against God and his Church. They
will find in the end his words true, Non facilis est veniae prava dixisse de
rectis: that it Hiero. Algos.
is not so small an offense, or so easily pardoned, to speak evil of the
righteous, God give them better minds.

Secondly, we see by this doctrine, what shall be the end of all blasphemers,
and wicked speakers, and profane persons, that delight in swearing, in jesting
or scoffing of religion, and speaking irreverently of God, of Christ, of the
blessed Trinity, of the Sacraments of the Church, as Atheists, and other
ungodly persons: the Lord shall rebuke them at his coming of all their wicked
words, and railing speeches: all their oaths, railings, blasphemies, shall
then come to their remembrance, though now they think not of them: as the Lord
says, I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee. Psalm. 50. 21.

The 12. lecture.
verse. 16. These are murmurers, complainers, etc.] The Apostle here by a
recapitulation rehearses together the several corruptions of these deceitful
hypocrites: they are toward God, murmurers: in themselves, following fleshly
lusts: toward men, either inferiors, such as their followers, they are
boasters and speak proud things; or superiors, them they flatter and have in
admiration, for their own advantage.

Murmurers, complainers.] This is the Doctr. 1.
property of carnal men, when all things fall not out according to their
corrupt desire, to murmr against God.

So says the wise man, The foolishnes of a man peruerteth his way, and his
heart fretteth against the Lord. Prove. 19. 3.

Such were the Israelites in the desert, that murmured against Moses and Aaron,
when they wanted food, and wished that they had died in Egypt, Exodus 16. 8. To
whom Moses says, Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord, v.
8. So they murmured again, when they wa^ted water, Wherefore have thou brought
us out of Egypt, to kill us, our children, and cattle with thirst? Exodus 17. 3.

But this murmuring against God, which is a kind of resisting his will, is, as
our Savior says to Saul, a kicking against the prick, Act. 9. 5. the more a
man strives, the worse is his heel galled: or like as a potsheard should
strive against a vessel of brass: a potsheard with the potsheards of the
earth, as Esai says, 45. 9. like against like: it is not for man to strive
against God.

The reason, that ought to cause us to leave murmuring is this, as it is
expressed, Exodus 16. 12. because the Lord hears the murmurings of the people:
and if, as it is in Job, No man will say unto the king, Thou art wicked, how
much less to him that accepts not the persons of princes? Job 34. 18, 19. If
murmuring and repining against the prince go not unpunished, how much less
shall they not escape that repine against God?

First then this doctrine discovers the impiety of popish professors, who
being Error 40.
discontented with the present state, murmr and repine at every thing. They
Papists murmurers and grudgers.
were not contented to enjoy their lands and livings, and to live in ease and
quiet, but began to practice against the state, and to lie in wait against
the life of our Sovereign; whereupon, the state has been enforced to make
laws to restrain their unbridled, factious, and rebellious spirit: as before
they regarded not the princes lenity, so now they complain of cruelty,
which is not so, but just severity executed upon their disloyal and
unnatural treachery.

Secondly, all carnallmen, are here laid open, who if any thing fall out cross
against them, if sickness, unseasonable weather, loss of wordly substance do
overtake them, they are ready to lay the fault upon God. I remember Origin in
his time complained of such writing upon 2. Cor. 10.

Si nos non cessemus a querelis nostris, qua^ frequenter habemus aduersus deum,
cum de caeli intemperie, infaecu^ditate fructuum, caritate imbrium causamur.
etc. Hom. 7. in Exodus


these words of Saint Paul, Murmr not as some of them murmured, and were
destroyed of Serpents; if we (says he) cease not from our complaints against
God, when we complain of the unseasonable weather, of scarcity of fruit,
want of showers, we falling into the like offense, shall taste of the like
punishment. Of such complainers Bildad says in Job, 18. 4. They are like unto
those that tear their own soul: even as mad men that rend and tear their
flesh, so are they that are impatient and discontented in their troubles, they
profit not by their murmurings, but vex their spirit, torment and tear their
soul.

Walking after their lusts:] that is, their whole desire is to satisfy their
own carnal Doct. 2.
lusts and appetite: it is one thing to walk in the flesh, (...); an other to
walk after the flesh, (...): the first the Apostle confesses of himself, 2.
Cor. 10. 3. the other he denies, v. 2. We all walk in the flesh, so long as
we dwell in the body: but they only walk after the flesh that fulfill the
lusts and desires thereof.

This then is a note of a false religion, and of the professors thereof, that
it works not true mortification, but even the best of them are addicted to
their affections of envy, ambition, covetousness, lust, and such like: it is
the right faith only that mortifieth the earthly members, and causes all
Mortification a note of true religion.
those to die unto sin, that truly receive it. This Saint Paul shows, Tit.
2. 11. The grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has appeared, and
teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. The same
Apostle shows the practice hereof in himself, that although he had lived
after the most strict sect of the Pharisees, yet he was not crucified to the
world, till he knew Christ, Gal. 6. 14. The Pharisees notwithstanding their
outward glorious show, yet were carried away with a covetous humor, they
devoured widows houses, Math. 23. 14.

For like as no rivers could heal the leprosy of Naaman but the water of
Iorda^, though the rivers of Damascus, Abanah, and Pharphar, were in show more
excellent, 2. King. 5. 12. neither had any other poole but that of Bethesda,
such precious virtue to heal the lame, thereunto sanctified by the stirring of
the angel, John 5. So no other religion can sanctify the affections, but the
faith of Jesus Christ.

The reason here of Saint Paul shows, because heresies are of the works of
the flesh, Gal. 5. 20. and the flesh lusts against the spirit: but it is the
spirit whereby we do mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8. 13. The
followers then and embracers of heresies being void of the spirit cannot
attain to true mortification.

First then this note lays open the nakedness of popery, which never is
able Error. 41.

No true mortification in Popery.


truly to sanctify the comers unto it: who are more ambitious, then their
spiritual father the Pope with his Cardinals, and popish prelacie? who more
idle and given to epicurisme then their Monks? who more traitorous to prince
and country, the^ the Jesuits a principal sect among them? and where in the
world is more fornication, and adultery, so domitrie, to be found, then in
Rome the chief seat and palace of the Popedom?

If they shall object, that there are truly mortified among them, as their
Hermites, Anachorites, Caponchians, Carthusians, many of them going barefoote,
eating no flesh, clothed with sackcloath, etc. I answer, that among the
Jews, there were the Essaei, a most strict sect, that eat no flesh at all,
and the Pharisees, that were more secular and worldly; among the heathen, we
read also of diverse sects, the Epicures, that gave themselves to pleasure.
The Stoickes and Pythagoreans, that professed strictness and severity of
life, yet both these were enemies to the Apostle Saint Paul, Act. 17. and the
other sects adversaries to our Savior Christ: there was no true humility
amongst them, what outward show soever they made. Like as it said of Plato,
that he thus answered Diogenes, when he spurned his Calco Platonis fastum,
inquit Diogenes, sed maiore fastu, inquit Plato.
carpets and couerings, saying, I tread under my feet Platoes pride: I says
he, but with greater pride, So the superstitious sects seeking for merit and
justification in their strict obseruances, thereby bewraied their pride, and
want of true mortification. So that Saint Paul has truly prophesied of them,
Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, false accusers,
intemperate, fierce, despisers of them that 2. Tim. ^. 2, 3, 4, 5.
are good, traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers
of God, having a show of godliness, but having denied the power thereof.

Secondly they which profess the right faith, must also endeavor to lead a
godly life, and to mortify their carnal lusts: for if they be not led by
the spirit of Christ, they are not his, Roman. 8. 9. and it is vain for them
to put the hand to the plough by a good profession, and to look back by an
evil conversation: such are not apt for Gods kingdom, Luke, 9. 62. Hierome
well says to this purpose, Inter Christianum and Gentilem non fides tantum
debet, sed vita distinguere, and diuersam religione^ per diuersa opera
monstrare ad Celantia: Between a Christian and a Gentile not faith only, but
the life must distinguish, and we must show a diverse religion by diverse works.

Whose mouths speak proud things:] the word is (...), swelling things like to
a bubble, or things puffed up with wind^: that is to their scholars, followers
and inferiors, they do boast themselves, and make great ostentation of
knowledge: such are all hypocrites, schismatickes, heretics, False religion
full of boa^ting
the Apostle does so prophecy of them, that they should be boasters, 2. Tim.
3. 2. as the wise man says in the Proverbs, There is, that makes himself
rich, having nothing, Prou. 13. 7. so do these make themselves rich in
knowledge and virtue, wanting both.

Such an one was Zidkiah, that smote Michaiah upon the cheek, saying, When
went the spirit of God from me to speak unto thee? 1. King. 22. 24. This proud
hypocrite boasts, as though he only had the spirit of God, whereas he was
altogether destitute of it.

Such a proud boaster was the Pharise, Luke 18. that vaunteth even before God
of his virtuous life, but the Publicane is preferred before him.

Like as the harlot is described, crying thus to those that pass by the way:
Who so is simple let him come hither, and to him that is destitute of wisdom,
she says, etc. Prou. 9. 16. She uses the very same words which Wisdom does
unto her followers, v. 4. Like as the harlot makes ample and large promises to
those whom she enticeth, yet her guests are in the depth of hell, v. 18. even
so do false teachers and deceivers abuse the simple.

This cunning they learn of their great Master Satan, who as he can
transform himself into an angel of light, so these false Apostles are
deceitful workers, 2. Cor. 11. 13, 14. So did Satan deal with our Eve in
paradise, promising if they did eat of the forbidden fruit, they should in
knowledge be as God: but by their transgression; they came nearer to the nature
and condition of the devil that tempted them.

First then, let us compare the cunning practices of the Romanists, and lay
them Error. 42.

Papists boasts and vain brags of faith.


to this rule; who do boast more of knowledge and godliness then they? what
great promises do they make to their proselytes of indulgences, pope-pardons,
a paena and culpa, of the intercession of Saints, merits of Martyrs, virtue of
images, releife by their masses, of holy bread, holy water, the agnus dei,
crucifixe, hallowed grains, and such like toys, which are all but popish
trash and trumpery? These their promises, are like to that which Rabsakeh made
in the name of the king of Assure his master, make appointment with me and come
unto me, that every man may eat of his own vine, and sigtree, etc. till I
come and bring you to a land like your own land, a land of wheat and wine, of
bread and vineyards, a land of oil and honnie, that ye may live not die, 2.
Kin. 18. 31, 32. Here were goodly promises, but the people found no such
matter, when they were carried away captive into the land of the Assyrians:
neither shall popish corrupted proselytes find any thing answerable in popish
religion, to the great protestations of their Iudasited, I would say, Iesuited
fathers.

Secondly, the people of God are here warned, not to regard swelling words, or
glorious titles, if any shall come unto the^, with the name of the Catholic
Church, the Popes holiness, the unspotted virgin, with the body of Christ in
a box, and such like: for as Origin well says, All heretics, Omnes
haereti^i^v^ Judas, Ihesu dicunt Rabbi, and osculisigno, i quadam indicatione
cha itatis veritatem produnt. Tract. 35. in Math.
as Judas, say unto Christ, Master, and with the sign of a kiss, that is a
certain show of charity they do betray the truth: even so do heretics
in these days, which in a show of truth betray the truth.

Having men's persons in admiration for lucre sake:] This then is an other note
of Doctr. 4.

Flattering in false teachers.


hypocritical seducers, that such, as serve their turn, and are for their
profitte, they will extol to the skies, and deprave others as much that are
not to their humor.

The prophet Isay notes this in his time to have been a fault, that
flatterers would call a fool wise or ingenious, and a nigard or churl
liberal, Isay, 32. 5. but he prophesies that this custom should not be used
by the faithful servants of Jesus Christ.

Such were the princes of Zoan, and counselors of Egypt that flattered foolish
and simple Sethon their king, saying unto him, that he was the son of the wise,
Isa. 19. 11.

Thus the woman of Tekoah being instructed by wily Ioab, flattered king
David, saying, My Lord the king is as an angel of God, that she might win
his favor for the return of bloody Absalom, 2. Sam. 14. 17. Thus Baals
prophets that were fed at Iezabels table, flattered Ahab, and pleased his
humor, that they might pamper their bellies still, 1. King. 22. 6.

Like as the strumpet enticeth the young man with carpets, and laces, and
perfumes, Pro. 7. 16. 17. til she have got all his substance into her house,
Prou. 5. 10. so do flatterers play, they perfume and please others with sugared
words, and renowned praises, as with toys and laces, till they have served
their own turn, and sucked advantage to themselves.

The reason that moves men to use flattering words, is because they know,
that many times the truth offends, as the Apostle says, Am I therefore
become your enemy, because I speak the truth! Gal. 4. 16. As Hierome says,
The truth is bitter, of a Ve^itas amara est, rugolae fro^tis and tristis and
offendit corr^ctos. Dialog. 1. advers Pelagian.
frowning and severe countenance, and offends them that are reproved. They
foolishly consider not the end: for as the wise man says, He that rebukes a
man, shall find more favor at the length, then he that flattereth with his
tongue, Prou. 28. 23. This glozing and clawing of hypocrites, in the end will
bring shame.

First we here discover the hypocrisy of the Romanists, Jesuits, seminary
priests, Error 43.
with others, that will crouch and insinuate themselves into the courts and
favor of princes, commending them with most honorable words, and blazing
their praises, The popish sort flatterers of the state.
many times, but due and just, but they do it cunningly to make a way for
themselves, and to get footing for their superstition. It is to be feared, yea
and almost it is apparent, that these popish practisers, seeing all their
violent and treacherous plotts to be frustrate, do attempt now by flattering
the state to win favor: but I trust our wise governors, having sufficient
experience of them already, will remember that worthy saying of the wise man,
speaking of flatterers, Though he speak favorably, believe him not: for their
are seven abominations in his heart. Prou. 26. 25.

Again, this may be a rule to all true professors of the Gospel, especially
to ministers of the word of God, that they regard not the persons of men,
neither seek to please them, for their own preferment sake. I am afraid,
least there be many such preachers, that having occasion to speak before great
persons, are afraid to offend them, but study to deliver pleasing things: not
remembering what Saint Paul says, If I should yet please men, I were not the
servant of Christ. Neither shall the fawning persuasions of such profit the
souls of the hearers, no more then a building can stand, which is daubed up
with untempered and unwrought mortar. Ezech. 13. 10.

The 13. lecture.
verse. 17. But ye beloved:] Now follows the fourth and last part of this
Epistle, which is the conclusion, containing an effectual exhortation, from v.
17. to v 24. and a solemn thanksgiving unto God, v. 24, 25. The exhortation
has three parts: 1. how they should behave themselves toward these
hypocrites, v. 17, 18, 19. 2. what they should do concerning themselves, v.
20, 21. 3. what toward their brethren within, v. 22, 23.

But ye, beloved, remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ:] In that this our Apostle refers Doctr. 1.
them to the sayings of the elder Apostles, he thereby teaches us, what
authorities we ought to rely upon in matters of faith: not upon humane and
terrene, such as are the writings of poets, philosophers, and other heathen,
but upon divine sayings of the prophets and Apostles.

So the Apostle says, We are built upon the foundation of the prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Ephesians. ^. 20.
Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

As our Savior Christ himself being to preach in the Synagogue, takes his
theme out of the prophecy of Esaias. Luke 4. Saint Peter refers the brethren
to the epistles of Saint Paul, 2. Pet. 3. 15. thus writing: As our beloved
brother Paul, according to the wisdom given unto him, wrote unto you, as one,
that in all his epistles speaks of these things.

For like as it is a vain thing to leave the fountain that is never dried up,
and to dig broken pittes, that can hold no water, Ierem. 2. 13. so is it to
leave the word of God, and to follow the fancies of men.

And as the Israelites loathed Manna, and longed for the fleshpottes of Egypt,
Exodus 16. so do they that not contented with the word of God, delight
themselves with the gross inventions of men.

For if the word of God be profitable to reach, to improoue, to correct and
instruct in righteousness, and not only profitable, but sufficient, being
able to make the man of God perfect to every good work, 2. Tim. 3. 16. where a
sufficiency may be had, other helps are superfluous.

First then the Papists are here confuted, who in stead of Scripture in their
Error 44.

Humane writings preferred before scripture in popery.


Churches, did read their legend stories, lies of their own making, Prophets
and Apostles in the mean while being silent: in their schools they expounded
not the books of scripture, but some other humane author, as Dionysius
hierarchy, or such like: in their writings they did gloase and comment upon
the master of sentences, in stead of interpreting the scripture.

Next unto these, young wanton deuines are reproved, of which sort there are
many in these days, especially in the Universities, that stuff their sermons
with the quotations of Philosophers, Poets, and make ostentation of humane
eloquence, and so preach themselves, and not Jesus Christ. S. Paul did not so:
His preaching was not in the entising speech of man's wisdom. 1. Cor. 2. 4.

If any shall object Saint Paul's example, that alleges the testimony of
heathen How S. Paul alleges Poets.
Poets, Act. 17. 28. 1. Cor. 15. 33. Tit. 1. 12. the answer is ready: 1. the
Apostle is very sparing in such allegations, he uses them but thrice. 2. He
does it not with vain ostentation of their names, or producing of long
sentences in a strange language, but in the same wherein he wrote and spoke. 3.
He does it upon just occasion, in confuting the heathen by their own writers:
which we deny not, but is a lawful and commendable use of profane authors:
for so Origin against Celsus, Cyprian against Demetrianus, Methodius against
Porphirie, Hilarious against Vioscorus, being Gentiles, do urge the
authorities and testimonies of their own wise men. But Saint Paul, using such
testimonies sparingly, not with vain ostentation, neither superfluously, but
upon just occasion; is no warrant to our green Divines to do it ordinarily,
vainly, unprofitably: and so I conclude this point with Origin, who reading
according to the Septuagint, that Joshua made knives of stone, or of the rock,
to circumcise the people, thus writes: Esaxo non ex ferro artificis opere
fabricatos: hoc Hom. 26. ^^ Ios.
ostendit, quod s^rmo hic Dei, qui circumcidere de animis auditorum immunditias
potest, non ex art grammatica vel rhetorica veniens, neque doctorummalleis
edomitus aut studiorum incudibus climatus, sed ex petra illa descendit, quae de
monte sine manibus abscissa est. They were made of stone not by the work of
the artificer, because that speech which may circumcise the uncleanness of
the hearers, proceeds not from the art of grammar or rhetoric, ^ined with
the hammers of the learned, and polished with study, but descends from that
rock which was cut out of the mount without hands.

Lastly, the curiosity of the people is here restrained, that they should not
fancy novelties, or delight in vain words, desiring to have their ears
rather tickled with curious speech, then their hearts edified with comfortable
doctrine: who admire those that for Prophets allege poets, for Apostles
Philosophers, for holy Scripture humane conceits: such hearers also Saint Paul
prophesied of, that having itching ears, should after their own Against
itching ears.
lusts get them an heap of teachers: and the reason is there alleged,
because they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, 2. Tim. 4. 3. Such hearers
make such teachers: that now men waxing weary of the plain doctrine of faith,
affect novelties: like sick stomachs that must have their meat relished with
some new devised sauce: as the Israelites that loathed Ma^na lusted for the
fine and dainty quayle flesh, but while it was between their teeth they died;
so they which forsake wholesome Manna, for men's quailed queazic fancies, do
starve their own souls.

verse. 18. How that they told you there should be in the last times mockers:]
The Apostles called all those the last time, Doctr. 1.
from the first coming of Christ to the latter day, and his second coming.

Saint John agrees with this our Apostle, Babes, it is the last time, 1. Ioh.
2. 18. Saint Paul also says, These things are written to admonish us upon
whom the latter ends of the world are come. 1. Corinthians. 10. 11. Yea the
Prophets speaking before of the age wherein the Apostles lived, calls them
the last days, as Saint Peter applies the prophecy of Joel, Io^l ^. ^^.
Act. 2. 17. where he shows by evident demonstration, the accomplishing of
these things which the Prophet foretold should fall out in the last days; as
that God would power out of his spirit upon all flesh: their sons and
daughters should prophecy, etc. which was then presently fulfilled before
their eyes, when the Apostles and brethren being filled with the holy Ghost,
began to speak with diverse tongues.

This is expressed in the parable of the eleventh hour, Math. 20. All the time
of the last calling of the world by Christ, is called by the Apostle, novissima
hora, the last hour, 1. Ioh. 2. 18. For like as after the sun begins to
decline, we count it the latter part of the day, though yet there are some
hours to night; so this is the latter age of the world, though many hundred
years thereof are already past.

Saint John gives this reason, why it should be accounted the last time, even
then when he lived: As ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are
there many Antichrists, whereby we know it is the last time, 1. Ioh. 2. 18.

Another reason may be gathered from the words of our Savior, Math. 11. 14.
If ye will receive it, this is Elias which was to come: from whence, we reason
thus; Elias was to come in the last times, even immediately before the great
and fearful day of the Lord, Mal. 3. 1. But John Baptist was that Elias:
therefore the time, wherein John Baptist preached and ever since are the last
times.

First then if the last times began in the Apostles days, and there are now
run of these last times, 16. hundred years, and Error. 45.

Antichrist is come long si^ce.


by the scriptures we find that Antichrist was to be revealed in the last
times; here agreat error of the Papists is discovered, who imagine that
Antichrist is not yet come, neither can they tell when he shall come; which
their opinion is contrary to the scriptures: for if the mystery of iniquity
began to work in the Apostles time, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 6. and if then many
Antichrists were in the world, the forerunners of the great Antichrist, how
can it be that a way having been prepared for Antichrist above a thousand and
half of years; that he should not yet come. And further, seeing that which was
the only let of Antichrists coming, is taken out of the way, which was the
Roman Empire, which has been many years since changed and altered, why
should not Antichrist be revealed, there being nothing to hinder him? And as
touching the Roman Empire, we say it is removed out of the way, both in
respect of place, name, order, Error. 46.
authority, jurisdiction: the place and seat of the Emperor was in Rome,
from thence it was translated to the Greeks, from them to the French, from them
to the Germans: neither has now the Emperor his name of the Romans, but of
the Germans: the order is changed, the Empire went by succession, now it is
conferred by election: his authority was before the Bishop of Rome, now it is
inferior: the Emperor did sometime confirm the election of the Pope, now
the Pope confirms the election of the Emperor: and as for his jurisdiction,
sometime all the West parts were obedient and subject to the Emperor but now
all kingdoms are fallen away from him his imperials are limited to certain
free cities in Germany. Wherefore seeing that which let Antichrists coming
is taken out of the way, as the Apostle says, Only he which now withholdeth,
shall let, till he be taken out of the way, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. We conclude that
Antichrist is already, and has been a long time in the world, and he none
other but the Bishop of Rome.

Secondly, seeing the last times began so many hundred years ago, and we
are so much the nearer the end of the world, how much more ought we to be
careful The last times should prepare us for Christ.
to address our selves for the coming of the Lord? if the Apostle thus
persuaded in his time, The Lord is at hand, be careful for nothing, Phil. 4.
5. 6. then now the nearer the Lord is at hand, the less greedy should we be
for the things of this life. Therefore the Lord in wisdom has concealed the
secret of his coming, still telling us by his Apostles and ministers, that we
are in the last times, that we might always be watchful. Carnal and worldly
men make a contrary use: for some of the^ as Saint Peter says, will begin
to mock and say, where is the promise of his coming? 2. Pet. 3. 4. still the
last times, the last times, say they, but we see no end yet: whom the Apostle
answers excellently, first that in respect of God there is no slackenes,
because one day is with him as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day: secondly, neither is he slack to us ward, but patient; because he would
have all men come to repentance.

Others there are that take more liberty to sin, because their master
deferreth his coming, Matthew. 24. 48. But our Savior Christ teaches us to
make another use, Non prodest scire, sed m^^uere, quod suturum est, vt se^* per
limus quasi in excubus co^stituti: and ne aut iustus estet remissior, aut
pe^cator securior, vt ignorantes timer^mus, obseruantes eme^d^remur. lib. 5.
deside cap. 8.
Watch for ye know not when the Master of the house will come, Mark. 13. 35.
and so I end with that good sentence of Ambrose: It profits not to know,
but to fear what is to come, that we always may be set as in our watch, least
the righteous man should be more remiss, or the sinner secure, that not
knowing we should fear, and observing amend.

There should be mockers, which should walk after their own ungodly lusts.]
We Doct. 3.

Against scorners of religion.


see, that they which measure every thing according to their own sensual
lust, become mockers and scorners of religion, and of the mystery of God, and
have in derision the faithful professors thereof.

Such the Prophet speaks of, Psalm. 89. 51. They have slaundered the
footesteps of thine anointed: that is, they laugh to scorn those that
patiently wait upon the Lord, and walk in his paths: the prophet Isay
complains of such, that scorned and mocked at the judgments of God, as
though they should not come near them, Isay, 28. 14, 22.

Such were Lots sons in law, that when they were warned to depart the city,
he seemed to them, as though he had mocked, but indeed they mocked him, and
regarded not his words, Genesis 19. Thus the Philosophers mocked and scorned S.
Paul when he spoke unto them of the resurrection, and of the day of judgment,
Act. 17.

Even like as the Israelites believed not, that God would provide for them in
the desert, saying, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? Psalm. 78. 19.
And as the noble man gave no credit to the prophet, when he foretold of the
great plenty and cheapnesse of corn, to morrow this time, saying, that
though God should open the windows of heaven, it could not so come to pass, 2
Kin. 7. 2. Such are these mockers, that in matters of religion are incredulous,
as concerning the mystery of the incarnation of Christ, the resurrection, life
everlasting, and such other mysteries, thinking these things impossible

The reason of this their scorning incredulity the Apostle shows, thus
writing, 1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know the^
because they are spiritually discerned.

First then by way of reproof this doctrine may be applied against all
professed or close Atheists, which deride the doctrine of the Trinity, of Gods
providence, of our redemption by Christ, of the virgins birth: they believe
neither heaven nor hell, to whom I say with the prophet, Isay, 28. 22. Now
therefore be no mockers least your bonds increase: least you sooner feel God,
then believe him: as Pharao, who contemptuously said, who is the Lord, that I
should let Israel go? Exodus 5. 2. to his cost had experience of Gods power,
being overwhelmed in the red sea.

Secondly, let Papists take heed, that are the greatest scorners of the faith
and Error. 47.

Papists scorners.


gospel of Christ in these days, calling us so^^fidians, only faith men, the
assurance of salvation, presumption, our communion table an oyster table: a
christian in Italy, B White apud Foxum.
in scorn they take to be a fool or idiot: they jest at our sermons, deride
our prayers: in disputation with them, they thrust out their tongues make
mockes and mowes without all shamefastness and modesty. Like as the prophet
David complains of his enemies, Psalm. 35. 16. They gnash with their teeth.
verse. 19. wink with their eye. v. 21. they gape upon me with their mouths.
God give them better grace.

Thirdly, let us take heed, that there be not any scorners among us, which
deride the godly disposition or honest life of their brethren: as David had
experience, Psalm. 69. 10. When I wept and fasted, it turned to my reproach: I
put on sackecloath, and I became a proverb unto them. But let such take heed,
least if they scorn Isaac with Ismael, together with Ismael they be cast out
of Abraham's house, and with Esau loose the birthright.

Likewise we are taught not to measure the high points of religion with the
shallowe reach of man's wit: for this were, as if a man should gather the wind
into his fist, or bind the waters in a garment, Prou. 30. 4. But that, if we
remain yet in doubt, let us seek with humility to believe what we read, not
by reason to comprehend: as the prophet says: Nisi credideritis non
intelligetis: Unless ye believe, ye cannot understand. Isay. 7. 9. And as one
writes well upon these words of the Apostle, He that comes unto God must
believe. Heb. 11. 6. No man goes to the sea and commits himself Nec mare
quis ing^editu^, ^ec liquido and profundo se committi^ elemento, nisi credat se
posse seruari, etc. Ruffin. Symbol.
to that liquid element, unless he did believe he might be saved: the
husbandman would not sow his seed, if he did not hope for increase: and
marriage is contracted for hope of issue, etc. So every man that enters into
Gods school, must with humility believe God that teaches, though he do not
understand the reason of Gods works.

Uerse 19. These are makers of sects, or which segregate themselves (...), We
must take heed of sect^.
fleshly or sensual (...), having not the spirit:] From hence we learn that
it is a work of the flesh, and that they are carnally minded, void of the
spirit of God, that are given to make sects and do divide themselves from the
fellowship of Gods Church.

Saint Paul reckons up heresies among other works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 20.
Another Apostle also says, They went out from us, but they were not of us. 1.
Ioh. 2. 19. that is, they were not of the Church of Christ, nor yet led by
his spirit, because they separated themselves.

Such an one was Diotrephes, that received not the brethren, but pratled
against the Apostle with malicious words, Ioh. epist. 3. v. 9. and Demas that
departed from S. Paul, and severed himself from the Church, 2. Tim 4. 10.

These may fi^ly be compared to the raven, Genesis 8. that being sent once out of
the arc, returned not again as the dove did: such are heretics and
sectaries, that for ever cut themselves off from the church of God.

And like as, while the whole host of Israel kept an holy rest in celebrating
the sabbath according to the commandment of God, certain rebellious persons
went out from them to gather Manna, but found none. Such are they, which gather
to themselves and invent new and strange doctrines apart from the Church of God.

And there are two special causes, that make heretics to divide themselves;
either ambition and vain glory, as Diotrephes, that loved to have the
pre-eminence Ioh. epist. 3. 9. opposed himself to the brethren: or else the
hope or expectation of some worldly commodity or gain: as Demas embraced the
world, and departed from Saint Paul, 2. Timoth. 4. 10. To this purpose
Augustine well defines an heretic: He is an heretic which for Heretic^s
est, qui alicuius te^poralis commodi, and maxim glori^ and principatus causa
fal^as and nouas opiniones gignit aut lequitur: de vtilitat. credend. c. 1.

Papists mak^^^ of sects.


some temporal commodity, but chiefly for glory and pre-eminence sake, does
devise or follow false and new opinions.

First then, whereas the papists our adversaries charge us, that we have
divided our selves from the fellowshippe of the Church, and from the obedience
of the sea of Rome, going out into diverse sects, etc. Rhemists, annot. Iud. v.
16. and so are those of whom the Apostle here speaks. We do most justly
return this accusation upon their own heads, that have Error. 48.
departed from the Apostolic faith, and have made an apostasy from the
ancient truth, as the Apostle prophesied of them: that there should come a
departing or apostasy, when the man of sin should be revealed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
3. The protestants then leaving the society of the false and corrupt Roman
Church, do no more segregate themselves then Noah did, when he went into the
arc, and left the old world in their infidelity: or Lot, which went out of
Sodom, forsaking both their sins and plagues: or Elias which separated
himself from Baals priests: or our Savior, that refused the traditions of the
Scribes and Pharisees, or the Apostles, that communicated not with the idolatry
of the Gentiles. They then are not schismatickes or sectaries, that are fewer
in number, neither are they Catholics, that boast of their multitudes: for
Jacobs family was fewer in number then the Cananites, Genesis 34. 30. And there
were four hundred Baals priests, to one Michaiah, 1. King. 22. But they make
sects and segregate themselves, that forsake the ancient faith of the Apostles
and primitive Church, as the Romish Church has done: and they are the true
Catholic Church, which retain the truth, and profess the right faith, how
small so ever their number is.

Again, we are taught to take diligent heed, that we be not at any time
seduced to break the peace and unity of the Church, We must not leave the
fellowship of the Church.
to run into schisms: give not ear to the enticing persuasions of
Brownists, Familists, Anabaptists, Papists, to forsake the communion of the
saints in the visible Church of God amongst us: for if the branch be broken
off from the stock, it withers, or if the sheep go a stray from the flock
it is in the way of perishing. Such are they that go out of the Church.
Ambrose well compares such unto moths: Arrius is a moth, so is Photinus, which
do rend the holy garment of the Church by their Tinea est Arrius, tinea
Phorinus, quisanctum ecclesiae vestimentu^ impietato sua s^indunt, and
sacrilego mors^ fidei velamen obrodunt. lib. 1. de spirit. c. 19.
impiety, and do with their sacrilegious biting gnawe the holy veil of
faith. Such mothwormes let us take heed of, following the counsel of the
Apostle, not forsaking the fellowship which we have among our selves, as the
manner of some is, but let us exhort one another, Heb. 10. 25.

The 14. lecture.
Verse. 20. But ye beloved edify your selves in your most holy faith, etc.]
This is the second part of this last exhortation, where the Apostle exhorts
unto two necessary graces of faith and charity, showing the means how to be
preserved, and to persevere in both: in faith, by effectual prayer in the
spirit, v. 20. In charity, in the expectation of everlasting life by the
mercy of God, v. 21.

Edify your selves:] (...), that is, Doct. ^.
building upon: whereby the Apostle signifies an increasing and going forward
in faith; even as a building, the foundation once laid, is still raised up, and
one piece added to another.

To this purpose the prophet Isaie speaks divinely, c. 40. 31. They that wait
upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall lift up the wings as
Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint:
that is, they shall still We must increase in faith.
increase and go forward in the race of faith, not fainting nor giving over.

Saint Paul thus professes of himself, that he did forget that which was
behind, and endeavor to that which is before and follow hard toward the
mark, Phil. 3. 13. He did find in himself an endeavor still to go forward,
even as he that runs in a race, if he will come to the mark and obtain the
prize, must still go forward.

Like as it is said of those that go up to Jerusalem, they go from strength
to strength, Psalm. 84. 7. They proceed on by steps and degrees, like an army
marching in battle array. And the wise man to the same effect says, The way of
the righteous shines as the light, that shines more and more unto perfect
day.

The reason hereof may be gathered from that saying of our Savior, Ioh. 15. 2.
Every branch, that bears not fruit in me, he takes away, and every one
that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. So
the^ that branch which grows and increases not, is like to prove a dead and
withered branch: and so is that faith, that does not gather daily more
strength. We ought therefore to grow and increase that we may appear to be
living branches graft into the stock, which is, Christ.

First this doctrine, which teaches increase Error. 49.
of faith, meets with an erroneous opinion of the papists, who do require of
their people only a weak and imperfect faith, to believe as the Church
believes, and say it is sufficient though they themselves be not able to give
any reason, A general confused says not sufficient.
nor render any account of faith: for where is now this edifying of our selves
in faith, this spiritual grows and increase of faith? they grow not at all,
which content themselves with a rude, weak, imperfect and general faith. S.
Peter otherwise teaches, that we should be ready to give an answer to every
man that asks a reason of the hope that is in us. 1. Pet. 3. 15. And thus
Origin expounds those words of the Apostle to our Savior Christ: Lord
increase A d^^ge nobis fidem i habentes eam fidem quae non est secundum
scientiam, habeamus and eam, quae est secundum scientiam. in c 10. ad Romans
our faith, Luke, 17. 5. That is, having that faith, which is not according to
knowledge; let us have that also which is according to knowledge.

Secondly we see what they may think of themselves, that continue in one stay:
their faith, hope, charity, knowledge, zeal, is the same, which it was many
years since: surely such may worthily suspect themselves that their faith is
dying in the^: for it is most true, qui non proficit, deficit, he that
increases not, decreaseth. Wherefore every man ought to give all diligence, to
add grace to grace, virtue to virtue: as the Apostle says, Join virtue with
your faith, with virtue knoweledge, with knoweledge temperance, etc. so shall
they not be idle and unfruitful, 2. Pet. 1. 5, 6, 8. And as Hierome says,
Isti sunt veluti scalae gradus, quam vidit Jacob: these are as the stairs of
Fabiolae. tom. 4.
the ladder which Iaacob saw, whereby we must scale the heavens.

Praying in the holy Ghost.] The Apostle here shows that the means whereby
Doctrine. 2.
we are enabled to edify our selves, and to go forward in faith, is by
prayer: he likewise teaches, what manner of prayer it ought to be, in the holy
Ghost: that is, we must pray effectually, zealously, as the spirit shall make
us to pray.

Saint James testifies as much saying, If any of you lack wisdom, let him
ask of god, who gives to all men liberally, etc. but let him ask in faith.
Iam. 1. 5. The prophet David is a notable president to us in both these points:
that prayer is a mean to obtain such graces as we want, Psalm. 109. 4. But I
betake my self unto prayer: and that it ought to be with the heart, Psalm. 108.
1. Mine heart is prepared, mine heart is prepared, O God, I will sing and give
praise.

Exor. For like as Moses with his rod wrought wonders, and Elisha with his
staff, in such stead is prayer unto Christians: but like as the Arc was
covered with gold, both within and without, Exodus 25. 11. so our prayer must
not consist in glorious and goodly words, but proceed from the golden
meditations of the heart.

Aitiol. For as God is, so ought our prayer to be, He is a spirit, and we must
worship him (and pray unto him) in spirit: and because Ioh. 4. 24.
Christ says, Come unto me all that are weary, and I will ease you, Math. 11.
28. and to him we have access by prayer: therefore we ought to have recourse to
prayer, as unto the haven and rest of our souls.

If then, our prayers ought to be spiritual, whereunto we are stirred by the
H. ghost, which as the Apostle says, makes requests for us with sight, that
can not be expressed: Romans 8. 26. then first of all, all lip-labor Error 50.
in prayer is condemned, such as are all popish Popish liplabour in prayers
vain^.
latin prayers made by simple people without any knowledge or understanding of
that which is prayed: which is contrary to the Apostles rule, I will pray with
the spirit, I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the
spirit, I will sing with the understanding also. 1. Cor. 14. 15. For if public
prayer ought to be made to the understanding of others, whereof the Apostle
here chiefly speaks, much more to the understanding of those themselves, that
pray. Origin says well, upon these words of our Savior, If two agree upon
^arth, whatsoever they desire, it shall be given them, Math. 18. 19. that is,
There must be a consent of the heart in believing, and a ^^it consensus cordis
crodendo, linguae co^sitendo. tract. 6. Matthew.
consent of the tongue in confessing.

And secondly, seeing prayer is so necessary an instrument of the soul, they
are grievous offenders that so seldom use it. Daniel would not forbear
prayer 30. days unto God, though it cost him his life, but used to pray thrice
every day. Dan. 6. 10. Men now are not only terrified from prayer, but
comforted and encouraged to pray, yet I am afraid that many pass days,
weeks, months, years, and never humble themselves in their private prayer
unto God. Great is the efficacy of fervent prayer, Iam. 5. 16. And Hierome
well says, Vim facicbat precum tuarum fidelis ambitio: The faithful ambition,
ad C^la^ti^^.
as it were of your prayers, was violent and forceable.

verse. 22. Keep your selves in the love of God:] He means brotherly
charity, which is wrought in us by God. The love of God is taken either for
that love whereby God loves us, 1. Ioh. 4. 9. In this appeared the love of God
toward us, etc. or whereby we love God, v. 19. We love him, because he loved us
first: or for that love, whereby we love one an other: which is said to be the
love of God, because it comes of God, 1. Ioh. 4. 7. Beloved, let us love one
an other: for love comes of God: and so is it taken here.

The Apostle then in these words, exhorts Doct. ^.
to perseverance and continuance in love, that we should take heed of all
offenses and occasions, whereby our charity might be interrupted or broken
off: so that it is as great a virtue, to cherish and nourish Christian love, as
once to have begun it.

Testim. Therefore the Apostle says, Endeavoring to keep the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. And again, Be angry and sin not,
v. 26. that is, so moderate your affections, as thereby ye sin not against
charity.

Examp. Thus was Abraham desirous to keep charity, he being both far greater
then Lot, as elder in years, his uncle by kindred, and heir of Gods promises,
yet thus offers himself unto him, seeking peace, Let there be no strife, I
pray thee, between thee and me, neither between thy heardmen, and mine. Genesis
13. 8. Thus did Moses seek to pacify the strife between two Hebrews his
brethren. Exodus 2. 13.

Exornat. The amity and love of brethren is like a threefold coard, that can
not easily be broken, Eccles. 4. 12. And the Prophet speaking of brotherly
love, gives it these two properties, that it is both bonum, and iucundum, a
thing good and profitable, as also sweet and pleasant: for the sweetness
thereof he compares it to the savor of Aarons ointment, for the profit
thereof, to the dew of the hills Hermon and Sion, that water the valleies and
make them fruitful. Psalm. 133. Some things are profitable, but not pleasant,
as affliction and crosses; some things are pleasant, but not profitable, as the
pleasures of sin; but Charity and Love has this pre-eminence, The
excellen^^^ of charity.
to be both pleasant and profitable.

Aitiolog. Now the Apostle shows the reason, why we ought to be careful to
maintain peace and love. Ephesians. 4. 5. There is one Lord, one faith, one
baptism: that is, like as they, which are servants to one master, of one
opinion and judgment, and of the same blood will hold together; so should we,
being servants to one Lord, professors of the same faith, and of one
spiritual kindred in baptism.

Applicat. Now whereas the Apostle says, Keep your selves, least the Papists,
and Error 51.
other freewill-men should take advantage by these and such other words, as
though it Against freewill.
were in our own power to keep or preserve our selves in charity, or in any
other Christian virtue, we make this answer unto them. 1. That it follows
not, upon these and other such like precepts, given in Scripture, that it is in
man's power to perform them: for then, where S. John Baptist says, Repent: for
the kingdom of God is at hand, Matthew. 3. 2. and where Saint Peter says, Save
your selves from this froward generation, Act. 2. 40. it might be enforced,
that man has power by his freewill to repent, and to save himself. 2.
Wherefore, as the Apostle says, the law was given us as a schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ, Galat. 3. 29. so to the same end are these and such other
precepts set forth in scripture, that man seeing his own weakness to keep
them, may thereby as by a schoolmaster be brought to seek help from God: as
Augustine well says, Ad hoc lex praecepit ista, vt cum in his imple^do homo
deficeret, nonse extollat superbia tumidui, De great. and lib. ^rbi^* c. 6.
sed ad gratiam aufugiat fatigatus. Therefore has the law commanded these
things, that man failing in the fulfilling of them, should not swell with
pride, but run unto grace for help, being wearied in himself. 3. Again
another reason is why the Scriptures so exhort us, because man is in deed to
will and perform all those things, yet not of himself, but by the strength of
grace: as the Apostle says, He labored: yet not he, but the grace of God in
him, 1. Cor. 15. 10. And this point is well touched by Augustine: Nos velle cum
volumus, sed ille facit vt velimus bonum: certum est nos facere, sedille facit,
vt faciamus. That we do De bono persev. c. 16.
will, when any thing is willed; but God makes us to will: it is certain, that
we do, when any thing is done, but he makes us do it.

Secondly we are taught by this doctrine, that we ought to be most careful to
keep charity, and so shun all occasions which may interrupt it: not as
they, which do snuff and puff upon every light matter, and being once
offended, are hardly reconciled: but let us remember the prudent counsel of
the wise man, The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and his glory is to
pass by an offense. Prou. 19. 11.

Looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life.] Here we
learn that Doctr. ^.
the hope and expectation of the kingdom of God is an excellent mean, as to
sustain a man's infirmity in affliction, so to stir up his zeal unto every
Christian duty.

Testim. Thus the Apostle testifies, 1. Cor. 15. 58. Therefore, my brethren,
be ye steadfast, immovable, always abundant in the work of the Lord, for as
much as you know your labor is not in vain in the Lord: that is, that God
has a reward in store for the faithful and fruitful works of his servants.

Exampl. David shows the practice thereof in himself: I should have fainted,
except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.
Psalm. 27. 13.

Exorn. Like as the husbandman endures his labor, hoping to receive the
fruits, 2. Tim. 2. 6. and as he that keeps the fig tree shall eat thereof,
Prou. 27. 18. so the assurance of the reward should make us diligent and ready
to every good work.

Aitiolog. The reason is taken from the contrary. 1. Cor. 15. 19. If then in
this life we should only have hope, we were of all men most miserable. Now
because we know, that the condition of Gods children is most happy and
blessed, we assuredly believe, that God has a reward in store, the hope
whereof brings chearefulnes, and increases our courage and zeal to every
good work.

Applic. First then by these words of the Apostle, who ascribes everlasting
life to Heaven is not merited.
the mercies of Christ; the error of the Papists is confuted, that say, heaven
may as Error 51.
well be merited by good works, as hell by evil: and that life everlasting is
the stipend of justice, as damnation is the stipend of sin. Rhemist. annot.
in Romans 6. 8. sect. But here the Apostle directly refers life eternal to
the mercy of God: and S. Paul, Romans 6. 23. says, it is the gift of God;
whereas the wages of sin is death. Ambrose agrees to this Apostolic
doctrine: Let Intelligant se donum gratiae, non operu^ accepis^e mercedem. lib.
1. de ^ocat g^nt. c. 3.
them know that they have received a gift of grace, not a wages of their works.

Secondly we must take heed of an oother popish error: they say, men ought to
do good in respect and for their reward, and recompense in heaven. Rhemist.
Hebr. 11. 26. But we contrariwise affirm, 1. that we must not at all expect,
that heaven should be given as a just recompense We must not do well chiefly
for the reward.
of our works, as due to the worthiness thereof, because as I have showed, it
is the free and gracious gift of God. 2. Though a faithful man may propounde
unto himself the recompense of reward, as it is said of Moses, He had respect
unto the recompense of reward, Hebr. 11. 26. yet that ought not to be the
chief or greatest motive; but the respect to Gods glory, and their own
duty, ought most of all to move them: so Saint Paul says, If I preach the
Gospel I have nothing to rejoice of, for necessity is laid upon me, etc. if I
do it willingly, I have a reward, 1. Cor. 9. 16, 17, 18. What is my reward
then? that when I preach the Gospel, I make the Gospel of Christ free: here we
see the Apostle rejoices not of any other reward, but of the fruit of his
calling, and the testimony of a good conscience, in preaching the gospel of
Christ freely. Ambrose has a saying very consonant to the Apostle, Propositum
piae mentis mercedem non Lib. 1. de Ab^^^. cap. 8.
expetit, sed pro mercede habet bonifacti conscientiam, and iusti operis
effectum. A godly-minde looks for no reward, but in stead of a reward it has
the conscience of well doing, and the fruit of good works.

Thirdly, they are here reproved, which either believe not, or do not hope
for the kingdom of heaven, like to the perverse Israelites, that gave no
credit to Caleb and Joshua, concerning the promised land, that flowed with milk
and honey: or else flattering themselves with a false hope of salvation, do not
endeavor so to walk, as that they may be counted worthy thorough Christ of
the reward: not remembering S. Paul's words, The husbandma^ must 2. Tim. 2. 6.
first labor before he receive the fruits.

The 15. lecture.
v. 22. Having compassion on some in putting difference:] But the vulgar latin
text reads thus [these certes reprove being iudged] as though the word were
(...), reprove, not (...), show mercy, or pity: but we justify the first
reading by these reasons. 1. Because all the Greek authenticalls, together with
the Syrian translation, only except three Greek copies, as M. Beza upon this
place says, do so read. 2. The sense of the place gives it: because thus
reading, have compassion on some, and others save with fear, there is an
apparent difference made between two sorts of men, the weak, and the
obstinate: but in the other translation, those reprove being judged, and them
save by pulling out of the fire: this difference is taken away: for to save by
pulling out of the fire, and by an earnest reproouing, is all one. 3. Because
the latin Error 54.
translator is hereby driven to a great inconvenience, to corrupt and transpose
the words of the text, reading the next verse thus: but them save pulling out
of the fire, and on other have mercy in fear: whereas this word, in fear,
should be joined to save, and these words, on other show mercy, should be read
in the former verse.

Have compassion on some, etc.] These words begin the last part of the
exhortation, how they should behave themselves toward others: which are of two
sorts; either such as sin of infirmity, which are with gentleness Some to be
won with gentleness.
to be won; or such as are obstinate offenders, which must with fear and
terror be humbled.

First then, that such as are ignorantly seduced, Doctr. 1.
or fall of infirmity, are with compassion and love to be handled and dealt
withal, as S. Paul testifies, 2. Tim. 2. 25. Instructing them with meekenes,
that are contrary minded, if God at any time will give them repentance, that
they may know the truth.

Exampl. With such meekness and compassion did our Savior Christ entertain
Zacheus, saying unto him, when he had looked up and seen him in the tree: Come
down at once, for to day I must abide in thy house. Such mercy did S. Paul
show to the incestuous young man, excommunicated for his offense: and upon his
repentance received to mercy, writing thus to the Corinthians concerning him:
now contrariwise you ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, least the
same should be swallowed up with too much heaviness. 2. Cor. 2. 8.

Exorn. Like as it was prophesied of our Savior, A bruised reed shall he not
break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, Math. 12. 20. that is, he shall
bear with those that are weak. As flax not flaming but smoking, need no
great quenching, and a reed already bruised need not to be broken; so a
bruised spirit is rather to be comforted, then twice afflicted.

Like as the prophet Esaias compares it: the husbandman beats out fitches and
commin with a staff or rod, not with a cart wheel or threshing instrument,
as he does the more stiff and stubburn grain: so a tender conscience, as a
green and tender wound, not yet corrupt and festered, is gently and tenderly
to be handled.

Applicat. First then we condemn the cruel proceedings of the Papists, who
had Error 55.
no compassion of any, not of children, as Bonner burned Richard Mekins a child
The inconsiderate dealing of Papists.
of 15. years, caused to be scourged to death John Fettres child of 8. years:
not of mad men; Collins and Cowbridge burned being both frantic. Fox page
1131. not of simple women, that submitted themselves; as three such burned in
the Isle of Garnesey, ann. 1556. whereof one was great with child, which brast
out of the womb by the violence of the fire, and was most cruelly thrown in
again. Fox p. 1944. Such is the compassion of Papists: they show pity to
none: like to that nation, of whom Moses speaks, A nation of a fierce
countenance, (or barbarous, cruel, and impudent) which will not regard Deutr.
28. 50.
the person of the old, nor have compassion on the young. Herein they show
themselves unlike to their predecessors: Leo thus writes, Sedis Apostolicae
moderatio ha^c temperantiam Epist* ^^*
observat, vt severius agat cum obduratis and venia^ cupiat praestare
correctis. The sea Apostolic observes this moderation, to deal more severely
with those which are hardened, and to show favor to those that will be
reformed.

Secondly, the Apostle here gives a rule to all those that exercise Civil or
spiritual jurisdiction, to make a difference between offenders. He sins
not a like, that steals to satisfy his hungry soul, Prou. 6. 30. as he
that robs to spend upon his lust: neither deserves he to be excommunicate,
that by negligence appears not when he is called, as the blasphemer or
adulterer: they therefore, which without compassion measure like extremity of
justice to all, do follow the unwise example of Rchoboam, who when he might
have winned the people by speaking kindly unto them, and in making their heavy
yoke lighter, by following rash counsel did alienate their minds, making this
answer, that whereas his father had chastised them with rods, he would correct
them with scourges: so they profit not Church or commo^wealth, 1. King. 12. 11.
which without making difference carry a like severe hand toward all
offenders. Doctr. 2.

The unclean must be separate from the clean.




In putting difference:] This is an especial gift of the spirit, to be able to
set a difference between good and bad, and to sort out the bad from worse.

Testim. This is that which S. Paul wishes to the Philippians, cha. 1. 10.
that they may (...), discern things that differ: and it is reckoned among
other gifts and graces, the discerning of spirits, 1. Cor. 12. 10. which though
it were a peculiar and extraordinary gift in the Apostles time, as Peter
discerned the hypocrisy of Simon Magus, Act. 8. 20. who deceived Philip, v.
13. he also by this gift found out the dissimulation of Ananias and Saphira,
Act. 5. yet in some measure does the Lord grant this grace to his Church still.

Exam. Thus loseph discerned between Pharaos baker and butler, showing the
different end of the^, Genesis 40. Jacob between Manasses and Ephraim, preferring
one before the other, Genesis 48. 19. Our Savior discerns between the widows
offering, and the gifts of the rich, Luke 21. 1. between the prayer of the
pharisie and the publican. Luke 18.


Exorn. Like as to the priests judgment in the law was committed the
discerning of the diverse kinds of leprosy, Lev. 14. as the shepherd
separateth the unclean and diseased sheep from the sound and whole: so is the
Minister of God to divide the faithful and sincere from the licentio^s and
profane.

Aitiolog. The means whereby to discern them first is by the word of God.
Romans 2. 18. Thou discernest things that differ being instructed by the law:
secondly, our Savior gives an other rule, By their fruits ye shall know them,
Math. 7. thirdly, the Apostle says, Heb. 5. 14. Having their wits exercised to
discern both good and evil. So then by the knowledge of Gods word, by
observation of their life, and by continual exercise and experience, we are
made able to put difference between the good and bad.

Appl. First then by this doctrine the practice of the popish Church is
reproved, who admit all tagge and ragge without due examination to the
Eucharist: who Error 56.

Papists profane the Eucharist.


although in show they require a great preparation by auricular confession, yet
notwithstanding that, many profane persons without true contrition are
received: but as touching their knowledge, they examine them not at all: nay
they say, that the sacraments do justify, ex opere opera^o, by Error 57.
the very work wrought without the faith of the receiver, Synops. ce^tur. 2.
err. 96. That the wicked in the sacrament eat the true flesh of Christ,
Ce^tur. 3. err. 28. That Error ^8.
the mass is available for Pagans and infidels: Centur. 3. error. 35. by
which opinions Error. ^^.
of theirs we see what small difference they make in the communicant^ if that
wicked men, pagans, infidels, may as well receive fruit by it as faithful
receivers: so that herein their mass is like to the Pharisees corban, that
though a man we disobedient to his parents, yet if he brought a gift to their
altar, he should be free, Matthew, 25. 5.

Beside the corrupt use in popery, this is also a fault among careless
ministers, that admit unto the Lords table many both in respect of their
profannesse unworthy, and for want of knowledge unfit: an uncomely thing it is,
that holy things should be given unto dogs or swine: they are dogs, that
are malicious, envious, cruel, usurers, oppressors, extortioners; sensual
persons, licentious, carnal, Epicures, adulterers, drunkards: ignorant sottes
are swine: it is herein the Ministers part, to separate the precious from the
vile, Ierem. 15. 19. And if spiritual governors, by laying hands suddenly
upon others, are partakers of their sins, 1. Tim. 5. 22. so are they, which
by their hands rashly and suddenly deliver holy things.

Lastly all Christians are taught to make difference between men in respect of
their civil conversation, to have an especial care with whom they converse,
or enter any league of friendship, affinity, marriage, or howsoever else:
whether they be of a corrupt religion, or of a profane life: for the first, S.
Paul gives us a rule, Tit. 3. 10. Reject him that is an heretic: for the
other, the wise man gives counsel, Prou. 22. 24. Make no friendship with an
angry man. Prou. 24. 21. Meddle not with them that are seditious. Men
therefore should carefully make choice of their companies, and consort
themselves with those that be like minded. Origin well says, Qui congregat
cum male sapientibus de Christo, cum Christo non congregat. He that Hom* 19. in
Math.
gathers with those that are not right minded toward Christ, does not gather
with Christ. But all Atheists, profane persons, papists are such, therefore to
have any familiarity, friendship, affinity with such, is to leave Christ.

Uers. 23. And other save with fear, pulling them out of the fire:] that is,
such as are Doct* ^.
now in great danger, even as in the midst of the fire ready to be consumed,
must be saved by the terror and fear of Gods judgments, and so as it were
violently pulled away from the flames of hell fire.

We se then, that the preaching of the law, and threatenings of Gods judgments
The law must first be preached.
is necessary for obstinate sinners, and such as are indurate in their sins.

Testim. This order Saint Paul prescribes unto Timothy, that he should first
improoue, rebuke, then exhort. 2. Tim. 4. 2. So Eliphaz in Job says, Job. 5.
18. The almighty makes the wound, and binds it up, he smites, and his
hands make whole: the wounding goes before the binding, and smiting before
healing.

Examp. Thus Nathan dealt with David, denouncing against him Gods heavy
judgments, saying, The sword shall never depart from thine house, etc. 2. Sam.
12. 10. And afterward upon David's repentance, he ministers comfort unto him:
saying, The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die. v. 13.

This course also Saint Paul kept with the incestuous person, first in
delivering him up to Satan for the destruction of his flesh, that his spirit
might be saved. 1. Cor. 5. 5. then afterward upon his earnest sorrow he
releaseth the sentence, and writes to the Corinthia^s for his restraying, 2.
Cor. 2.

Exornat. Like as the husbandman first gathers out the stones in his
vineyard, and then planteth it with the best plants, Isay, 5. 2. so in man's
heart, before grace can be planted, sin by true repentance must be extirpate:
and like as when one is in a dead sleep, he must be raised with the loud sound
of a trumpet; so the Lord says to his prophet, Isay, 58. 1. Life up thy voice
like a trumpet, and show my people their transgressions. Joseph's fetters of
iron, Genesis 40. 3. went before his chain of gold, Genesis 41. 42. So says
Augustine: Incipit a vinculis ferreis, finit ad torquem auream: Wisdom
begins with iron fetters, and ends with a golden chain: first it
terrisieth the heart with judgments, then suppleth it with comforts.

Aitiolog. The reason why it is profitable to preach gods judgments unto those
that are settled in their sins, and plunged as it were in hell fire, is this;
because by them they are brought to repentance, as the city of Ninive was at
the preaching of Jonas, when he cried, yet 40 days, and the city shall be
destroyed, Ion. 3. and the Apostle says godly sorrow causes repentance, 2.
Cor. 7. 10 and sorrow is wrought in us by consideration of gods judgments,
which are prevented by repentance.

Applic. This doctrine first discovers the indirect course used in the popish
Error. 60.

Papists promis^ pardons when they should threaten judgments.


Church; wherein nothing is more common, then to hear of pardons, indulge^ces,
for days, for months, for years, for hundreds, for thousands. Any man that
will be at the cost, or will yield himself to their superstitious
observations, shall have the Popes indulgence, or Iubile pardon: look synops.
Centur. 5. error. 47. in the mean time no mention atall is made of repentance:
but it is an evident sign that it is but light ware and slender stuff, that
is so easily had. These popish indulgences are like unto that untempered mortar
which Ezechiel co^pareth the false prophets flattering sermons unto, Ezech. 13.
10. Such buildings will abide no storms, and such pardons cannot deliver from
Gods judgments.

Secondly here is a rule given for preachers, that where they see the state of
the people requires it, to take a round course with them, to course them up,
and to thunder against them Gods judgments: I fear me, there are few
congregations in this land, that have not need of such plasters: they shall
find, that one sermon of this kind will do them more good then ten smooth
sermons. God send us many such preachers, which as good physicians having to
do with old festered sores, may first search and cle^se the wound, and then
apply their gentle medicines: for the prophet says, that such preachers, as
have sweet tongues, do but steal away the word from the people, they profit
them not, Ierem. 23. 30, 31. Origin has a good note, Atristibus semper, sed
necessarijs inchoat deus veluti ego occida, and ego viuificabo, ego percutiam,
and ego sanabo. hom. 1. in Ierem. God always begins with sorrowful things,
but necessary: as I kill, and I make alive, I smite, and I heal.

And hate the garment spotted of the flesh.] The Apostle alludeth to the
custo^e Doct. 4.
of the law, that even the garment that touched the flesh of an unclean person
was unclean, Leuit. 15. 17. yea the bed whereon he lies, the seat whereon
he sits, shall be unclean, v. 4. so that his meaning is, that men should
not only abstain from the grossest and greatest sins, but The smallest
sins are to be shunned.
from the least pollution thereof.

This is all one with that of Saint Paul, Abstain from all appearance of evil.
1. These. 5. 22.

Testim. So the Lord for badde our first parents not only to eat of the
fruit, but to touch it, Genesis 3. 3. he would have them to shun the very
occasion of evil.

Examp. So chaste Joseph when he saw the unclean desires and wicked disposition
of his masters wife, he would come no more in her company, Genesis 39. 10. he
would not in curie the least suspicion of evil.

Exornat. For like as the prophet reprooueth the hypocrites of his time, who
though they would not eat of polluted or unclean flesh, yet the broth thereof
was found in their vessels, Isay, 65. 4. So the suspicion or appearance of
evil must be shunned, even as the broth of that which is unclean. As
Cockatrice eggs are venomous, and hurtful, not only if one do eat them, but
if he do tread upon them, or be sprinkled therewith, Isay. 59. 5. so the
least felloweship with evil is contagious, and brings infection

Aitiolog. The reason, why we should resist the very first beginnings of sin,
may be gathered from Saint Paul's words, Ephesians. 4. 27. neither give place to the
devil: for if in small matters we give place to him, we make a way to his
greater tentations: the course of the water must be stopped in the beginning,
Prou. 17. 14. and so must Satan's temptations be resisted at the first.

Applicat. Who sees not now how fitly this doctrine serves for the reproof
of the Papists and popish profession? who if they might be cleared from the
unclean and polluted flesh, that is, from gross idolatry and paganism, as
they can not by any means, yet it is most apparent, that they have the garment
spotted of the flesh: that is, they retain many carnal rites, ceremonies, and
vsages borrowed of the Jews and Gentiles: from the Jews they have their
washings, censings, holy water, oil, salt, palms, priestly garments,
difference of meats, observation of days: from the Gentiles, adoration of
images, purgatory, invocation of the dead, pilgrimages, worshipping of angels,
and such like; that if every bird had his feather, and the Gentiles and Jews
might fetch home their own, that the popish Church has borrowed, they would
be left very beggarly and naked. So then the best and chiefest ornament of
Popery, is the garment spotted with the flesh; and their religion consists
in touch not, taste not, handle not, which all perish with the using, and are
after the commandments and doctrines of men, as S. Paul says. Coloss. 2. 21.

Secondly we that profess the glorious Gospel of Christ are taught, that we
should not neither in opinion, nor in any external vsages, rites, or customs,
which may breed offense, conform our selves to the carnal and spotted
profession of popery, Popish religion spotted of the flesh.
but to decline in all things, the very shadow, show, or least suspicion
thereof: and beside concerning the errors of life, not to think it sufficient
to abstain from gross and noisome sins, as foul and ugly deformities, but
to wipe away the very blemishes and spots, that is, the occasions, entisments,
appearance, prouocations to sin. Job, as he was free from adultery and
uncleanness of life, so he did avoid the very baits and allurements to sin: He
made a covenant with his eyes, not to look upon a woman, Job. 31. 1. Hierome
uses this similitude, Vt creatorem non in clephantis, Epitaph (No) poti^n.
camelis, lconibus miramur, sed in minutis quoque animalibus, formica, culice,
it a men's Christo dedita aeque in maioribus and minoribus intenta, etc. Like as
we do admire our Creator, not so much in elephants, camels, lions, as in the
smaller beasts, the ant, gnat; etc. so a mind devoted to Christ, does as well
take heed of small as great sins.

The 16. lecture.
v. 24. Now to him, that is able to keep you, that you fall not:] Here
begins the second part of the conclusion, which contains a solemn
celebration of the praise of God: wherein are three things to be considered;
what it is that is here yielded? glory, majesty, dominion, power, v. 24. to
whom? to God only wise: wherefore? because it is he only that is able to
keep us from falling, and to present us blameless at his coming.

God then is both able and willing to stay and keep his children, that they
fall Doctr. 1.

It is the Lord that keeps us from evil.


not: some read, which is able to keep us without sin: but the word is,
(...), free from falling: that although the righteous can not in this life be
free from all sin, and from slumbling; yet God will preserve him from falling.

Testim. So the wise man says, Prou. 24. 16. The just man falls seven times
and rises again, but the wicked fall into mischief: that is, though the
righteous do fall into danger, and run into offenses, yet shall he not be
quite given over as the wicked. S. Paul also says, He shall be established:
for God is able to make him stand. Romans 14. 4.

Exampl. The Lord says to Abimelech, Genesis 30. 6. because his offense was of
ignorance, I have kept thee, that thou shall not sin against me. So David
confesses that it was the Lord, that kept him back from hurting the house of
Nabal, 1. Sam. 25. 34. And Saint Paul assures himself, that the Lord will
keep him from every evil work. 2. Tim. 4. 18.

Exorn. For like as our Savior Christ stayed Peter by the hand, that he did
not sink; so the Lord guides us by his grace: and as the nurse holds and
staieth the infant in going, so the angels of God do bear us in their hands,
that we dash not our foot against a stone. Psalm. 91. 12. But much better do
they hold us up from falling, then Mephiboseth was kept of his nurse, who in
her have let him fall, and so he became lame. 2. Sam. 4. 4.

Aitiolog. And this the Lord does for his own glory sake, that although his
children be compassed with many infirmities, yet he so directs them, that
they be not overcome of them: as the Lord says to S. Paul, My power is made
perfect through weakness. 2. Cor. 12. 9.

Applicat. First then, if it be God, that keeps us from falling, then is not
a man able by his freewill to eschew evil, and preserve himself from sin,
which is the Error 62.
opinion of the Papists. Synops. centur. 4. er. 44. For our Savior Christ
says, Without me, ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 5. And it is God that works
in us, both the will and the deed, of his good pleasure, Philip. 2. 13.
Augustine writes excellently of this point, Duobus modis cavetur corporis
malum, vt non accidat, and si accciderit, cito sanetur: Aug. de Not. and great.
c. 67.
sic vt non accidat peccatum, cavemus dicendo, ne nos inferas in tentationem,
vt cito sanetur, dicimus dimitte nobis. As we two ways take heed to our
body, that no evil happen unto it, if it do, that it be soon healed, so
that sin happen not unto us, we take heed, saying, lead us not into
temptation, that it may be soon healed, we say, forgive us our sins. So that
both our preservation from sin, and our restitution when we have sinned,
proceeds only from the grace and strength of Gods spirit.

Secondly we are taught, that no man presume of his own strength, that he can
Man is not able to guide himself.
guide himself. Peter did so, and was deceived, because he undertook more,
then he could perform: but that we depend upon God for his grace to direct our
steps, and to preserve us from evil: and to give him thanks, that whereas
we see the ungodly daily in heaps to fall into the snares of Satan, and to
commit great sins with greedines, adulteries, blasphemies, murders,
oppressions, with such like, that God does stay us by grace from such
downefalls, that we may say and acknowledge with the Prophet, Lord unto us,
thou will ordain peace, thou have wrought all our works for us. Isa. 26. 12.

To present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with joy.] As God
in this Doctr. 2.
life does preserve us from falling, so in the coming of Christ, he also shall
present us faultlesse with joy: so then, while we live we can not be
faultlesse, but this work is reserved for the coming of Christ.

Testim. This S. Paul evidently shows, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. I pray God, that your
whole spirit and soul and body, may be kept blameless in the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And again, Ephesians. 5. verse. 25, 26, 27. Christ gave himself
for his Church, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it by the washing of
water through the word: that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church
without spotte or wrinkle. So then the Church in this world is sanctified and
cleansed, but it shall then be without spot and wrinkle when it shall be a
glorious Church, and that is at Christ's coming.

Examp. S. Paul thus professes of himself, that he was not already perfect,
Philip. 3. 12. he shows in that place, that the state of perfection in Gods
Saints shall not be till the resurrection. v. 11. If by any No perfection in
this life.
means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead, not as though I had
already attained unto it, either were already perfect: so that he looks not
for perfection till the day of resurrection.

Exorn. Like as when Iehoshuas filthy garments were taken from him, a fair
diadem was set upon his head, Zachar. 3. 4, 5. so we shall then be thoroughly
purged from our sins, when we are crowned with glory: then at his coming
shall the Lord be as fullers soap, Malach. 3. 2. thoroughly to wash and cleanse
his Church. This is that, which John saw: A great multitude standing before the
throne and the Lamb, clothed with white long rayments, and palms in their
hands, Revel. 7. 9. that is, then they shall be perfectly purified, when they
shall be in triumph and glory, which is signified by the palms.

Aitiolog. The reason is evident out of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 25. He must
reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet, the last enemy that
shall be destroyed is death. v. 54. When this mortal has put on immortality,
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death shall be
swallowed up in victory, etc. So then, sin and death are yet in the world,
not perfectly subdued unto us, because mortality yet remains, and Christ
has not yet put down all his enemies, and perfectly triumphed: though he have
bruised the serpents head, yet he still biteth his heel, Genesis 3. 15. This
glorious triumph and perfect victory, though now begun, shall not be finished
until the resurrection.

Applicat. First then this doctrine, overthrows a popish error: that a man
Error 61.
in this life may be perfect, and that some are so just here, that they need
no repentance. Rhemist. Luke 15 sect. 1. And that it is possible in this life
to keep the law and Error 64.
commandments of God. Synops. Centur. 4. err. 63. Bellarm. Which is contrary
to No man can keep the co^mandement^ in thi^ life.
the Scriptures, Isa. 64. 6. We all have been as an unclean thing, and all
our righteousness is as filthy cloutes. Psalm. 130. 3. If thou, O Lord,
straightly markest iniquities, who who shall stand? This privilege to be without
sin, is peculiar and proper only to Christ: as Augustine well says, Nullus
existit homo, de quo in haec vita constituto veraciter dici potest, quod nullum
habeat peccatum excepto vno mediatore. There is no Contr. Pelag. lib. 2. c. 29.
man, of whom it may be truly said in this life, that he has no sin,
excepting only our alone Mediator.

Secondly, seeing we do hope one day to be presented unspotted and blameless
before God through Christ, we ought now to endeavor to lead an holy life, and
with the Apostle to prease forward toward the mark: as Saint Peter exhorts,
Seeing ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in
peace without spotte and blameless, 2. Pet. 3. 14. that although we can not
while we live in the flesh be freed from all infirmity, yet that we should
pray to God to be preserved from iniquity: as Augustine says, writing against
the Pelagians, Op^andum est, vt fiat, conandum est, vt fiat, supplicandum est,
vt fiat, non tamen, quasi factum fuerit, Contr. Pelag. lib. 3. c. 10.
confidendum. This which they say, that some men have lived without sin in
the world, we are to wish it may be, to endeavor it may be, to pray it may be,
not to be confident as though it has been.

Uers. 25. To God only wise our Sauiour] Doct. 3.

Christ one God with his father.


Here in that the Apostle calls our Savior Jesus Christ the son of God,
only wise, God the father is not excluded: for he is also the only wise God,
Romans 19. 27. Like as, the Apostle before v. 4. calls Christ Jesus the only
Lord, yet god the Father also is the only prince, king of kings, Lord of
Lords, 1. Tim. 6. 15. By these scriptures then is evidently proved unto us the
unity of the Godhead, and that Christ with his Father and the Holy Ghost is
one God, one only wise, one Lord, who only has immortality, 1. Timoth. 6.
16. that although we believe the blessed Trinity of the Father, Son and holy
Ghost: yet these three are one only wise, immortal, God: they have all one
power, one Godhead, one wisdom, one eternity, one essence, as by these
scriptures is evident. And the Apostle Saint Paul further says, Philip. 2. 6.
Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal to God. But
if our Savior Christ had not been one God with his father, it had bin wrong
and robbery to be made equal to him. Here then we learn, that God is the
fountain of all wisdom, and that the wisdom of man is but foolishnes
before God, 1. Cor. 3. 18. The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise be
vain. v. 20. and the foolishnes of God (as men count it,) is wiser then
Testimon.
men. 1. Cor. 1. 15.

Examp. This was confessed by Pharao, when he said, thus to Joseph, Genesis 41.
39. For as much as God has showed thee all this, there is no man of
understanding or of wisdom like unto thee: He acknowledges that Joseph must
needs be a prudent man, because he had his wisdom from God. David also
sets forth the infinite wisdom of God when he says, Psalm. 119. 98. By thy
commandments thou have made me wiser then mine enemies: the wisdom of the
world was not like that wisdom which David received from God.

Exornat. Christ is then as the olive tree that ministereth oil to the
candlestick of the Church, Zach. 4. 12. that gives all grace and wisdom to
his members, and he is the stone with seven eyes, graven with the Lords own
hand, Zach. 3. 9.

Aitiolog. For who can compare with God in wisdom, who is the ancient of
days? Dan. 7. 9. who was before all things, from all eternity; his eyes are
as flaming fire, Reuelat. 1. he sees all things: he dwells in light, 1. Tim.
6. 16. He is light and in him is no darkness. 1. Ioh. 1. 5. If then antiquity
and knoweledge bring wisdom, who is wiser then Christ, who knows all things,
and was before all things?

Applicat. First of all, where the Apostle says, to God only wise, our
Savior, etc. Error. 65.
a certain erroneous opinion of the Papists is confuted, as touching the god
head Christ God of himself though not the son of himself.
of Christ; for they say, that he had not only his person, but his substance of
his father. Rhemist. Ioh. 1. sect. 3. We contrariwise do hold; that Christ,
though as he is the son, he be of the Father in respect of his person, yet he
is God of himself as the father is: as the Apostle says here he is only wise,
as Saint Paul calls God the Father only wise, Romans 16. 27. wherefore Christ
is God himself, wise of himself, immortal of himself, as God the father is:
if that his wisdom, power, Godhead, should be begotten of god, then he should
be wise, not as he is God, but as he is the son; then could he not be only
wise, for the son cannot be said to be sole or only because he is never
without the Father, as Ambrose well notes: Audeo dicere, primus est fillus,
sed solus non est: primus, quia cu^patre semper, solus non est, quia sine
patre, nunqua^ est, non ego hoc dico, sed ipse dixit, non sum solus, quia pater
mecum est: solum diuinitas facit, and quod vnum est, solum est. I dare say the
son is first, but the son is not alone: he is first, because always with
the Father, not alone because he is never without the father: I say not this,
but himself said it, I am not alone, because my father is with me: the Godhead
makes him alone, for that which is one is alone. Wherefore Christ is only
wise as his father is, he is wise of himself, and God of himself as his
father is: and so our Savior Christ says, that as the father has life in
himself, so likewise has he given to the son, to have life in himself,
Ioh. 5. 26.

Secondly, seeing we have a Savior who is only wise, in whom dwells the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, Coloss. 2. 9. to whom God gives not his
spirit in measure, Ioh. 3. 34. but in great abundance beyond all measure, and
of whose fullness we have received grace for grace, Ioh. 1. 16. We are taught
now to whom we may have recourse, if we want any spiritual grace, as Saint
James teaches: if any man lack wisdom let him ask of God who gives unto
all liberally, Iam. 1. 5. Wherefore the carnal security of all worldly minded
men is here condemned, which as though they had all fullness in themselves,
whereas they are empty and destitute, seek not unto Christ for wisdom, grace
and knowledge: as our Savior Christ vpbraideth the Jews, Ye will not come
unto me that ye may have life, Ioh. 5. 40.

Be all glory, majesty, dominion (or strength) and power, both now and for
ever.] The vulgar latin text adds in the beginning, Through Jesus Christ our
Lord, and in the end, before all worlds: and then it follows, to the worlds
end, or for ever and ever. The first clause seems to be taken from the
Apostle, Romans 16. 27. and to be transposed hither; but not so fitly, because
the Apostle spoke of the person of our Savior before, as Saint Paul does not
there: although the sense and matter in neither reading be much altered, yet
the first is not received in the most authentical Greek copies and in the
Syrian translation: therefore it is not much to be contended about.

Here the Apostle teaches us, that all things should be referred to the glory
of God, all our actions should begin and end in him: two of these show the
end, to the which all things should be directed, that is glory, and majesty
or magnificence, that is an higher degree of glory: the other two the cause
and means whereby all things are effected; namely, the strength and power of
God: and in that we say, Amen, the Church of God consents hereunto in
judgment and affection, and by this word we seal this prayer to be true.

Test. This duty of thanksgiving and yielding glory unto God, the Apostle
exhorts to be used, as agreeable to his will, and acceptable through Jesus
Christ. 1. These. 5. 18. In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God
through Jesus Christ.

Examp. The angels themselves give us an example, who celebrate the praises of
God: glory to God on high, Luk, 2. 14. Our Savior himself also does the
like, Math. 11. 25. I give thee thanks O father, etc. Saint Paul often uses
this form of doxology, Romans 16. 27. Ephesians. 3. 20. 1. Tim. 1. 17. 1. Tim. 6. 16.
and in diverse other places.

Exornat. For like as the dove brought an olive branch to Noah into the arc
in token of joy and thankfulness to that person and place, where she had
been preserved from the rage of the waters, Genesis 8. 11. And as the ox and
ass do thankefully acknowledge their masters cribbe, where they use to be
fed, Isay, 1. 3. so should we celebrate the praise of god, from whom we
receive all good things.

Aitiolog. For this is all the recompense which the Lord looks for at our
hands: Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the
Lord. Unworthy then are we of the least of gods mercies, if we do not vouchsafe
to open our mouths to call upon his name, and give him thanks.

Applicat. First, if all glory and power is to be given unto God, who is only
wise, Error. 66.

Papists give thanks to Saints.


what great blindness and superstition is it in the Papists to give praise and
thanks to Saints? as their great writer Bellarmine is not ashamed blasphemously
to join the virgin Marie with God in this service of praise, concluding his
book thus, Laus deo Virginique matri Mariae, Praise be to god and to the
virgin Marie his mother. Let them show us any such form of thanksgiving used
by the prophets or Apostles, if they can. Nay they directly forbid us to
rejoice in men, 1. Cor. 3. 21. Was not Herod smitten by the angel, because he
gave not the glory unto God? Act. 13. 23. And as Saint Paul says of himself,
Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized into the name of Paul? 1. Cor.
1. 13. So say we of the virgin Marie, was she crucified for us? did she
create, or redeem us? or are we baptized into her name? Wherefore she is not
to be prayed unto, or trusted in, or praise and glory to be yielded to her. No
doubt the Saints in heaven say with the Church in earth, Not unto us Lord, not
unto us, but unto thy name give the praise, Psalm. 115. 1.

Ambrose upon these words of Saint Paul, who is Paul, who is Apollos, but the
Ministers? thus writes, Ut quia ministri sunt, spes in his non sit, sed in
domino, cuius ministri sunt. Because they are Ministers, let not our hope or
trust be in them, but in God whose ministers they are.

Secondly, the slackenesse and dullness of many carnal and secure persons is
reproved, who seldom give thanks unto God, nor yield praise unto him for
the benefits which daily they receive: of such speaks the Prophet David,
calling them men of this world, whose bellies God fills with his hid
treasure. Psalm. 17. 14. It is an hid treasure to them, because they neither
know, nor acknowledge the giver and author thereof. But we should say rather
with the Prophet, Psalm. 118. 14. The Lord is my strength, and my song: that we
should sing unto his praise, from whom we receive strength and grace to every
good work: and so as the Apostle says, That whatsoever we do, we should do
it to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Ambrose well says, Christus in bonis
adiutor, in malis conservator, etc. ante omnes actus seculi debemus Sermon. 43.
habere actus pietatis. Christ in good things is our helper* in evil our
preserver, before all secular acts, we should use the act of piety, that is,
to pray and give thanks unto God. And as for all other external blessings God
is to be praised, his power to be God in all things to be praised.
acknowledged, glory to be advanced: so chiefly, for his assistance in
spiritual works, as in the preaching and expounding of his word, and for the
good fruit and success thereof: as S. Paul tha^kfully confesses, By the grace
of God I am that I am: I labored more 1. Cor. 1^. 11.
abundantly then they all, and yet not I, but the grace of God with me, etc.
Hereof is that godly use, first taken up by the Apostles to end their
epistles, with a doxologie or praise unto God, since continued in the Church of
Christ, in the same manner to conclude their prayers, sermons, and other holy
exercises: the same shall be the end of this treatise: I say therefore and
conclude with this our Apostle, Now to him, that has enabled me by his spirit
unto this work, and is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 21. to God only wise our Savior, be glory, majesty,
dominion, and power, both now and ever,

Amen.
THE PROTESTANTS DIET PRESCRIbed, in discerning the true religion and Church
from the false.
LIke as nothing is more profitable to preserve health, and to keep the body
in a constant state, then carefully to look unto the diet, to refrain such
meats as are enemies to nature, and to feed of those which are of wholesome
nourishment: so the welfare of the soul is happily procured, when as erroneous
and corrupt doctrine, as contagious and hurtful meat is shunned and avoided.
And as every man should be so well acquainted with his own state, as he need
not ask of the physician, what meat is fittest for his stomach, whether his
pulse does beat strongly or remisly, whether in summer or winter he fare
better for his health: for this were, as though a man should be ignorant, what
is done in his own house. So in matters of religion, every one should be able
to discern in some measure between truth and error, and not to depend
altogether upon the judgment of their spiritual physicians. Therefore S. Paul
wishes this grace to the whole church of the Philippians, that they may
discern things that differ. Philip. 1. 10. Tiberius Caesar is reported to have
said, that it was ridiculous for a man after 60. Plutarc. lib. de (...). ^uend.
years of age to require help of the physician: nothing thereby that in all
that time a man should gather experience and knowledge, what is good for his
own body: but it is a greater shame for a man of long continuance to be
ignorant, what is profitable, what hurtful to his souls health.

Therefore, that every man may in some sort learn to judge between a false and
true religion, and may be expert to discern of the best diet for the soul, I
have here set down certain marks and notes out of this epistle of S. Jude,
whereby the true worshippers of God from hypocrites may be distinguished, and
truth from error and superstition selected and severed. 1. Note.

Not making the knowledge of faith common.




The first note then is this: that whereas the Apostle writes of the common
salvation, v. 3. which is therefore called common, because it ought not to be
kept from the knowledge or notice of any: hereby a false religion is descried,
which hides the depth and secrets of their sect from their common followers
and favorers, and locketh The Church of Rome keeps the knowledge of faith
secret.
it up in the breast of their professed Rabbines. From hence then I reason thus:
Whosoever will not have their religion commonly and universally known, but
kept from the knowledge of the people, are suspected to be false teachers: but
such are the Papists. Ergo:

The first part is thus proved, 2. Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
only to the^ which are lost. The Apostle would not have the Gospel hid to any.
Heb. 8. 12. Ali shall know me from the least of them to the greatest. Origin
says, upon those words, Drink waters out of thine own fountain. Tenta and
tu Hom. 12. in Genes.
auditor proprium habere fontem, and proprium puteum, vt cum tu apprehenderis
libru^ scripturarum incipias e^iam ex proprio sensu proferre aliquem
intellectum. Try also thy self (O hearer) to have thy proper fountain and
well, that when thou take into thy hand the book of scripture, thou may
begin out of thine own sense to bring forth some venderstanding.

The assumption is true: the Rhemists allow not the scriptures to be
indifferently read of all. Prefac. sect. 6. nor the Scriptures to be in the
hand of every husbandman, artificer, prentice, etc. sect. 7. they mislike that
women should be reading or talking of scripture. 1. Timoth. 1. 12. so they
would have their people misled still in ignorance, that they should not
perceive their gross errors.

The Apostle says, v. 3. the faith once 2. Note.

Changing of the ancient faith.


given: signifying, that faith is certain, never to be altered or changed, but
as Christ and his Apostles have left it, it must continue to the worlds end.
1. Timoth. 6. 14. I charge thee, to keep this commandment without spot and
unrebukable till the appearing of our Lord.

They then which alter and change the Apostolic faith, are not the true Church:

Such are the Papists. Ergo:

The proposition is euidents the assumption is thus proved: by particular
induction: 1. the Apostle teaches that we are justified by faith without the
works of the law, Romans 3. 28. the Papists hold we are justified by works.

2 The Apostle condemns prayers in an unknown tongue. 1. Cor. 14. 16. How
shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at the giving of
thanks, seeing he knows not what thou say? but the popish service is said
in the latin tongue not understood of the people.

3 The Apostle would have the communion celebrated publicly: We that are many
are partakers of one bread, 1. Cor. 10. 17. the popish Church uses private
communions, when as the priest receives alone, excluding the people.

4 The scriptures forbid idolatry, 1. Ioh. 5. 2. Babes, keep your selves from
idols: but the popish Church worshippeth images of gold and silver, which is
idolatry. Deuteronomy 4. 15. Takeheede to your selves: for ye saw no image in the day
the Lord spoke unto you, that ye corrupt not your selves, and make you a graven
image.

5 The scriptures testify, that Christ's body is in heaven, and there shall
remain till the coming of Christ to judgment, when all things shall be
restored. Act. 3. 21. the Church of Rome holds, that Christ's body is in the
earth in the Eucharist present carnally.

6 The scripture teaches, that all are sinners, and none righteous, Romans 3.
10. Christ only is excepted, Hebr. 4. 15. the Papists hold the virgin Marie
free from all both original and actual sin.

7 The scriptures acknowledge no Mediator, or advocate of our prayers but
Christ, 1. Ioh. 1. 2. The popish church makes saints our mediators, and prays
unto the^

8 The Apostle says, that Christ was once offered to take away sin, Heb. 9.
28. the Papists hold, that he is daily offered up in the sacrifice of the Mass.

9 The Apostles make marriage honorable among all men, Heb. 13. 4. the papists
say it is a profanation of orders, and that it is unlawful for Ministers to
marry.

10 The Apostle teaches that we have no power to think a good thought, 2.
Cor. 3. 5. they hold, that a man has freewill by nature to do good.

In these and many other points has the Church of Rome presumed to alter and
change the Apostolic faith, as I have Tetrastyl. 2. pill. par. 2.
else where set down at large.

It may likewise be showed how they have declined from the faith and doctrine
of the elder Church, a taste whereof I will give by these few instances in stead
of many. The Church of Rome has altered the faith of the primitive Church.
1. In the first Nicene Counsel it was decreed, that the 4. Patriarchal seas
should have like authority, and Alexandria among the rest: quia Roma vrbis
episcopo parilis mos: because the like custom the B. of Rome has, can. 6. but
now they hold the contrary.

2. In the same Synod where a restraint was moved for the marriage of
ministers, Paphnutius by his wisdom stayed it, and the whole synod commended
the sentence of Paphnutius and left it free.

3. About the same time, which was anno 300. or there about, was held the
Eliberine Council in Spain, where it was decreed, Ne cerei in coemiteriis,
aut public incendantur: That wax candles should not be be burnt in the
churchyards or openly, can. 34.

4. Can. 36. Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere: It seems good that
pictures should not be in the Church, least that which is worshipped be painted
in the walls.

5. Can. 77. Concerning those which died without baptism, it was thus
concluded: Fide qua quis credidit poterit esse iustus: By faith wherewith one
believes he may be justified: they affirm no absolute necessity of baptism,
as the Papists hold.

6. Can. 55. Sacerdotes qui sacrificantium coronam portant, etc. Priests which
carry a sacrificers crown two years must abstain: that is, from the
communion: but the contrary is practiced in the popish Church, for their
priests do wear shaven crowns.

7. Council. Gangrens. celebrate about ann. 324. can. 4. Quicunque discernit,
etc. Whosoever makes difference in regard of a minister or Presbyter, that
has a wife, that he will not receive at his hands, let him be accursed: but
such are not suffered to minister in the popish Church.

8. Can. 2. Si quis carnem comedentem, etc. If any condemn one eating flesh in
faith, let him be accursed. But in the popish Church, eating of flesh upon fish
days was condemned as a wicked and impure thing and the flesh cast away as an
unclean thing: as Frebarnes pigge was buried by B. Stokeslies sumner in
Finsburie field. Fox p. 1184.

9. Ibid. c. 17. Siqua mulier crines attondeat, etc. If any woman do pole or
clippe her hair for the service of God, as she thinks, and so takes away
the matter or sign of her subjection, let her be accursed: but poling and
shauing of Monks and Nuns is defended by the Rhemists, 2 Thessalonians. 3. v. 10.

10. In the Council of Laodicea, held ann. 364. cap. 59. there are 22. books
only of the old testament decreed to be Canonical: whereas the Church of Rome
makes the nine Apocriphall books, of Tobie, Judith, Ecclesiasticus,
Machabees, with the rest, of Canonical authority.

In these and many hundred such points the Church of Rome is swarued and
degenerate from the faith of the Primitive Church: so that this note of the
Apostle does discover them to be of the false Church.

Uers. 4. There are certain men crept in, Romanists creepers in.

3 Note.

Creeping into houses.


etc.] These which creep in corners and despise the public assemblies of the
Church, are false teachers and seducers. Such are popish professors. Ergo:

The first is proved by Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 3. 6. Of this sect are they which
creep into houses, and lead captive simple women, etc. Ioh. 3. 20. They hate
the light, neither come to the light, least their evil deeds should be
reproved. Council Gangrens. cap. 5. Si quis docet domum dei contemptibilem,
etc. If any man teach that the house of God is contemptible and the assemblies
kept therein, let him be accursed.

The second part is evident: for popish priests, seminaries, Jesuits, do
secretly creep into houses, to seduce, and despise the assemblies of the
Church among us.

Uers. 4. Which turn the grace of God into 4. Note.

Doctrine of ^icontiousnesse.


wantonness.] so does the popish church, by granting pardons and indulgences
so commonly, yea for the time to come, whereby people are made more secure and
careless. Gelasius long since complained of this abuse: Date nobis veniam, dum
in errore duremus, etc. Give pardon, while we continue in error still. He
calls it one of the monsters of the world, to forgive sins for the time to
come: Remitti culpa de praeterito potest; Sin may be remitted for the time
past, etc. epist. ad Faustum. Likewise Opusc. Tripartit. lib. 3. cap. 8. this
complaint is renewed. Quaestuarii praedicatores quaedam brevia habent, etc. The
pardoners have certain briefes which they leave in every parish; wherein so
many indulgences are contained, that good men do wonder, that ever they could
be granted with the Popes knowledge. The further abuse hereof is confessed by
Roger Holland sometime a papist: I was of this your blind religion, says he,
that now is taught, etc. having liberty under your auricular confession, I
made no conscience of sin, but trusted to the priests absolution, he for
money doing also some penance for me, which after I had given, I cared no
further, what offenses I did, no more then he cared after he had my money,
whether he fasted with bread or water for me or no. Fox page 2040. Thus we see
how they turned the grace of God in pardoning of sins to a further liberty
of sinning.

They deny the Lord Jesus Christ. So 5. Note.

Denying of Christ, offices.


does the popish Church deny Jesus Christ, in denying of his offices; for
they make other Mediators beside Christ, other sactifices beside his death,
and so deny his priesthood: they make another head and law giver, to make
laws to bind the conscience beside Christ, as namely the Pope, and so deny
his kingly office: they make the Apocriphall books Canonical, and their
unwritten Traditions equal to the word of God and so deny in that they
empaire and diminish his prophetical office. And therefore as Augustine says
of Peter, quicquid eius negauit, ipsum negauit: what soever he denied of
Christ, he denied Christtract. 66. in ^oann. And as Ambrose, Gratia dei tota
repellitur, si non tota suscipitur: The grace of God is wholly repelled or
wholly received. epist. 84. Wherefore the Church of Rome denying any part of
the offices of Christ, deny Christ, and then consequently are not the true
Church of Christ.

Uer. 6. The seducers and deceivers whom the Apostle writes against, he
resembles 6. Note.

Pride of Lucifer.


to the angels, that fell for their pride; whence this argument may be framed:

They are not of the Church of Christ, which are led with the spirit of pride,
and exalt themselves against Christ:

But so does the Pope the head of that body: Ergo:

The first is proved by S. Paul, that Antichrist shall sit as God in the
temple of God, and be exalted against all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
Eusebius says, Hoc est argumentum eos edisse deum, etc. This is an argument
that they hate God, because they would have themselves called Gods: de
preparat. Euang. l. 7.

The second is evident, not only in that the Pope has exalted himself
against kings and Emperors, which are called Gods in earth, causing them to
kiss his feet, to hold his stirrup, to lead his horse by the bridle, treading
upon their necks, etc. But also in suffering most blasphemous titles to be
given unto him, as one Christofer Marcell. said to the Pope in the late
Council of Laterane, Tu es alter deus in terris. Thou art another God on
earth. sess. 4. Cardillus the Spaniard, calls the Pope terreum Deum: an
earthly God. pro Council. Trident. in the bull of Clem. 6. for his year of
Iubile, he thus says, Mandamus angelis, etc. We command the Angels to carry
their souls to heaven that come to Rome this year, etc. This Luciferian pride
is an evident argument and badge of Antichrist.

The next note of false teachers is out of the 7. verse, they are likened to
Sodom 7. Note.

Strange (...).


for following strange flesh: which whether we take it for that sin which is
contrary to the moral law, as of adultery, fornication, incest: or for that
which is against the law of nature, such as was the sin of the Sodomites,
and of the heathen, where of Saint Paul speaks, Romans 1. 27. When the men
burnt in lust among themselves (for both these are counted strange flesh.) It
is notoriously known, that the Romanists have exceeded in these strange lusts.

For as Bernard did well foresee the mischeifs like to ensue, where lawful
marriages is forbidden, thus writing: Toll de Ecclesia Reples e^m
concubinarii^, seminifluis, incestuosis, masculo^^^u con^^bito^ib.
honorabile coniugium, etc. Take out of the Church honorable marriage, and the
bed undefiled, and you fill the same with concubine lovers, incestuous,
unclean persons, and abusers of the male sex: so has it fallen out in the
Roman Church.

To let pass former examples, as of Sergius 3. that had a son by afamous
harlot Platina.
Marozia: of Ioann. 10. that used Luitprand.
Theodera: of Platina.
John 13. that was slain in adultery: of Beano.
Gregory 7. that was familiar with Mathild otherwise then became him: of
Appendix c^^cil. Constable.
John 23. that was accused in the Council of Constance to have committed
incest with his brothers wife, and fornication with Nuns and virgins.

To come to nearer times, Sixtus the fourth did erect brothell houses for both
Agrippa de vanitat. scient. ^. de leno^^^.
sexes, and granted to a certain Cardinal the use of unnatural venerie for
certain months, he had also his Ganymedes. Petrus Riarius.

Innocentius 8. had diverse bastards, and was the first, as Volaterrane says,
that boasted Volaterran. geograph.
of his base sons and advanced them to great riches.

I am ashamed to rehearse the incest of Alexander the 6. with his own daughter
Lucretia: of the monstrous and unnatural Guicciardin. 1. 3.
venerie of Julius the 2. of Paulus the 3. his incest with his own sister,
daughter Constantia, Lib. 7.
and his niece Laura: I say here with Bernard, It is a shame to speak what is
done of these Bishops in secret, I think it better to dissemble and conceal
these things: Sermon. in council. Rhemens.
but why should I be ashamed to speak that which they are not ashamed to do?
Again he says, of the patrimony of the cross of Christ, No^ facitis codices
in ecclesia, sed pascitis pellices in thalamis. Ye make not books in the
Church, but ye feed harlots in your chambers.

As were their heads, such was the rest of the body: their Monasteries and
Monkish cells were detected of most infamous incests, fornications, Sodomitrie,
as may appear in the Inquisition made Vid. Prae fat. Balaei de actis Roman.
pontif.
in the time of Henry 8. And Gregory 12. gives this testimony of certain
monasteries of Phrysia: All religion and fear Libido and carnis corruption
inter ipsos mares and moniales, etc. Theod. Niem* tract. union, 6. cap. ^4.
of God is departed, carnal lust and filthiness between the Monks and
Nuns, with other vices are grown up in stead thereof.

This inconvenience Bernard in his time did foresee: co^plaining how one
attempted to place certain Nuns not far from a monastery, though he were
instantly entreated not to do it: says Bernard, ne seminariu^ sca^dali
posteris parerent relinquendu^: least they Epist. 253.
should beget a seminary or seede-plot of offense, and leave it to their
posterity. Yea he further says concerning the force of lust: Non aspernatur
tuguria, non reveretur palatia, vtinam sola caenobia fugiat: it despises de
inter. dom. cap. 29.
not cottages, nor fears palaces, I would it did only escape Monasteries.

Thus it is evident, that if the following of strange flesh be a proper note of
a false religion: hereby the popish profession may worthily be called in
question.

v. 8. Likewise notwithstanding these dreamers.] 8. Note.
If dreaming and following of fables, Following of fables.
be also a fit mark to know a false prophet by; the Romanists in this kind
shall not give place to any. For if they should leave out their fained miracles
and coined lies, they should want some of their best arguments, for the carnal
presence, purgatory, adoration of images, and such like.

For the proof of this I will only produce the acts of the second Nycene
Council, which denied the worship of images: there it is evident, what gross
fables and old wives tales are alleged to establish that gross superstition.
In the fourth action, one steppeth up and tells this tale: how a certain Jew
succeding a Christian in his habitation, found there an image of Christ, which
he with other Jews invited to supper espying, ran at it all at once, and
thrust it through, and presently there issued forth such a quantity of blood,
that it filled a great hydria, or waterpot: such as mention is made of, Ioh. 2.
6. which contained about fifteen gallands a piece.

Likewise in the same action, they tell of a monk being tempted of a spirit
of incontinencie, the devil appeared to him, thus saying, If thou will not
have me to tempt thee, worship this image no more: which was the image of the
Virgin Marie: as though the devil hated the worshipping of images, which is
his own invention.

A certain man of Cyprus striking out with an ox goad the eye of the image of
the Virgin Marie, had his own eye smitten forth with the same staff breaking
into shiuers and lighting upon his eye.

A certain Saracene did beat out the eye of an image, and presently his own
eye fell to the ground.

Such stuff was then produced to confirm the superstitious adoration of
images: and such fables are their festiuals and legends full of, who list to
peruse them ^ and thus as Nicolaus Lyra complained, aliquando in ecclesia fit
maxima deceptio popu^^ in miraculis fictis a sacerdotibus, etc. sometime in the
Church the people is greatly deceived by miracles fained of the priests, and
their adherents for lucre sake.

verse. 8. They despise government:] This note also most fitly agrees to the
Sea of 9. Note.
Rome. For they have despised and abused Despising of government.
the greatest Potentates and governors in earth; as Gregory 7. made Henry 4.
Emperor, with his wife and child to p. 784. to p. 789. Marty tolog. Fox.
wait three days and three nights in the cold winter at his gates. Alexander
3. did tread upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick 1. Pope Celestine crowned
Henry 5. with his foot, and with his foot spurned it off again. Frederick
1. was rebuked for holding Pope Adrianes stirrup on the wrong side.

Neither has this been the insolency only of some Popes, but it is
prescribed as a rule and order in the Popes book of ceremonies; That the
Emperor must Lib. 1. cerem. sect. 5. c. 4.
bear the Popes chair on his shoulder; shall bear up the Popes train; bring
the basen and ewer to the Pope; shall carry sect. 13. c. 2.
the Popes first dish, shall bear the Popes first cup: What is it to despise
government if this be not? to make vassailes and slaves of Kings and Princes.
So that we see that to be fulfilled in this Sea, which Gregory spoke of: Rex
superbiae Lib. 4. epist. 38.
in foribus est, The king of pride is at the doors.

verse. 8. They speak evil of them, which 10. Note.
are in authority:] This has been an usual practice in popery, not to
spare to revile Speaking evil of princes.
and speak evil of the sacred Majesty of kings and princes.

Gregory 7. accursed the Emperor Henry the fourth, accusing him of diverse
crimes, sending forth his bull of excommunication against him, wherein he
calls him son of iniquity. Martyrolog. p. 181.

Innocent. 3. denounced his great curse against king John: forbidding under the
same curse all persons to eat or drink, or talk with him, yea his own
servants to do him any service either at bed or board, in Church, hall, or
stable. page 251.

Thus Gregory 9. used Frederick 2. comparing him to the beast rising out of
the sea, full of names of blasphemy, and charging him with atheism.
Martyrotyrd. Fox. page 307.

At the instigation of Paulus 3. Cardinal Poole wrote a contumclious and
infamous libell against Henry 8.

Pius 5. and Sextus 5. have in their wicked bulls of excommunication uttered
most vile blasphemies against her Majesty.

And that saucie and beastly friar Feverdentius, has published a most vile
slander of her Highness, Dialog. 1. page 12. lin. 30. They rail of Princes.
showing himself to be a filthy bird of that unclean nest. Wherefore these
popelings, can not be right members of the Church of Christ, nor yet are lead
by his spirit, which contrary to the commandment of God, Exodus 22. 28. Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, are so shameless and
impudent to open their mouths against the Lords Anointed.

Some of our Runagates, apostataes from the church, and traitors to the state,
have most wickedly affirmed, that heresy in England, is diademate regio
ornata, adorned with the princely crown, and most traitorously compare their
Sovereign to Herodias, etc. Gifford, Reinolds in secund. praefat. ad
Calvinoturcis. which railing libell of theirs is learnedly already answered; I
D. Sutliff. de turcopapism. cont. Calvinoturcism.
only note how fitly this mark set down by the Apostle agrees unto them,
that they speak evil of them which are in authority.

v. 10. These speak evil of those things, 11. Note.

Slander of Christ's servants.


which they know not.] This also is a common thing with our adversaries to
blind both the persons and religion of Protestants, when they know not the
one, nor understand the other.

Thus the Sorbonists in Paris slanderously reported of the Christian
congregation there: that when they assembled, they put out the candles, and
went together after a beastly manner; that they maintained there was no God;
that they denied the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the flesh,
and such other false crimes they objected. Fox. page 927.

Thus have they railed upon the faithful servants of Christ, whose neither
lives nor deaths were known unto them: as that B^lla^^*
Luther died of drunkenness, Surius.
Bucer denied Christ at his death, that Polsecus.
Calvine gave his soul to the devil.

In like manner do they speak evil of the doctrine of the Protestants, that
we leave nothing but bare bread in the sacrament; that we make God the author
of evil; Protestants b^li^d.
that by the doctrine of predestination we take away all choice of things, and
say it is no matter to salvation or damnation, Se^m. B. Watson con^r.

Bucer. Fox. p. 1963.


what a man did in this life.

They are not ashamed to belie us, that we deny Christ, and take away the
Gifford. praef. 2. ad Calvinoture.
Trinity.

But of all other Feuerdentius a friar of Paris is most impudent in coining
lies, and imputing most blasphemous heresies to the Calvinists, as he calls
the Protestants.

As that they deny the three persons of Dial. 1. p. 27.
the Trinity.

That they mislike the invocation and adoration of the Trinity. p 37.


That they deny God to be omnipotent, or to have absolute power. p. 89.


That they charge God with lying, inconstancy, mutabilitie. p. 115. 119.


These and an hundred more such heretical opinions he falsely obiecteth against
the Protestants: wherein they either against their conscience belie us, or
speak evil of those things they know not: that they may appear to be of that
sect which is here by the Apostle described.

Uers. 11. They have followed the way of Caine.] What the way of Caine was
Saint John 11. Note.

^oul^ of (...)


she weth: he slew his brother because his own works were evil and his
brothers good, 1. John. 3. 12. So have the Romanists persecuted innocent and
good men, only of envy and despite against their virtuous and honest life.

Brewster and Sweeting burned, because the one said to the other, reading
certain good things out of a book, the son of the living God help us: the
other answered, the Lord so do. Fox. p. 818.

Ioa^nes de Cadurco, because he brought forth this posie at a feast, Christ
reign in our hearts, was put to death. Fox p. ^97.

Thomas Sanpaulinus, because he reproved a man for swearing, was judged to be
a Lutheran, and thereupon examined and condemned, p. 904.

Thomas Thomkins a devout man, who when any man came to talk with him, would
always begin with prayer, was cruelly handled of Bonner, his face buffeted,
his hand scorched with a torch, and after his body burned. Fox, page, 1534.

A monk burned in France, ann. 1525. for marrying a wife, p. 896.

These and many other were through the envy of Caine brought to their end:
for thus he envied the piety and innocence of his brother Abel.

Uers. 11. They are cast away with the deceit of Balaams wages.] The Apostle
here 1^. Note.

Covetousness of the Roman Church.


makes covetousness a badge of a false church, when they may be hired with
promise of reward as Balaam was, to give wicked counsel, being corrupted
themselves Balaams wages
with money, and corrupting others.

Alexander 6. being hired of the great Louic^^. Turk. ^ist* lib. 1.
Turk with no small sums, caused Gemes the Turks brother to be poisoned.

Parrie was induced by the great promises of Gregory 13. to attempt his wicked
conspiracy against her Majesty: so likewise Lopez was enticed with the king
of Spaines gold to do the like.

And as they play Balaacks part to corrupt others with money to serve their
turn: so also they of the court of Rome as Balaams may be wrought with money
to any purpose: as one says, In Romana curia omnia possunt pecuniae: Money can
do all things in the court of Rome. (...). p^risiens. (...). 1247.


Another says, Romanus Pontifex laetatur spolijs ecclesiarum, quaestum omnem
reputat Io^n. (...)* lib. 6. c. 24.
pietatem: The Bishop of Rome is delighted with the spoil of Churches, he
counts all manner of gain, godliness.

Yea one of the Popes darlings says, Roma facta est meretrix and prostituta
pro Thom Eec^^^ in epist. ad A^chiepisc. Moguntin.
mercede: Rome is become an harlot, and for money is set to sale.

And that it may yet more fully appear how like they are to Balaam, who gave
counsel to Balaack for his hire, to entice the Israelites to commit
fornication: it is notoriously known, that in Rome by the license of the Pope
many thousand harlots Jewel. defens. apolog p 424.
are permitted, and that Paulus 3. had in his tables the names of 30. thousand
courtesans, of whom by way of pension he yearly receives 30. thousand
ducates, Constitut. Othou. de concubini^ cleric. remouend.
which the Popes marshall has charge of. This is the right deceit of Balaams
wages, which he had also for giving counsel to commit fornication.

Uers. 12. They perish in the gain saying of 14. Note.

Rebellion.


Core.] Like as then Core, Dathan, and Abiram, with their confederates resisted
the authority of Moses, so the Pope and his adherents have continually
practiced against princes often inciting the subjects against them, and raising
and causing tumults and rebellions. Pope autho^ of rebellion.


Thus did Gregory 7. first set up Rodolphus against the Emperor Henry 4.
Vrsperg^^s. an. ^105.
and afterward raised Henry 5. the son against his father: the same Pope
does in his bull release all the subjects of the Emperor of their oath and
fealty. Fox. p. 179.


Thus did Innocentius 3. serve king John, sending over his Legate Pandolphus,
who accursed the king, and assoyled all his Nobles, Barons, Knights, Fox. p.
252.
of their service, homage, and fealty toward him.

The like attempted Gregory the 9. against Frederick 2. enticing his
soldiers to rebel against him, and writing to the princes of the Saracens,
that they should make no truce with him, nor deliver to him the crown and
kingdom of Fox. p. 302.
Jerusalem.

Paulus 3. stirred commotions against Henry the eight, and sent Cardinal
Poole to persuade other princes to take part against him. Pius the 5. was
author of the rebellion in the North, by his agent Morton. Gregory the 13. by
his wicked instrument Saunders procured the sturres in Ireland. Thus in all
respects they show themselves to be the disciples of rebellious Core.

Uers. 12. Without all fear feeding themselves.] Those hypocrites of whom the
15. No^^
Apostle speaks, were men given to their appetite, greedy and insatiable
feeders; whose belly is their God, as Saint Paul says: such belly gods and
pamperers Belly god^ Gal 2^^.
of the flesh if ever any sect could affoard, popish monkerie shall therein
exceed. Of such slowe-bellies Hierome began to complain in his time, Post
Idle monke^ fil-bellies.
coenam dubiam Apostolos somniant: After they have well supped, they dream of
the Apostles. Siquando dies festus venerit, Epist. ad E^stoch.
saturantur ad vomitum: If an holy day come, they are filled up to the throat.
And he further shows what manner of fasting some hypocrites used in those
days: that they would eat no oil, and abstained from bread, yea resused to
drink water: ad Nepotian.
yet they did eat figs, pepper, nuttes, dates, and sorbitiunculas delicatas,
betarumque succum sorbere: and suppe delicate brothes, and the juice of beetes.
This was the right guise of the fatbellied monks, they would refuse to eat
flesh or drink wine, but in stead thereof they had marmolet, sucket, iollies,
and all other dainty delicates.

With such curious dishes did the Lord Cromwell at his first beginning
insinuate Fox. p. 1878.
himself to the presence of Julius the 2. and so pleased his tooth with his
fine devises of dishmeate, that he obtained his Boasten pardons. Boston.


Julius the 2. loved his tooth well, when being forbidden by his physicians to
eat porke, he called for it with great indignation saying in the Italian
tongue, Give me it in despite of God: at another time missing a cold peacocke,
he chafed and fumed, saying, B^laeus in vita (...). ^.
if God were angry with Adam for eating an apple, may not I his Vicar be
offended for a peacocke?

Like unto this belly godhead were the other rabble of idle Monks, who, for
the most part of them, as it is well known to the world, gave themselves to
eating and drinking, and to all kind of pleasure: in so much that they were
constrained to make laws to stint them, and put them to a certain allowance
by the day; as in a certain council it was provided that the regulars should
every day be allowed four pound of bread and five pound of wine, or if the
Aquisgran^c. 121.

Accipiant per singulos dies, 4. libras panis, and 5. libras vini.


country were not fruitful of wine, three pound of wine, and three pound of
ale or beer. It should seem they exceeded before, yet this was a sufficient
proportion for a reasonable man.

In the council of Collen certain fraternities p^rt. 9. c. ^^.
were dissolved, In quibus tam clerici, quam Laici commessationibus and
ebrietatibus vacant: Because both the Clergy, and La^e sort did give
themselves there to gluttony and drunkenness.

Who will not now say, considering the voluptuous and riotous life of these
monastical persons, that this note of the Apostle fitly agrees unto the^,
without fear feeding themselves?

Uers. 12. Clouds they are without water carried about of the winde] Here the
Apostle 16. Note.
notes the vanity of false teachers, Clouds without water.
which though they profess and promise much to their followers, yet are able
to yield no true comfort, but are as clouds Popish doctrine without true
comfort.
that make show of rain, yet they let fall no drops.

Such in all respects is the profession of popery: for though they boast of
the true Catholic faith, and that none of their Church can be saved: yet if a
man look into their doctrine, he shall never find his conscience settled
therein, but still to remain in doubt. They teach that God has elected none
but conditionally, so they believe: Rhemist. 1. Tim. 2. sect. 4. that Christ
died for all men, for Turks, Jews, infidels: that a man cannot know, neither
ought discuss, whether he be in the state of grace. Rhemist. 1. Cor. 4. sect.
4. that it is a damnable and false illusion and presumption for any particular
man, to be sure of his salvation: Rhemist. Romans 8. in v. 38. they hold
generally that faith may be lost, that no man can be sure that he shall
persevere or continue to the end.

These and such like comfortless doctrines are held and maintained in popery:
so that according to their rules, the most devout papist can never be sure that
his sins are forgiven him, or that Christ died for him, more then for a Turk
or Jew, or that he finally shall be saved. The faith of the Apostle was not
so, who was fully persuaded, that nothing could separate him from the love of
God, Romans 8. 38. and that there was a crown of righteousness laid up in store
for him, 2. Tim. 4. 8. and that God would preserve him to his kingdom. v. 18.
For as Hierome well says, Ut quid rogo, medicus noster inter librorum suorum
loculos tot co^stituit pigmentorum Obiurg. in Euagr.
genera, si nihil est ex emplastris eius, quo possit sanari vulnus? etc. Why I
pray you has our Physician appointed so many medicin^s in his books, if there
be no plaster to heal the wou^d which the enemy has made? Wherefore that is
the true faith and religion, which is able to apply comfort to a wounded and
distressed soul: and carries water in the cloud to moysten and supple the
barren and dry clots of the pensive heart, not that which leaves the soul
plunged still in despair without any firm hope and assurance of salvation, as
the popish profession does.

v. 13. Foaming out their own shame.] 17. Note.
Thus do our adversaries foame out their shame in their writings, wherein they
rail Railing.
against and revile the Protestants, calling them caitiffs, Sathanists,
reprobates, miscreants, fools, deuillish, heretics, as I have showed before in
the exposition of this verse. This has always been the practice of false
teachers, to rail and revile: so was Augustine handled of the Donatists: Dum
oves domini mei perditas diligenter inquiro, spinosarum linguarum veprebus
laceror. While I diligently seek the lost sheep of my Lord, I am torn with
the brambles of Contr Petilian. 3. cap. 11.
thornie tongues. And Origin in like manner was used of Celsus: says he,
Philosophus viriste, cum nos instruere velit, convitiatur. This philosopher,
going about to instruct us, rayleth. lib. 7. Such is the usual style of
papists: thus plaieth Harding; the Rhemists in their annotations; Gifford in
his vile libell which he entituleth Calvinoturcis. and all the sort of them can
almost do no other but rail: the truth is not so defended: this foame of
their mouths bewraieth a foul and unclean heart: and as is their cause, such
is their manner of defense.

verse. 13. They are wandering stars.] Such wandering stars were the
Pharisees, 1^. Note.

Wanderers.


that compassed sea and land to get one proselyte, Math. 23. 15. Thus has the
church of Rome their wandering stars: the Pope has his Cardinals, whom he
sends abroad as his factours and agents, his Seminary priests and Iesu^^s,
that are dispersed into all countries to win disciples, and to corrupt the
says of the simple: they insinuate themselves into Princes courts, and noble
men's houses, and are those ^ogges spoken of in the Revelation, which came forth
of the D^a^on^mouth to go unto the Kings of the earth. They change the^^
ha^ite dissemble their profession, alter (...), as occasion ^erue^^: like as
Ambrose reports of Auxentius the Ar^ian, Ne congnosceretur quis esset,
mutavit (...) and induit lupum: alius in Scithiae partibus dicebatur, alius
hic: nomina pro regionibus habet. Least he be known what he is, he has
changed his name, but not his treachery: he puts off a wolf and puts on
an other: he is called by one name in Scythia, by an other here: for every
country he has a name. This Auxentius was a right wandering star, that
wandered from Italy to Scythia, from the south to the North, from the East, to
the West, changing his name and habit, but not his conditions: such wanderers
are popish priests and Jesuits, that are sent abroad into the world, and
travel from country to country, changing their habits and names, but not
their conditions.

v. 16. These are murmurers and complainer^.] 19. Note.
Such are the Romanists, that show themselves male contents, complaining with
open^sse of the hard de^ling of the state toward them, and of the great
persecution of Catholic (...) Whereas (...) ^ath dealt most gently with them
in respect of their (...) against Recusants, or capital^ aga^^^^ Seminary
priests and Iudasites, for (...) space of twenty years of her Majesty's (...)

With such curious dishes did the Lord Cromwell at his first beginning
insinuate Fox. p. 1178.
himself to the presence of Julius the 2. and so pleased his tooth with his
fine devises of dishmeate, that he obtained his Boasten pardons. Boston.


Julius the 3. loved his tooth well, when being forbidden by his physicians to
eat porke, he called for it with great indignation saying in the Italian
tongue, Give me it in despite of God: at another time missing a cold peacocke,
he chafed and fumed, saying, B^laeus in vit a (...). 3.
if God were angry with Adam for eating an apple, may not I his Vicar be
offended for a peacocke?

Like unto this belly godhead were the other rabble of idle Monks, who, for
the most part of them, as it is well known to the world, gave themselves to
eating and drinking, and to all kind of pleasure: in so much that they were
constrained to make laws to stint them, and put them to a certain allowance
by the day; as in a certain council it was provided that the regulars should
every day be allowed four pound of bread and five pound of wine, or if the
Aquisgran c, 121.

Accipiant per singulos dies, 4. libras panis, and 5. libras vini.


country were not fruitful of wine, three pound of wine, and three pound of
ale or beer. It should seem they exceeded before, yet this was a sufficient
proportion for a reasonable man.

In the council of Collen certain fraternities part. 9. c. 11.
were dissolved, In quibus tam clerici, quam Laici commessationibus and
ebri^tatibus vacant: Because both the Clergy, and La^e sort did give
themselves there to gluttony and drunkenness.

Who will not now say, considering the voluptuous and riotous life of these
monastical persons, that this note of the Apostle fitly agrees unto the^,
without fear feeding themselves?

Uers. 12. Clouds they are without water carried about of the winde] Here the
Apostle 16. Note.
notes the vanity of false teachers, Clouds without water.
which though they profess and promise much to their followers, yet are able
to yield no true comfort, but are as clouds Popish doctrine without true
comfort.
that make show of rain, yet they let fall no drops.

Such in all respects is the profession of popery: for though they boast of
the true Catholic faith, and that none of their Church can be saved: yet if a
man look into their doctrine, he shall never find his conscience settled
therein, but still to remain in doubt. They teach that God has elected none
but conditionally, so they believe: Rhemist. 1. Tim. 2. sect. 4. that Christ
died for all men, for Turks, Jews, infidels: that a man cannot know, neither
ought discuss, whether he be in the state of grace. Rhemist. 1. Cor. 4. sect.
4. that it is a damnable and false illusion and presumption for any particular
man, to be sure of his salvation: Rhemist. Romans 8. in v. 38. they hold
generally that faith may be lost, that no man can be sure that he shall
persevere or continue to the end.

These and such like comfortless doctrines are held and maintained in popery:
so that according to their rules, the most devout papist can never be sure that
his sins are forgiven him, or that Christ died for him, more then for a Turk
or Jew, or that he finally shall be saved. The faith of the Apostle was not
so, who was fully persuaded, that nothing could separate him from the love of
God, Romans 8. 38. and that there was a crown of righteousness laid up in store
for him, 2. Tim. 4. 8. and that God would preserve him to his kingdom. v. 18.
For as Hierome well says, Ut quid rogo, medicus noster inter librorum suorum
loculos tot co^stituit pigmentorum Obiurg. in Euagr.
genera, si nihil est ex emplastris eius, quo possit sanari vulnus? etc. Why I
pray you has our Physician appointed so many medicines in his books, if there
be no plaster to heal the wou^d which the enemy has made? Wherefore that is
the true faith and religion, which is able to apply comfort to a wounded and
distressed soul: and carries water in the cloud to moysten and supple the
barren and dry clots of the pensive heart, not that which leaves the soul
plunged still in despair without any firm hope and assurance of salvation, as
the popish profession does.

v. 13. Foaming out their own shame.] 17. Note.
Thus do our adversaries foame out their shame in their writings, wherein they
rail Railing.
against and revile the Protestants, calling them caitiffs, Sathanists,
reprobates, miscreants, fools, deuillish, heretics, as I have showed before in
the exposition of this verse. This has always been the practice of false
teachers, to rail and revile: so was Augustine handled of the Donatists: Dum
oves domini mei perditas diligenter inquiro, spinosarum linguarum veprebus
laceror. While I diligently seek the lost sheep of my Lord, I am torn with
the brambles of Contr Petilian. 3. cap. 11.
thornie tongues. And Origin in like manner was used of Celsus: says he,
Philosophus viriste, cum nos instruere velit, convitiatur. This philosopher,
going about to instruct us, rayleth. lib. 7. Such is the usual style of
papists: thus plaieth Harding; the Rhemists in their annotations; Gifford in
his vile libell which he entituleth Calvinoturcis. and all the sort of them can
almost do no other but rail: the truth is not so defended: this foame of
their mouths bewraietha foul and unclean heart: and as is their cause, such
is their manner of defense.

verse. 13. They are wandering stars.] Such wandering stars were the
Pharisees, 18. Note.

Wanderers.


that compassed sea and land to get one proselyte, Math. 23. 15. Thus has the
church of Rome their wandering stars: the Pope has his Cardinals, whom he
sends abroad as his factours and agents, his Seminary priests and Jesuits,
that are dispersed into all countries to win disciples, and to corrupt the
faith of the simple: they insinuate themselves into Princes courts, and noble
men's houses, and are those frogs spoken of in the Revelation, which came
forth of the Dragons mouth to go unto the Kings of the earth. They change
their habit, dissemble their profession, alter their names, as occasion
serves: like as Ambrose reports of Auxentius the Arrian, Ne cognosceretur
quis esset, mutavit nomen, Ambr. in Aux.
sed perfidiam non mutavit, exuit lupum and induit lupum: alius in Scithiae
partibus dicebatur, alius hic: nomina pro regionibus habet. Least he be known
what he is, he has changed his name, but not his treachery: he puts off a
wolf and puts on an other: he is called by one name in Scythia, by an other
here: for every country he has a name. This Auxentius was a right wandering
star, that wandered from Italy to Scythis, from the south to the North, from
the East, to the West, changing his name and habit, but not his conditions:
such wanderers are popish priests and Jesuits, that are sent abroad into the
world, and travel from country to country, changing their habits and names,
but not their conditions.

v. 16. These are murmurers and complainers.] 19. Note.
Such are the Romanists, that show themselves malcontents, complaining with
open cry of the hard dealing of the state toward them, and of the great
persecution of Catholics in England, and of the severity. yea cruelty of the
state against them. Whereas her Majesty has dealt most gently with them, in
respect of their desert. 1. There was no law made either pecuniarie against
Recusants, or capital against Seminary priests and Iudasites, for the space
of twenty years of her Majesty's reign: for against the first it was decreed
ann. 23. against the other ann. 27. and not before. 2. The Recusants are not
put from their living, as Protestants were both from living and life, but
paying the penalty of the statute, they enjoy the rest. 3. Whereas the
Seminaries and Jesuits are by the law subject to capital punishment, some of
them only are imprisoned, some only banished, some have greater liberty, if
it would make them honest men and good subjects: and yet for all this, they are
not contented. But herein they are like to the old Donatists, that complained
of Romanists with the old Donatists complain of persecution.
persecution as they do, and used the same shift that Papists do, Non
pertinere ad Imperatorem de religione iudicare, that it belonged not to the
Emperor to judge of religion. Whereunto Augustine answered excellently. 1.
Primo ostendant se non esse hareticos, etc. First let them prove they are not
heretics or schismatikes, and then let them complain of unjust punishment. 2.
They may say as well, that the Civil magistrate may not punish Idolaters,
witches, etc. as heretics: for all these are reckoned in the same number,
Galat. 5. 20. 3. How came it to pass, that they excelled the Maximinianists
(which were a certain sect or schism of the Donatists) by the Emperors
authority? and so did the August. contr. ep. st. Parm l. ^. c. 7.
Papists persecute the Protestants by the magistrates authority: what reason
have they to take exception against that power which they are content to use to
serve their turn? 4. says he, Tribunus non est persecutor vester, sed
persecutor persecutoris Contr. Gaud^^^. cap. 10.
vestri: the Magistrate does not persecute you, but persecuteth your
persecutor, that is, your error. 5. Lastly he says, Si vniversarum contra vos
latarum legum severitas, etc. if the severity of all laws made against you be
compared to your lawless cruelty, it will seem to be lenity: and so he
concludes, Legibus latis catholica magis mansuetudo commendatur, quam
haeretica Contr. Cresco^. lib. 3. c. 44.
immanitas plectitur. By these laws which are made, the Catholic gentleness
is rather commended, then heretical perverseness punished. Wherefore they
complain without cause, and so this note also does well beseem them.

verse. 16. Whose mouths speak proud 20. Note.
things.] Never did any heretics speak more proudly, or give more arrogant
titles, They speak proud things.
then the Romanists do unto the Pope: as that he is a God a Marcell. in
Council. Lateran. s^st. 4.
in earth; that he is the wonder of the world, neither God nor Clement. in
prooem. in glos^.
man: that the Pope has power over purgatory: that he may Felinus.
command the angels of God: that he is inter decret. Adrian. tom. 1. council.
Lord of lords, king of kings: for so the Emperor is called the Popes servant:
that no mortal man may distinct. 40. c. 6.
reprove the Pope, though he carry innumerable souls to hell. Thus also they
proudely and blasphemously extol their priesthood, saying, that every priest
is after the order of Melchisedeck, which the scripture only affirms of
Christ, and that the sacrifice upon the cross was Heskin. lib. 1. c. 15.
after the order of Aaron and not of Melchisedeck. One Nitinghal parson of
Croudon in Kent uttered this blasphemous speech in his sermon, that the Fox p.
1560.
lord Cardinals grace had made him as clean from sin as he was at the
fonstone: and thereupon he fell down dead out of the pulpit. Who now can
deny, but that their mouths speak proud things, and so may be rightly
discerned by this note, not to be be of the true Church?

verse. 16. Having men's person in admiration, because of advantage.] If
flattery be a 21. Note.

Flattery.


mark of an hypocrite and false teacher, as here the Apostle says; the
Romanists are here comprehended, who are most gross and palpable flatterers of
the Pope. For they do all hold, that he cannot err, that he sits in Peter's
chair: they call him the most holy father: though some of them were heretics,
as Honorius, some idolaters, as Marcellinus, some sorcerers, as Gregory the
seventh: some perjured, as Gregory the ninth accused of perjury 3. Math.
Paris in Henr. 4.
by Frederick the second: some infidels, as John 22. that denied the
immortality of the soul: some murderers, as Vrbanus 6. that caused certain
of his Cardinals to be sowed in sackes and cast Theodor. Nie^^. lib. ^. schism.
into the sea: some adulterers, as Alexander 6. some incestuous, as Paulus 3.
Sodomites, as Sixtus 4. yet all of them are justified by Bellarmine and the
rest, to be holy fathers, and right good men. But as Augustine well says, Nec
malam conscientiam sanat praeconium laudantis, nec bonam vulnerat convitiantis
opprobrium: neither does a flatterers commendation heal an evil conscience,
nor yet a raylers defamation wou^d a good conscience.

v. 18. There shall be mockers.] Mockers and scorners are not of the Church of
21. Note.
Christ: for they are persecuters, as S. Paul Mockers.
says, Ismael persecuted Isaak, Gal. 4. 29. because he mocked him, Genes. 21.
9. But such are the Romanists, deriders and mockers of religion, and of the
servants of Christ: for it is well known, that an idiote or fool in Italy is
noted by the name of a Christian: the Rhemists call our communion a feast of
Ceres and Bacchus: another with a scornful spirit calls it an oyster table:
one Simo^s a persecutor of Anthony B White apud ^o^um.
Persons, when the Martyr said unto him standing at the bar, that at the last
day it should appear, which of them had best deserved that place, answered
scoffingly shall I have so long a day (and held up his finger) then I care not,
says he. From Fox. p. 1218.
this scorning spirit proceed all those terms of Zuinglians, Lutheranes,
Caluinistes, precisians, puritanes, Hugonites, which the Papists do give in
disdain and scorn to Protestants. This mark then of mocking and scorning
being so proper unto them does descrie them not to be governed by the spirit
of Christ, and so consequently not of his Church. We say then unto them, as
Origin concerning the scornful writings of Celsus: Si grauiter and Lib. 6.
contra Celsu^^.
modestius haec tractaret, plus forsitan suasionis sunt habitura, sed cum per
risum and scurriliter multa eloquendo deliret, etc. If he handled these things
gravely and modestly he were more like to persuade, but seeing he by laughter
and scurrilitie uttering many things shows his madness, I say for want of
better words he is fallen into this braweling vain. etc.

Uers. 19. These are makers of sects.] This can not be more truly affirmed of
23. Note.

Romanists se^^ makers.


any, then of the Church of Rome: for never had any profession so many sundry
orders, of Monks, Nuns, Hermites, Anchorites, Friars, black, gray, white,
blewe, and I know not of what colors, nor of how many orders, Augustines,
Benedicts, Franciscans, Dominicans, Carthusians, Caponchians, Carmelites,
Brigets order, barefoote friars, Caelestines, Loc. 25. ^^. 10.
Hieronomites, Charterhouse monks, with a great number more: Heshusius
reckons 65. orders of them, and M. Fox an hundred. So many, as that they
were p. 259.
constrained to make a public decree in a general council, that no man
should bring in any new religion; yea some of Council. Later. ^^ sub Innocent.
part. 3. c. 3.
their own side have much misliked this multiplicitie of sects, as Nicholaus
Cusanus a Cardinal thus writes: Fallacia illorum qui sub habitu Christi
apparent, vix potest sciri ob suam varietatem: nam alius quidem sub hac vesle,
alius sub illa, etc. The deceit of those that show themselves under the habit
of Christ, cannot be known because of their variety: One says under this
garment, another under that, that he is Christ's soldier when as they all seek
not the things that are Christ's, but their own.

Uers. 20. Praying in the holy Ghost:] 24. Note.
The Apostle having described the qualities and conditions of corrupt teachers,
Liplabour prayer.
now he turns himself to describe the true members of the Church of Christ,
whom by this note as one he would have known: they do pray in the holy
Ghost, that is, with feeling and understanding, for such are the prayers of the
spirit: this difference our Savior Christ makes between true and false
worshippers, John, 4. 22. Ye worship that ye know not, we worship what we
know, for salvation is of the Jews. But the members of the Roman Church
know not what they worship, nor what they pray, speaking in an unknown
tongue; and therefore wanting the true and right use of prayer, they are not
the true Church of Christ: for in the Church of God there is the true
invocation of the name of God, and there are the true worshippers of God in
spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 24. but liplaboure is no true worship of God, such
as are all prayers made without understanding in an unknown tongue: as Ambrose
says upon these words of S. Paul, My mind is without fruit, 1. Cor. 14. 14.
Quem fructum habere potest, qui ignorant, quae loquitur? What fruit or profit
can he have that knows not what he says?

Uers. 23. Hate the garment spotted of the flesh:] This is another note of the
true 25. Note.
religion, that it retains not carnal rites and ceremonies, which are here
understood by the fleshly garment, such as the Apostle speaks against,
Coloss. 2. 2. such traditions as consisted in touching, tasting, ha^dling,
which things perish with the use.

But such is the popish profession altogether adorned with the vesture of the
flesh: for most of their carnal and ceremonious rites and vsages they have
borrowed partly from the Jews, partly from the Gentiles.

From the Gentiles they have learned, their adoration of images, prayer to the
dead, multiplicitie of saints, purgatory, setting up of wax candles and
burning of tapers, with such other infinite rites, the original whereof is
derived from the heathen, as Moresin. de origin. papat.
a learned scottish writer has lately showed in a treatise only of that
argument.

From the Jews they have their palm, salt, oil, holy water, observation of
days, difference of meats, with such other; therefore we can not judge that to
be sound religion, which uses such traditions, which are after the
commandments of men, Col. 2. 22. and so I conclude this point with Augustine:
De aqua, frumento, vino, oleo in seruitute veteris populi multa celebrari
imperatasunt, quae nobis tantum intellige^da traduntur. Ang. de cele^^at. pasch.
Many things concerning corn, wine, oil, were commanded to be observed in the
servitude of the old law, which are only so be understood of us.

Thus have I by these 25. notes gathered out of this epistle consisting of 25.
verses, declared how the true religion and Church from the false may be
discerned: which also may serve as a caveat and advertisement to the Reader,
concerning a certain seditious popish pamphlet lately dispersed, called a
quarterne of reasons, wherein the libeller by his 25. reasons would impugn the
credit of our Church and religion: which book, as I understand, is very
sufficiently answered by a studious young man, and learned divine, and is
ready for the press. Thus I end exhorting the reader according to S. Paul's
rule: to try all things, and hold that is best. And so I conclude with that
saying of Augustine: Excipite verba contradicentium respuenda, non Tract. 9. in
^^am.
transglutienda, and visceribus danda, facite inde quod fecit Dominus, quando
illi obtulerunt amarum potum, gustauit and respuit, it a vos legite and
abiicite. Receive ye the words of gainsayers to refuse them, not to swallow
them and keep them in your bowels, but do with them as our Lord with the
bitter potion which they offered to him, he tasted and refused: so do ye^ read
their errors and reject them.

Praise, honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne,
and unto the lamb for evermore. Revel. 5. 13.

FINIS.
Amend the faults thus.
PREFACE.
Page. Fault. Correction. Page 17. l. 23. Romes, Romans. P. 21. l. 8. surely,
freely. P. 21. l. 11. We mislike we mislike P. 26. l. 11. and did leap, did
leap. P. 29. l. 5. exposition, opposition. P. 35. l. 3. the panltie, their
paultry.

BOOK.
Page. Fault. Correction. P. 52. l. 9. crackled racked. P. 58. l. 17. Ahas
Ahab. P. 69. l. 1. propounded Pronounced. P. 70. l. 16. word woe. P. 104. l. 7.
Caponchians Caponchians. P. 114. l. 27. Vioscorus Dioscorus. P. 138. l. 9.
aufugiat confugiat. P. 145. l. 12. Fettres Fetties. P. 149. l. 8. We were. P.
153. l. 23. course cause. P. 187. l. 2. terreum terrenum. P. 188. l. 7.
Theodera Theodora. P. 195. l. 7. blind blame.


